
Tim Bresnan was the star as Yorkshire scraped a two-wicket victory over 
Nottinghamshire to strengthen their position at the top of the Royal London 
One-Day Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/royal-london-cup> North Group. 
Bresnan, having already taken two for 24, hit a career-best unbeaten 95 to help 
his side to successfully chase Nottinghamshire’s total of 251 with two balls of 
their 50 overs remaining.

ECB’s neutrality on city-based T20 competition queried by county officials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/ecb-city-based-t20-cricket-county-officials>
Middle-order batsmen Steven Mullaney (89) and Dan Christian (52) impressed for 
Notts in Scarborough, steadying the ship after Greg Smith, Brendan Taylor and 
Samit Patel were all dismissed for ducks. The narrow victory was the hosts’ 
fourth success in six matches and puts them three points clear of fifth place, 
with the top four in each group progressing to the next stage.

Sam Hain produced a List A career-best knock for Warwickshire but they failed 
to keep pace with the leaders after slipping to a four-wicket defeat toDurham.

Hain’s score of 107, plus 86 from Tim Ambrose, helped the visitors set a 
target of 292 for seven in Gosforth. However, Mark Stoneman, Scott Borthwick 
and Paul Collingwood all hit half-centuries forDurham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/durham> as they claimed victory with 14 
balls to spare.

Northamptonshire strengthened their hopes of a top-four finish, leapfrogging 
Warwickshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> into second 
spot with a 23-run victory overWorcestershire at New Road. Adam Rossington (87) 
and Ben Duckett (86) led their side to a winning total of 319 for seven after 
the visitors were sent in to bat and lost opener Josh Cobb for a duck off the 
fifth ball.

Worcestershire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcestershire> started 
strongly in their pursuit of the target but, despite a century from opener Tom 
Kohler-Cadmore (119), they were bowled out for 296 by the penultimate ball of 
the day, with the Northants seamer Richard Gleeson taking five for 47.

Lancashire moved off the bottom of the table by beating Derbyshire by 27 runs 
at the County Ground. Liam Livingstone’s 98 and 68 from Steven Croft helped 
their side to 281 for eight. Despite Billy Godleman’s 91 from 98 balls,
Derbyshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/derbyshire> fell short, managing 
254 for nine as Kyle Jarvis took four for 31.

In the South Group, Surrey spinner Gareth Batty took five for 41 as his side 
climbed to third after hosting and thrashing holdersGloucestershire by 165 
runs. Steven Davies’s knock of 79, scored at exactly a run a ball, plus 50s 
from Rory Burns and Sam Curran putSurrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/surrey> in control as they amassed 323 for 
eight.

Gloucestershire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucestershireccc>, on the 
back of three successive wins, never threatened to test that total as Surrey 
captain Batty and Jade Dernbach (three for 33) led the way in bowling them out 
for 158 in the 34th over.

Sussex remain bottom of the table after they suffered a fifth loss in six 
matches with a nine-run defeat toHampshire. Jimmy Adams hit 94 for Hampshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hampshire> as they set a target of 268 for 
nine at Hove. Chris Nash and Ben Brown both made half-centuries for Sussex in 
reply but they fell short, finishing on 259 for six to all but end their hopes 
of a quarter-final spot.
 