
Tim Cook has spoken to Apple employees in a closed Q&A about his decision to 
meet with US president-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, arguing that it’s more 
important to engage than stand on the sidelines “yelling”.

Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tim-cook> also answered employee 
questions about the perception that Apple has abandoned its Mac line of desktop 
computers, and about what he thinks most differentiates the company from its 
competitors.

Although unsurprisingly deferential in tone, the questions nonetheless provide 
the clearest insight yet into Cook’s thinking about the election of Trump, who 
openly and repeatedly railed againstApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> in his campaign for the 
company’s lack of US manufacturing jobs, offshoring of capital, and refusal to 
aid the FBI in hacking into an iPhone once used by a dead terrorist.

“Last week you joined other tech leaders to meet President-elect Donald 
Trump,” the questioner said. “How important is it for Apple to engage with 
governments?”

Cook replied: “It’s very important. Governments can affect our ability to do 
what we do. They can affect it in positive ways and they can affect in not so 
positive ways. What we do is focus on the policies. Some of our key areas of 
focus are on privacy and security, education. They’re on advocating for human 
rights for everyone, and expanding the definition of human rights. They’re on 
the environment and really combating climate change, something we do by running 
our business on 100 percent renewable energy.”
 (L-R) Amazon’s chief Jeff Bezos, Larry Page of Alphabet, Facebook COO Sheryl 
Sandberg, Vice President elect Mike Pence, President-elect Donald Trump, Peter 
Thiel, co-founder and former CEO of PayPal, Tim Cook of Apple and Safra Catz of 
Oracle attend a meeting at Trump Tower. December 14. Photograph: Timothy A. 
Clary/AFP/Getty Images 
He added: “There’s a large number of those issues, and the way that you 
advance them is to engage. Personally, I’ve never found being on the sideline a 
successful place to be. The way that you influence these issues is to be in the 
arena. So whether it’s in this country, or the European Union, or in China or 
South America, we engage. And we engage when we agree and we engage when we 
disagree. I think it’s very important to do that because you don’t change 
things by just yelling. You change things by showing everyone why your way is 
the best. In many ways, it’s a debate of ideas.


“We very much stand up for what we believe in. We think that’s a key part of 
what Apple is about. And we’ll continue to do so.”


The question and answer, which TechCrunch verified as legitimate 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/12/19/tim-cook-explains-to-apple-employees-why-he-met-with-president-elect-trump/>
, were followed by a less politically-charged query about Apple’s dedication to 
desktop computers. “We had a big MacBook Pro launch in October and a powerful 
upgrade to the MacBook back in the spring. Are Mac desktops strategic for us?”, 
Cook was asked.

His response 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/12/19/apples-tim-cook-assures-employees-that-it-is-committed-to-the-mac-and-that-great-desktops-are-coming/>
 was that to confirm that yes, “the desktop is very strategic for us. It’s 
unique compared to the notebook because you can pack a lot more performance in 
a desktop — the largest screens, the most memory and storage, a greater variety 
of I/O, and fastest performance.


“Some folks in the media have raised the question about whether we’re 
committed to desktops. If there’s any doubt about that with our teams, let me 
be very clear: we have great desktops in our roadmap. Nobody should worry about 
that.”

Cook was also asked what he considered Apple’s “biggest differentiator, and 
what can employees do to foster and advance those efforts?” He argued that the 
company’s commitment to projects with no clear return on investment was hugely 
important.

“With so many things that we’ve done, we don’t do it because there’s an return 
on investment. We don’t do it because we know exactly how we’re going to use 
it. We do it because it’s clear it’s interesting and it might lead somewhere. A 
lot of the time it doesn’t, but many times it leads us somewhere where we had 
no idea in the beginning.”

Apple declined to comment for this story.
 