
To say that in the 25 years since Glasgow was named European city of culture 
it has transformed itself into an artistic powerhouse would not be an 
overstatement. The city’s artistic and cultural scene is one of the most 
diverse in the UK outside of London, but it has none of the elitism and 
snobbery that some say is rife in the capital. So, it is fitting that on Monday 
(7 December), theTurner prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/turnerprize> will be presented there 
for the first time. Especially so because in the past two decades Glasgow 
School of Art (GSA) has produced no fewer than 18 Turner Prize winners and 
nominees.

Whether you are a fan of contemporary art or more traditional painting and 
sculpture, there’s something for everyone. In fact, during an art-filled 
weekend inGlasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> I feel more engaged 
with the art world than I have for a long time – probably since I studied art 
history at university (where Scotland’s role in the art world was barely 
touched upon).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff07102bc05a3d35bef84d594f4179c34a9334b34%2F0_7_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20for%20Turner%3A%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20contemporary%20art%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20for%20Turner%3A%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20contemporary%20art%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff07102bc05a3d35bef84d594f4179c34a9334b34%2F0_7_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Glasgow Gallery of Modern Art. Photograph: Alamy 
At a time when London’s cultural dominance is being questioned by curators 
angered by the fact that 90% of the nation’s art is in storage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/29/london-galleries-hidden-art-treasures-loan-to-regions>
 rather than shared with regional galleries, Glasgow quietly and confidently 
makes the point that the capital really is not the be-all and end-all.

Club culture: a guide to Glasgow's nightlife – by Optimo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/25/club-culture-guide-to-glasgow-nightlife-by-optimo>
It’s worth stating upfront that it is impossible to see everything Glasgow has 
to offer art lovers in two days. We pack it in, but Glasgow merits return 
visits, not just because of the culture on offer but because of the many 
excellent bars and restaurants. My boyfriend and I arrived late on a Friday 
evening and, after checking in tothe Malmaison 
<https://www.malmaison.com/locations/glasgow/> hotel, in a converted church, we 
head straight toHanoi Bike Shop <http://hanoibikeshop.co.uk/>, a restaurant 
that comes highly recommended by almost everyone I meet for its Vietnamese 
street food made with local Scottish ingredients.

This, I think, is modern Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, 
though our weekend is not entirely free from cliche. Ashton Lane is a cobbled 
backstreet in Glasgow’s West End that’s teaming with pubs and bars – one of 
which we pop in to just in time for a raucous live rendition of The 
Proclaimers’ I’m Gonna Be (500 Miles) by the entire clientele. But as cliches 
go, it’s impossible not to smile at.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F3%2F1449145923995%2Fb963cc13-8e6b-4b29-9612-2e4f9c16b133-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20for%20Turner%3A%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20contemporary%20art%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20for%20Turner%3A%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20contemporary%20art%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F3%2F1449145923995%2Fb963cc13-8e6b-4b29-9612-2e4f9c16b133-1020x612.jpeg>
 Hanoi Bike Shop. Photograph: Facebook 
Next day we have an unconventional but delicious brunch at Glaswegian milliner 
William Chambers’s <http://www.williamchambers.co.uk/> favourite place, Babu 
Bombay Street Kitchen <http://www.babu-kitchen.com/>. It’s almost next door to 
theCompass Gallery <http://compassgallery.co.uk/2015/>, the city’s first 
contemporary art gallery, founded as a co-operative by collector Cyril Gerber 
in the late 1960s and now run by his daughter Jill. It shows a mixture of works 
by established artists and new graduates, all brilliantly curated. I’m 
particularly taken with the nature paintings of Japanese artistNaoko Shibuya 
<http://www.compassgallery.co.uk/cg-slide.php?q=1058> (Compass has a stall at 
the London art fair between 20-24 January).

10 best craft beer pubs in Glasgow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/18/10-best-craft-beer-pubs-glasgow>
Just around the corner is the Glasgow Art Club <http://glasgowartclub.co.uk/>, 
a stunning building with interior features by Charles Rennie Mackintosh, which 
has long been a meeting place for creative types and has a regular programme of 
events and exhibitions (private tours are also available). On the same street 
is the commercial galleryScotlandart <http://www.scotlandart.com/>, which has a 
show of contemporary Scottish landscape paintings. I am particularly mesmerised 
by Christine Clark’s Nocturne, which I would buy on the spot if I could afford 
the £4,000 price tag. Even with payments spread over 10 months, thanks to the 
Arts Council-supportedOwn Art scheme <http://ownart.org.uk/>, it’s sadly too 
much for me, but I love it.

The next stop on our itinerary (it’s worth getting hold of a free art map from 
peoplemakeglasgow.com <https://peoplemakeglasgow.com>) is the Gallery of Modern 
Art <http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/museums/GoMA/Pages/default.aspx> – GoMA, 
where we enjoy Devils in the Making, an exhibition of works made in the city 
since Douglas Gordon became the first Scottish artist to win the Turner Prize 
in 1996.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49e2590e4ee0e75b11624bd19acd39066721c2de%2F0_194_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20for%20Turner%3A%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20contemporary%20art%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20for%20Turner%3A%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20contemporary%20art%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49e2590e4ee0e75b11624bd19acd39066721c2de%2F0_194_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Babu Street Kitchen. Photograph: Marc Turner 
After that, we head to the Lighthouse <http://www.thelighthouse.co.uk/>, 
Scotland’s national centre for design and architecture, which hosts the 
Mackintosh Centre, a space celebrating one of Glasgow’s most famous architect. 
For Mackintosh fans, a stop bythe Willow Tea Rooms 
<http://www.willowtearooms.co.uk/> and the Hunterian Art Gallery 
<http://www.gla.ac.uk/hunterian/collections/permanentdisplays/hunterianartgallery/>
 (which has an excellent collection of the works of Whistler and the Glasgow 
Boys and Girls) is a must.

Top 10 budget restaurants, bars and cafes in Glasgow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/17/10-glasgow-best-budget-restaurants-bars-cafes>
For some insider tips, I drop by artist and designer Iona Crawford’s showroom. 
Against the wall is a portrait of Crawford, who is firmly plugged into the art 
scene, painted byGerard Burns <http://www.gerardmburns.com/>. She talks about 
her collaboration with the sculptorAndy Scott  
<http://www.scottsculptures.co.uk/>(his Kelpies horse sculptures, Scotland’s 
largest public art installations, are in Falkirk, half an hour away by train), 
before firing off recommendations for dinner and drinks. We must, she says, 
have a cocktail at theCentre for Contemporary Arts 
<http://www.cca-glasgow.com/programme>, followed by Arbroath smokies at Cafe 
Gandolfi <http://www.cafegandolfi.com/>, which boasts stained glass windows by 
John Clark and furniture by Tim Stead.

Next is Tramway <http://www.tramway.org/Pages/home.aspx> – a tramshed 
converted into a vast, white-walled gallery – and the Turner nominees. My 
favourite work is a housing project by a collective called Assemble, in 
collaboration with residents of the Granby Four Streets project, in Liverpool. 
I hope it wins. The smokies we eat at Gandolfi afterwards are, as promised, 
delicious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ec7e0065181635455e0b12a4d2ec7ab208d31d8%2F0_37_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20for%20Turner%3A%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20contemporary%20art%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20for%20Turner%3A%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20contemporary%20art%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftime-for-turner-glasgows-contemporary-art-scene%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ec7e0065181635455e0b12a4d2ec7ab208d31d8%2F0_37_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Tramway. Photograph: Alamy 
If the weather is fine, there is no better way to spend a Sunday than on one 
of theGSA’s walking tours <http://www.gsa.ac.uk/visit-gsa/city-walking-tours/>. 
Its Glasgow Style Tour explores the architecture and design of Mackintosh and 
others as seen from the city’s streets, while the Glasgow Miracle Tour looks at 
the contemporary art scene via brutalist architecture,Douglas Gordon’s neon 
Empire installation 
<http://www.communitywalk.com/location/empire/contemporary_public_art/1348132> 
and theTrongate 103  <http://www.trongate103.com/> arts centre. Unfortunately, 
we are confronted with torrential rain, so decide to visit theKelvingrove Art 
Gallery and Museum 
<http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/museums/kelvingrove/Pages/default.aspx>, with 
its works by Picasso, Gaugin, Monet, Van Gogh and Rembrandt. We leave the city 
on Sunday afternoon feeling that we have only skimmed the surface of the city’s 
vast cultural offerings (and far too few of its bars). I have no doubt I will 
be back soon.

• The trip was provided by Glasgow City marketing bureau (peoplemakeglasgow.com
 <https://peoplemakeglasgow.com/>)

Glasgow, by those who know it best

First on Iona Crawford’s list is the House for an Art Lover 
<http://www.houseforanartlover.co.uk/>, the Mackintosh-designed country retreat 
situated in Glasgow’s Bellahouston Park, which she describes as “one of his 
most ethereal and romantic accomplishments. A serene paradise for architectural 
enthusiasts, arts buffs, green-fingered explorers, gastronomes and lovers of 
tea and cake.” TheThistle Gallery <http://www.thistle-gallery.com/> is also a 
favourite.

For food, Crawford loves The Ox and Finch <http://www.oxandfinch.com/> in 
Finnieston and for a drink,the Salisbury <http://www.salisburybar.com/> in 
Glasgow’s lesser-publicised Southside.The bar has an impressive and inviting 
array of gins, she says. For shopping,Starry, Starry Night 
<http://starrystarrynightvintage.co.uk/> is, according to Crawford, the city’s 
finest vintage emporium.

Street artist Rogue One <http://globalstreetart.com/rogueone> is a huge burger 
fan and his favourite, Pietro’s Italian sausage burger, is served atBar 91 
<http://www.bar91.co.uk/>, which he also appreciates for its Scottish beers, 
especially William Brothers’ Joker IPA.Lebowski’s Pop-up 
<http://www.lebowskis.co.uk/>, for which Rogue One designed some of the 
signage, serves more than 40 different types of tequila and has a party 
atmosphere. The West End’sBrewdog <https://www.brewdog.com/bars/uk/glasgow>, 
with its view of the Kelvingrove gallery, is one of his favourite locals.

Charli Summers, assistant curator at Compass gallery, enjoys eating and 
hanging out atthe Project Cafe <http://theprojectcafe.weebly.com/>, a social 
enterprise that funds its event space by cooking fresh, homemade food, and 
Scottish restaurantStravaigin <http://www.stravaigin.co.uk/>. For vintage 
shopping, she recommendsVintage Guru <http://www.vintageguru.co.uk/>. Jill 
Gurbur, director of Compass, favoursTwo Fat Ladies 
<http://twofatladiesrestaurant.com/>, Ubiquitous Chip 
<http://www.ubiquitouschip.co.uk/> and the Wee Curry Shop 
<http://www.weecurryshopglasgow.co.uk/> and photographer Tommy Ga-Ken Wan 
<http://www.tommygakenwan.com/> is a fan of lunchtime theatre at the Oran Mor’s 
A Play, a Pie and a Pint 
<http://oran-mor.co.uk/a-play-a-pie-and-a-pint-new-season-announced/>.

MORE TO SEE

SWG3 <http://www.swg3.tv/>

Warehouse that houses artists’ studios, a gallery, a bar and hosts club nights 
and live music events.

The Briggait 
<http://www.waspsstudios.org.uk/studios-spaces/briggait-merchant-city>

Former fish market encompassing artists’ studios, cultural organisations, a 
cafe and exhibition spaces.

The People’s Palace 
<http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/museums/peoples-palace/pages/default.aspx>

A collection of historical artefacts, photographs, prints and film offering 
insight into the lives of Glaswegians past and present, and now showing the art 
of Billy Connolly.

The Burrell Collection 
<http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/museums/burrell-collection/pages/default.aspx>

Huge collection of more than 9,000 objects that represent five millennia of 
art and history, situated in Glasgow’s Pollok Country Park.

The Modern Institute <http://www.themoderninstitute.com/>

Contemporary gallery founded by GSA graduate Toby Webster.
 