
One inevitability of Jurassic World’s monster success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/17/global-box-office-jurassic-world-spy>
 is the speed with which it will spawn – not just its own sequels, but 
lookalike knock-offs too. First up isMeg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/17/eli-roth-horror-movie-meg-shark-prehistoric>
, a disaster movie announced on Monday about a 70ft, 20 tonne deep-sea beastie, 
Carcharodon megalodon, who suddenly pops up after 16 million years’ absence, 
ever so hungry, in the Pacific. Eli Roth will adaptSteve Altman’s thriller 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Meg-Novel-Terror-Steve-Alten/dp/1599551691/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1434534812&sr=8-1&keywords=meg>
; should the film prove a success, follow-up books – including Meg: Origins; 
Meg: Primal Waters; andMeg: Hell’s Aquarium 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Meg-Hells-Aquarium-Steve-Alten/dp/0765365855/ref=cm_cr_dp_asin_lnk>
 – offer franchise potential.

When Michael Crichton first had the idea that people might clone dinosaurs, he 
demanded $1.5m upfront from Steven Spielberg before he’d get cracking on the 
novel that would be turned into a movie that was, for a while, the 
highest-grossing of all time. For the likes of Meg, no such genius seed is 
necessary. The concept is simply that a big fish presumed lost to history 
wasn’t, in fact – like a set of keys that turns up behind the sofa, or some 
burnt onions that are just about about edible after all.

I’d always assumed dinosaur movies are such reliable cash cows because they’re 
family-friendly. The threat at their centre is, in the real world, pretty 
negligible. You could legitimately worry about cannibals or killer sharks or 
even poltergeists. But only the youngest among us would fret about something 
that’s extinct?

Wrong. A friend on Facebook has asked people not to post about Jurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world> on account of her 
dino-phobia. She’s serious. Yet humans and dinosaurs never coexisted; there can 
be no hardwired evolutionary memory such as that which programmes us to move 
aside should a sabre-toothed tiger come round the corner.

Such an irrational reaction, then, is a fantastic coup for cinema – great 
testimony to the power of movies to make the real unreal, to capture the 
imaginary. It also bodes well for Meg: Hell’s Aquarium.

The garden of Franzen



On Tuesday Lonely Planet voted Kent its top choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/17/kent-voted-europes-top-family-holiday-destination-by-lonely-planet>
 as a family holiday destination. The guide cited the regenerated retrocharms 
of Margate, and the posh caffs of Whitstable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/aug/05/kent-coast-art-summer-holiday>.

Kent would also, I’d suggest, be a good vacation tip for Jonathan Franzen. Not 
only is there lots of birdwatching, but trips toRochester 
<http://www.rochesterdickensfestival.org.uk/> and Broadstairs 
<http://www.broadstairsdickensfestival.co.uk/>, to the marshes at Hoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jun/08/thames-hub-boris-island-hoo-peninsula>
 and thechurch at Cooling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jun/13/trust-funds-church-treasures>, 
would help sate a Charles Dickens fixation that reaches giddy new heights in 
his new novel,Purity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/27/jonathan-franzen-purity-novel-misanthropy>
.

The heroine of that book is Pip. She’s an almost-orphan with a Havisham-ish 
mother and deep need of a benefactor. There’s a fugitive from justice who has 
committed a compassionate crime, much melodramatic coincidence, and a defence 
of the sort of long-form, socially conscious journalism that led to work such 
as Great Expectations in the first place. The biggest novel of the year has its 
roots firmly in the garden of England. Visit Kent should be thrilled.

Fantasy fancies 



Recent discussion of Kristen Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-stewart>, the actor whose mother may 
or may not have confirmed her bisexuality, has been accompanied by clapping and 
tutting – but not a lot of self-examination. Some say that the media has 
revealed its essential prejudice in its coverage; others accuse avaricious 
studios of stopping gay stars from coming out.

Actually, such issues begin and end with us, the audience. Studios cater for 
markets; newspapers too. As witnessed at the time ofGeorge Clooney’s engagement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/apr/28/george-clooney-reported-engagement>
, it appears many of us assume that if we fall into the broad category of 
people a movie star could fancy, they’re more likely to fall into bed with us. 
Yet such odds remain sadly slight. There is almost more chance of dinosaurs 
roaming the earth once more than Stewart sleeping with you, regardless of 
gender.

Until our own egos can learn to cope with this, neither stars nor studios 
should be blamed for seeking to placate us.
 