 Lord Widgery is just another "British establishment liar", according to Miss 
Bernadette Devlin. His report "means the end of the Whitelaw mission", 
according to Mr Eddie McAteer, President of the Nationalist Party. He has been 
"dishonest" and his report is "a total distortion of the truth" according to Mr 
Ivan Cooper of the Social Democratic and Labour Party.
Since January 30, the belief has been deep rooted among non-Protestants in 
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> that the 
events in Londonderry were a bloody massacre, deliberately provoked by the 
British Army as a punitive measure. Or, alternatively, that the paratroops ran 
amuck. Lord Widgery's detailed reconstruction of the events does not sustain 
either version. Hence the resentment of those who believe otherwise. The 
extremity of their words demonstrates again the way feuds and hatreds in 
Ireland feed upon themselves - and the apparent hopelessness of any attempt to 
bring reconciliation between the two communities. If Lord Widgery's findings 
really were to be "the end of the Whitelaw mission" then all Ireland would be 
on the way to self-destruction. It would mean that closed minds were bound to 
prevent any progress. But that cannot be accepted. The search for 
reconciliation has to continue.

Perhaps it is impossible for anyone, even a Lord Chief Justice, to reach 
wholly objective conclusions on events such as Londonderry's that day. One of 
Lord Widgery's implicit points, indeed, is that these events happened because 
of all the events that had preceded them - and each separate incident from 1968 
onwards (or 1690 or much earlier) is interpreted differently by each side. 
Perhaps it is enough, as a starting point, to say that the shooting of 
civilians by soldiers in any British city in any circumstances is a painful and 
horrible event. That, at least, ought to be common ground. The Prime Minister 
yesterday repeated the Government's deep regret that there were casualties; 
and, irrespective of blame, nearly everyone will agree with him. Lord Widgery, 
taking his conclusions chronologically, says that there would have been no 
deaths that day if the illegal march had not created a highly dangerous 
situation. One might add that what seemed acceptable in civil rights marches in 
1968 had become less acceptable by 1972, because by 1972 the dangers were much 
more obvious. But Lord Widgery's report is not one-sided. He admits that fatal 
mistakes were made on the army's side, even if some soldiers were under great 
strain; and he says that if the army had persisted in a "low key" attitude, the 
day might have passed off without serious incident.

Again, as so often, one can learn whatever one chooses to learn from such a 
detailed reconstructions of events. If it is true that a "low key" attitude 
might have let the day pass quietly, the point is one that Mr Whitelaw and the 
army commanders have plainly absorbed. Their recent tactics have been 
deliberately low in key. Even so, one shooting of an admittedly militant IRA 
leader still leads to intense resentment on the Catholic side, as in Belfast 
last week-end. And, on the other side, Lord Widgery's qualification of his 
conclusion about low key operations will be noted. The army, he says, had been 
subjected to "sever stoning" for upwards of half an hour; and the future threat 
"posed by the hard core of hooligans" in Londonderry made the arrest of some a 
legitimate objective. It may be added that to ask anyone to keep a low key 
attitude if persistently stoned is to ask for superhuman behaviour.

Last weekend, yet again, youths and even children in Londonderry and Belfast 
were incited to stone soldiers. And from behind the cover of children gunmen 
fired at the soldiers. Such conduct is arguably more criminal and more callous 
than anything done on either side in Londonderry on January 30; and it led to 
the deaths of three soldiers. Because only soldiers were killed, there will be 
no tribunal to inquire into it. Among some people in Ireland it is excused as 
"retaliation" for the death of Joseph McCann; and it is condoned by supposedly 
responsible leaders such as Miss Devlin and Mr McAteer. The repetition of the 
Irish tragedy, in other words, continues unabated. Is it to be carried to its 
illogical and terrible conclusion or is the Whitelaw mission to lead to a sane 
solution?
 