
Even as pundits and reporters alike continue to parse through returns, the 
nauseating and nasty 2016 election is essentially over. And that means it’s 
time for the #NeverTrump movement to die.

The lingering protests against Trump and his incendiary policies, comments and 
alleged actions are understandable, because the level of angry rhetoric reached 
a fever pitch in the waning days of the campaign and people are genuinely 
scared.

If Donald Trump gets his way, his administration will be disastrous | Trevor 
Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/donald-trump-administration-conflicts-of-interest>
That makes it even more troubling that experienced policy experts are 
continuing their resistance toDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> – the man who was elected by 
their peers as the nation’s 45th president.

Dr Peter Mansoor, a former army colonel who was at Gen David Petraeus’ side 
when they devised the brilliant surge in Iraq, has vowed to never serve in a 
Trump administration. “He has said too many things that eat away at my ethical 
and moral foundation that would enable me to serve under him,”he told Business 
Insider 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/peter-mansoor-david-petraeus-trump-administration-2016-11>
 after the election.

He’s not alone. Eliot Cohen, who worked in the Bush state department from 2007 
to 2009, gave Trump a chance only to jump the Trump transition ship. “After 
exchange w Trump transition team, changed my recommendation: stay away,” he
tweeted <https://twitter.com/EliotACohen/status/798512852931788800> this week. 
“They’re angry, arrogant, screaming ‘you LOST!’ Will be ugly.”

And progressive groups and some lawmakers are now pressuring Democrats in 
Congress to put politics ahead of the nation. “It is unacceptable for 
Democratic leadership to normalize Trump and collaborate with him so long as he 
continues his bigotry, hatred, and division,”penned 
<http://front.moveon.org/moveon-to-democrats-no-collaboration-with-trumps-hate/#.WC3h8LlvQZM>
 MoveOn.org executive director Ilya Sheyman.

But Trump’s very turn-offs are why the nation needs our best and brightest to 
surround our president-elect right now.

Trump’s a policy novice with no governing experience. In thinking about our 
president-elect it may be wise to look at the reasons given when Dr Ben Carson 
took his name out of consideration for a cabinet post.

“Dr Carson feels he has no government experience, he’s never run a federal 
agency. The last thing he would want to do was take a position that could 
cripple the presidency,” Carson’s friend Armstrong Williamssaid of the 
neurosurgeon this week 
<http://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/306045-carson-turned-down-offer-to-serve-in-trump-administration-report>
.

That sentiment also applies to Trump. His business acumen may have had 
electoral appeal, buthis transition team is in shambles 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/power-tension-purge-inside-trump-transition-turmoil-n685321>
 because he’s surrounded by political animals who are more focused on doling 
out favors and exacting political revenge than on governing the greatest nation 
on earth.

Trump’s tapping of former Breitbart CEO Steve Bannon to be his senior White 
House adviser has rightly sparked outrage because of the terrifying realization 
that the man whoshepherded and cultivated the alt-right 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/08/stephen-bannon-donald-trump-alt-right-breitbart-news>
 for years will now have the president’s ear on a daily basis.

It’s also troubling that Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, is vying for an 
influential seat in the White House 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/donald-trump-administration/2016/11/jared-kushner-trump-white-house-231535>
. Besidesthe appointment probably being illegal 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/jared-kushner-white-house-job.html>
, Kushner has never been vetted by the American people, lacks any governing 
experience and is married to Ivanka Trump, who will continue to run Trump 
enterprises in daddy’s absence.

The urge to avoid this Trumpster fire is understandable. But the president 
needs a new brain trust – one with knowledge, an understanding of history, 
clear-eyed vision and dedication to the constitutional principles that make 
America great.

America can remain a shining city on a hill if Trump is surrounded by the 
nation’s finest experts, and not his political cronies, alt-right activists,
conspiracy theorists 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/daughter-sandy-hook-victim-demands-donald-trump-disown-alex-jones-n685061>
 and unelected family members. Serving under a President Trump doesn’t require 
one to bend their morals or basic ethics. If anything it should make government 
workers more aware of their constitutional obligations that supersede any one 
person sitting in the Oval Office.

For many it won’t be easy to serve under our soon-to-be President Trump, but 
your fellow citizens would be forever grateful if you were able to derail even 
one unethical proposal or to block one wacky idea from coming to fruition, or 
to stop just one late-night, vengeful tweet from being transmitted.


The United States has always been more than one man, and that’s not going to 
change just because Donald Trump is our commander-in-chief. That is, unless 
America’s most talented public servants put themselves and their reputations 
ahead of the nation in a time of dire need.
 