
In the 1960s and 1970s, a “green revolution” of agricultural modernisation 
swept through many Asian countries, helping farmers and transforming economies 
as it went.

While similar attempts at the time yielded poor results across Africa, today a 
new wave of green revolutions is being implemented, in countries such as 
Malawi, Zambia, Uganda, Kenya and Ethiopia. This time, the policies have been 
hailed as transformative development successes by theIMF 
<https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2011/cr11154.pdf> and the Alliance 
for a Green Revolution in Africa <http://www.agra.org/> (Agra). 

The policies, which aim to promote modern seed varieties and inputs to boost 
the production of marketable crops, are seen as a major strategy to reduce 
poverty in sub-SaharanAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. These 
are justified by governments and donors as an essential response to rising 
populations, limited land and the need for growth to fuel more general 
development.

Meet India's female 'seed guardians' pioneering organic farming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/18/meet-indias-female-seed-guardians-pioneering-organic-farming>
In Rwanda, the key component of this strategy is the Crop Intensification 
Programme 
<http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/10/20297833/rwanda-third-phase-transformation-agriculture-sector-program-for-results-project>
, which was initiated in 2008 and is now in its third phase. The programme 
favours crop specialisation over diversity, dictating which single crop each 
Rwandan farmer can grow in each of the two main growing seasons and 
distributing modern seeds and subsidised chemical fertilisers.

But there is good reason to question these policies and whether Africa can 
copy Asia’s green revolution success. The conditions facing African countries 
today are very different from those in Asia some 40 years ago.

Alongside fellow researchers, I spent months talking to villagers in three 
mountainous areas in westernRwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> 
to hear about important changes in their lives. The testimonies were quite 
incongruous with more official accounts of policy impacts.

Farming is more than income generation

In western Rwanda, farmers traditionally cultivate up to 60 different types of 
crops. They plant and harvest in overlapping cycles to subsist and minimise 
chances of hunger. And the associated social systems encompass a way of life 
central to people’s knowledge and culture.

The mix of crops changes with subtle differences in soil, slope and altitude. 
Trade and patterns of labour follow these gradients. Each day droves of 
villagers take sugar cane uphill to trade for potatoes, labourers head to an 
area knowing there are crops to be harvested and deep relationships are formed.


For these reasons farmers consider living a good life to be dependent not 
purely on income but on their access to farm land, good social relations and 
their autonomy to make decisions about how to use their resources.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fto-reduce-hunger-in-africa-work-with-poor-farmers-not-against-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f962098ff36e6888b8368b1d7173186ee8facb8%2F0_120_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=To%20reduce%20hunger%20in%20Africa%2C%20work%20with%20poor%20farmers%20%E2%80%93%20not%20against%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fto-reduce-hunger-in-africa-work-with-poor-farmers-not-against-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=To%20reduce%20hunger%20in%20Africa%2C%20work%20with%20poor%20farmers%20%E2%80%93%20not%20against%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fto-reduce-hunger-in-africa-work-with-poor-farmers-not-against-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f962098ff36e6888b8368b1d7173186ee8facb8%2F0_120_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Researchers argue similar modernisation programmes in Malawi, Kenya, and 
Uganda are also showing negative results. Photograph: James Akena/REUTERS 
Farming policy in Rwanda argues that 
<http://rema.gov.rw/rema_doc/Policies/National_land_policy_english_version_.pdf>
 agriculture there should be focused towards specialisation and to manage the 
land and use it in an efficient, uniform manner. Yet revealing the common 
perspective on the ground, one farmer told us: “We have no ability to oppose 
decisions made by the government. They tell us to plant crops in the wrong 
season. They’ll say, ‘Grow beans now’ and everyone here knows it’s the wrong 
time to grow them.” The policies designate which crops are to be grown in which 
region and aim to drive widespread use of new seeds and input technologies.

We interviewed 165 individuals in eight villages, in three different parts of 
western Rwanda. A further 50 people took part in group discussions held in each 
village. Participants feel this policy is a very real risk to their control 
over their land. Some 10% had seen the government take land previously for 
conservation or reallocation to refugees. Others said they had seen 
non-approved crops destroyed by local officials.

How a successful collective of smallholder farmers in India is showing the way
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/11/how-a-successful-collective-of-smallholder-farmers-in-india-is-showing-the-way>
The result we saw was that the long-standing knowledge of soils, ecological 
gradients and associated social as well as economic interactions have, in a 
flash, been replaced with rules and administrative boundaries.

Who wins and who loses?

Importantly, our study reveals that in Rwanda only a minority – about 
one-third of relatively wealthy landholders – were able to comply with enforced 
modernisation. For those households, increases in production and income could 
be substantial: 16% of wealthier households had been able to increase their 
land holdings, despite facing some of the highest population densities in 
mainland Africa.

But taking part in the new scheme is not easy and benefits are not guaranteed. 
Modern seeds cannot be used without fertiliser for which people need to take 
credit to pay for. That requires the confidence to be able to pay money back at 
the end of the season and to manage to feed your family in the meantime. To 
comply involves taking a leap of faith.


The poorer you are, the higher that risk is. Fears of harvesting nothing and 
the potential for the government to seize the land means many choose to sell 
up. In recent years 12% of households had become landless labourers.

As they shift from subsistence to dependence on income from intermittent and 
arduous labouring opportunities, people’s incomes might actually increase, yet 
they are stripped of their most valued resource: land. Instead of helping the 
poorest farmers, the policies serve to exacerbate landlessness and increase 
inequality.

Implications for agriculture in Rwanda and beyond

Traditional farming practices are not necessarily superior to any form of 
modernisation or innovation, but innovation must target the needs of rural 
smallholders and involve their participation.


Rising to the nutrition challenge: South Africa's new obesity research centre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/24/south-africa-obesity-nutrition-health-issues>


Negative results for the poor are emerging from similar policies in Malawi 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03066150.2013.848428#.Vs2lBmThDAw>, 
Kenya <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305750X12003105>, 
Ethiopia <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305750X14000436> 
andUganda <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305750X10001142>. 
It is not enough to assume that improvements in the national economy will 
trickle down to the poor. Ultimately, reducing poverty and hunger through 
farming innovation in Africa requires working with poor farmers – not against 
them.

Neil Dawson is senior research associate at the School of International 
Development, University of East Anglia. Research on the impact of farming 
innovation on sub-Saharan Africa was published here 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305750X15002302>. 

A version of this article was first published on The Conversation. Read the 
full versionhere 
<https://theconversation.com/why-the-green-revolution-is-making-farmers-poorer-in-rwanda-54768>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 