
When Ben Franklin was the American ambassador in Paris, someone asked him how 
his revolution was getting on at home. “Ça ira,” he replied. “It’ll do.” Once 
their own revolution arrived, the sans-culottes took this less-than-inspiring 
answer and turned it into one of the world’s most potent political chants. “Ah! 
ça ira, ça ira, ça ira,” they bellowed, in the stirring rhythm tum-tutter 
tum-tutter tum-tutter tah.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-srLjMRjoVI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-srLjMRjoVI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-srLjMRjoVI&media=>
The fact that it’s the rhythm that matters, not the words, is emphasised by 
the fact that it’s always called THE Ça ira. We don’t talk about “the” Frère 
Jacques or “the” Sur le pont d’Avignon.

Rhythm is the heartbeat of political slogans. Maybe it’s not an accident that 
the national anthems of France and America should share a rhythm for five 
notes; thoughthe American one <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sN6NrrvgsCk>, 
likeour own <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iJtN5iswzf0>, is a stately waltz 
rather than the gruelling march ofthe Marseillaise 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xcBX3ssfNLk>.

The intrusive image of Beethoven knocking on the Door of Fate at the beginning 
of his Fifth Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_4IRMYuE1hI> has 
eclipsed the obsessive deployment of the same rhythm in Schubert’s magnificent 
melodramatic songDer Zwerg <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yXfZt94Gfjs>, where 
the dwarf strangles his unfaithful princess in a boat on a misty lake, lowering 
her pale body into the depths before sailing on alone into an unknowable 
future; or its gentler presentation in Mozart’s Piano Trio in B flat, where the 
absence of any image emphasises the fact that rhythm has a meaning of its own, 
independent of words or pictures. It’s that independence that makes music so 
hard to explain, of course. Even the best explanation can only deepen an 
understanding that’s already there. (“If you gotta ask, you ain’t got it, 
<http://www.allaboutjazz.com/fats-waller-if-you-got-to-ask-you-aint-got-it-by-jim-santella.php>
” said Fats Waller in 1947). But such an understanding is something we can all 
work on, simply by listening to music with our whole attention.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZZi_6FUbo-Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZZi_6FUbo-Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZZi_6FUbo-Q&media=>
The political use of Beethoven’s rhythm during the second world war, however, 
had less to do with its musical meaning, however you might describe it, than 
with the happy coincidence that, in Morse code, dit-dit-dit-dah spells V – for 
Victory, of course. I don’t quite remember how they used the rhythm during the 
war myself (b 
<https://audioboom.com/boos/3460432-political-rhythm?utm_campaign=embed&utm_content=retweet&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter>
ut Colonel Britton will tell you 
<https://audioboom.com/boos/3460432-political-rhythm?utm_campaign=embed&utm_content=retweet&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter>
) but I do know how Wally Stott’s timpani throbbed away asTony Hancock made up 
tall tales <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hancock%27s_Half_Hour> of how he’d 
baled out over Berlin.

During the Ferguson riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/19/guardian-view-on-ferguson-riots>
 in Missouri last autumn, the angry crowd came up with a telling political 
rhythm as they chanted: “This is what democracy looks like.” Different versions 
of the chant, which goes back at least to the Seattle WTO protests in 1999, 
tell us something about politics and creativity. At quasi-official 
demonstrations like that at theWisconsin State Capitol at Madison in 2011 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WTLg729voaU>, or the Justice for All march in 
St Louis <http://www.nbcnews.com/video/nbc-news/56215857#56215857> last 
October, both with instrumental accompaniment, the chant trots along almost 
happily in a syncopated four-four version, the musical equivalent of 
drum-majorettes. But in a radio news bulletin in November, I heard a rawer 
version, just angry voices with no instruments to add any veneer of musical 
learning. The rhythm was much stronger, slightly awkward, and unmistakably 
sincere (I dare say the smile of a drum-majorette is sincere, but you’ll see 
what I’m getting at). The unfamiliar, lopsidedness of the rhythm adds real 
menace to its message. Authentic rhythms from spontaneous voices – crowds are 
composers too.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWTLg729voaU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWTLg729voaU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWTLg729voaU&media=>
I was sketching my new piece, Turning Points, when I heard that news bulletin, 
and I jotted the fascinating rhythm down in my sketchbook, with the date, 25 
November 2014. I would never have bothered to jot down the drum-majorette 
version. The Ferguson rhythm twisted and changed even as I listened, like a 
live thing, and it quickly fed itself into my piece. The richness of the rhythm 
is purely musical, and quite independent of the words – though towards the end 
of my piece, I use them too.

Turning Points, you see, is a celebration of democracy, taking as its main 
texts the documents of Magna Carta, Agincourt and Waterloo, turning points in 
the march of history whose anniversaries we celebrate this year. But the piece 
is more than a glossy glance at great events. The most important phrases in its 
libretto are “The price of liberty is eternal vigilance” 
<http://freedomkeys.com/vigil.htm>, a phrase first written down by the American 
Thomas Charlton in 1809, and “The annals of earlier reigns should have served 
as lesson for the lords of France” – the wise comment of a French monk writing 
shortly after Agincourt.

Waterloo <http://www.britishbattles.com/waterloo/waterloo-june-1815.htm>, 
where an alliance deposed a tyrant, brings in theDuke of Wellington, who’s a 
fascinating metrical study all on his own 
<https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Arthur_Wellesley,_1st_Duke_of_Wellington#Quotes>
. The rhythms of his more apocryphal phrases – “I have seen their backs 
before”, “Publish and be damned”, “Try sparrowhawks, Ma’am” – remind us that he 
was a musical man, the son of a composer, and a concertgoer – there’s a 
watercolour byLami <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eug%C3%A8ne_Lami> of him 
escorting Queen Victoria to Chopin’s recital. But the gnarled syntax of his 
despatches and parliamentary speeches is a different matter, and in setting 
them to music – where the chief thing is to find the rhythm – I found myself 
sucked deep into the Duke’s mind, and began dimly to understand his universal 
competence. Here he is as prime minister, urging Catholic emancipation in 1829:


I am one of those who have probably passed a longer period of my life engaged 
in war than most men, and principally in civil war; and I must say this, that 
if I could avoid, by any sacrifice whatever, even one month of civil war in the 
country to which I was attached, I would sacrifice my life in order to do it.

Not polished, though its majestic opening understatement probably raised a 
smile, but it doesn’t leave anything out, and he really means it. These words 
introduce the Duke to us in the first movement of my piece, Battles & 
Manifestos, and I believe it’s the first time the Duke of Wellington’s words 
have been set to music. Peter Savidge, my baritone soloist in the three 
imminent performances of Turning Points, makes a fine lookalike.

In the fourth movement of Turning Points, a children’s choir sings the words 
“I am Malala”, over and over again. This phrase, the title of Malala 
Yousafzai’s autobiography, written after her views on female education made her 
a target for the Taliban <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PeADICM8isY>, is the 
musical incarnation of her whole philosophy, the unvarying persistence of its 
equal rhythm enhanced by its emollient consonants. As the children sing, the 
solo soprano echoes Martin Luther King’s most famous rhetorical phrase.

Rhetoric has its rhythms too, often swung in larger metres than can be borne 
by a pithy slogan. Take Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg address, the kernel of my 
penultimate movement, Gettysburg:

It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before 
us: that government of the people by the people for the people shall not perish 
from the Earth.

The threefold crescendo of “people” climaxes in the dignity of “perish”, with 
the technically redundant “from the earth” the perfect analogy of the runner’s 
slowing pace after breasting the tape.

Compare Churchill’s use of a similar threefold structure, the 
sting-in-the-tail sharpened by the sudden stop – no winding-down phrase here.

Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few.

(Churchill exploits the associations of the word “few”. Olivier’s film was not 
yet made, but many of Churchill’s audience would have known theSt Crispin’s Day 
speech from Shakespeare’s Henry V – “we few, we happy few 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St_Crispin%27s_Day_Speech>”, which complements 
Churchill’s words in my fugal representation of the Battle of Agincourt.

My piece ends by turning to issues of enfranchisement, brought to the fore by 
the Malala section, but subliminally present from the very outset, since the 
whole thing is a Fantasia on a suffragist song of 1912:You’ll Get There, 
composed by Sir Hubert Parry for his friend Millicent Garrett Fawcett 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02l7xj9>, the campaigner for women’s 
suffrage. Catchy rhythms don’t play such a prominent part in Parry as in a 
composer like Elgar, for example, but in his own almost Handelian way, Parry 
knows how to exploit simplicities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Frhythm-revolution-political-power-slogans-turning-point-david-owen-norris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff28523566472241923c5c8d7c83a120e991647e1%2F259_25_2628_1578%2F2628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=To%20the%20barricades!%20Why%20rhythm%20is%20the%20heartbeat%20of%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Frhythm-revolution-political-power-slogans-turning-point-david-owen-norris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=To%20the%20barricades%21%20Why%20rhythm%20is%20the%20heartbeat%20of%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Frhythm-revolution-political-power-slogans-turning-point-david-owen-norris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff28523566472241923c5c8d7c83a120e991647e1%2F259_25_2628_1578%2F2628.jpg>
 David Owen Norris plays the oldest surviving English grand piano in Apsley 
House, London – once owned by the Duke of Wellington. Photograph: AFP/Getty 
Images 
Consider just the minims <http://minimserver.com/images/minim.jpg> – those 
un-filled-in notes with stems, lasting two beats, the longest notes in You’ll 
Get There. Its first phrase has one minim, a middle G. The second phrase is in 
the identical rhythm, and its minim is one note higher, on A. The third phrase 
has no minim: its extreme notes are top E, and F seven notes below. Then the 
last phrase snaps up the lost minim so it has two in all: the first on a top F 
(the top note of the whole song), and the other on middle G – the interval of a 
seventh again.

So the first two phrases share a rhythm, and the second two share a shape, 
while the minims rise from G to A and up to F, before falling to G again – the 
very same structure as that Gettysburg phrase, the threefold build-up to the 
climax, as effective in music as in speech.

Parry, like Lincoln and Churchill, knows that the climax need be neither the 
highest nor the loudest note – it’s all a matter of timing. Simple things, 
arranged with skill to communicate a deep meaning.

 * Turning Points <http://www.davidowennorris.com/turning-points/> by David 
Owen Norris premieres at St Mary’s church, Southampton, on Saturday 19 
September; then is performed at St Matthew’s church, Northampton, on 26 
September, and St Paul’s church, Covent Garden, London, on 1 October.Buy 
tickets here <https://www.ticketsource.co.uk/davidowennorris>
 