
For me, sourcing produce from a farmers' market is a delight, and most of what 
you find is seasonal and local, which I'm fanatical about. It's also a 
wonderful way to learn about ingredients straight from the experts who grow, 
farm and produce them.Stockbridge Market <http://www.stockbridgemarket.com/> is 
on every Thursday and Sunday, and it's up the street from our gastro pub, the
Scran & Scallie <http://scranandscallie.com/>, which opened in March, so I like 
to pop along to see what local suppliers have fresh that day.

Not far away in Leith, the Ship on the Shore 
<http://www.theshipontheshore.co.uk> seafood restaurant and champagne bar is 
where, as a family, we often spend Sundays. It epitomises everything I enjoy 
about Scottish pub food. They respect the produce and keep it simple.

In central Edinburgh, Castle Terrace <http://www.castleterracerestaurant.com/> 
restaurant is going from strength to strength. The proprietor, Dominic Jack, is 
a talented chef and has made his mark on Edinburgh's culinary scene. His menus 
are modern and innovative and he makes the most of the fantastic produce we 
have on our doorstep, delivered straight from land and sea and cooked that day.

Edinburgh has really upped its game in the past few years when it comes to 
dining at all levels, and we have some of the best restaurants in the UK, where 
the chefs really focus on the quality of the produce. I really enjoyOndine 
<http://www.ondinerestaurant.co.uk>, Roy Brett's restaurant off the Royal Mile. 
The shellfish is of fantastic quality and I especially like the eye-catching 
fruits of the sea platter.
 The Lobster Shack, North Berwick. Photograph: Alamy 
Something my wife Michaela and I love to do when we can is get together with 
friends and head out of town. Whenever we do, we make a stop at theLobster Shack
 <http://www.lobstershack.co.uk/> on the harbour in North Berwick, a small 
seaside town just outside Edinburgh. The lobster is freshly caught and served 
with garlic and herb butter.

Although I've travelled the globe with my job, there's nowhere quite like 
Scotland. St Andrews is a must visit for anyone coming to Scotland and my wife 
and I loveThe Peat Inn <http://www.thepeatinn.co.uk/>, which is close by. 
Geoffrey Smeddle and his wife, Katherine, do a fantastic job up there and the 
food is first class.

Up in the Trossachs, Monachyle Mhor <http://mhor.net/> overlooks Lochs Daine 
and Voile, a few miles from Balquhidder. The stunning surroundings make it an 
idyllic retreat. It's a family-run business and some of the produce is sourced 
on their doorstep: the bread they serve is from their bakery, and their farm 
provides the fresh eggs, pork, venison, beef and vegetables they use in the 
restaurant. It's a real Scottish hidden gem.

Over at the Gleneagles Hotel, in Auchterarder, Andrew Fairlie 
<http://www.andrewfairlie.co.uk/> is one of Scotland's finest chefs. His 
eponymous two-Michelin-star restaurant is in the heart of Perthshire, where I 
grew up, and sits in a spectacular location.

Tom Kitchin is Michelin-starred owner of The Kitchin, Leith, Edinburgh 
(0131-555 1755,thekitchin.com <http://thekitchin.com>), and owner of The Scran 
& Scallie, Stockbridge, Edinburgh (0131-332 6281,scranandscallie.com 
<http://scranandscallie.com/>)
 