
Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> has said 
the election of Donald Trump as US president should be a wake-up call for 
Australia, proving it needs a strong centre-right leader.

But he praised Malcolm Turnbull for becoming a more “orthodox” centre-right 
prime minister since his election, pointing as evidence toTurnbull’s policies 
on coal and renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/coal-will-be-important-for-many-many-decades-to-come-says-turnbull>
.

Speaking on the ABC Radio National on Friday, Abbott said political events 
showed the danger of paying too much attention to polls.

He said many voters had stopped being upfront with pollsters because they did 
not want to be excoriated for not being politically correct.

“The UK election last year, the Brexit vote and the Trump vote are a good sign 
that we should not be ruled by polls,” Abbott said.

When Turnbull deposed Abbott in September last year he noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/14/malcolm-turnbulls-speech-in-full-we-need-a-new-style-of-leadership>
 that the Coalition had “lost 30 Newspolls in a row”.

Unpopularity in Australia may hinder security cooperation with Trump – analysts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/unpopularity-in-australia-may-hinder-security-cooperation-with-trump-analysts>
Abbott said Trump’s election demonstrated that voters wanted a leader who 
would get things done, regardless of his personal failings. “In the end people 
are not voting for a role model or a saint, they’re voting for a leader,” he 
said.

He warned voters who were unhappy with conventional standard bearers in modern 
politics would look for alternatives: “This is something that mainstream 
politicians ignore at their peril.”

“If you don’t have a strong centre-right party ... people who are looking for 
what might broadly be described as conservative positions will find other 
voices to represent them.

In that context, he said, Turnbull had made some positive policy changes since 
the election.

“It’s quite interesting, ... that if you actually listen to the prime 
minister, there’s been a lot less talk about innovation and agility and the new 
economy, a lot more talk about national security and border security, a lot 
more talk about cost of living and the need to reject Labor’s 50% renewable 
energy target, which will result in a $50bn overbuild of surplus power capacity 
and everyone will be paying that through their power bills.

“There’s been a lot more talk about the problems inside the Labor party and 
union corruption.

“So what you’ve seen from Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> post-election is 
a much more orthodox centre-right leader.”

He said the government must continue to resist unnecessary attacks on the cost 
of living. “And the most obvious and unnecessary attack on your cost of living 
right now is what Labor is doing to your power bills through renewable energy 
and its assault on the coal industry.”

He vigorously endorsed the latest push to overhaul section 18C of the Racial 
Discrimination Act, which he hadabandoned when he was prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/05/tony-abbott-dumps-race-act-changes-terrorism>
 because of the public backlash, and described the Human Rights Commission as 
“a pretty crook organisation”.

Malcolm Turnbull backs Trump as a conciliator following 'bitter' US campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/09/malcolm-turnbull-backs-conciliator-bitter-us-campaign>
He said 18C was a “bad, bad law” and actions against a group of Queensland 
university students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/04/qut-computer-lab-racial-discrimination-lawsuit-thrown-out>
 and the cartoonist Bill Leak were outrageous.

He said people had been hauled before the “thought police” and made to feel 
“un-Australian” because they had spoken their minds.

“We are not precious little flowers in this country,” he said. The best 
antidote to something people found offensive or insulting was to point out 
exactly why it was untrue and unfair.

Abbott said there should be appropriate laws against the incitement of 
violence and hatred.

“One of the reasons why I hesitated back in 2014 when it came to amending 
section 18C ... was because I didn’t want to see people standing up in the 
prayer rooms of this country saying about Jewish people – the sort of things 
that we are hearing regularly.

“This whole idea that it is OK to stand up and say ‘death to the infidel’ I 
think is just wrong and we need to stop that.

“But 18C is not stopping that. That’s going on and on and on.

“It’s a bad, bad law but you’ve also got a pretty crook organisation in the 
Human Rights Commission.”

Asked whether he still entertained leadership ambitions, Abbott said: “I’m not 
asking to be promoted, I’m just seeking to do the best possible job where I am.”
 