
There is no experience more enchanting than waking in a tent, deep in the 
Australian bush, and listening to the play of birdsong on the air: strange, 
haunting melodies so unlike the dawn chorus we have grown accustomed to at home.


To a foreigner, the curling, coiling tangle of the bush seems strange indeed: 
the medicinal aroma of the eucalypts, their slender slips of leaves; dropped 
branches littering the ground, fallen clean away like lizards’ tails; dark-eyed 
possums creeping in the dark. But much as the legend of the wild west has come 
to define American identity, so the Australian bush is firmly embedded in the 
national psyche.


Thicker Than Water by Cal Flyn review – my ancestor the murderer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/02/thicker-than-water-cal-flyn-review-angus-macmillan>
Broadly speaking, “the bush” refers to all rural areas (not only those still 
forested with gum and stringybark) and encompasses the arid “outback” at the 
continent’s heart. Its wildness and untamed nature, its distinctiveness, has 
come to symbolise much about Australian culture and history.


While researching Thicker Than Water 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/thicker-than-water-427431.html>, I made great 
efforts to immerse myself in Australian frontier life: reading 19th-century 
journals, hiking old trails, digging in archives and heading out into the hills 
alone. But of course, one is never alone with a book. Here are the 10 that I 
feel best summon the spirit of the bush and the mindset of those who live there.

1. The Drover’s Wife and Other Stories by Henry Lawson 
<http://www.eastoftheweb.com/short-stories/UBooks/DrovWife.shtml>
Lawson was an enormously popular writer of short stories and poetry in the 
early 20th century, whose sketches of rural life – such as that of the 
eponymous drover’s wife (“a gaunt, sun-browned bushwoman” protecting her 
children from a snake) – form the backbone of Australia’s self-mythologising as 
a nation of battlers, larrikins and bushwackers. The “poet of the people” is 
today more often invoked than read, but regrettably so: his prose is 
understated and evocative. You can feel the red dust settling on your face as 
you read.

2. My Brilliant Career by Miles Franklin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-brilliant-career-2.html>
Stella “Miles” Franklin wrote My Brilliant Career (1901) when she was only a 
teenager, and it was an immediate hit, printed with a foreword from Henry 
Lawson. Franklin was “born of the bush”, he said, and her story of a bookish, 
headstrong farmgirl was full of “startlingly, painfully real” descriptions of 
rural life and land (although “the girlishly emotional parts”, he added, were 
“for girl readers to judge”). Free-spirited Sybella struggles against society’s 
limiting expectations of women, and dreams of a life of art, literature and 
theatre as sandstorms whip the walls of her family’s lonely homestead. Closely 
autobiographical – so much so that some neighbours sued Franklin after its 
publication – this coming-of-age classic is also a proto-feminist text.

3. The Bush by Don Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/22/the-bush-by-don-watson-review-driven-by-the-burning-truth>
The academic, speechwriter, essayist and general polymath Don Watson’s most 
recent book charts the social, cultural and natural history of the Australian 
outlands. He luxuriates in the romance of frontier life – the felling of the 
great-girthed trees, the billycan on the campfire – without neglecting to mine 
its darker seams. The bush, he writes, is both real and imaginary, “in that 
among the life it harbours is the life of the Australian mind”. Just so.

4. All the Birds, Singing by Evie Wyld 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/all-the-birds-singing-2.html>
The second novel by the acclaimed Anglo-Australian author weaves together the 
past and present of Jake, an Australian sheep farmer who has started afresh on 
an unnamed English island. Flashbacks to an earlier life in Western Australia 
deftly capture the unforgiving beauty of the antipodean landscape, and the 
macho culture of the shearers’ shed, where the female protagonist is accepted 
into the fold on the basis of being “a bloody good bloke”. Bleak in parts and 
full of foreboding, but also lyrical and compelling.

5. The Secret River by Kate Grenville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jan/22/fiction.features2>
When William Thornhill is transported to the other side of the world for a 
minor theft, wife and offspring in tow, he is catapulted into a wild and 
lawless land where life is cheap but opportunity abounds. After his pardon is 
secured, Thornhill becomes fixated on setting his family up as landowners in a 
(then) remote corner of the colony. Grenville deftly captures his visceral 
hunger for land – “the confusion of wanting” that springs up as he rows upriver 
into the wilderness – and the fears of early settlers, who cast anxious eyes 
into the forest, where their Indigenous Australian neighbours “flickered 
amongst the trees, as if the darkness of the men were an extension of bark, of 
leaf-shade, of the play of light on a water-stained rock.” It can’t end well, 
and it doesn’t.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Faustralia-books-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-australian-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62c75ed3b6ff186251f42852de654ee367100d9c%2F0_118_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20Australian%20bush&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Faustralia-books-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-australian-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20Australian%20bush&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Faustralia-books-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-australian-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62c75ed3b6ff186251f42852de654ee367100d9c%2F0_118_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Judy Davis in Gillian Armstrong’s 1979 film of My Brilliant Career. 
Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
6. The Greatest Estate on Earth by Bill Gammage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sko-YDIULKY>
Gammage’s investigation into traditional methods of land management has 
forever changed the way that we see the outback and the nature of pre-contact 
Indigenous Australian life. Far from the “primitive” hunter-gatherers they are 
often cast as, Gammage showed that the original inhabitants of Australia 
employed a complex programme of “firestick farming” to systematically regulate 
plant growth and the movement of prey animals. As a result, pyrophytic 
(fire-adapted) plants dominate the bush – some, like gum or banksia, waiting 
for wildfire to release their seeds. The skill with which the people sculpted 
their habitat serves as a counter-narrative to those tales of “battling against 
nature” that abound in settler society.

7. Letters from Victorian Pioneers, edited by Thomas Bride 
<https://archive.org/stream/lettersfromvicto00publiala/lettersfromvicto00publiala_djvu.txt>
This compendium of first-hand accounts by the earliest settlers in what would 
become the state of Victoria is full of insight into the hardships of life as a 
pioneer and their wonder at this strange new land. Gathered by the governor, 
Charles La Trobe, they are candid descriptions of interactions with indigenous 
tribes, grisly injuries, fording rivers on horseback, discoveries of strange 
new flora and fauna, and the difficulties of keeping alive their ragged, 
scab-ridden livestock. Immersive and unexpectedly entertaining.

8. Carpentaria by Alexis Wright 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/carpentaria.html>
Wright’s epic, serpentine novel spans aeons and explores Indigenous Australian 
culture, spirituality – and dispossession. At its heart is the modern-day 
mystic, Norm Phantom, who lives in an encampment in the pricklebush scrub on 
the fringes of a small gulf country town. These characters are the “edge 
people”, in shacks amid the thorns and the long grass, outsiders to society, 
but for all the white folks’ smugness, they see powerful ancestral spirits 
moving through the town heedless of locked gates and stone walls. Visions of 
past, future and the Dreamtime overlap with present-day political wrangling, 
and in the end it comes full circle: nature will always win out.

9. Tracks by Robyn Davidson <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tracks.html>
Davidson, a young bohemian, arrived in Alice Springs in 1975 with a suitcase 
of unsuitable clothes and a “lunatic idea”: to trek across 1,700 miles of the 
Australian outback with only four skittish camels and a dog for company. 
Davidson is uncompromising company, but she revels in nature, sleeping out on 
“mattresses of fallen leaves”, and picking bushtucker as she travels 
(“kungaberries and solanums and mulga apples and eucalyptus manna”). It’s a 
spectacular adventure through some of Australia’s remotest regions, and 
succeeds partly because she displays some of that classic frontiersman 
derring-do.

10. The Songlines by Bruce Chatwin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/songlines.html>
As part of a lifelong fascination with nomadism, Chatwin headed to remote 
central Australia to learn about the songlines, the ancient “labyrinth of 
invisible pathways which meander all over Australia”, sung out by the mythical 
totems during the creation of the Earth. They sit by the campfire and listen to 
the song whose melodic contours describe it like a map. The Songlines is both 
absorbing and informative, and serves well as an introduction to Indigenous 
Australian spirituality and its reverence for the country’s wildernesses.

• Thicker Than Water by Cal Flyn is published by HarperCollins, priced £16.99. 
It is available from the Guardian bookshop priced £12.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/thicker-than-water-427431.html>.
 