
Grove Beer Tap & Grill

Grove’s sleek, minimalist darkwood interior, broken up by some eye-catching 
digital-print art and a bed of plants growing above the bar, may feel 
Scandinavian, but its emphasis is firmly on US craft beers. Up to 13 keg lines 
showcase many beers rarely seen on draught in the UK, from Anchor, Brooklyn and 
Flying Dog (try its remarkably complex, Easy IPA), as well as Liverpool Craft 
Brewing Co’s excellent, unfiltered pale ale, Love Lane, or that unusually tasty 
German pils, Rothaus Tannenzapfle. A bottled list goes deeper on the same US 
breweries, as well as throwing a few other great beers into the mix: various 
Goose Island, Sierra Nevada pale ale, Paulaner hefeweizen. The choices may seem 
“obvious” to hardcore craft geeks, but you could easily fritter away a 
pleasurable evening here. Incidentally, should you wish to visit it, you will 
find the Liverpool branch ofBrewdog <http://www.brewdog.com/> at other end of 
Seel Street.
• Pint from £4.20. Concert Steps, off Seel Street, 0151 709 7393; Facebook page
 <https://www.facebook.com/grovebeergarden>

The Ship & Mitre

If pressed to identify Liverpool’s HQ of hops, it is difficult to look beyond 
the Ship & Mitre. With more than 30 cask and keg lines and a thick book of 
German, Belgian and imported craft beers to choose from, even the most contrary 
of beer enthusiasts will find something to excite them. Helpfully, all draught 
beers are served in pints, halves and third-pint “nips”, meaning you can try a 
lot of beers at low cost. I went near and far, sampling Cheeky Pheasant 
(well-made, mainline bitter) from St Helens’George Wright Brewing 
<http://www.georgewrightbrewing.co.uk/> and a third of Brooklyn Brewing’s 
stunning Sorachi Ace saison (quietly spicy and full of sour, hugely expressive 
tropical fruit flavours). The pub itself is designed to mimic a ship’s galley, 
while, in its rear lounge, amid the dartboards, bric-a-brac and endless pump 
clips, a small stained glass dome presumably nods to the ecclesiastical part of 
the pub’s name. The Ship also has a sister business, the Ship In A Bottle 
off-licence (45a Whitechapel,theshipinabottle.co.uk 
<http://www.theshipinabottle.co.uk/>), where you can pick up, among others, 
bottles of its own label Ship In A Bottle beers, brewed for it byLiverpool 
Organic Brewery <http://www.liverpoolorganicbrewery.com/>. Said brewery runs an 
annual winter ales festival 
<http://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/st-georges-hall-winter-ales-festival-january-2015-tickets-13407767995?aff=eorg>
 at St George’s Hall (22-24 Jan, £8), which will feature beer from more than 
100 small UK micros.
• Pint from £2.60. 133 Dale Street, 0151 236 0859, theshipandmitre.com 
<http://www.theshipandmitre.com/>

Baltic Social and the wider Baltic Triangle

This hip, artsy late-night bar serves a modest range of craft beers which, 
beyond the obvious Anchor, Einstock and Goose Island bottles, is notable for 
its focus on small breweries from both Manchester (Runaway 
<https://twitter.com/runawaybrewery>, Tickety Brew <http://ticketybrew.co.uk/>) 
and Liverpool (Mad Hatter <http://madhatterbrewing.co.uk/>, Melwood Beer Co 
<http://melwoodbeer.co.uk/>, Parker Brewery <https://twitter.com/parker_brewery>
). One cask and a couple of craft-keg lines always include at least one IPA 
from Crafty Dan, Thwaites’ boutique brewing arm, which is the least worst of 
the big-brewery attempts to muscle in on craft beer. Its Lil’ Bewdy was fine 
but forgettable. The Baltic also hosts beer ’n’ food matching events and a 
series of lively one-day beer festivals with Melwood Beer Co.

Baltic Social is on the fringes of Liverpool city centre, in the Baltic 
Triangle – opposite the old Cains brewery site – and there are several other 
points of ale interest you should note, locally. Mad Hatter brews nearby (15-37 
Caryl Street), and opens to the public as a “tap” at various times.Liverpool 
Craft Beer Co <http://www.liverpoolcraftbeer.com/> is also in the process of 
moving into the Baltic Triangle and should have a bar and visitor centre open 
by February.

Liverpool Craft also brews three bottle-conditioned beers for the Baltic 
Triangle bar, restaurant and warehouse events space,Camp & Furnace 
<http://www.campandfurnace.com/> (bottles from £4.50). Considering that its 
Brown Bear is made with Wirral honey and malted wheat smoked at Camp & Furnace, 
it was not as smoky as I had expected. It tasted more like a good, full-bodied 
English bitter: malty, with a well-balanced sweetness and a true, lingering 
bitterness.
• Pint from £3.25 Parliament Street, 0151 707 1137, thebalticsocial.com 
<http://thebalticsocial.com/>

The Baltic Fleet
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418321616596%2Ffa0eb0c5-63af-4e60-9544-c2a4b67ad18f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418321616596%2Ffa0eb0c5-63af-4e60-9544-c2a4b67ad18f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
This historic dockside pub (now convenient for the Albert Dock and Echo Arena) 
is Liverpool’s only brewpub. Its Wapping beers, brewed downstairs in the 
cellars, tend to be more traditional in style, but they are fresh, elegant 
ales. Craft fanatics should keep an eye out for its hop-forward Baltic IPA and 
its occasional Indian Summer and Amarillo pale ale specials. A sample stout was 
bright, light and ripe with dark berry fruit flavours, its dry smokiness 
punctuating each mouthful beautifully. It lacked a little body perhaps, but it 
was a very tasty pint. The Baltic Fleet itself is an unapologetically no-frills 
affair, a bare-bones boozer – its small collection of nautical memorabilia as 
outlandish as a the decor gets. On a cold day, hunker down by the log burners 
in the back room.
• Pint from £2.70. 33 Wapping, 0151 709 3116, balticfleetpubliverpool.com 
<http://www.balticfleetpubliverpool.com/>

The Kazimier Garden
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F12%2F1418383297236%2Ffefa1590-c74e-43e7-8c0f-22ca9314495e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F12%2F1418383297236%2Ffefa1590-c74e-43e7-8c0f-22ca9314495e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: PR 
The Kazimier’s garden is more akin to the kind of hidden, ad-hoc space you 
might find in East Berlin, than a bar off Seel Street. There is an old railway 
carriage to keep warm in and glitter balls wrapped in twigs twirling under 
recycled, plastic-sheet roofing. The soundtrack, on Thursday afternoon, veers 
from Billie Holiday to scratchy avant-rock. Beer-wise, three cask and four keg 
lines dispense a mix of regional real ales (for example First Chop,Nethergate 
<http://www.nethergate.co.uk/>, Magic Rock <http://www.magicrockbrewing.com/>, 
Off Beat), and more obviously cutting-edge stuff from breweries as 
geographically diverse as Brooklyn and Beavertown. Unique to the Kazimier is 
Organo, a beer-series in conjunction with Liverpool Craft Beer Co. As darker, 
wintry beers are in season, Organo has now morphed into Organo Kazm, a damson 
and oatmeal stout which, while plummy enough, lacked the thick mouthfeel you 
expect from an oatmeal stout. In the fridges, you will find a compact 
collection of craft bottles and around 40 German and Belgian classics and 
curiosities (Taras Boulba, various Paulaner, Geuze Boon, smoked Schlenkerla 
Rauchbier).
• Pint from £3.30. 4-5 Wolstenholme Square (entrance on Seel Street), 0151 324 
1723,thekazimier.co.uk <http://www.thekazimier.co.uk/>

Fly In The Loaf
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F12%2F1418383074036%2F1c5887ef-019c-4527-805e-283aaf86447e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F12%2F1418383074036%2F1c5887ef-019c-4527-805e-283aaf86447e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: PR 
Owned by the Isle of Man brewer, Okells <http://www.okells.co.uk/>, this big 
old barn has never been the nicest environment in which to drink. It has some 
cute interior features, such as the mosaic around the bar, but, again on this 
visit, the lighting was too bright, the music bad and, for me, football playing 
silently on numerous TVs is a stone cold atmosphere-killer. What Fly In The 
Loaf does have in abundance, however, and which trumps any reservation, is good 
beer. The choice is a little undiscriminating, perhaps. The presence of a 
handful of bandwagon-jumping craft beers from large breweries, Crafty Dan 
bottles or Fuller’s Frontier lager, jars a little among such a wealth of 
genuinely wonderful beers from, say,Camden Town 
<http://www.camdentownbrewery.com/>, Wiper and True <http://wiperandtrue.com/>, 
Thornbridge <http://www.thornbridgebrewery.co.uk/>, Oakham 
<http://www.oakhamales.com/home.html> and Beavertown 
<http://www.beavertownbrewery.co.uk/>, but that is a minor caveat. Across 23 
cask and keg pumps and a sizeable, constantly evolving bottled menu, which 
contains interesting US imports, you will find numerous excellent and unusual 
beers, not to mention the occasional bargain. Magic Rock’s lemon and lime, 
radler-style fruit beer, Pith Head (tart and refreshing like fizzy lime 
cordial) was being sold at just £3.10 a pint.
• Pint from £2.90. 13 Hardman Street, 0151 708 0817, flyintheloaf.co.uk 
<http://www.flyintheloaf.co.uk/>

The Grapes

With its salmon pink interior and eclectic decor, the Grapes is one of those 
(much loved) pubs that seems to have evolved organically over many years. Note: 
there were strangers at the bar next to me discussing, not as you might expect 
the weather or what Brendan Rodgers needs to do about Gerrard, but Derrida. The 
Grapes also hosts a Sunday jazz session. Its real ale selection (nine pumps) 
tends to the more traditional – Wainwright, Brimstage beers, Bishops’s Finger, 
on this visit – but you can usually find something more crafty on there, too. 
Liverpool Craft Brewing Co’s Toast was precisely that, a chewy and stridently 
hopped rye, amber ale. The Grapes also carries various Mad Hatter bottles, as 
well as better quality mainstream beers (Budvar, Blue Moon, Erdinger), and a 
large selection of speciality rums and gins.
• Pint from £2.75. 60 Roscoe Street, 0151 708 6870, thegrapesliverpool.co.uk 
<http://www.thegrapesliverpool.co.uk/>

The Pen Factory
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418321821779%2F1045d5f4-1d60-4e80-864a-37299c61f4de-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418321821779%2F1045d5f4-1d60-4e80-864a-37299c61f4de-1020x612.jpeg>
Opened at the start of December, this relaxed basement bar and (if you feel 
peckish) canteen, has been packed out ever since. The reputation of its owners, 
Paddy Byrne and chef Tom Gill, who used to run the Everyman Bistro, clearly 
precedes them. On this fly-past, its five real ales included beers from 
Liverpool Organic Brewery, the fantasticMallinsons 
<http://www.drinkmallinsons.co.uk/> and Salopian 
<https://twitter.com/salopianbrewery>. The latter’s Oracle, bristingly hoppy 
but full of delicate apple and melon flavours, was in sparkling form. In the 
fridges, you will find several Liverpool Organic and Fordham’s bottles and a 
core selection of reliable Belgian beers, such as Duvel, Maredsous and Brugse 
Zot. I loved the look of the place, too: a whitewashed, bare-brick space which, 
in its post-industrial simplicity, already feels like it has been there for 
years.
• Pint from £3.13 Hope Street, 0151 709 7887, pen-factory.co.uk 
<http://www.pen-factory.co.uk/>

The Caledonia

The area around Hope Street is home to a network of brilliantly basic, 
unreconstructed Liverpool boozers; something which Liverpool still has in 
abundance compared with many other cities.Roscoe Head 
<http://www.roscoehead.co.uk/> and the two-room Belvedere 
<http://www.belvedereliverpool.com/>, where you will usually find a couple of 
Liverpool Organic Brewery beers on, are two such classics. However, the 
Caledonia is your best bet if you want unpretentious surroundings and 
forward-thinking beer. Home to various folk and live music nights, the 
Caledonia serves four real ales, one craft keg beer, a few interesting cans and 
bottles (Sly Fox, Mad Hatter etc) and three beers from Portland Craft Beer Co 
(personally, I have been underwhelmed by its American ale). Those real ales are 
usually a mixture of traditional and, as the pub’s pump clip collection 
elaborates, occasional edgier beers from the likes ofFirst Chop 
<http://firstchopbrewingarm.com/> and Magic Rock. Reminiscent of a light ‘n’ 
zesty, refreshing South Pacific pale ale, Melwood Beer Co’s Stanley Gold was 
fantastic easy drinking: sweet but earthy, with a distinct grapefruit tang.
• Pint from £2.80. 22 Caledonia Street, 0151 708 0235, 
thecaledonialiverpool.com <http://www.thecaledonialiverpool.com/>

The 23 Club

On par with the Ship & Mitre, but with a more radical craft bent, the 23 Club 
is another Liverpool beer hub that will leave craft geeks drooling in 
excitement. A small basement space beneath the Clove Hitch restaurant (which 
serves an astonishing 16 keg beers), its eight keg and three cask pumps, not to 
mention its huge bottled beer list (there are 200+ bottles available to 
takeaway), read like a who’s who of the planet’s most innovative brewers.
Burning Sky <http://www.burningskybeer.com/>, Brew By Numbers 
<http://www.brewbynumbers.com/>, Brau Kunst Keller 
<http://www.braukunstkeller.de/>, Buxton <http://www.buxtonbrewery.co.uk/>, 
Brewfist <http://www.brewfist.com/>, Birra Del Borgo 
<http://www.birradelborgo.it/> are highlights – and that’s just the Bs. I opted 
for two one-third samplers. AD Hop’s Tongue Twister is an IPA/ brown ale hybrid 
which, in its citrusy sharpness, gritty rye edge and distinctive Belgian 
sourness, lived up to its name. Liverpool Craft Beer Co’s White Fox, tasting so 
sweet after that relative hop bomb, is another innovation (a wheat beer 
bitterly and tropically loaded with US hops), whose flavour dimensions are so 
layered and well-balanced, that it is one of my favourite new wave beers. Look 
out for various meet-the-brewer and tap-takeover events.
• Pint from £3.20. 23 Hope Street, 0151 709 6574, theclovehitch.com 
<http://www.theclovehitch.com/>

Travel between Manchester and Liverpool was provided by First TransPennine 
Express <http://www.tpexpress.co.uk/>
 