
Bow Bar

It may look like a classic old-school Edinburgh pub (it is, in fact, a 
painstaking, late-1980s recreation), but the Bow Bar is resolutely 
forward-thinking when it comes to beer. Beside that mahogany bar – the Bow Bar 
is also the newly-crowned Dram Magazine Whisky Bar Of The Year – you will find 
an extensive bottled beer menu, whose contemporary tone is in sharp contrast to 
the surrounding decor of vintage cigarette advertising and historic pub-trade 
memorabilia. As well as Belgian and German classics, the menu takes in 
lesser-spotted craft beers from trendy Scandinavians (Mikkeller, To ØL), US 
trend-setters (Alesmith, Odell) and the new, creative UK breweries which they 
have inspired, such asBear Hug <http://www.bearhugbrewing.com/>, Elixir 
<http://www.elixirbrew.com/> and Ticketybrew <http://ticketybrew.co.uk/>. 
Meanwhile, eight cask pumps (three permanents include Alechemy’s Bowhemia Pale 
and Cromarty’s “new wave pale”, Happy Chappy), and several keg lines dispense 
beer of a similar seriousness and variety. Bow Bar also runs several, seasonal 
mini beer festivals. Its summer festival finishes on Sunday 3 August.


As local beer geeks will be aware, the company that owns Bow Bar, Edinburgh 
Real Ale Ltd, also runs two equally good beer bars on the fringes of the city 
centre.Cloisters Bar <http://www.cloistersbar.com/> has 16 cask/keg lines and a 
busy events programme. Its Scottish beer festival runs until Sunday 31 August. 
The Stockbridge Tap (2 Raeburn Place) is Edinburgh’s current Camra pub of the 
year.
• Pint from £3.30. 80 West Bow, 0131-226 7667, @bow_bar 
<https://twitter.com/bow_bar>

Jeremiah’s Taproom

One year old this week, Jeremiah’s is very much a sign of the times: a once 
down-at-heel boozer reborn as a craft-beer standard bearer. You may find its 
swanky makeover – a colourful fusion of Victorian pub and trendy Brooklyn beer 
bar – a bit OTT, but the enthusiasm of the staff is real enough. As with most 
of the staff in Edinburgh’s specialist bars, they are passionate beer 
advocates. Five craft-keg and three cask lines are in constant rotation 
supplemented by a small bottled range (Brewdog, Anchor, Flying Dog etc.). 
Scottish micros dominate, with established names such asBlack Isle 
<http://www.blackislebrewery.com/>, William Bros 
<http://www.williamsbrosbrew.com/> and Harviestoun 
<http://harviestoun.com/age_verification>, listed alongside newer craft 
upstarts, such as Leith hop-shots,Pilot <http://pilotbeer.co.uk/>. From south 
of the border, Thornbridge, Redchurch and Summer Wine were all recent guests, 
while I enjoyed a 3.9% Smoke Bomb fromMorpeth’s Anarchy Brewing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>. A moreish backdraft of bonfire and 
chocolate flavours, its dry, assertive hop tang kept it light on its feet.


• Pint from £3.60. 7-8 Elm Row, 0131-556 8201, jeremiahstaproom.co.uk 
<http://www.jeremiahstaproom.co.uk>

Usher’s

Named after a famous family of Scottish distillers and brewers, this vast new 
basement space is a, “speciality purveyor of mankind’s greatest creation”. 15 
keg and five cask pumps dispense progressive beers, the choice fleshed-out by a 
compact bottled list of select gems. For instance, Sierra Nevada’s classic 
Torpedo, Harviestoun’s barrel-aged Ola Dubh and bottles from Thornbridge 
(expensive at £6.50). While wondering at the logic of a mid-afternoon music 
policy that alternated Doves and Elbow with blustering “rawk”, I drank a 
Volcano IPA – more a light, zippy, tropical South Island pale, to me – from 
Barney’s, a local micro based at the arts centre and Fringe venue, Summerhall.

Talking of the festival, Usher’s is open until 3am for the duration, as are 
many other Edinburgh bars. These include the nearbyAuld Hoose 
<http://www.theauldhoose.co.uk> (pint from £3.60). A no-nonsense, bare-bones 
place, famous for its punk/goth/metal jukebox, the Hoose only serves one guest 
real ale of its three, as well as a few craft bottles and Brewdog’s Dead Pony 
Club on draught. However, that guest pump generally features – in this instance,
Fyne Ales <http://www.fyneales.com/>’ terrific zesty, toffeeish Jarl – the 
creme de la creme of UK craft breweries: Marble, Dark Star, Red Willow, Arbor, 
Bristol Beer Factory, Magic Rock, Buxton, Summer Wine. What the Auld Hoose 
lacks in choice it certainly makes up for in quality.
• Pint from £3.50. 32b West Nicolson Street, 0131-662 1757, 
ushersofedinburgh.co.uk <http://www.ushersofedinburgh.co.uk>

The Potting Shed
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F31%2F1406816169630%2Fd6ee4d28-21d4-4b24-8715-457e8cb6fa8e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-edinburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F31%2F1406816169630%2Fd6ee4d28-21d4-4b24-8715-457e8cb6fa8e-1020x612.jpeg>
No one could accuse the Potting Shed of not fully committing to its concept. 
There are tin buckets and plant pots as light fittings; mini wheelbarrows and 
gardening forks suspended from the walls; wooden planking and old hessian 
sacks, everywhere. Any misgivings about this thematic heavy-handedness will be 
offset by the A1 beer choice. On top of a modest can and bottled selection, 17 
taps (three cask) serve beer from next-level UK micros such asSiren 
<http://www.sirencraftbrew.com/>, Four Pure <http://www.fourpure.com/>, Camden 
Town <http://www.camdentownbrewery.com/> and Thornbridge 
<http://www.thornbridgebrewery.co.uk/>. Warning: these regularly top £5-a-pint 
(and, annoyingly, the Potting Shed only serves beer in schooner or pints, no 
halves). There is an emphasis on beers from Scottish brewers, both big (West, 
William Bros.) and boutique (Inveralmond <http://www.inveralmond-brewery.co.uk/>
). A sample Iced Tea Ale from Leith’s Pilot was, undoubtedly, the pick of the 
beers on this Edinburgh trip. Made with bergamot and lemongrass, this crisply 
bitter, unfined amber beer has an exhilarating spiciness that grows and grows, 
before it unveils its aromatic earl grey notes and earthier, tannic twangs. It 
is a brilliant summer beer, hugely refreshing, yet satisfyingly complex. The 
Potting Shed, incidentally, is just across the road from the Underbelly Fringe 
stages in Bristo Square.


• Pint from £3.50. 32-34 Potterrow, 0131-662 9788, 
thepottingshededinburgh.co.uk <http://www.thepottingshededinburgh.co.uk>

Holyrood 9a

With its 25 taps and extensive bottled beer list, this bar and burger joint 
clearly means business. In the nearby Scottish parliament, MSPs map Scotland’s 
future, while in Holyrood 9a – a butch, wood-panelled chocolate-brown space: 
part gentleman’s club, part hunting lodge – beer geek’s debate the future of 
British beer with equal fervour and analytical rigour. The “house” draught 
beers include selections from prominent forward-thinking Scottish breweries, 
such as Fyne Ales,Tryst <http://www.trystbrewery.co.uk/>, Alechemy 
<http://www.alechemybrewing.com/> and the excellent Cromarty 
<http://www.cromartybrewing.co.uk/>, while the guest taps and bottles roam 
further afield, from Bristol’s Wild Beer to Copenhagen’s Mikkeller. Following a 
meet-the-brewer event with Welsh outfit,Celt Experience 
<http://celtexperience.com/>, the boards were heavily dominated by its beers, 
but I opted, instead, for a bottle of Sugar Lumps by an exciting new 
experimental Livingston brewery, Elixir. A 7.7% imperial stout laced with oats, 
Demerara and Belgian brewer’s candi sugar, this was rich, thick beer; as warm 
as good brandy, its syrupy-ness nicely offset by tart, dark fruit and roasted 
flavours. It was a big beer that needed mulling over, at length, by a roaring 
log fire. Such depth of flavour does not come cheap. You can drink interesting 
stuff at Holyrood 9a, at around £4/£4.50-a-pop, but that Elixir bottle was 
£5.95, while £3 halves (Magic Rock <http://www.magicrockbrewing.com/>’s Magic 
Eight Ball), are not uncommon. Holyrood 9a’s owners, Fuller Thomson, also run 
two similarly beer-focused bars in Edinburgh,The Southern 
<http://www.thesouthern.co.uk> and Red Squirrel 
<http://www.redsquirreledinburgh.co.uk>.
• Pint from £3.60. 9A Holyrood Road, 0131-556 5044, theholyrood.co.uk 
<http://www.theholyrood.co.uk>

Timberyard & Blackfriars
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F31%2F1406816408062%2Fcd8c5948-8eb2-475c-b8fd-f97598d3ec32-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-edinburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F31%2F1406816408062%2Fcd8c5948-8eb2-475c-b8fd-f97598d3ec32-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Timberyard 
It is not just Edinburgh’s pubs that are embracing craft beer, many of its 
restaurants are too. Two of these, Timberyard and Blackfriars, have bars open 
all day to non-diners. Blackfriars particularly (which I didn’t visit, it is 
closed Monday/Tuesday), is an established part of an Edinburgh beer circuit 
which includes, among others, the Bow Bar and the local branch ofBrewdog 
<http://www.brewdog.com>. It has five craft-keg taps that often feature 
something creative from Bristol’s Wild Beer (craft pints around £5), while its 
can and bottle menu includes contemporary classics such asBeavertown 
<http://www.beavertownbrewery.co.uk/>’s Gamma Ray and Redchurch 
<https://theredchurchbrewery.com/>’s Great Eastern IPA.

Meanwhile, across four taps and several bottles, Timberyard focuses on 
highly-serious, cutting-edge beers – sours, saisons, a gruit beer that includes 
local herbs, even a mead – from the likes ofKernel 
<http://www.thekernelbrewery.com/>, Brew By Numbers 
<http://www.brewbynumbers.com/> and Partizan <http://www.partizanbrewing.co.uk/>
. Those beers have clearly been chosen with a connoisseur’s eye to complement, 
and reflect the ethos of, Timberyard’s food. However, there is a one 
significant sting in the tale: the prices. You are looking at £6/£7-a pint. A 
750ml bottle of Meantime IPA is a staggering £13.

Yet, sat there drinking an invigoratingly fresh Kernel Table Beer (as murky as 
grapefruit juice and, remarkably, given its 3.3% “weakness”, just as tasty), I 
couldn’t help but love Timberyard. A serene, Scandi-style warehouse space: all 
whitewash, weather-beaten wooden planks and minimalist wire sculptures, it is a 
peaceful escape from the hubbub of the local pubs and/or festival madness. My 
advice? On a sunny day, treat yourself to a half of something extraordinary in 
Timberyard’s beautiful, rugged walled garden. In such a setting, those 
ludicrous prices are still ludicrous, but suddenly far easier to swallow.
• Blackfriars, pint from £3.70. 57-61 Blackfriars Street, 0131-558 8684, 
blackfriarsedinburgh.co.uk <http://www.blackfriarsedinburgh.co.uk>. Timberyard, 
beer from £4.50. 10 Lady Lawson Street, 0131-221 1222,timberyard.co 
<http://www.timberyard.co>

Blue Blazer

This is a traditional corner pub that retains its original features – not just 
that lovely inlaid mosaic insignia by the door but, more crucially, a lively, 
free-flowing banter between staff and drinkers at the bar – while embracing the 
latest innovations in beer. You will find William Bros. Joker IPA and Black 
Isle’s organic lager on keg and bottles of Brooklyn lager in the fridge, but 
the centre of the action is seven cask pumps serving beer from such outfits as 
Sonnet 43, Pilot, Alechemy, Harviestoun,Arbor <http://arborales.co.uk/> and 
Cromarty. Two of those taps are so-called “Scottish tall” or Aitken fonts, 
historic beer taps, which advocates will tell you dispense a superlative pint. 
Certainly,Cairngorm <http://www.cairngormbrewery.com/>’s Trade Winds, despite 
its boring, old-fashioned pump-clip, was alive with the advertised, “citrus, 
wheat, elderflower” flavours. It was a timely lesson that, even in this brave 
new craft beer world, there is still some fantastic beer hidden away behind 
fusty, traditional packaging.
• Pint from £3.50. 2 Spittal Street, 0131-229 5030, facebook.com/blueblazeredin
 <http://www.facebook.com/blueblazeredin?rf=161611373865315>

The Hanging Bat

The Bat is generally regarded as Edinburgh’s HQ of hops, a craft beer nirvana 
where fans can geek-out over some 20 keg and cask taps and a bottled selection 
of over 100 beers. You know you are in safe hands when that bottled menu 
includes a section of new wave “farmhouse ales” (saisons, lambics, 
spontaneously fermented sours) and another, simply entitled, “strange brews”. 
While it is littered with the hottest names in UK brewing, the menu also 
confidently includes some less-trendy items, such as Sam Smith’s organic fruit 
beers.

Such knowledge and enthusiasm is equally evident at the bar, where the staff 
are ready with tasters and advice to help you navigate that selection of 
draught beers from, for instance, Kernel, Thornbridge, Siren,Wild Beer 
<http://wildbeerco.com/>, Beavertown. Sat there sipping Brew By Number’s 
brilliant Mosaic Session IPA – a mid-strength beer full of overripe fruit 
flavours and paracetamol bitterness – all of this excitement is almost enough 
to make you forget that the Bat doesn’t serve pints, only schooners and halves. 
We will have to leave that debate for another time, but in most other regards 
this split-level bar is a doozy. Even elements of the design (the urinals are 
made of cut-out beer kegs), are cute in a way which makes up for the now 
cliched filament lightbulbs and reclaimed plank-cladding. At the back of the 
room is the Alpha Project, a tiny brewing setup that sometimes produces beers 
for the bar, which also takes some beers from its separate sister-business, the
Hanging Brewing Co <http://hangingbatbrewco.tumblr.com/>. Of course, given the 
Bat’s reputation and pull – it is owned by craft beer distributor, New Wave – 
it has no problem attracting big names to its meet-the-brewer events. Later 
this year, the Bat will open a second bar in New Town.
• Schooners from £2.40. 133 Lothian Road, 0131-229 0759, 
facebook.com/pages/The-Hanging-Bat 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Hanging-Bat/298430460244401>

Cambridge Bar

On Young Street and blandly decked out in first-wave gastropub fashion: 
Chesterfields and bucket seats in the bar; bare tables in the de facto 
restaurant section, you could easily overlook this pub. However, give the bar a 
thorough onceover and you will find plenty of interest. Three cask pumps 
serving, on this visit, beers fromTiny Rebel <http://www.tinyrebel.co.uk/>, 
Blackjack <http://www.blackjack-beers.com/> and Alechemy, sit alongside six 
craft keg lines (three of those are Black Isle beers). In addition, the 
Cambridge stocks a surprisingly adventurous range of around 20 craft bottles. 
These included brews from Partizan,Bad Seed <http://badseedbrewery.com/>, 
Cromarty, Edinburgh’sKnops <http://www.knopsbeer.co.uk/> and also Natural 
Selection <http://www.naturalselectionbrewing.com/>, a brewery staffed by 
post-grad students at Herriot-Watt University. They show a lot of big-screen 
sport in the bar here, but, oddly, hadn’t turned the music off in the rest of 
the pub. Which left me listening to an irritating soundclash of the 
Commonwealth Games commentary and the Mamas & Papas. But if you are heading to 
this month’sEdinburgh international book festival 
<https://www.edbookfest.co.uk/> (9-25 August) in Charlotte Square, then the 
Cambridge Bar will be a godsend.
• Pint from £3.75. 20 Young Street, 0131-226 2120; thecambridgebar.co.uk 
<http://www.thecambridgebar.co.uk>

Guildford Arms
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F31%2F1406816917278%2Fd9968d3a-43de-475b-b70e-288e0f695673-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-edinburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F31%2F1406816917278%2Fd9968d3a-43de-475b-b70e-288e0f695673-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Has it got good beer? It certainly has. But this grand Victorian boozer is a 
showstopper even before you get to its (handsome, polished) bar. For once, I 
found myself scrutinising the ceiling – a masterful composition of decorative 
plasterwork, gilding and intricate carving – more closely than the short 
bottled beer menu. For the record, it included tasty tackle from local micros 
Knops and Elixir, as well as beers fromOrkney 
<http://www.sinclairbreweries.co.uk/index.php> and Harviestoun (its Orach Slie, 
a lager matured in whisky casks). Nine cask pumps, five permanents and four 
regularly changing guests, dispense everything from staid stalwarts (Wells’ 
Bombardier) to lovely, on-trend stuff from, for example,Fallen 
<http://www.fallenbrewing.co.uk/>, Mòr <http://www.morbrewing.co.uk/home.php>, 
Great Heck <http://www.greatheckbrewery.co.uk/>, Sonnet 43 
<http://sonnet43.com/> and Craft Beer Kitchen 
<http://www.stewartbrewing.co.uk/beerhead/?p=418>, the new innovative arm of 
traditional regional real ale brewer, Stewart’s. Even better, the Guildford 
Arms stages a monthly tap takeover, where it gives over its four guest taps to 
a specific brewery and sells its beer at £2.50 a pint. Previous collaborators 
have included Leith’s Pilot and Alechemy. The legendaryOakham 
<http://www.oakhamales.com/home.html> are next up (25-28 September). Throw in a 
couple of interesting continental beers on keg (namely, wheat beers from 
Paulaner and Weihenstephan) and the fact that Waverley Station is two minutes 
away and, in many ways, you have the perfect Edinburgh pub. Or, certainly, the 
perfect end to any Edinburgh crawl.
• Pint from £3.50. 1-5 West Register Street, 0131-556 4312, guildfordarms.com 
<http://www.guildfordarms.com>

• Travel between Manchester and Edinburgh was provided by First TransPennine 
Express <http://www.tpexpress.co.uk>
 