
Writing about the Beatles has saddled me with two heavy burdens. The first is 
that almost everyone considers themselves an expert on what the band’s 
publicist Derek Taylor called “the 20th century’s greatest romance”. I’ve 
noticed that many of these self-appointed sages hate to hear something about 
the subject that they don’t already know. My new biography ofPaul McCartney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/paulmccartney> was full of revelations about 
his life, in and after the Beatles, yet from many quarters still brought that 
resentful chorus of “nothing new here”.

The second, long-term burden is becoming classified as a “rock biographer”. In 
Britain, writing about rock music still isn’t really taken seriously – and, by 
and large, doesn’t deserve to be. In the US, by contrast, it’s taken far too 
seriously, with the earnest, plodding pairGreil Marcus 
<https://greilmarcus.net/> and Peter Guralnick <http://www.peterguralnick.com/> 
vying for supremacy in the field. To me, their combined surnames suggests a new 
verb, “to greilnick” – ie churn out leaden paragraphs overstuffed with 
show-offy facts, yet be unable to create a compelling narrative or convey 
character or atmosphere.

In listing my top 10 Beatles books, I’ve omitted most of the best-known “full” 
biographies. One reason is that they’re often by American authors who combine 
greilnicking with laughable ignorance of British culture. (In Bob Spitz’s the 
Beatles, for example, teenageJohn Lennon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/johnlennon> learns of his mother Julia’s 
tragic death from police arriving by “squadcar”, whereas in late-50s Liverpool 
it would just have been a lone copper on a bike.) Most of my choices are 
peripheral works, illuminating a specific era or personality.


When I embarked on Shout! 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/10-best-beatles-books-20160504/shout-the-beatles-in-their-generation-by-philip-norman-20160421>
 – my Beatles biography – in the late 70s, friends and journalistic colleagues 
told me I was mad; there was nothing more to know. Indeed, at the beginning I 
was almost embarrassed to mention the B-word, saying instead I was writing 
about popular culture in the 60s. How different from today, when the appetite 
for Fab Four trivia seems inexhaustible. If I proposed a book of Ringo’s 
collected laundry lists, publishers would form a queue.


1. Love Me Do: The Beatles’ Progress by Michael Braun 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/10-best-beatles-books-20160504/love-me-do-the-beatles-progress-by-michael-braun-20160421>
Braun was a 27-year-old New Yorker working in London, who presciently joined 
the Beatles’ 1963-64 British tour and so was on hand for their first 
breakthrough in the US withI Want to Hold Your Hand 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jenWdylTtzs>. Though American, he was no 
greilnicker but a gifted reporter whose fly-on-the-wall account prefigured many 
later scenes in A Hard Day’s Night. Braun paid a high price for this amazing 
access: John later admitted the Beatles had been “bastards” to him and
photographer Dezo Hoffman 
<http://silverkgallery.com.au/rock-n-roll-photography/the-beatles/dezo-hoffman-photographs/>
 remembered them throwing him a lamb chop from a room-service trolley “as if he 
was a dog”.

2. Paul McCartney:  
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/the-25-greatest-rock-memoirs-of-all-time-20120813/paul-mccartney-many-years-from-now-1997-20120813>
Many Years From Now by Barry Miles 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/the-25-greatest-rock-memoirs-of-all-time-20120813/paul-mccartney-many-years-from-now-1997-20120813>
An authorised biography. Formerly known simply as “Miles”, the author was a 
co-founder of Indica, the art gallery and bookshop that became the epicentre of 
London’s underground scene in the mid-60s (and where John famously met Yoko 
Ono). Initially, Paul intended the book to deal solely with his “London years”, 
proving how he, not John, was the first to explore the avant garde, but Miles 
convinced him to include his childhood as well. The result is part-biography, 
part-autobiography, with long, fascinating first-person reminiscences by its 
subject. But there’s little about his marriage to Linda and nothing about their 
much-criticised career in Wings.

3. Daddy Come Home by Pauline Lennon 
<http://fifthbeatle.proboards.com/thread/366/john-lennon-father>
John grew up believing that his father, Freddy, a ship’s steward, had deserted 
his wife and child when John was a toddler. That feeling of abandonment 
continued to haunt him even as a Beatle, finally erupting in an anguished 
shriek of “Daddy, come home!” on the first Plastic Ono Band album. Having 
reappeared in John’s life in the mid-60s, 54-year-old Freddy astonished 
everyone by marrying 19-year-old university student Pauline Jones, with whom he 
had two further children. Jones’s memoir casts him in a more sympathetic – and 
believable – light.

4. The Longest Cocktail Party by Richard DiLello 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/richard-dilello/the-longest-cocktail-party-a-personal-history-o/>
One of many American flower children who washed up in London in the late 60s, 
DiLello became Apple’s “house hippy”. His sharp-eyed account runs from the 
early days, when the Beatles’ business was plundered by con artists and 
freeloaders, to the arrival of Allen Klein and the reign of terror that 
followed. Along the way, he assists in ticklish PR projects like promoting John 
and Yoko’s film Self-Portrait. When this extended study of the Lennon penis is 
boycotted by conventional reviewers, Yoko comments that “the critics wouldn’t 
touch it”.

5. Magical Mystery Tours: My Life With the Beatles by Tony Bramwell 
<http://www.tonybramwell.com/mmt.html>
Bramwell was one of the many babies delivered by Paul’s midwife mother, Mary; 
his house was on George’s round as a butcher’s delivery boy. As the Beatles 
grew more famous on Merseyside, long before they had roadies, he’d carry their 
guitars into gigs, becoming so ubiquitous that John nicknamed him “Measles”. 
His rollicking autobiography describes how he worked for Brian Epstein’s NEMS 
company, became an indispensable aide to Paul in particular – witness to the 
very moment that he fell in love with Linda – and later successively head of 
Apple Films and Apple Records.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNCtzkaL2t_Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNCtzkaL2t_Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNCtzkaL2t_Y&media=>
6. Lennon Remembers by Jann S Wenner 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/lennon-remembers-part-one-19710121>
The full text of a marathon interview John gave to Rolling Stone’s co-founder 
in 1970, just as the band’s breakup was moving into its final chaotic phase. 
Like an extension of the therapy he was undergoing, it pours out John’s 
frustration during years straitjacketed by the Beatles’ image and his 
bitterness at media attacks on Yoko. It swipes at George and Paul even 
downgrades the Beatles’ incomparable producer George Martin to a mere 
“translator”. “What was all that shit about, John,” Martin finally got the 
chance to ask just a few months before Lennon’s murder in 1980. The reply?: 
“Out of me head, wasn’t I?”

7. The Man Who Gave the Beatles Away by Allan Williams 
<https://www.beatlesbible.com/people/allan-williams/>
In later years, Williams competed with Pete Best as the worst case of what I 
call “Liverpool eyes” – the tragic gaze of those left behind when the Beatles 
conquered the world. His coffee bar, the Jacaranda, was the favourite hangout 
for a band he initially termed “a right load of layabouts”. He nonetheless got 
them their first work in Hamburg, driving them there in his own beaten-up van. 
But after they’d avoided paying his commission, he let Brian Epstein take over. 
This book, ghosted by Daily Mirror journalist William Marshall, has the 
authentic reek of Liverpool back alleys circa 1961.

8. All You Need Is Ears by George Martin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/399495/>
The first of the much-mourned Sir George’s two autobiographies, describing the 
career path – studying oboe at the Guildhall School of Music, producing 
classical music and comedy records by the Goons and Peter Sellers – that seemed 
least likely to lead to the greatest pop act of all time. And how that left him 
uniquely qualified him to help Lennon and McCartney to their undreamed heights.

9. As Time Goes By by Derek Taylor 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-derek-taylor-1238372.html>
Though Taylor started as a journalist, his unique wit was too subtle to work 
in cold print. This is mainly a collection of music-press articles written 
between his two stints as the Beatles’ press officer when, as he recalled, “I 
was a Hollywood character, which is easy if you’re a murderer or a twat or know 
a line of Keats”. One piece of reportage captures the authentic Derek tone in a 
classic instance of Paul’s readiness to perform anywhere. Driving down from the 
north on a golden summer’s evening in 1968, they followed a signpost to a 
village called Harrold simply because they liked the name. Thrilled by this 
whimsical visit, the villagers laid on a sumptuous cold supper, then they all 
adjourned to the pub where Paul sat down at the piano for a first sneak preview 
of Hey Jude.

Paul McCartney by Philip Norman review – the Beatle finally gets his due
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/28/paul-mccartney-the-biography-by-philip-norman-review>
10. The Lives of John Lennon by Albert Goldman 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1989/03/02/the-lives-of-john-lennon/>
Included as a masterclass in how not to write a biography of a pop star – or 
anyone else. Firstly, for its blitz of untruths (John is portrayed as a 
schizophrenic, epileptic, autistic, bisexual killer and wife-beater) which 
often contradict one another. Secondly, for its ludicrous ignorance (to take 
just one random instance, the British police are said to wear “balaclava 
helmets”). Thirdly, for the sheer futility of writing an 800-plus book about a 
musician – and a music – its author despises. Even if the subject is a monster 
(which John wasn’t) your first duty as a biographer is to love your monster.

• Paul McCartney: the Biography by Philip Norman is published by Weidenfeld & 
Nicolson in hardback priced £25, andis available from the Guardian bookshop for 
£21.25 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/394819/s/paul-mccartney/>
. It is also available as an ebook, priced £12.99.
 