
Number Thirty Eight

The West Loft Suite, on the top floor of this elevated Clifton townhouse, is 
one of the city's finest rooms – like a mini apartment, with super king-size 
bed, copper bath tub and views front and back. But all 10 rooms are pretty cool 
– even the smallest comes with robes and slippers, REN toiletries and a decent 
city view. The decor is modern-Georgian: a mix of antiques and contemporary 
art, hints of Bristol's nautical history and painted panelling in a rich 
palette of Farrow and Ball. Downstairs there's a clubby lounge with fireside 
armchairs and tables laid for breakfast. Order a cocktail on the terrace before 
hitting the bars and restaurants of Whiteladies Road.
• 38 Upper Belgrave Road, Clifton, 0117 946 6905, number38clifton.com 
<http://www.number38clifton.com/>, doubles from £115 B&B (£125 at weekends)

Brooks Guesthouse

With a sunny courtyard garden, complete with pond and shrubbery, this is an 
urban oasis in the thick of the city – the harbour, the shops and theOld Vic 
<http://www.bristololdvic.org.uk/> theatre are a short stroll away and St 
Nicholas market <http://www.stnicholasmarketbristol.co.uk/> (the Georgian 
arcade better known as St Nicks) is just outside the gates. The former hostel 
was reinvented as a boutique guesthouse by the people behind Brooks in Bath; 
the rooms are compact but high-spec (travertine marble bathrooms, Cole & Son 
wallpapers, crisp cotton linen) and with twins and triples on offer, it's a 
good choice for families and groups of friends. The triumph is the big, airy 
open-plan lounge-diner: sit in a designer chair looking at the terrace through 
picture windows, breakfast on organic produce, or help yourself to a drink from 
the honesty bar. Three British-made Rocket caravans are to be added to a roof 
garden in May.
• St Nicholas Street, 0117 930 0066, brooksguesthousebristol.com 
<http://www.brooksguesthousebristol.com/>, doubles from £70 B&B

The Greenhouse

Owner Fran Jones promises not to preach but she is passionate about the 
environment, and her newly refurbished B&B is a temple to all things green, 
organic and fair. There are solar panels on the roof and wool insulation under 
the floors; the soft grey carpet is made from recycled plastic bottles, the 
toiletries are by Ecover or Faith in Nature, even the bedding is fair trade 
(ditto the towels). The rooms are light, fresh and simply furnished (the wood 
is traceable American ash) with luxury beds and posh white eco showers. On a 
quiet street in Southville, it's close to theTobacco Factory theatre 
<http://www.tobaccofactorytheatres.com/>, a short walk to the harbour, the SS 
Great Britain <http://www.ssgreatbritain.org/> or local cycle paths (there is a 
bike store in the garden).
• 61 Greenbank Road, 0117 902 9166, thegreenhousebristol.co.uk 
<http://www.thegreenhousebristol.co.uk/>, doubles from £105 (two-night minimum 
stay at weekends)

The Bristol Hotel

From the front, it looks like another bland, multi-storey chain hotel but the 
Bristol has one of the best locations in town. On cobbled Narrow Quay, 
overlooking the floating harbour, it was built as a motel in 1966 (the 
adjoining carpark is Grade II-listed, thanks to a bit of classic honeycomb 
concrete). With 187 rooms, it's not exactly boutique, but a recent £20-million 
upgrade spruced up the decor, which is plush, fragranced (this season's aroma: 
Lavendar Sunshine) and colourful – soothing neutrals with flashes of fuschia 
and peacock. The views are the thing though: enjoy them from the glassy River 
Grille restaurant, or the Shore, a cafe-bar with tables on the waterfront, or 
cough up an extra £30 for a harbour-facing room.
• Prince Street, 0117 923 0333, thedoylecollection.com 
<http://www.doylecollection.com/hotels/the-bristol-hotel>, doubles from £85

9 Princes Buildings
 9 Princes Buildings bristol 
At the edge of the Avon gorge, among the honeyed stone terraces and squares of 
Clifton Village, Simon and Joanna Fuller's Georgian house is more homestay than 
hotel. Over 30 years, it has been loved and lived-in, cluttered with sofas and 
books, ornaments and family memorabilia. Sash windows and a wrought iron 
veranda give views of the river below. A cantilevered staircase spirals up to 
three spacious rooms, all very traditional (chintz and china, wallpapered 
bathrooms, dressing tables, decanters of sherry, glimpses of Brunel's Clifton 
suspension bridge through a curtain of trees). Downstairs a room with a huge 
bathroom overlooks the Fuller's clifftop garden.
• 9 Prince's Buildings, Clifton Village, 0117 973 4615. 9princesbuildings.co.uk
 <http://www.9princesbuildings.co.uk/>, doubles from £85 B&B

The Boutique B&B 
 The Boutique B&B bristol 
Home to artist Sadie Spikes and husband Pete, this Victorian semi in suburban 
Fishponds is a shrine to the vintage aesthetic – everything from the dainty 
porcelain tea cups to the antique beds are pre-loved finds (just add 
fairylights and Wi-Fi). In the rooms, it's wall-to-wall junk shop (old leather 
suitcases, standard lamps, snow-white bedspreads, vintage fabrics, tapestry 
rugs on wood floors) but it's all spotless and full of thoughtful touches: 
homemade cake, fresh milk, feather duvets. Breakfast on crusty bread, pastries, 
jams, fresh fruit or the house special, sultana and nut porridge, served in 
Sadie's colourful kitchen or, at weekends, in the rooms. There's a hot tub in 
the garden and a bus stop right outside (it takes about 15 minutes to reach the 
town centre) or bring a bike and cycle back and forth on the off-roadBristol 
and Bath Railway path <http://www.bristolbathrailwaypath.org.uk/home.shtml>.
• 35 Downend Road, 0117 935 4964, theboutiquebandb.co.uk 
<http://www.theboutiquebandb.co.uk/>, doubles from £75 B&B (or less for longer 
stays; minimum two-night stay at weekends)

The Wellington

A big red-brick number owned by Bath Ales, the Wellington is a proper boozer. 
Upstairs, though, it's a different world. The rooms are quiet and nicely 
decorated in a simple, modern-traditional style (tongue-and-groove panelling, 
heritage paints, original Victorian fireplaces). The beds are king-size, the 
pillows are downy and the white tiled bathrooms are equipped with rain showers. 
It's at the far end of Gloucester Road – a two-mile strip of boho shops, cafes 
and bars that heads north from the city – so is a bit of a trek from town 
(buses take around 15 minutes), but stick around, order a beef and porter pie 
washed down witha pint of Barnsey <http://www.bathales.com/our-ales/aid/barnsey>
 (or Cornish mussels and a Bounders' cider). In the summer, you can eat outside 
on the terrace.
• Gloucester Road, Horfield, 0117 951 3022, bathales.com/pid/the-wellington 
<http://www.bathales.com/pid/the-wellington>, doubles from £79

Clifton House

The stained glass, ornate plasterwork and grand staircase make the entrance an 
impressive one. The rooms are plainer and a little formulaic – baroque mirrors 
on slabs of purple paint, matching velvet throws, cheap wood furniture – but 
most are large and sunny, with high ceilings, marbled bathrooms and views of 
tree-lined Tyndall's Park with its terraces of Victorian villas. It's good 
value, too, and there's a spacious family room on the lower ground floor. A 
portrait of Brunel, looks down on guests as they tuck into their breakfast 
specials. Free off-road parking is a bonus, and it's an easy walk to Bristol 
University, Park Street's shops and busy Whiteladies Road.
• 4 Tyndall's Park Road, Clifton, 0117 973 5407, cliftonhousebristol.com 
<http://cliftonhousebristol.com/>, doubles from £75 B&B

YHA Bristol
 Photograph: Steven May/Alamy 
With its basic, dorm-style rooms, bunk beds and slight whiff of food and feet, 
it doesn't quite pass as a posh-tel, but YHA Bristol has lots of good points – 
not least a brilliant waterfront location in the heart of the city. In a 
converted, red-brick grain warehouse, it has a quayside cafe-bar serving 
down-to-earth meals at reasonable prices (pizzas, tempura-battered hake and 
chips or farm-assured burgers), a sociable library-cum-lounge, a games room, a 
bike store and a communal self-catering kitchen. The best rooms are for two, 
with private bathrooms and views of the harbour.
• 14 Narrow Quay, 0845 371 9726, yha.org.uk/hostel/bristol 
<http://www.yha.org.uk/hostel/bristol>, beds from £18, private rooms from £28 
per person

The Battleaxes, Wraxall 
 Battleaxes Bristol 
A handsome gothic-revival building, which used to be a meeting place for 
workers on the Tyntesfield estate, this is an out-of-town option – less than 15 
minutes (roughly 7 miles) south of the city, but overlooking Somerset fields in 
Wraxall village. In the bar and restaurant the look is 
hunting-lodge-meets-country-inn, with fringed lamps, shabby leather sofas, 
scrubbed tables, log fires and original stained glass. Guestrooms are decorated 
in moody vintage colours (chocolate, gold and olive green) with gilded or 
forested wallpapers, big comfy beds, thick carpets and art deco furniture. 
Start the day with a full English; round it off with a Battleaxe grazing board 
(meat, fish or vegetarian) and a pint of Flatcapper ale. Bristol's Long Ashton 
Park and Ride is a 10-minute drive andTyntesfield 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/tyntesfield/>, a National Trust mansion and 
500-acre estate, is within walking distance.
• Bristol Road, Wraxall, 01275 857473, flatcappers.co.uk/the-battleaxes 
<http://www.flatcappers.co.uk/the-battleaxes/>. Doubles from £100 B&B

For more information, go to the Visit Bristol website 
<http://visitbristol.co.uk>
 