
A senior US attorney who was involved in the prosecution of Native American 
activist Leonard Peltier has requested thatBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> grant clemency, with a rare 
plea that has energized the campaign to free the high-profile indigenous 
prisoner.

James Reynolds, who supervised a key part of the case against Peltier, who 
claims he waswrongfully convicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/leonard-peltier-clemency-obama-pine-ridge>
 of the 1975 murders of two FBI agents, wrote to the president that clemency 
for the 72-year-old would be “in the best interest of justice in considering 
the totality of all matters involved”.

“There seems to be no point in taxpayers paying his room and board,” Reynolds, 
77, said by phone on Wednesday. “It’s time to call it quits.”
 James Reynolds, a former US prosecutor, is supporting clemency for Leonard 
Peltier. Photograph: Courtesy of James Reynolds 
The letter is an extraordinary development for the Native American activist 
who has been incarcerated for more than 40 years. Civil rights activists and 
indigenous leaders have long argued that he faced adeeply flawed 
<http://www.amnestyusa.org/our-work/cases/usa-leonard-peltier> and unfair trial.

The clemency push from a former US prosecutor, which is highly unusual, comes 
as Obama has continued topardon or commute the sentences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/barack-obama-commutes-sentences-presidential-pardons>
 of hundreds of prisoners in his final weeks in office, raising hopes that he 
will also releasepolitical activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/obama-pardon-mandela-puerto-rico-oscar-lopez-rivera->
 jailed for decades.

Peltier’s conviction stems from the American Indian Movement’s siege of the 
site of the Wounded Knee massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/01/wounded-knee-tensions-south-dakota-tribe>
 where the US army slaughtered hundreds of Lakota people in 1890. The actions 
at the Pine Ridge reservation in South Dakota, which began in 1973 and 
protested broken treaties, prompted an aggressive response from the FBI.

Peltier, who is serving two life sentences, arrived in June of 1975, and soon 
after twoFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> agents entered private 
property and sparked a shootout. The special agents, Jack Coler and Ronald 
Williams, were killed during the confrontation, along with Joseph Stuntz, a 
Native American.

President Obama: use clemency to free a wrongfully convicted Native American
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/leonard-peltier-clemency-obama-pine-ridge>
According to Peltier’s attorneys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/leonard-peltier-clemency-obama-pine-ridge>
, who filed a clemency request last year, federal agents madefalse statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/leonard-peltier-clemency-obama-pine-ridge>
 andaffidavits <http://www.freepeltiernow.org/extradition.html>, coerced 
<http://www.whoisleonardpeltier.info/LEGAL/TRIAL.htm> witness statements and 
deliberatelywithheld 
<http://www.whoisleonardpeltier.info/LEGAL/uploads/831056P.pdf> crucial 
ballistics reports. A prosecutor eventually admitted in court that the US 
attorney’s office “can’t prove who shot [the agents]” and claimed that Peltier 
was guilty of “aiding and abetting” in the shooting.

Reynolds was appointed US attorney in 1976 and oversaw the case’s appeal when 
much of the evidence that raised serious doubts about the government’s case 
were revealed.

The former prosecutor’s letter to Obama does not address the underlying 
conviction, and in an interview, he declined to say whether he believed Peltier 
is innocent.

But Reynolds said it was wrong for Peltier to remain behind bars after 40 
years, particularly considering that prosecutors ultimately considered him an 
accomplice in the crime. “You’re not really participating in the crime 
yourself. Just because you’re there, you’re going to get nailed.”

Citing Peltier’s motives, Reynolds added, “he didn’t go out there with the 
intention to kill anybody. He was trying to protect his people.”

Cynthia K Dunne, a former assistant US attorney who is representing Peltier, 
said she has never heard of a case of a federal prosecutor requesting clemency.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ffree-leonard-peltier-obama-open-letter-james-reynolds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F055cf4999546e50d8c7f998df09d0af2245ca500%2F547_121_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20prosecutor%20in%20Leonard%20Peltier%20case%20urges%20clemency%20in%20'extraordinary'%20move&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ffree-leonard-peltier-obama-open-letter-james-reynolds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20prosecutor%20in%20Leonard%20Peltier%20case%20urges%20clemency%20in%20%27extraordinary%27%20move&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ffree-leonard-peltier-obama-open-letter-james-reynolds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F055cf4999546e50d8c7f998df09d0af2245ca500%2F547_121_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
 Hopes have been raised that Obama will use his final weeks in office to 
release political activists jailed for decades. Photograph: Carlos 
Barria/Reuters 
“It’s really incredibly extraordinary to have the lead prosecutor on the case 
stand up,” she said, noting that the FBI has continued to oppose Peltier’s 
release. “It takes a lot of strength to take on the institution.”

Dunne, who communicates regularly with Peltier, said he was pleased to learn 
of Reynolds’ letter, but didn’t want to get his hopes up given past 
disappointments: “It’s just a horrible time to be waiting and not knowing.”

Dear Obama: progressives share what they want done before president leaves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/21/barack-obama-progressive-wish-list-immigration-prisons>
The renewed fight for clemency comes at a time when the Standing Rock tribe’s 
fight against an oil pipeline in North Dakota has become an international 
flashpoint for indigenous rights. Local law enforcement’sharsh tactics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/standing-rock-protest-north-dakota-shutdown-evacuation>
 andaggressive prosecutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/north-dakota-access-pipeline-standing-rock-legal-fine-threats>
 havedrawn parallels to the government’s treatment of Peltier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/dakota-pipeline-activist-red-fawn-fallis-accused-shooting-police-pacifist>
.

The Obama administration’s recent decision to deny a key permit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/dakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock>
 for the Dakota Access pipeline has further sparked hope that he may seek to 
release Peltier and cement his legacy on indigenous rights.

Time is running out before the inauguration of President-elect Donald Trump, 
who isnot expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-criminal-justice-reform>
 to continue Obama’s records of clemency grants and pardons.

Peltier’s request for clemency is not a pardon appeal, but simply asks that 
Obama reduce the sentence. “If he doesn’t take action before 19 January,” Dunne 
added, “Mr Peltier will die in jail. He’s too frail and too sick to make it 
much longer in the prison system.”
 