
Bartons Arms

This pub is a five-minute bus journey from town towards Aston, but well worth 
the detour (you could walk, but New Town Row is hardly scenic). “One of the 
most beautiful pub interiors in the country,” claims the website, and that is 
no idle boast. The Bartons Arms is a Victorian temple in carved wood, gleaming 
tile work, stained glass and wrought iron. Every square inch was designed for 
maximum aesthetic impact. As this is an Oakham Ales pub, the beer is equally 
special. A craft pioneer, Peterborough-based Oakham was one of the first UK 
breweries to use big, powerful American hops and its beers, such as JHB, 
Inferno and the legendary Citra, still pack a mighty punch. There are a handful 
of guest beers on, too, and Hammerton’s Islington steam lager in bottles, but 
really this is all about those Oakham’s beers and that extraordinary interior.
• Pint from £2.80, 144 High Street, Aston, 0121 333 5988, thebartonsarms.com 
<http://thebartonsarms.com/>

Purecraft Bar & Kitchen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437396413181%2F83d0fb0e-14a6-4628-95fc-2e9df789692f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437396413181%2F83d0fb0e-14a6-4628-95fc-2e9df789692f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Pub purists may wrinkle their noses at this stark, post-industrial space. With 
its open kitchen and sections of tables laid with cutlery, it is as much a 
restaurant as a bar. However, plenty of seating is set aside for drinkers and 
there is no faulting the beer quality. Purecraft is owned by Warwickshire 
brewery Purity and its beers feature prominently (Longhorn IPA, Mad Goose), but 
across 24 cask/keg taps you can find everything from dunkel and dark Czech 
lagers to exceptional US IPAs, such as Victory Brewing’s 8.7% Dirtwolf, which 
is made with whole rather than pelletised hops. The enthusiastic, clued-up 
staff are keen for you to taste their more recherché beers and, if you can’t 
find anything you like on tap, Purecraft carries around 60 Belgian, US and UK 
bottled beers.
• Pint from £3.60, 30 Waterloo Street, 0121 237 5666, purecraftbars.com 
<http://www.purecraftbars.com/>

Post Office Vaults

It may be a cliche to describe a menu as being as thick as a telephone 
directory but in this case it is the only comparison hefty enough. This basic 
basement bolt-hole – rudimentarily decorated with hanging hops, old bottles and 
beer signs – stocks over 350 bottled beers across a menu so comprehensive it 
opens in Austria … When did you last drink an Austrian beer? The Post Office’s 
nine cask pumps run the gamut from ultra-traditional beers, such as Hobson’s 
mild (the West Midlands is a doughty mild stronghold), to new wave ales from, 
for instance, Mad Hatter, Alechemy and Left-Handed Giant. It also has one guest 
keg tap which dispenses only the most cutting-edge craft beers - on this 
fly-past from the fantastic new Manchester brewery Cloudwater. This tart, 
refreshing, slightly salty German beer style is currently enjoying a revival in 
craft beer circles after decades of almost total obscurity.
• Pint from £2.80, 84 New Street, 0121 643 7354, postofficevaults.co.uk 
<http://postofficevaults.co.uk/>

The Botanist
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437396561855%2F180360db-46a9-43b4-864f-696384c3e6b7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437396561855%2F180360db-46a9-43b4-864f-696384c3e6b7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Paul Pickard/Alamy 
When visiting a city with friends less militant in their drinking, it always 
pays, for the craft beer fan, to have one venue on standby that does more than 
just great beer. That way, if your companions start demanding cocktails or 
wine, you have an immediate suggestion – rather than getting dragged into 
somewhere random. Part of a small northern chain, the Botanist is that trump 
card. A swanky bar and restaurant (the decor is what I can only describe as 
“Victorian potting shed chic”), it does some unusually interesting things in 
beer. Its two house beers, Pacific Pale Ale and Passionate Blonde, are brewed 
by Freedom and Cloudwater respectively and, on this look-see, its four cask 
ales included one from Birmingham’s Two Towers. A 95-bottle world beer menu 
contains a significant amount of dull chaff, but also many first-rate US and 
European craft beers (Orval, Snake Dog, Left Hand Nitro Milk Stout, Paulaner 
Hefe-Weizen).

Great city walks: Birmingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/feb/03/great-city-walks-birmingham-west-midlands>
Talking of small chains doing novel things in craft beer, the nearby coffee 
shop and cafeBoston Tea Party <http://www.bostonteaparty.co.uk/> (190 
Corporation Street), carries a seasonally varying amber ale from Bristol craft 
whizz-kids Wiper & True as well as a couple of Meantime and Bristol Beer 
Factory bottles.
• Pint from £3.80, 14-16 Temple Street, 0121 600 7430, thebotanist.uk.com 
<http://thebotanist.uk.com/location/birmingham>

Cherry Reds

This is very much a boho cafe-bar rather than a boozer – all retro furniture 
and Arctic Monkeys on the stereo – but to complement its food menu Cherry Reds 
also goes big on beer. Its idiosyncratic bottled menu takes in connoisseur’s 
choices from Italy (Brewfist), Norway (Nøgne Ø), the US and London (Beavertown, 
Brew By Numbers), but also finds space for local beers from Wolverhampton’s 
Sacre Brew and Fixed Wheel in Halesowen. Its cask pumps are usually occupied by 
vibrant, modern beers (from Atom, Offbeat and Walsall’s Backyard Brewhouse on 
this visit) and you will find the odd gem on keg too. Note that the Birmingham 
branch ofBrewdog <https://www.brewdog.com/> (81-87 John Bright Street) is just 
over the road.
• Pint from £3.40, 88-90 John Bright Street, 0121 643 5716, cherryreds.com 
<http://cherryreds.com/>

The Craven Arms
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437396897905%2F25b4dc83-e4a8-435b-abc4-a35631c3466c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437396897905%2F25b4dc83-e4a8-435b-abc4-a35631c3466c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Tony Smith/Alamy 
Ostensibly, this looks like the most traditional of pubs. Its historic, glazed 
tiled exterior gives way to an immaculate interior of busy carpets, etched 
windows and old school banquette seating. It is a beautiful period piece. Yet, 
the Craven Arms may also be the most exciting craft beer bar in Birmingham. 
Scan its six keg taps and its fridges, and you will spot many of the hottest 
names in European brewing, with a particular focus on London (Brodie’s, Anspach 
& Hobday, Brew By Numbers) and Scandinavia (Mikkeller, To ØL). Moreover, the 
Craven Arms does not just carry the mainline beers from those breweries, but 
often weird and wonderful limited-edition collaborations. Its 11 real ales are 
less outlandish but good quality. Black Country Ales, which owns the Craven 
Arms, also owns Birmingham’sWellington 
<http://www.blackcountryales.co.uk/the-pubs/the-wellington/> (37 Bennetts 
Hill), a brilliant 18-pump real ale pub, but one where there is less emphasis 
on craft beer.
• Pint from £3. 47, Upper Gough Street, 0121 643 2852, blackcountryales.co.uk 
<http://www.blackcountryales.co.uk/the-pubs/the-craven-arms/>

The Victoria
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437397374499%2F18bc2b59-a08f-4afc-a9ff-2ad8856f82e2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437397374499%2F18bc2b59-a08f-4afc-a9ff-2ad8856f82e2-2060x1236.jpeg>
The design of this lively corner pub, which includes a club/gig space 
upstairs, is trying a little too hard. One room has an eccentric Victoriana 
thing going on, with lots of tasselled lamps and gothic anthropomorphic animal 
portraits. In another, a glitterball hovers over huge tattoo artworks. It is 
all a bit too self-consciously trendy. None of which will bother you, however, 
once you get a load of the Victoria’s beer selection. Outside of its one 
permanent ale, Wye Valley’s Butty Bach, its five cask pumps dispense good, 
modish stuff from the likes of Leeds’ Northern Monk and Blackjack. Three of the 
Victoria’s keg taps are, likewise, given over to contemporary craft beers – on 
this occasion Magic Rock’s High Wire, Longhorn IPA and a new Thornbridge 
creation, American Sister. The predominantly UK-focused, bottled beer menu is 
unusually extensive for a non-specialist pub, and also very discerning. You 
will find the usual headline names on there (Beavertown, Kernel, Weird Beard) 
as well as less well known beers from Manchester’s Shindigger, Celt Experience 
and the mighty Redchurch. Whoever put that list together clearly knows their 
saisons, pils and stouts.
• 48 John Bright Street, 0121 633 9439, thevictoriabirmingham.co.uk 
<http://www.thevictoriabirmingham.co.uk/>

The Lamp Tavern
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437397487117%2F8590034f-ae50-4bac-824c-168145ce9dd3-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437397487117%2F8590034f-ae50-4bac-824c-168145ce9dd3-2060x1545.jpeg>
Hidden amid industrial units in Digbeth, about 10 minutes’ walk from the city 
centre, this one-room, street corner local feels like a lone survivor from 
another era. It’s full of curious knick-knacks and fading memorabilia and has 
not, I imagine, changed a jot since its jovial landlord, Eddie Fitzpatrick (“Is 
this your first time in? Oh, we’ll make an exception then. That’s £2.90 for 
half.”), was awarded that certificate above the bar for serving a perfect pint 
of Boddies in 1997. Everyone appears to know one another in the Lamp, and you 
probably will too before you leave. In one important respect, however, it is 
blazing a trail. Last year, the Rock and Roll Brewhouse started making beer on 
the roof, and two of its beers are usually served among the Lamp’s standard 
offer of Everards’ Tiger and Stanway’s bitter. Easy to spot – given their pump 
clips are decorated with bright yellow flowers – Rock and Roll’s beers, such as 
Mott The Hop Pole and Telstar Mild (“3.5%... allegedly,” warns a bloke at the 
bar), are lovingly crafted, full-flavoured ales. Brew Springsteen, an American 
pale ale, was all sweet melon and almost bubblegum, tropical fruit flavours.

A quick city guide to Birmingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/jan/21/quick-city-guide-birmingham> 
The Lamp is not the only place in Birmingham that you can drink beer brewed 
on-site. TheTwo Towers brewery <http://twotowersbrewery.co.uk/> in the 
Jewellery Quarter in Hockley (Unit 1, Mott Street Industrial Estate) opens its 
brewtap every Friday. In the business district, meanwhile, Edmunds, has just 
reopened asEdmunds Brewhouse <http://edmundsbrewhouse.co.uk/> (106-110 Edmund 
Street), with a nine-gallon brewkit in the cellar. Its sharp, limey pale ale is 
already a refreshing drop but, for me, it lacked the elegance and depth of 
flavour that it will hopefully acquire as the brewery beds in. The overall beer 
range, which includes a small selection of predictable craft bottles – Brooklyn 
lager, Sierra Nevada, Goose Island IPA – needs expanding if they are to turn 
this into a genuine destination
• Pint £2.90, 157 Barford Street, Digbeth, 0121 688 1220, 
stanwaybrewery.co.uk/lamp <http://stanwaybrewery.co.uk/lamp/>

The Anchor

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437397735683%2F3234b031-1a2e-41e8-afbf-5c4c65216996-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437397735683%2F3234b031-1a2e-41e8-afbf-5c4c65216996-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Phil Wills/Alamy 
The second Digbeth pub on our list is this Victorian, Grade II-listed old barn 
of a boozer with great, chatty staff and a highly impressive choice of beers. 
The cask pumps deliver a variety of traditional and hop-forward ales, many from 
tiny English breweries that were new names to me, such as Shiny, Coastal, Exit 
33 and Tapstone (whose profoundly bitter, tropically fruity Voodoo Juice is a 
fine pint). The Anchor’s keg taps usually include a couple of notable beers – 
for instance, Clouded Minds’ Dolce Vita IPA and Sacre Brew’s Leopard Stout – 
and there are also several shelves of Sam Smith’s and assorted Belgian beers to 
go at. Perhaps most tantalising for beer geeks, the Anchor also has a small 
collection of beers from Irish microbreweries, such as Dungarvan, Hilden and 
Eight Degrees.
• Pint from £2.75, 308 Bradford Street, Digbeth, 0121 622 4516, 
anchorinndigbeth.co.uk <http://anchorinndigbeth.co.uk/>

Spotted Dog
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437397992031%2Ffd6a85f2-36a4-4414-841f-6a8f6817dcdf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Ftop-10-craft-beer-pubs-in-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437397992031%2Ffd6a85f2-36a4-4414-841f-6a8f6817dcdf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Spotted Dog Spotted Dog Photograph: PR 
Think of the Spotted Dog as an interface between old and new Digbeth. 
Historically, this area was home to a large Irish community, hence the 
traditional music nights and rugby and Gaelic football paraphernalia that are 
still a key feature of this handsome pub. Yet, out back, there is a huge 
bizarre patio area – dismembered mannequins, huge plastic penguins smoking 
cigarettes, antique furniture … oh, and the odd leprechaun – that is much more 
in keeping with the arty, creative types who are, slowly, colonising this 
former industrial enclave. Beer-wise, the cask ales at the Spotted Dog are 
pretty old fashioned, although it did have Anarchy’s terrific Citra Star on as 
a guest. The key attraction is a small but very high quality selection of 
bottled beers, that includes brews from Flying Dog and Nøgne Ø, as well as 
select Belgian and German beers (Viven Imperial IPA; De Kazematten’s Wipers 
Times; that super-dry pils, Jever; and the revered Schneider Aventinus 
Weizen-Eisbock). Work through those and you would have a very fun night, 
followed by a quite devastating morning after.
• Pint from £3, 104 Warwick Street, Digbeth, 0121 772 3822, spotteddog.co.uk 
<http://www.spotteddog.co.uk/>

Birmingham Beer Bash <http://birminghambeerbash.co.uk/> runs July 24 and 25, 
at The Bond Company, 180-182 Fazeley Street, Digbeth, entry from £10. Train 
travel between Manchester and Birmingham was provided byCrossCountry Trains 
<http://www.crosscountrytrains.co.uk/>
 