
A border is a question. In fact, a border poses a whole series of implied 
questions; such as “can you cross me?”, “will you cross me?”, “what am I doing 
here in the first place?” and maybe most importantly: “Willyou be someone else 
on the other side?”


Writers relish questions. They’re what propel narratives, for one thing, but 
more importantly, I believe good books are themselves sprawling, messy 
questions, tens of thousands of words long.


And borders are especially intriguing to writers, I think, because they are 
the physical representation of liminality – the threshold between different 
(literal and metaphorical) states. Since so much writing is about change, it’s 
endlessly fascinating to look at the indefinable moment when one thing becomes 
another. (And of course, there’s the negative to this: when a border is 
impossible to cross, when we are trapped, unable to be where we want to be orwho
 we want to be.) And if we do manage to cross the border, what then? What will 
it cost us? Will we become someone new? Or is it true, as Horace said, that the 
traveller changes the sky above their heads, but not their soul?


I set Saint Death <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/saint-death.html> in 
Mexico, as close to the US border as is possible, for all these reasons, and I 
chose one of the places where what already exists of the infamous “wall” simply 
stops. Just west of Juárez, in the Colonia de Anapra, the 20ft-high composite 
fence of wire and steel plate runs out. Here, at some imprecise spot, Mexican 
sand becomes US sand. Crossing the border here is entirely possible physically, 
yet potentially comes with the highest price tag of all.


1. On the Black Hill by Bruce Chatwin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/on-the-black-hill.html>
If you’re going to write about borders, one way is to make maximum use of the 
symbolism. Chatwin’s beautiful, melancholic tale sweeps through the lives of 
twin brothers in a farmhouse where “one of the windows looked out over the 
green fields of England: the other looked back into Wales” and of which it was 
said that the border ran right up the staircase. As befits borders, much of the 
book is about loyalties, nowhere more apparent than when the recruiting officer 
comes to town, looking for Welsh boys to send to a different kind of frontier, 
in the fields of France.

2. Goodbye to All That by Robert Graves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/16/good-bye-to-all-that-robert-graves-review>
It was at the western front, in real life, that Graves commanded a detachment 
of Welshmen from Chatwin’s borders. In one passage here, a certain Captain 
Furber makes a bet with another officer – that the frontline trenches would not 
shift more than a mile over the next two years. Everyone laughed at Captain 
Furber. He won the bet.


 3. Stamboul Train by Graham Greene 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/stamboul-train.html>
Greene’s self-confessed attempt to “write a book to please” uses the old 
writers’ trick of the world in microcosm as he outlines the fates of a group of 
passengers aboard the Orient Express. Borders aplenty are swiftly crossed, but 
this is an uneasy journey, full of tension and suspicion, and antisemitism is 
never far away. It’s here, too, that we see someone actually question the 
notion of borders, as Dr Czinner, teacher and revolutionary, cries out: “How 
old fashioned you are with your frontiers and your patriotism!” But this is 
Europe in the mid-1930s, and the world was about to see the ultimate dark face 
of such concepts.

4. The World of Yesterday by Stefan Zweig 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/world-of-yesterday-2.html>
Like Thomas Mann and Hermann Hesse, Zweig was one of the German-speaking 
writers who fled before nazism. This autobiography was posted to his publisher 
the day before he and his wife took their own lives in despair at the bleak 
future of Europe. It’s fascinating, poignant, and touches on that mysterious 
thing about borders: how people can be smoking pipes and reading papers and 
fishing on one side of a border and at war just the other side; “In the moment 
of crossing the border I was already thinking differently, more freely, more 
actively.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Ftop-10-books-about-borders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F282c473a56c75e10e2e8ac01a645677738c59e5a%2F0_88_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20borders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Ftop-10-books-about-borders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20borders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Ftop-10-books-about-borders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F282c473a56c75e10e2e8ac01a645677738c59e5a%2F0_88_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
 A scene from the English National Opera’s 2003adaptation of The Handmaid’s 
Tale. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
5. The Crossing by Cormac McCarthy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/crossing.html>
Such musings are echoed by a line in the middle book of the excellent Border 
Trilogy. In the scenes in which young Billy Parham heads south on horseback, 
with a bound and wounded wolf in tow, McCarthy tells us they “crossed sometime 
near noon the international boundary line into Mexico, State of Sonora, 
undifferentiated in its terrain from the country they quit, and yet wholly 
alien and wholly strange”.

6. Juárez: The Laboratory of Our Future by Charles Bowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jun/20/war-capitalism-mexico-drug-cartels>
Bowden’s journalism puts many a novelist to shame – the prose in all his books 
about Juárez is superb: electric, angry yet cool, brutal. The subtitle of this 
book, published almost 20 years ago, spells out not just his chilling vision of 
the future of Mexico’s most infamous border city, but our own if we continue to 
build fences between the rich and the poor.

7. Signs Preceding the End of the World by Yuri Herrera 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/signs-preceding-the-end-of-the-world.html>
It’s in this same modern borderland that Makina, the pawn-like protagonist of 
Herrera’s short and mystical novel finds herself. Finding himself the 
go-between of drug lords, Makina moves between worlds, not just those of Mexico 
and the US, but between different states of being and thinking. Was Horace 
right in his pessimistic account of travel? Is all that changes the sky above 
our heads? Or is there, as the next book suggests, salvation to be found?

8. Follow the Rabbit-Proof Fence by Doris Pilkington Garimara 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/10801790/Doris-Pilkington-Garimara-obituary.html>
A rare note of hope in this list, Garimara’s book is based on her mother’s 
experiences as one of the Stolen Generation of Indigenous Australian children 
forcibly removed from their families by government agencies. Incarcerated in 
the Moore River internment camp, Garimara’s mother, sister and cousin managed 
to escape, and then, with poetic justice, followed a different fence – the 
Western Australian pest control fence – back north in order to find their way 
home, a journey of nearly 1,000 miles.

Top 10 books about freedom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/13/top-10-books-about-freedom-george-orwell-virginia-woolf>
9. The Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/20/handmaids-tale-margaret-atwood>
The foregoing fences have been very literal ones; Atwood’s seminal feminist 
dystopian novel gives us both literal and metaphorical borders. There’s the 
Canadian border over which Offred and Luke tried to escape before her 
indoctrination as a handmaid. There’s also “the Wall” (once Harvard) upon which 
traitors of various kinds are hung. But what the novel is really about is 
gender boundaries, where roles are assigned and rigidly enforced.

10. Coasting by Jonathan Raban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/sep/20/featuresreviews.guardianreview11>
Written around the same time as Atwood’s response to the step back in women’s 
rights during the Reagan era in the US, Raban’s account of his journey around 
the coast of Britain in a sailing boat is most notable for its reflections upon 
Margaret Thatcher’s period of greatest social and political power. Listening to 
the House of Commons debate on the Falklands war while moored snugly by the 
Devon coastline, he turns off the radio in disgust. Raban finds that it’s when 
we step outside something that it can be most clearly seen, which in his case 
led him to leave Britain for good, just as Robert Graves did decades before; 
finding himself a stranger in his own land, he left the island. Goodbye to all 
that, indeed.

 * Saint Death by Marcus Sedgwick is published by Orion Children’s Books, 
priced £10.99. It isavailable from the Guardian bookshop for £9.01 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/saint-death.html>.  