
Minmin Noodle Bar

Be warned, when this colourful, modish noodle bar describes a dish as hot and 
spicy, it means it. This is not Wagamama. My ramen, its stock red and glossy 
with chilli oil, was a sinus-clearer with serious depth of flavour. I was left 
coughing and spluttering over the first mouthfuls like an amateur. Luckily, 
this was takeaway, so I didn’t have to suffer stifled laughter from the next 
table. Composure regained, I delved into a small bucket of ingredients: prawns, 
fatty pork nuggets, vegetables, seaweed, tofu, all jostling for space in that 
soul-stirring broth. Imported from Hong Kong, the somewhat gluey noodles were 
the only drawback. Minmin’s menu roves across east Asia, taking in Chinese, 
Japanese, Vietnamese and Thai dishes, several of which (spicy tripe, pig’s ear 
in chilli oil), throw down the gastronomic gauntlet.
• Mains from £6.50. Unit 4, Latitude Building, Bromsgrove Street, 0121 622 
5955,facebook.com/MinMinNoodle <https://www.facebook.com/MinMinNoodle>. Open 
Tues-Sun midday-10.30pm

La Vera

Rather hidden away in the drab Martineau Place shopping centre, La Vera merits 
higher visibility. Prices at this pizzeria are super-keen – my margherita cost 
£4.90 – but it is a quality operation, which makes good use of its hulking, 
wood-fired pizza oven. The base on my sample pie was nicely charred, pliable 
and authentically paper-thin at its centre. The fresh, easily digested dough 
had a good, just-baked flavour and the mozzarella and pulped tomatoes were 
sweet and vibrant. Straight from the oven, it was a little sloppy, those 
vigorously blitzed toms and the cheese had combined to form a roiling molten 
sea, but that was a minor matter. Purists may scoff at aspects of La Vera 
(look, just don’t order the Hawaiian, OK?) and fussier travellers may wrinkle 
their noses at the unlovely location, but if you want great, affordable pizza, 
this is the place to come.
• Pizzas £4.90-£7.50. 16 Martineau Place, 0121 233 1988, no website. Open 
Mon-Sat 11am-8.30pm, Sun 11am-7.30pm

Anderson & Hill

“Deli sandwich” is one the most abused phrases in the English language 
(possibly). It promises XXL, New York-style portion control and foot-long fresh 
breads piled high with first-rate meats and cheeses. Yet often the reality is 
distinctly English and weedy. Praise be then for Anderson & Hill, a compact 
delicatessen which, without making a song and dance about it, is knocking-out 
seriously heavyweight sandwiches. You know how a ciabatta sandwich is normally 
half the ciabatta “loaf”? Well, at Anderson & Hill you get the full thing, 
stuffed. On my New Yorker there was sliced-to-order, extra-peppery pastrami, 
complex Neapolitan salami, a dense thicket of pickles and a poky French 
mustard. Dislocating your jaw eating one of these beasts is a distinct 
possibility. Anderson & Hill also does soup, upmarket salad boxes and 
serviceable scotch eggs but those sandwiches are the stars. Grab a flat white 
from the nearbySix Eight Kafé <http://www.sixeightkafe.co.uk/> on Temple Row, 
too, and for a combined £6 you have a tasty lunch that will set you up for long 
into the evening.
• Sandwiches from £3.15. 7 Great Western Arcade, Colmore Row, 0121 236 2829, 
andersonandhill.co.uk <http://www.andersonandhill.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Wed and Sat 
10am-6pm, Thurs-Fri 10am-7pm

Peach Garden

Nick and Lap-Fai, who run the Birmingham food blog Smoke & Umami 
<http://smokeandumami.com/>, are obsessed with a dish seemingly peculiar to the 
city’s Chinatown: the triple roast. Everywhere does its own version of 
Cantonese pork belly, duck andchar siu pork over rice (explosive chilli oil, 
optional), but they pointed me to Peach Garden as the current pacesetter – and 
I can see why. While its location means it’s tucked away down Bath Passage, the 
window display of freshly roasted meats is enticing and the welcome is warm. 
The salt and pepper pork is beautiful, its crackling like a sensational savoury 
crumble. Sweet and spicy, the pink-tingedchar siu is almost like eating little 
porky toffees. This is very much no-frills dining. The meats are roughly 
chopped over the rice and squeamish souls may balk at all that skin, fat and 
occasional bones. But the flavours are big and so are the portions. Dig in.
• Triple roast £7.20, other dishes from around £5.50. Bath Passage, off 
Ladywell Walk, 0121 666 7502, no website. Open daily 11am-11pm

40 23 Mediterranean Food

A stone’s throw from New Street, Brum’s main railway station, this tiny 
takeaway cafe specialises in north-eastern Mediterranean food (the 40 and 23 
are map coordinates), which, broadly speaking, means it serves Greek dishes 
that have absorbed influences from across the Black Sea and beyond. The short 
menu’s main focus is on grilled meats and vegetables served as salad platters 
or wrapped in bouncingly fresh pitta breads. Thekeftedes lamb meatballs were 
beautifully charred, juicy as hell and thick with herbs and garlic. Served as a 
kebab with yoghurt sauce, lettuce and plenty of very thinly sliced fried 
potato, it made for a pretty sensational mouthful. As well as the grills, 40 23 
also produces great sweet and savoury pastries (try the feta and spinach filled 
filo kihi), and daily specials such as the baked pasta dish,pastitsio, and 
stuffed gemista peppers and tomatoes.
• Wraps and platters from £3. 34 Stephenson Street, 0121 643 5297, 4023.co.uk 
<http://www.4023.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Thurs and Sun midday-8pm, Fri-Sat midday-10pm

Peel & Stone


A short walk from the city centre, the Jewellery Quarter is a handsome museum 
piece of Victorian workshops and factories, now largely colonised by the 
creative industries. That rebirth has encouraged a growth in good places to eat 
locally. Peel & Stone is a highlight. It is in a tiny unit beneath a railway 
bridge, and the bakery specialises in serious sandwiches (baba ganoush and 
roasted peppers; meatloaf and Swiss cheese), served on its own slow-fermented 
breads. It also serves salads, soups, frittata and various hot specials. Its 
pulled pork was a great thick tangle of meat, the pork all hot, treacly and 
supremely savoury thanks to its various rubs, marinades and sauces. The cakes 
are not to be missed either. Its caramel bread pudding was every bit as good as 
that sounds. Peel & Stone also runs a weekend brunch club at its sister 
business,the Church <http://www.churchjq.co.uk/> (22 Great Hampton Street)
• Lunches £3-£4.50. Arch 33, Water Street, 0121 572 1713, peelandstone.co.uk 
<http://www.peelandstone.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Fri 11.30am-3pm, Sat 10am-2pm

Café Opus at IKON
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426695891211%2F317ffd40-607f-46d8-97b8-ab54841898d7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426695891211%2F317ffd40-607f-46d8-97b8-ab54841898d7-1020x612.jpeg>
Opus is one of Birmingham’s best mid-market restaurants and its team, led by 
chef David Colcombe, also runs the bright and airy cafe at the IKON gallery. On 
the menu, all-day breakfasts rub shoulders with interesting salads: for 
instance, roasted sweet potato and caramelised peach with a maple thyme 
dressing; alongside slick, populist dishes such as artichoke linguine; cod with 
spiced orzo pasta, wilted spinach and lemon tahini yoghurt; or beer-braised 
beef with bacon, peas and creamed potatoes. The kitchen is all about the 
scratch-cooking of predominantly British ingredients, and my soundly executed 
fish cake and side salad was lifted by a good, spiky homemade tartar sauce. The 
two-course £9.95 menu looks like a sensible investment, unlike some of the 
rather pricy cakes.
• Breakfasts £5-£8.95, mains £6.95-£9.95. 1 Oozells Square, Brindleyplace, 
0121 248 3226,cafeopus.co.uk <http://www.cafeopus.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Sat 
10am-8pm, Sun 11am-5pm

Digbeth Dining Club, and Habaneros
 Habaneros 
Every Friday (and possibly every Saturday soon, too), Digbeth Dining Club 
(DDC) gathers together a small selection of the best street food traders from 
Birmingham and beyond. This is the place to catch such local heroes as the
Original Patty Men <https://www.facebook.com/OriginalPattyMen>, Andy’s Low ‘N’ 
Slow <https://www.facebook.com/LowNSlowStreetFood> barbecue or Bare Bones Pizza 
<http://barebonespizza.co.uk/>, and it is well worth the 10-minute walk down to 
Digbeth, Birmingham’s nightlife and cultural quarter. DDC is usually based at 
the railway arch bar, Spot*light (free entry, dishes £3-£8,
digbethdiningclub.co.uk <http://www.digbethdiningclub.co.uk/>), but it is 
holding two big, all-out street parties on Good Friday and 1 May.

Birmingham is still waiting for this activity to resonate in the city centre, 
in terms of its street food cognoscenti opening permanent premises or taking 
regular pitches, but one outfit which does serve on the street on a daily basis 
(Mon-Fri) are the burrito-slingers, Habaneros. Habaneros uses high-quality 
local meats on its burritos, free-range Saddleback pigs in this case, and my 
pulled pork was long on flavour. The novel addition of a chipotle slaw and a 
little smoky barbecue sauce worked surprisingly well, too. Habaneros backs on 
to Birmingham’s dinky, boutique cathedral, the grounds of which offer a nice 
place to sit and eat on a sunny day – pigeons notwithstanding.
• Habaneros: burritos from £4.50. Temple Row, 07501 045842, habvan.com 
<http://habvan.com/>. Open Mon-Fri 11.30am-3pm

Ginger’s Bar at Purnell’s Bistro

It is not often you get to try a Michelin star chef’s food for less than a 
tenner but in the cocktail bar at Glynn Purnell’s swanky diffusion bistro, 
ardent foodies can enjoy a bavette steak, weekly pies, a gourmet hotdog, fish 
and chips, sandwiches and various snack items like smoked haddock scotch egg 
coated in a cornflake crumb. It was not flawless (my burger needed more 
seasoning, for instance), but generally the detail was of a piece with the 
kitchen’s pedigree. Ordered as a side, chips were earthy, skin-on numbers and 
arrived with an expertly modulated garlic mayo, as well as fantastic whipped 
butter and slices of homemade pumpkin seed bread. If you are eating here for 
£10 a head, you may prefer to stick to tap water to maximise the bang for your 
buck, particularly as the beer choice is so mundane.
• Sandwiches and meals £5-£9.95. 11 Newhall Street, 0121 200 1588, 
purnellsbistro-gingers.com <http://www.purnellsbistro-gingers.com/>. Ginger’s 
Bar open Mon-Thurs midday-11pm, Fri-Sat midday-till late, Sun midday-5pm for 
lunch

Rod Roj

You could easily walk past this Turkish kebab house without a glance. But 
beyond its menu of pizzas, burgers and chicken nuggets, you will find an 
unusually spruce space, which, via its authentic charcoal grill, homemade 
breads and more unusual dishes (lambs’ liver kebabs; marinated lamb chops), is 
bringing some next-level grill action to shabby Smallbrook Queensway. Rod Roj’s
lahmacun, a huge flatbread topped with seasoned ground lamb and fresh tomato, 
is creditable – a steal, in fact, for £2.49 – while a sample Adana kebab was 
outstanding. There is something about lamb – expertly minced with herbs and 
chillies then placed on smoking coals – that produces food of a primeval 
majesty. It speaks to your very marrow. The “extras” displayed an equally 
persuasive finesse: chilli sauce was a freshly blitzed mix that delivered a 
smooth, slow-burning heat: the side salad-y bits were interesting, particularly 
the tart red cabbage; and it came with good fresh bread and perfectly cooked 
rice.
• Kebab meals from £4.49. 25-27 Smallbrook Queensway, 0121 633 0999, 
rodroj.co.uk <http://www.rodroj.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Fri 10am-9pm

Train travel between Manchester and Birmingham was provided by CrossCountry 
Trains <http://www.crosscountrytrains.co.uk/>
 