
Riverhill Coffee Bar

Almost slap bang by Central Station, Riverhill is a tiny, independent coffee 
and sandwich shop – note: seating is extremely limited – which, in its rigour 
and imagination, not to mention its use of regional ingredients (coffee from 
Glasgow roaster Dear Green, hams and sausages from Puddledub), puts its high 
street rivals to shame. A huge savoury scone, topped with cheese and pickled 
gherkins, was glorious filth – the kind of the thing Riverhill’s near neighbour 
Gregg’s might do, but not half as well. At the other end of the healthy-eating 
spectrum, a beetroot and mackerel salad was a simple triumph of fresh, true 
mittel-European flavours. Elsewhere, the choice ran from interesting daily 
specials, such as lamb kofta, to tasty, fashionable sandwiches, such as a New 
York deli-style pastrami, or the Smokey Jo – smoked pork, smoked cheese, 
coleslaw.
• Snack items £1-£2, soups, salads and sandwiches up to £4.50. 24 Gordon 
Street, 0141-204 4762,riverhillcafe.com/coffee-bar 
<http://www.riverhillcafe.com/coffee-bar>

McCune Smith Cafe

I approached this sharp, modish East End cafe with a degree of caution. It 
provokes a frothing, evangelical enthusiasm in its regulars, which I have 
learned, through bitter experience, to dial down. But one bite of my pastrami 
sandwich and any cynicism evaporated. Takeaway, it cost just £3.80 for a 
sandwich of the gods. Every element was terrific, from the unusually light, 
fresh rye bread to the sweet, crunchy (but, of course) homemade red onion 
coleslaw. Its constituent flavours – the pastrami’s hot pepperiness, that 
creamy, nutty blanket of gouda – were pronounced and well-balanced. This was a 
sandwich that had been lovingly assembled. A flat white was equally precise, 
the coffee’s roasted, chocolatey notes asserting themselves amid all that 
expertly textured, velvety milk.

If you are wondering about the cafe’s name, Dr James McCune Smith was an 
abolitionist and the first African American to hold a medical degree, after 
studying at the University of Glasgow. Sandwiches are named in tribute to other 
stars of the Scottish Enlightenment, such as Robert Adams and David Hume. The 
cafe also wittily celebrates Scottish traditional and artisan produce, in its 
Harris tweed lampshades and shelves lined with deli goods as diverse as Arran 
oatcakes and Glasgow Mega Death Hot Nuts (“So hot they’ll make you cry like a 
woman. No particular woman.”).
• Takeaway, breakfast items, £1.60- £2.50, lunch £2.20-£3.80. 3-5 Duke Street, 
0141-548 1114,mccunesmith.co.uk <http://www.mccunesmith.co.uk>

Babu Bombay Street Kitchen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2F10-glasgow-best-budget-restaurants-bars-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405523340163%2F3a2d1068-40f7-4187-831f-fb6ba7fa1860-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%2C%20bars%20and%20cafes%20in%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2F10-glasgow-best-budget-restaurants-bars-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%2C%20bars%20and%20cafes%20in%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2F10-glasgow-best-budget-restaurants-bars-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405523340163%2F3a2d1068-40f7-4187-831f-fb6ba7fa1860-2060x1236.jpeg>
This small, colourful basement space – decorated with Bollywood posters and 
imported Indian groceries – is much-loved for its daily curries and 
specialities such as itsdhokla “sandwich”, a baked rice and semolina cake from 
Gujarat. Owners Rachna Deer and Gail Finlayson play irreverently with 
tradition, serving their curries not just with rice, but also with traditional 
Scottish morning rolls. Babu’sbhurji pau sees one filled with spicy scrambled 
eggs, for the ultimate Scots-Indian crossover.

Some of this tweaking is very clever indeed. A pot of terrific moong dhal was 
a warm bear-hug of a dish, as it should be. Rather than overtly spicy, a good 
dhal offers unfathomable depths of savoury flavour, but in this case lifted by 
a zingy topping of red onion, lime juice and coriander. Thebhel puri (a kind of 
cold, savoury puffed rice salad) wasn’t quite so impressive. It needed more 
vermicelli-likesev and more of its baked, cracker-like pieces – as well as, 
perhaps, diced potato, chickpeas or a few nuts even – to liven it up, 
texturally. Heavy on the puffed rice, it was a little stodgy. Nonetheless, 
laced with onion, tomato and several chutneys, it was alive with zig-zagging, 
tongue-wagging flavours: notably lime, chilli and sour, fruity tamarind. I 
wolfed it down.
• Breakfast, £3.50-£4.50, snacks and meals £2.50-£5.50. 186 West Regent 
Street, 0141-204 4042,babu-kitchen.com <http://www.babu-kitchen.com>

The Glad Cafe
 Photograph: Emma Lindsay Photography 
It is a hike or a bus ride from the city-centre (through some rundown spots 
few tourists would normally see, which may be itself of interest), or a much 
shorter walk from Hampden Park, which will host the track and field events 
during the Commonwealth Games. Either way, the cafe at this Southside arts 
hub/music venue will reward any detour. A non-profit social enterprise, it has 
fair prices and high quality. The attention to detail in the coffee training 
that was going on at the bar on my visit (a member of staff being schooled in 
the art of the Aeropress), was borne out by a credible, properly dosed flat 
white (coffee from £1.50). Likewise Glad’s rarebit was the real deal: a proper 
grain mustard and Worcester-spiked paste, on toasted slices of the house 
Crossmyloaf, a rustic, twangy bread made for the Glad Cafe by West End artisan 
bakery-cafe Kember & Jones. The kitchen could have been more generous with the 
rarebit mix itself, but that is a minor criticism.

Elsewhere, the menu evolves through the day, as some interesting breakfast 
dishes, such as Italian sausage and chorizo hash, give way to sandwiches, 
salads and gutsy lunch mains. For instance, a daily fried gnocchi dish or a 
black pudding potato cake with streaky bacon, poached egg and Hollandaise. In 
the evening, sharing platters of continental meats and/or cheeses are the main 
attraction. On the morning I visited, the soundtrack veered from melancholy 
folk to Belle & Sebastian, in a way entirely fitting with the early hour.
• Breakfast, £2.50-£6, lunch, £4.50-£9, sharing plates from £8.95. 1006a 
Pollokshaws Road, Shawlands, 0141-636 6119,thegladcafe.co.uk 
<http://www.thegladcafe.co.uk>

Bread Meats Bread

Right now, Britain can’t get enough of gussied-up US junk food, and Glasgow 
particularly is firmly in the grip of this meaty mania. Pulled pork, ribs and 
dogs are repeated across the city’s menus like a holy trinity, while the title 
of Glasgow’s best burger is hotly contested by outlets such asMeat Hammer 
<http://www.meathammerltd.com> (burger meal, eat-in, from £7.95); Buddy’s 
<http://www.facebook.com/BuddysBBQandBurgers> (takeaway burger, from £4); 
Burger Meats Bun <http://www.burger-meats-bun.co.uk> (burger meal, eat-in, 
£9.50 - £10.50); and the unrelated Bread Meats Bread.

I managed to test the last two. Burger Meats Bun is the creation of two chefs 
who first met at Fife’s renowned Peat Inn. Sensational home-cured smoked bacon 
or their fondness for Barwheys, a rich, pungent artisan Ayrshire cheese, are 
evidence of their past in fastidious, Michelin-starred dining. Nonetheless, it 
didn’t quite rock my world. I would happily eat there again but, being picky, I 
found my brioche bun a mite dry and the burger itself (a surprisingly common 
issue, this), although expertly chargrilled, didn’t deliver a particularly 
strident beefy flavour. Essentially, it was carried by the sauces and extras, 
spiced ketchup and the BMB house burger sauce among them.

In comparison, the patty from Bread Meats Bread, a mix of three different cuts 
from dry-aged Scottish cattle, was a veritable beef-bomb. Loosely packed, 
beautifully seasoned and juicy as hell, it had sweeter flavours merging 
seamlessly with the cheese and a mound of outstanding, plump, slow-braised 
onions. Pickles and a smear of tangy burger sauce provided a well-judged 
counterpoint, while the bun was like the perfect New Man: tough but sensitive. 
Throw in a portion of unusually moreish, non-cloying sweet potato fries, and 
you had the best burger that I have tasted outside of Troll’s Pantry in 
Brighton. With one caveat: I was told my burger would be cooked “medium”, but 
in a small patch at the very centre, it was rare, borderline raw. Despite that 
(seemingly uncharacteristic) error, this was still a drool-inducing doozy of a 
burger.

Naturally, given that quality, Bread Meats Bread was buzzing on a Thursday 
lunchtime, its tables crammed with folk greedily hoovering up burgers, dogs and 
meaty BBQ sandwiches from enamelled plates, as Radiohead were almost drowned 
out by the sizzling of the hotplates in the open kitchen. For a real bargain, 
however, budget travellers should take advantage of the truncated weekday 
lunchtime takeaway menu (all meals with fries £6 or £7, midday-3pm, Mon-Thu).
• Eat-in meals £4-£12. 104 St Vincent Street, 0141-249 9898, 
breadmeatsbread.co.uk <http://www.breadmeatsbread.co.uk>

Saramago
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2F10-glasgow-best-budget-restaurants-bars-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405523080631%2F620944cb-75e2-4236-9de6-4fcdd4f58697-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%2C%20bars%20and%20cafes%20in%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2F10-glasgow-best-budget-restaurants-bars-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%2C%20bars%20and%20cafes%20in%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2F10-glasgow-best-budget-restaurants-bars-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405523080631%2F620944cb-75e2-4236-9de6-4fcdd4f58697-2060x1236.jpeg>
In my experience, Sauchiehall Street’s reputation for drinking, puking and 
kebab-related violence is rather overplayed. Certainly, you rarely hear that it 
is also home to the Glasgow Centre for Contemporary Art, whose fetching atrium 
(the Georgian facade of an adjoining building dominates one side), is home to 
ace vegan canteen Saramago. The kitchen concentrates on punchy North 
African/Mediterranean flavours across a menu of small plates, sandwiches, vivid 
salads and mains such as a Moroccan chickpea and lentil tagine. A sample bowl 
of roast onion and rosemary soup was remarkable, delivering several fathoms of 
sweet, savoury flavour, and innovatively augmented with a few parsnip crisps 
(the new crouton?). My only quibble would be that the terrific bread, organic 
and baked in-house that morning, came with a thin vegan “spread” that had me 
longing for butter. An above-average beer list that, alongside a few US craft 
imports, majors on William Bros and Sam Smith’s beers – including the latter’s 
Yorkshire ale at £2.50-a-pint! – seals the deal on this busy, but laid-back 
hang-out.
• Light meals, £3.95-£6.50, mains up to £8.50. Set lunch, two course, £9.50 
(noon until 1pm). 350 Sauchiehall Street, 0141-352 4920,
cca-glasgow.com/saramago-caf <http://www.cca-glasgow.com/saramago-caf>

The Hyndland Fox

A spin-off from Peckham’s, a small, regional chain of delicatessens, the 
Hyndland Fox is as adept as that suggests, but less expensive than you might 
think. Even at night, this West End newbie serves big salads, gourmet 
sandwiches and a handful of mains, such as coq au vin or pappardelle with 
artichoke and roast peppers, for under £10. By day, such dishes are joined by 
jacket potatoes and a full complement of all-day brunch plates. Eggs Benedict, 
served not with ham but with first-rate, properly crisped, dry-cure bacon, was 
A1, the hollandaise silky but nicely acidulated. The space itself, like the 
background music, is a bit MOR, a bit mumsy, a bit Mumford & Sons, but clearly 
the lure of good food is trumping any concerns about interior design. On a 
Friday morning it was heaving.
• Breakfast, £3.50-£8, lighter dishes from £6, mains from £8. 43 Clarence 
Drive, 0141-341 6633,thehyndlandfox.co.uk <http://www.thehyndlandfox.co.uk>

Old Salty’s 

One of those new wavers taking proper pride in what it does (frying to order, 
homemade pies and sauces), Old Salty’s is a shade expensive by chip shop 
standards, but worth every penny. I was a little dubious on arrival. Some 
rather OTT, almost gothic design flourishes (grand, ancient portraits standing 
out against its exposed stone walls), had me wondering if this takeaway and 
restaurant might be all fur coat, no knickers – but not at all. Buttery, 
super-fresh hake arrived encased in an unusually thin, crisp batter, that held 
its audible crunch most of the walk back into town. The chips were what you 
could only describe as proper chip shop chips. Perfectly cooked, profoundly 
potatoey and with the right mix of bite and almost caramelised chew at their 
edges. Tartar sauce was a little thin, but packed a tight capery, gherkin punch.
• Fish and chip meals, takeaway, £5.95-£7.95, other meals, from £4.45. 1126 
Argyle Street, Finnieston, 0141-357 5677,oldsaltys.co.uk 
<http://www.oldsaltys.co.uk>

Meat Bar
 Smoked chicken brioche with crispy pancetta, aioli, and house leaves 
This handsome basement space, all timbers and tan leather, refuses to define 
itself. Bar? Restaurant? It is both, fluidly managing those who just want a 
drink (see its entry in the Glasgow craft beer 10), or those who want a full 
three-course steak blow-out. Budget travellers can drop in for its pared-back 
express menu (two courses £10), or take away its sensational street buns, £5 
each. Glasgow certainly isn’t short of BBQ geeks putting low ’n’ slow, smoked 
meats in brioche buns –Smoak <http://www.smoakltd.co.uk> are also doing good 
things at Pivo Pivo (£5.50-£12) - but Meat Bar’s buns bring something truly 
special to this 24/7 protein party. Grilled chorizo is godlike, right? Stuff it 
in a properly malleable, durable bun with smoked chicken slathered in its own 
barbecued cooking juices, tangy pickles, slaw and aioli, and you have a mighty 
mouthful. In Glasgow, happiness is a warm bun.
• Takeaway buns, £5. 142 West Regent Street, 0141-204 3605, themeatbar.co.uk 
<http://www.themeatbar.co.uk>

Singl-end

The gorgeous stuffed and topped breads, focaccia and pizzas by the entrance, 
or the trays of roasted vegetables spilling out of the open kitchen, give you a 
sense of what this Italian is about. Swerving trattoria clichés, it aims to 
serve fresh, affordable dishes using a mixture of first-rate ingredients and 
Puglian peasant savvy. The lunch menu, which is available to take away until 
9pm (it is too expensive to eat in at night, certainly for the budget 
traveller), is comprised of smaller, half-portion dishes, to be mixed and 
matched. A couple could share some sort of bread, a salad and a couple of hot 
dishes for about £16. A bowl of little, twistedtrofie pasta, a Genovese 
speciality, with a kind of wetter, tomato-less beef skirt bolognese, was very 
good, its deeply savoury gravy a testament to what can be achieved by the 
patient cooking of herbs and finely chopped vegetables. As was the case across 
Glasgow, the service was easygoing and friendly, with the staff enthusing in an 
informed, genuine way. Far less endearing are the TVs that line this 
interestingly designed basement space (a mishmash of post-industrial and Amalfi 
coast influences). Watching Bargain Hunt on numerous screens as I ate all felt 
a bit Orwellian. Less Naples, more North Korea. Thank god the sound was off.
• Lunch dishes, £3.95-£5.95. 265 Renfrew Street, 0141-611 7270, singl-end.com 
<http://www.singl-end.com>

• Accommodation in Glasgow was provided by the Arthouse Hotel 
<http://www.thearthouseglasgow.co.uk>, one of the ABode Group’s townhouse 
properties (129 Bath Street, Glasgow, G2 2SZ, +44 (0)141 221 6789). Rooms from 
£79 B&B. Travel between Manchester and Glasgow was provided byFirst 
TransPennine Express <http://www.tpexpress.co.uk>
 