
Philosophy tends to be arid, more related to mathematics or dispatches from 
the courtroom than art, but some philosophy exhibits playfulness or poetic 
sensibility in relation to language or narrative form and some has even been 
speculative in a literary or imaginative sense. Jean Baudrillard, for one, 
coined the term “theory fiction 
<http://www.absintheliteraryreview.com/archives/fierce4.htm>” and speculated on 
scenarios for future real worlds that were more wild and improbable than 
science fiction. In his case, it was part of a quest to exacerbate the 
groundlessness of signs and meaning.

But postmodern suspicion is not the only way in which philosophers have used 
the strategies of fiction to further their projects. Hegel’s great work
Phenomenology of Spirit <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gXpxCPiN7IQ> can be 
read as a vast novel in which the characters, avatars of the spirit, move 
progressively through the world and through history. Its French translator, 
Jean Hippolyte, called it a “philosophical novel”: in one section the 
characters of Lord and Bondsman struggle dramatically over questions of 
recognition. Nietzsche was a stylist and his Thus Spoke Zarathustra often 
appears in lists of top philosophers’ novels. It has a protagonist and a plot 
that resembles something like a bildungsroman, as the tragic teacher hero 
learns lessons in life through his failures.

As industrial capitalism, with its wars and its factories, shook Europe up, 
literary form loomed as a crucial issue for disaffected philosophers – 
especially those in war-broken Germany, who were schooled in the Hegelian 
tradition, with its sense of universal history and dialectical method. Some 
understood the epic poetry of a seemingly harmonious and integrated ancient 
world to be unobtainable in the modern epoch that had birthed the novel, a form 
that is individually composed and consumed.Georg Lukács’s Theory of the Novel 
<https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/theory-novel>, written as the first world war 
raged, described the fallen personages of modern life as transcendentally 
homeless and barred from greater meanings.

The novel developed its forms in a world in which the inner life of 
individuals, revolution and disenchantment clash and combine. By the early 20th 
century the novel was frayed and had absorbed the chaos, clatter and clutter of 
modern life. As a communist, Lukács turned to recommending that novelists 
invent rational and functioning worlds, like those once embodied in the work of 
a Walter Scott or a Balzac. In short, for Lukács, the choice was Thomas Mann 
over Franz Kafka. Others, those philosopher-poets who montaged Hegel, Marx and 
Nietzsche and invented critical theory, added up literary form, politics and 
philosophy differently. They drew on the exaggerations and emotional resonances 
of expressionism, the playfulness of Dada or the fairytale, the enigmas of 
allegory and the sharp wit ofNew Objectivity 
<https://www.moma.org/explore/collection/ge/styles/new_objectivity>. One such 
was Walter Benjamin, with whom this top 10 begins.

The Storyteller by Walter Benjamin review – a master thinker's fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/01/walter-benjamin-the-storyteller-review-fiction>
1. The Storyteller by Walter Benjamin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/01/walter-benjamin-the-storyteller-review-fiction>
Benjamin is known for his complex Marxist and Messianic philosophy, which at 
times, as in his On the Concept of History, uses parable, metaphor and poetic 
description. Less well known is the fact that he dabbled in literary forms – 
writing many radio plays, sonnets, film treatments, genre fictions, novellas 
and an array of other, usually short, forms. There are Kafkaesque parables, 
skits that ironise the conditions of his own existence, surreal and fantastical 
tales, origin myths for children and psychologically realist stories. These 
deal with travel, play, gambling, love, fate, literary tradition, the relations 
between the generations, action and inaction, just as do his philosophical 
writings. One of his earliest stories is titled Schiller and Goethe: A Layman’s 
Vision. It is a bizarre hallucination of German literary history dotted around 
a pyramid and brought to the brink of destruction by the devil.

2. Elective Affinities by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/elective-affinities.html>
The aforementioned Goethe is an immensity: a poet, an administrator, a 
statesman, a playwright, short story writer and a novelist. He is impelled by a 
philosophical vision that suffuses his literary writings as much as his 
natural-philosophical experiments in colour theory and optics, botany and 
evolution. This novel integrates his various interests in its exploration of 
human chemistry and its attractions, repulsions, affinities and reactions.


3. Scorpion and Félix: A Humouristic Novel by Karl Marx 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1837-pre/verse/verse41.htm>
In 1837, aged 19, Marx wrote this portion of a novel. It is absurd, whimsical 
and full of wordplay, with elements of the style of Tristram Shandy. It is also 
part of a burgeoning discussion with German idealist philosophy and has a keen 
sense of the material needs of the self and the division of society into 
classes: “The ordinary mortal – that is: he who has no right of primogeniture – 
fights the storms of life, throws himself into the billowing sea and seizes 
pearls of Promethean rights from its depths, and before his eyes, the inner 
form of the Idea appears in glory, and he creates with greater boldness, but he 
who is entitled to primogenital inheritance lets only drops fall on him, for 
fear he might strain a limb, and so seats himself in a washcloset.”

4. Traces by Ernst Bloch <http://www.sup.org/books/title/?id=1332>
Bloch did not write fiction, but some of his early philosophical writings, 
such as this collection, proceed by use of essays, stories, fairy tales and 
anecdotes, suitably inconclusive modes to pursue the “not yet” and “to bring 
light” into the obscurity of the lived moment. This is philosophy as poetry.

5. Ginster by Siegfried Kracauer 
<http://www.suhrkamp.de/buecher/ginster-siegfried_kracauer_42353.html>
An autobiographical novel with slapstick movie passages straight out of 
Chaplin and a bitterly ironic sense of the world, related by an outsider from a 
lost generation. In bleakly comic form it presents the contemporary 
fragmentation of the human body and the loss of individuality in mass society. 
Available only in German.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Ftop-10-philosophers-fictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F950ff42d2476f02abc1a8bd846b67e0c02108491%2F0_254_1945_1167%2F1945.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20philosophers'%20fictions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Ftop-10-philosophers-fictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20philosophers%27%20fictions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Ftop-10-philosophers-fictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F950ff42d2476f02abc1a8bd846b67e0c02108491%2F0_254_1945_1167%2F1945.jpg>
 Adorno’s co-author ... Thomas Mann. Photograph: Eric Schaal/Time & Life 
Pictures/Getty Image 
6. Doctor Faustus by Thomas Mann 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/doctor-faustus-10.html>
Languishing under a hot sun in “German California”, Mann and Theodor Adorno 
worked together on this vast novel. This narrative about barbarity and 
rationality features a composer who is something like Arnold Schoenberg. The 
work of the fictional, demonic, syphilitic composer Adrian Leverkuhn are 
described in lines fromAdorno’s Philosophy of New Music 
<https://blogs.commons.georgetown.edu/engl-218-fall2010/files/Philosophy-of-New-Music0001.pdf>
. Adorno himself makes an appearance as the devil, in the shape of a 
“theoretician and critic, who himself composes, so far as thinking allows him”.


7. The Treasure of Indian Joe by Theodor Adorno 
<http://www.suhrkamp.de/theater_medien/der_schatz_des_indianer-joe-theodor_w_adorno_100456.html>
Adorno wrote this libretto in the early 1930s, enthused by Richard Hughes’s A 
High Wind in Jamaica. It deals with the friendship of two boys in rural America 
in the 19th century, but its themes are fear and guilt. It has murder, haunted 
houses, execution and it uses Huckleberry Finn and Tom Sawyer to explore the 
possibilities, dear to Adorno, of “de-mythologisation”. Only in German.


8. Sketch for a Novel on Neville Chamberlain by Max Horkheimer 
<https://www.radicalphilosophy.com/article/sketch-for-a-novel-on-neville-chamberlain-1942>
A sociologist and theorist of the Frankfurt School 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/25/anders-breivik-frankfurt-school>
, Horkheimer also wrote Dawn and Decline, a poetic study of German society and 
its anti-revolutionary institutions using aphorisms and short essays. More 
curious, though, is this very unusual piece of writing. A satirical work, it 
tracks Chamberlain’s arrival in the afterlife and his meeting with the 
Almighty. God – contrary to his expectations – is a woman but, in line with his 
qualms, has socialist and democratic sympathies.

9. All the King’s Horses by Michèle Bernstein 
<https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/all-kings-horses> 
Bernstein was a situationist and therefore steeped in the philosophy of Hegel 
and Marx. This novel was allegedly written to raise cash and it deployed the 
trashy pop literary forms of the postwar teen romance: “We’re all characters in 
a novel, haven’t you noticed? You and I speak in dry little sentences. There’s 
even something unfinished about us. And that’s how novels are. They don’t give 
you everything. It’s the rules of the game. And our lives are as predictable as 
a novel, too.”

10. Dudley Zoo: An Elephant Story by Alfred Sohn-Rethel 
<http://www.zvab.com/buch-suchen/titel/dudley-zoo-eine/autor/sohn-rethel/>
Sohn-Rethel is much better known for his epistemology of real abstraction than 
for his little children’s book set in the West Midlands. This is a short tale 
about an escaped elephant who crushes a bright red Mini. A fairytale cum 
media-worthy hard-luck story, it is witty and wry. It was published in German 
in 1987, when Sohn-Rethel was 88, and it comes with a lovely picture of 
Sohn-Rethel reading the Sunday Times, along with various sketches of just what 
it would look like if an elephant sat on a Mini.

• Esther Leslie is one of the translators, with Sam Dolbear and Sebastian 
Truskolaski, of The Storyteller by Walter Benjamin.
The Storyteller is published by Verso, priced £12.99. It is available from the 
Guardian bookshop for £10.65 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/storyteller-418940.html>.
 