
The first modern writers to bring animal behaviour and biology to the general 
public were Konrad Lorenz and especially Desmond Morris with his international 
bestseller The Naked Ape. These 1960s books paved the way for other 
popularisers, including EO Wilson, Richard Dawkins, Stephen Jay Gould, Jane 
Goodall and myself. We are now very used to this kind of literature, but I 
still remember how my professors at the time warned against reading Lorenz and 
Morris, fearing that it would muddle our minds. They should not have done so, 
though, because we took their warnings as recommendations.


I met Morris when he came to open the chimpanzee facility at Burgers’ zoo 
<http://www.burgerszoo.com/> in Arnhem, in the Netherlands, where I conducted 
my studies. Seeing the water moat surrounding the ape island, he predicted, 
tongue in cheek, that the chimps would one day build a raft to get out. They 
never did (chimps are hydrophobic), but the entire colony of 25 apes did escape 
a few years later by propping a tree stem against a concrete wall and climbing 
over it, upon which they raided the zoo restaurant. Returning home with their 
bellies full, they left the zoo staff – and me – wondering how they could have 
done so without tight coordination. The tree was way too heavy for a single 
chimp.

This event interests me nowadays for different reasons. It has become 
customary to claim that only humans cooperate with insight and joint 
intentions. But I hold animal intelligence in much higher esteem. My latest book
Are We Smart Enough to Know How Smart Animals Are? 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/are-we-smart-enough-to-know-how-smart-animals-are.html>
 laments the persistence of human exceptionalism. For about a century, we have 
tried to squeeze everything other species do into two small boxes: learning and 
instinct. We now have outgrown these boxes and are willing to consider a much 
wider range of possibilities. Animal capacities are often similar to ours, but 
can also be quite unique. Since we use ourselves as touchstone, we downplay 
capacities that we don’t possess, such as echolocation or magnetic navigation, 
while excessively admiring those we rely on, such as language. With this in 
mind, here – chronologically – are a few linguistic products that have 
influenced my thinking:

1. The Prince by Niccolò Machiavelli 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/prince-23.html> (1532)
While watching chimpanzee power struggles at the zoo, I found zero help in my 
biology books. So I turned to Machiavelli, reading him during the quiet hours 
in between the upheavals of bluster and aggression that the chimp males 
produced. Machiavelli was clear that (military) might is crucial for any ruler, 
as are strategic alliances and backing from the masses. In chimpanzees, too, no 
alpha male rules on his own: he needs to make deals, and pay off his 
supporters. The Florentine chronicler of human affairs helped me see the 
patterns that I described inChimpanzee Politics 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/chimpanzee-politics.html> in 1982.

2. The Mentality of Apes by Wolfgang Köhler 
<http://wkprc.eva.mpg.de/english/files/wolfgang_koehler.htm> (1924) 
This book started the cognitive revolution, at least for animals. It describes 
in detail how chimpanzees solve problems in their heads. Köhler presented his 
apes with a brand new problem, such as a suspended banana, and noted how they 
would stare at it for a long time before suddenly jumping up to stack up the 
boxes he had provided. They reached the solution on the basis ofeinsicht, 
translated as “insight”. This radical proposal made Köhler a hated man – many 
scientists still cannot speak his name, only hiss it. Yet he ushered in an era 
of research that now includes corvids, dolphins, elephants, parrots, and other 
brainy animals considered as thinking beings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Ftop-10-books-about-intelligent-animals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb15eae59762560b5acd5e0749a29f9b19d6902f%2F192_306_1195_1494%2F1195.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20intelligent%20animals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Ftop-10-books-about-intelligent-animals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20intelligent%20animals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Ftop-10-books-about-intelligent-animals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb15eae59762560b5acd5e0749a29f9b19d6902f%2F192_306_1195_1494%2F1195.jpg>
 Desmond Morris with a chimpanzee in 1961. Photograph: ITV / Rex Features 
3. The Naked Ape by Desmond Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/dec/18/scienceandnature.science> (1967)
This classic about humanity’s place in evolution is still a fun read, because 
Morris writes with such humour. We may have the biggest brain for our body 
size, he said, but should never forget that we also have the biggest penis. He 
went on to treat human sexuality as explicitly as only a biologist can. Many of 
his provocative ideas are now outdated, but some have withstood the test of 
time, even though the author is rarely credited for them. These include 
speculations about the link between primate grooming and human gossip, or the 
roots of human monogamy.

4. Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of Mind and Behaviour by 
Robert Richards 
<http://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/D/bo5975789.html> (1987)
A critically important book at a time when most evolutionary writing went to 
the dark side. Biologists couldn’t stop talking about selfishness, competition 
and the lack of genuine kindness in a dog-eat-dog world. Perhaps not 
coincidentally, this was also the time of Reagan and Thatcher and the 
celebration of human greed. Since all of this was advertised as Darwinian, I 
was profoundly grateful for philosophers, such as Richards andMary Midgley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/23/mary-midgley-philosopher-soul-human-consciousness>
, who illuminated a different side of Darwin, including his views on moral 
evolution.

5. Passions Within Reason by Robert Frank 
<https://jasoncollins.org/2012/06/11/franks-passions-within-reason/> (1988)
Frank is an economist inspired by evolutionary theory. But instead of using 
that theory to make the case for unfettered competition, he has always 
emphasised the social side of our species; our commitments, our concern for 
fairness, our genuinely charitable impulses. He was writing about these issues 
long before the modern wave of behavioural economics and our current 
understanding that the default mode of human interaction is actually 
cooperative rather than competitive.

6. Ravens in Winter by Bernd Heinrich 
<http://www.thenaturalistsnotebook.com/ravens-in-winter/> (1989)
Reading this book one can’t help but shiver, because it is all about ravens in 
freezing Vermont, and an author dragging frozen carcasses up and down the 
mountain – and waiting days for his ravens to land near them. How do these 
birds communicate about the food bonanza, and whom do they tolerate close to 
it? We learn a great deal about corvid intelligence as well as the persistence 
of naturalists.

7. Naturalist by EO Wilson <http://islandpress.org/book/naturalist> (1994)
I am such an admirer of Wilson and his bravery in the face of opposition! A 
mild-mannered southern gentleman, he was accused of being a Nazi, just because 
he believed that biology might tell us something about human behaviour. I could 
list his scientific works, but the best read is still this autobiographical 
one. Wilson hailed from Alabama, the state next doors to mine (I live in 
Atlanta, Georgia), so I can relate to the nature he describes and also his 
early enthusiasm for all kinds of organisms.

8. A Primate’s Memoir by Robert Sapolsky 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/primate-s-memoir.html> (2001)
I am always jealous of authors with English as their native language, and 
especially of Sapolsky who is a hilarious storyteller. He writes with such ease 
that you’d want to go out with him to the field. A primatologist and 
neuroscientist, Sapolsky spent years with wild baboons in Kenya, documenting 
their tense social relations and stress levels.

9. Mothers and Others by Sarah Blaffer Hrdy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mothers-and-others.html> (2009)
The debate about human evolution often turns on violence and males, with 
females being the passive vessels of male reproduction. Hrdy takes exactly the 
opposite tack by stressing female sexuality and choice, and the
it-takes-a-village 
<http://www.simonandschuster.com/books/It-Takes-a-Village/Hillary-Rodham-Clinton/9781416540649>
 cooperation with which we raise our young. Very refreshing and insightful, not 
only in relation to our own species, but also to the matriarchal society of 
bonobos.

10. We Are All Completely Beside Ourselves by Karen Joy Fowler 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-are-all-completely-beside-ourselves-3.html>
 (2013)
It is hard to write about this novel without spoiling its plot, but let me 
just say that as a primatologist I enjoyed it immensely and felt that the 
author had done her research and/or experienced things that I can relate to.

 * Are We Smart Enough to Know How Smart Animals Are? by Frans de Waal is 
published by Granta, priced £14.99.It is available from the Guardian bookshop 
for £12.29, with free UK p&p 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/are-we-smart-enough-to-know-how-smart-animals-are.html>
.  