
It’s been one asteroid-impactor of a year, and most of us can’t wait for 2016 
to go extinct. But it’s not been all bad: for palaeontologists there were some 
knock-out discoveries, including‘three-eyed’ reptiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/28/triopticus-three-eyed-extinct-reptile-was-a-bone-headed-dinosaur-mimic-100-million-years-early>
, and an ID for the infamousTully monster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/18/tully-monster-mystery-of-the-300-million-year-old-fossil-finally-solved>
.


We’d like to share our pick of the Top Fossils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/fossils> of 2016. Our choices reflect the 
broad range of specialities and interests we have here in The Lost Worlds 
Revisited blog team, so there should be something for everyone. We hope you 
enjoy our selection - may 2017 bring us many more such wonders!

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f3f8c31af00efe82dc8c65b641e20d27b736038%2F0_104_4430_2734%2F4430.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f3f8c31af00efe82dc8c65b641e20d27b736038%2F0_104_4430_2734%2F4430.jpg>
 Image of the SOA-MM4 mandible superimposed on the Homo floresiensis skull 
(LB1) and compared with a modern human skull from the Jomon Period of Japan 
Photograph: Yousuke Kaifu 
Hanneke Meijer <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hanneke-meijer>’s choices -
Homo floresiensis,and dinosaur tail in amber

Despite all the uglyness that was 2016, looking at what this past year has 
brought us in amazing fossil discoveries makes me feel (somewhat) better. For 
my personal favorites, I picked two. The first one constitutes only a tiny 
fragment of a lower jaw and a handful of teeth, but is the culmination of years 
of hard work under the scorching sun in remote eastern Indonesia. This tiny jaw 
represents a small species of hominin, 700,000 years old, and is presumed to be 
ancestral toHomo floresiensis, the ‘hobbits’ of Flores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/08/new-fossils-shed-light-evolution-hobbits-flores>
. Stone tools alongside the bones of extinct animals such as pygmy elephants 
and giant rats have been found in the So’a Basin since the 1950s, but of the 
stone-tool makers, no sign. Until last year, when the team finally came across 
hominin bone remains. As tantalizing as the fragments are, they raised even 
more questions about the origin of the little people of Flores.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef8083f4076c332b0e2520077f17f44cb063e3d2%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef8083f4076c332b0e2520077f17f44cb063e3d2%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Dinosaur tail complete with its feathers trapped in a piece of amber - found 
on a market in Myitkyina, Myanmar, last year - showing the tip of a preserved 
dinosaur tail with feathers. Photograph: R.C. McKellar/Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum (RSM)/Handout via REUTERS 
And then there was the dinosaur tail. The first evidence for feathered 
dinosaurs came in the late 1990s in the shape of fuzzy dark outlines around 
fossils and feather attachments sites on bones. Later on, exceptionally 
preserved fossils from China showed clear feather impressions, and most 
paleontologists now agree that dinosaurs sported a fuzzy coat. But thisnew 
specimen <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982216311939>, 
the firstpiece of dinosaur in amber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/14/why-palaeontologists-are-aflutter-over-new-fossil-feather-finds>
 ever, shows for the very first time evidence for feathered dinosaurs not in a 
flattened 2D arrangement, but in three beautiful life-like dimensions. Being 
face to face with an animal trapped in amber is almost as if a wormhole opened 
and you’re staring down into earth’s history. Right in front of you is a part 
of a dinosaur so very life-like, as if it had died yesterday. If that does not 
lighten up your day, I don’t know what will.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-hone>

Dave Hone <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-hone>’s choice - 
Dracoraptor hanigani

This little carnivorous dinosaur made a big splash when it was discovered last 
year at Penarth near Cardiff, butthe paper describing and naming it 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0145713> came 
through in 2016. There are actuallylots of dinosaurs in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jan/28/british-dinosaurs-should-be-everyones-cup-of-tea>
, but too many of them are very incomplete skeletons which are not always very 
informative and most are (in Mesozoic terms) from relatively recent species.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66ef43f6cf783087641502597350f69abea1c4ec%2F239_9_1932_1159%2F1932.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66ef43f6cf783087641502597350f69abea1c4ec%2F239_9_1932_1159%2F1932.jpg>
 This is an artist’s impression ofDracoraptor hanigani. Illustration: Bob 
Nicholls/http://paleocreations.com 
Dracoraptor bucks both trends being from the very earliest Jurassic making it 
right around 200 million years old, and being known from quite a bit of 
skeleton. The specimen so far has most of a skull, most of the limbs and some 
vertebrae, but more of it was recently recovered so our knowledge will grow. 
The animal would have been about 2 m long, but as it was a juvenile its final 
size isn’t known. Still, few members of the group to which is belongs (the 
coelophysoids) got to be very big so it may never have been a titan when full 
grown.

Elsa Panciroli <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/elsa-panciroli>’s choice - 
Palaeoxonodon ooliticus 

They say good things come in small packages: at the start of 2016, the 
stunning little jaw of a 166 million year old mammal 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pala.12218/abstract> was published 
from the Isle of Skye, Scotland.


 Scotland represents a new frontier in British palaeontology; nowhere more so 
perhaps than Skye. While I must admit bias in my top fossil choice (I’m a 
native of the Highlands and Islands, and the authors are fellow field workers), 
there’s no denying this is an underappreciated piece of palaeontological 
perfection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a961d493853a3c3831ca563f92038b903fb9cae%2F0_170_1656_1864%2F1656.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a961d493853a3c3831ca563f92038b903fb9cae%2F0_170_1656_1864%2F1656.jpg>
 The small jaw of the early mammalPalaeoxonodon (top), the digital 
reconstruction using CT scans (middle), and the enlarged 3D printed version 
(bottom). Photograph: Roger Close 
This teensy jaw, no bigger than a 20 pence coin, looks inconspicuous, but when 
enlarged and printed in 3D – a process made possible byCT-scanning and digital 
reconstruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/30/getting-under-a-fossils-skin-how-ct-scans-have-changed-palaeontology-dinosaur-lizard>
 – the ferocity of this insect guzzler’s dentition is on par with any fearsome 
dinosaur. Close and colleagues’ discovery is not only beautifully preserved, 
but proves that several individual teeth thought to belong to different species 
from Jurassic sites in England, are all from this single species:Palaeoxonodon. 

It’s unlikely that these are our direct ancestors, but they are important 
cousins on our increasingly bushy Jurassic family tree. It’s a time in the 
history of mammal evolution we know little about, but recent research indicates 
mammals were exploding in diversity - and importance - in their ancient 
ecosystems. People go bonkers over giant reptiles, but the real wonder (and 
great scientific importance) is in such micro-vertebrate fossils. There will 
undoubtedly be many more miniature wonders to come out of Skye in 2017.

Susannah Lydon <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/susannah-lydon>’s choice - 
Radix carbonica

My top fossil of 2016 has to be Radix carbonica, a 300 million year old plant 
root tip with recognisable stem cells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/22/fossil-plant-stem-cells>. The 
cellular detail preserved in a concretion from the Lancashire coal measures 
shows a plant root caught in the act of stem cell proliferation, with an 
anatomy which is different from that seen in any modern plant.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47e489e637156a1e1933e5d739183f13926cefae%2F0_245_2340_1404%2F2340.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47e489e637156a1e1933e5d739183f13926cefae%2F0_245_2340_1404%2F2340.jpg>
 The oldest fossilised remains of an actively growing root meristem, namedRadix 
carbonica (Latin for coal root). Photograph: Alexander (Sandy) Hetherington 
(Department of Plant Sciences University of Oxford) 
 If root anatomy in the Carboniferous Period was much more diverse than we 
thought, what else are we missing at the cell scale in the plant fossil record? 
This discovery brings together the worlds of palaeobotany and developmental 
biology to great effect. Evo-devo research has been a fruitful approach in 
other areas of palaeontology (early tetrapod evolution is a great example), and 
it is great to see more and more plant evolution researchers also taking this 
approach. The fossil material in this study was collected and prepared a 
century ago, and shows the importance of looking after our museum collections: 
there’s always something new to learn from old fossils.

Mark Carnall <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mark-carnall>’s choice – 
smelly cephalopods

My fossil pick for this year are the twenty deceased common octopuses (Octopus 
vulgaris) and the twenty European squid (Loligo vulgaris) bought from a fish 
merchant in Bristol by the team behind the paperBuoyancy Mechanisms Limit 
Preservation of Coleoid Cephalopod Soft Tissues in Mesozoic Lagerstätten 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pala.12267/full> (Clements et al. 
2016). They aren’t strictly fossils but they certainly served in the interest 
of palaeontology in a smelly and interesting example of experimental 
palaeontology.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b96df1b4165cde96c9117f6fa882e41564e1bb1%2F52_93_668_867%2F668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20Fossils%20of%202016%20%7C%20Lost%20Worlds%20Revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftop-fossils-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b96df1b4165cde96c9117f6fa882e41564e1bb1%2F52_93_668_867%2F668.jpg>
 Thomas Clements with an octopus ‘participant’ getting prepped for an 
experimental palaeontological experiment. Photograph: Thomas Clements/Caitlin 
Colleary 
As I mentioned in an earlier Lost Worlds Revisited blog post, cephalopod soft 
tissue fossils are extremely rare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/17/evolution-octopus-fossils>. 
There are a handful of octopus and vampire squid body fossils but not a single 
example of ‘true’ (Teuthid) squid or cuttlefish fossil is known (well no body 
fossils – we have cuttlebones, squid jaws and statholiths). However, molecular 
and phylogenetic data indicates that these groups evolved around the same time 
as the octopods in the past).

The team examined some of these preservation biases by rotting the squid, 
octopus and fish carcasses in jars of artificial seawater over 14 days to see 
how the breakdown of the bodies affected the microenvironment, in particular, 
if the pH was getting low enough to enable key fossilisation processes. The 
conclusion? The higher ammonia content in squid tissue - which keeps them 
neutrally buoyant in life - buffers the pH drop and reduces the chance of these 
organisms fossilising.

Of course, this doesn’t mean that a squid or cuttlefish body fossil will never 
be discovered, but these would-be-dinner specimens have helped explain the 
mysterious absence of fossil evidence of these two groups, which we now have a 
basis for knowing is not conclusive evidence of absence.

References

Clements, T., Colleary, C., De Baets, K. and Vinther, J. (2016) Buoyancy 
mechanisms limit preservation of coleoid cephalopod soft tissues in Mesozoic 
Lagerstätten <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pala.12267/full>. 
Palaeontology. doi:10.1111/pala.12267

Close, R. A., Davis, B. M., Walsh, S., Wolniewicz, A. S., Friedman, M. and 
Benson, R. B. 2016A lower jaw of Palaeoxonodon from the Middle Jurassic of the 
Isle of Skye, Scotland, sheds new light on the diversity of British stem 
therians <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pala.12218/abstract>. 
Palaeontology, 59, 155-169.

Martill, D. M., Vidovic, S. U., Howells, C. and Nudds, J. R. 2016 The Oldest 
Jurassic Dinosaur: A Basal Neotheropod from the Hettangian of Great Britain 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0145713>. 
PLOS ONE. 11 (1): e0145713. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0145713

 Xing, L, McKellar, R.C., Xu, X, Li, G, Bai, M, Persons IV, WS, Miyashita, T, 
Benton, MJ, Zhang, J, Wolfe, AP, Yi, Q, Tseng, K, Ran, H and Currie, PJ, 2016.A 
feathered dinosaur tail with primitive plumage trapped in Mid-Cretaceous amber 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982216311939>. Current 
Biology, 26: 3352–3360 
 