
Among the pleasures of researching my book, A Walk in the Park 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/a-walk-in-the-park.html>, a historical survey 
of parks and green spaces from their origins as aristocratic hunting preserves 
to their modern role as public spaces, was not only visiting lots of parks but 
also reading plays, poems, novels and memoirs about them. Since literature and 
horticulture have always gone hand in hand, the canon of park-related writing 
is vast. It ranges from the bawdy verse of A Ramble in St James’s Park by the 
court rake John Wilmot, second Earl of Rochester, to contemporary US novels 
like Garth Risk Halberg’s City on Fire, whose plot turns on a murder in 
punk-era Central Park – a time, according to Woody Allen’s Annie Hall at least, 
when even actors performing Shakespeare in the park lived in fear of losing 
their leotards to muggers.

Though generally less fraught with peril, many other public parks also have 
Shakespeare gardens. These Tudorbethan groves, as it happens, are usually 
modelled along horticultural lines prescribed in the essayOf Gardens, by the 
bard’s near-contemporary Frances Bacon 
<http://www.gardenvisit.com/history_theory/garden_landscape_design_articles/europe/essay_francis_bacon_1625>
. Literature has also taken on solid form in Kensington Gardens in London. Here 
the statue of Peter Pan salutes the park’s own role in stirring JM Barrie’s 
imagination, as well as reminding passers-by of its place as the backdrop to 
his fairy’s adventures

 Over the course of my reading I was delighted to discover that the poet John 
Dryden had coined the phrase “park time” to describe the hours of the day when 
fashionable 17th-century fops took to parading in parks. Sadly, with only 10 
parks in literature to play with, Dryden – like many other distinguished 
writers on parks, not least Robert Walser and Walter Benjamin – had to be 
kicked into the long grass. Below then is a mere selection of works that offer 
a loosely historical tour of parks through the ages.

 1. The Epic of Gilgamesh 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/epic-of-gilgamesh-4.html> (circa 2100BC)
The earliest known literary description of a park-type landscape appears in 
the ancient Sumerian tale The Epic of Gilgamesh. Believed to have been written 
around 2000BC, the poem was preserved on stone tablets from the Assyrian King 
Ashurbanipal’s palace at Nineveh, near today’s Mosul in Iraq. It tells the 
story of two friends – Gilgamesh, ruler of Uruk, one-third human and two-thirds 
deity; and Enkidu, a wild man of the woods previously given to consorting with 
animals – and their quest to discover the secret of immortality. The quest 
leads them to a sacred cedar forest, forbidden to mortals. Well-tended, with 
winding trails and beautiful flowers, tall trees, sweet-smelling plants and 
exotic beasts, it is a park to all intents and purposes. It even has its own 
keeper, an ogre named Humbaba, whose “breath” is said to be “like fire ... and 
jaws like death”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Ftop-10-books-parks-jane-austen-graham-greene-iain-sinclair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c194fdb521c1c76028f9d017007d374182f967%2F0_306_2912_3640%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20featuring%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Ftop-10-books-parks-jane-austen-graham-greene-iain-sinclair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20featuring%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Ftop-10-books-parks-jane-austen-graham-greene-iain-sinclair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c194fdb521c1c76028f9d017007d374182f967%2F0_306_2912_3640%2F2912.jpg>
 Billie Piper as Fanny Price in the 2006 ITV production of Mansfield Park. 
Photograph: ITV/Company Pictures 
2. Mansfield Park <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mansfield-park-17.html>, 
by Jane Austen (1814)
Jane Austen lived in the period when wealthy landowners were smitten by 
schemes to remodel their great country estates along the quasi-pastoral lines 
promoted by such giants of landscape architecture as Lancelot “Capability” 
Brown and Humphry Repton. Repton’s name appears no less than five times in 
Mansfield Park. The hows, whys, wherefores and difficulties of “improving” 
estate parkland crop up in several of Austen’s novels – Pemberley in Pride and 
Prejudice is, for example, commended for the understated nature of its new 
garden work – but perhaps receives their most thorough dissection in the 
exchanges between Fanny Price and Mr Rushworth in chapter six of this book. 
Elsewhere in the novel, Price wisely maintains that “to sit in the shade on a 
fine day, and look upon verdure is the most perfect refreshment”.

 3. Vanity Fair <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/vanity-fair-389847.html>, by 
William Makepeace Thackeray (1847-48)
Vauxhall Pleasure Gardens began life shortly after the Restoration as the New 
Spring Gardens. Pepys, perhaps inevitably, records in his diaries visiting it 
at least twice. But Vauxhall blossomed into one of the foremost attractions of 
Georgian London, boasting tree-lined avenues, brilliant illuminations, firework 
displays, ballooning exhibitions, grottos, supper boxes decorated with 
paintings by Hogarth and musical performances by Handel. Contrary to its 
notoriety as a south of the Thames Sodom and Gomorrah, its entrance fee and a 
dress code kept it relatively respectable. But in Thackeray’s Vanity Fair, the 
“fat gourmand” Jos Sedley makes a fool of himself in Vauxhall Gardens, by 
getting drunk in front of his family and the book’s scheming anti-heroine Becky 
Sharp. Pointedly, though Thackeray’s novel looked sceptically back to the 
Regency era: at the time of its publication in 1847-48, Vauxhall was 
approaching its final decade and Victoria Park, London’s first purpose-built 
public park had already opened.

 4. The End of the Affair 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/end-of-the-affair.html>, by Graham Greene 
(1951)
Until it was destroyed by a bomb in 1940, Graham Greene had a house on the 
fashionable north side of Clapham Common – one of the capital’s ancient 
“commons” preserved as an open space under the Metropolitan Commons Act 1866 
and thanks to a campaign spearheaded by the likes of Octavia Hill and William 
Morris. Greene placed the common at the centre of events in The End of the 
Affair, his semi-autobiographical tale of adultery and Catholic conversion. 
Greene’s protagonist narrator, the second-rate novelist Maurice Bendrix, his 
lover, Sarah Miles, and her dull civil servant husband, Henry, all live about 
the Clapham Common. Its acreage becomes the battleground on which a war, 
initially romantic and then religious, is fought in the novel. While another 
character pivotal to its plot, the rationalist Smythe, is first encountered 
among the orators who gather to harangue the public on the common’s answer to 
Speaker’s Corner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Ftop-10-books-parks-jane-austen-graham-greene-iain-sinclair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91bfaea0e3acf4f2075c787644199193b956e6ce%2F0_302_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20featuring%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Ftop-10-books-parks-jane-austen-graham-greene-iain-sinclair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20featuring%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Ftop-10-books-parks-jane-austen-graham-greene-iain-sinclair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91bfaea0e3acf4f2075c787644199193b956e6ce%2F0_302_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Quasi-pastoral … Gatton Park in Surrey, the kind of Capability Brown parkland 
coveted by Jane Austen’s characters.
 Photograph: Alamy 
 5. The Heat of the Day <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/heat-of-the-day.html>
, by Elizabeth Bowen (1948)
The Irish-Anglo novelist Elizabeth Bowen lived near Regent’s Park for close to 
20 years and wrote about it on several occasions, including exceptionally 
movingly in a non-fiction piece entitled London, 1940 about a bomb landing in 
the park during the blitz. But her compelling 1948 novel, The Heat of the Day, 
set in the opening years of the war paints Regent’s Park as an idyll and hub of 
sexual intrigue and international espionage. Around the same period, Bowen was 
engaged in a passionate, adulterous affair with the Canadian poet and diplomat 
Charles Ritchie, and in a letter to him once described the park as the “gentle 
tract” of their happiness.

 6. The Hundred and One Dalmatians 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hundred-and-one-dalmatians.html>, by Dodie 
Smith (1956)
Originally published in 1956 and with exquisite illustrations of Primrose Hill 
and Regent’s Park by Janet and Anne Grahame Johnstone, the Rotten 
Row-frequenting, horse-riding-mad twin daughters of the costume designer and 
portrait painter Doris Zinkeisen, The Hundred and One Dalmatians marked Dodie 
Smith’s first foray into the field of children’s literature, having initially 
achieved success as a screenwriter and playwright. The book’s main characters 
are the Dearlys, a spotted-dog owning childless couple – not unlike Smith and 
her own husband and business manger Alec Beesley, who met when they were 
employed by the Heal’s department store on the Tottenham Court Road, in London. 
In the tentative days of their courtship, the couple often walked to work 
together across Regent’s Park from shabby rented rooms in Marylebone. Mr Dearly 
in the novel, however, is billed as “a wizard of finance” who has been lent a 
house in the Outer Circle of the park by the government for “getting rid of the 
national debt”, and its verdure duly provides the dramatic backdrop to several 
key scenes in the story and its subsequent two cinematic adaptions by Walt 
Disney.

 7. The Wombles <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wombles-4.html>, by 
Elizabeth Beresford (1968)
Named after her daughter’s mispronunciation of Wimbledon Common following a 
Boxing Day ramble, Elizabeth Beresford’s Wombles made their debut in book form 
in 1968. Initially drawn as teddy bear-like creatures by Margaret Gordon, Great 
Uncle Bulgaria, Tobermory, Bungo, Tomsk, Orinoco and Madame Cholet only gained 
their more familiar long-nosed appearances when the puppeteer Ivor Wood was 
tasked with bringing Beresford’s rubbishing collecting residents of Wimbledon 
Common to life in an animated series for the BBC television in 1973. In this 
opening print adventure, though, the Wombles not only go about their 
proto-green activities on home turf, but also venture to Battersea Park where 
they avail themselves of the funfair, which was to close only a year after 
their TV series aired.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Ftop-10-books-parks-jane-austen-graham-greene-iain-sinclair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F161e33340e3b42420abadf3cc8bdff7b85795277%2F0_180_4806_3460%2F4806.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20featuring%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Ftop-10-books-parks-jane-austen-graham-greene-iain-sinclair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20featuring%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Ftop-10-books-parks-jane-austen-graham-greene-iain-sinclair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F161e33340e3b42420abadf3cc8bdff7b85795277%2F0_180_4806_3460%2F4806.jpg>
 Out for a ramble … TV adaptation of The Wombles. Photograph: ITV/Rex 
Shutterstock 
 8. Small Holdings, by Nicola Barker (1995)
Revolving around a team of gardeners who have acquired the contract for the 
maintenance of a park in Palmer Green under the Conservative government’s 
scheme for competitive tendering, Small Holdings, Nicola Barker’s debut novel, 
offers a wry, surreal, affectionate and funny portrait of park life in the 
early 1990s – an epoch when many British green spaces were suffering from 
chronic underfunding and inept management.

 9. Lights Out for the Territory 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lights-out-for-the-territory-2.html>, by Iain 
Sinclair (1997)
During the early 1970s, Iain Sinclair, godfather to psychogeographers 
everywhere, worked as a parks department gardener in Mile End, tending to King 
George Fields among others. Details of that experience found its way into a 
hallucinatory early prose-poem Lud Heat. Its memory has also been evoked more 
recently in his book-length journeys through the pre- and post-2012 Olympic 
landscape of London, Hackney, That Rose-Red Empire, Ghost Milk and London 
Overground. Sinclair’s excursions have often taken him to, and through, parks 
and in Lights Out for the Territory, he relates a particular pilgrimage to 
Maryon Park in Charlton, which served as a location in Antonioni’s classic 1966 
film Blow-Up.

 10. The White Family, by Maggie Gee (2002)
Partially written in response to the murder of Stephen Lawrence and the 
electoral successes of the British National Party, The White Family was 
shortlisted for the Orange prize in 2002 and looked at racism in British 
society through the prism of a single “ordinary British family” – The Whites. 
This clan’s patriarchal head is Alfred White, a war veteran and the 
curmudgeonly keeper of Albion Park in the fictional north London suburb of 
Hillesden Rise. The park, as its name suggests, serves as something of a 
stand-in for the nation for Alfred, who hankers for the so-called “good old 
days”. His unyielding enforcement of its rules and active dislike of some of 
its users on largely ethnic grounds results in an altercation in the park that 
lights the touchpaper of Gee’s multi-voiced novel in its opening chapter.

 * A Walk in the Park by Travis Elborough is published by Vintage priced 
£18.99. It is available fromthe Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/a-walk-in-the-park.html> for £15.19 including 
free UK p&p.
 