
One of the appeals of chase stories is that they speak to experiences we’ve 
all known. We’ve all walked down a deserted street afraid that someone is 
following us. As children, we revelled in games where we hid from other people. 
And of course, if somebody is hiding, it usually means that somebody else is 
seeking.


In writing my latest novel, I thought a lot about the visceral fear of those 
being pursued, the dogged commitment of the pursuer – and the ties that bind 
them together. The result isLong Time Lost 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400231/>, a story 
about a network of people, hidden throughout Europe, in a privately operated 
and highly illegal protection scheme. When the scheme’s security is breached, 
there is no safety net and the chase is on.


As the books I’ve selected below demonstrate, the relationship between the 
hunted and the hunter can be an intense and strangely intimate one, with each 
anticipating the moves of the other, and in the crucible of the chase, with the 
psychological strains going both ways, it is sometimes unclear who is stalking 
whom.


1. Moby-Dick by Herman Melville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/13/100-best-novels-observer-moby-dick>
Call me a fan. In Melville’s epic adventure novel our narrator, Ishmael, is 
witness to Captain Ahab’s obsessive quest for revenge against the titular white 
whale that bit off his leg. Ultimately, Ahab’s fevered pursuit of the great 
leviathan consumes them both.

2. Frankenstein by Mary Shelley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/11/100-best-novels-frankenstein-mary-shelley>
For a chase taken to geographic extremes, look no further than Victor 
Frankenstein’s pursuit of his fabled “wretch” all the way to the Arctic 
wastelands. If Captain Walton’s first glimpse of a “being which had the shape 
of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature” sledding across distant ice floes 
seems fantastic, it is barely more than a prelude to the remarkable tale that 
follows.

Top 10 Arctic novels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/17/top-10-arctic-novels> 
3. The Thirty-Nine Steps by John Buchan 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/thirty-nine-steps-12.html>
Richard Hannay flees the scene of two murders in his London apartment building 
with a secret codebook handed to him by an American spy. As he attempts to 
safeguard Britain’s advance plans for the outbreak of the first world war, just 
under way when the novel was published in 1915, he is subject to a relentless 
chase. Hunted throughout the Scottish highlands, he returns to London, before 
his improbable ruses and derring-do culminate at the mysterious 39 steps of the 
title.

4. Rogue Male by Geoffrey Household 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rogue-male.html>
If The Thirty-Nine Steps showed the plight of an ordinary man caught up in 
extraordinary circumstances, Household’s classic 1939 thriller updated the 
formula by making the hero a trained killer. In the aftermath of the attempted 
assassination of an unidentified European leader, our unnamed narrator finds 
himself in a desperate struggle to make his way home to Britain – only to be 
pursued by shadowy forces within his own shores. Our hero’s ingenious efforts 
to evade his pursuers culminate in a devilish game of cat and mouse (crucially 
involving, at one point, an actual cat) in a hedgerow den in the Dorset 
countryside. For a long time, the protagonist’s motives remain as obscure as 
his pursuers, but their ultimate reveal is a surprisingly emotional 
justification for why the hunter became the hunted.

5. The Night of the Hunter by Davis Grubb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/16/peter-murphy-top-10-literary-preachers>
In Grubb’s wildly melodramatic tale set in Depression-era West Virginia, Harry 
“Preacher” Powell – the faith-warped killer with the words “love” and “hate” 
tattooed on his knuckles – is released from prison determined to get his hands 
on the loot stolen by his former cellmate, Ben Harper, in a botched robbery. 
All that stands in Preacher’s way is Ben’s widow, Willa, and her two young 
children, John and Pearl. The children’s escape on a skiff along the Ohio river 
unspools like a dark reimagining of The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Ftop-10-chases-in-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cddbbd0a495ce7e9cf4c4de9e7ad3a47118c87c%2F0_148_2155_1293%2F2155.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20chases%20in%20literature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Ftop-10-chases-in-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20chases%20in%20literature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Ftop-10-chases-in-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cddbbd0a495ce7e9cf4c4de9e7ad3a47118c87c%2F0_148_2155_1293%2F2155.jpg>
 Man versus man versus nature ... Bill McKinney and Burt Reynolds in John 
Boorman’s 1972 film of Deliverance. Photograph: Allstar/Warner 
6. Deliverance by James Dickey 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/25/books/25dickey.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
Four friends leave suburban America to set out on a backwoods canoe adventure 
– but the backwoods bite back. “I had never lived sheerly on nerves before,” 
says the narrator, Ed Gentry, and the reader won’t struggle to empathise. But 
this is more than simply a story of man versus man versus nature. Deliverance 
is also an exploration of four men engaged in their own futile mythmaking, and 
of the emotional impact of what it takes to survive.

7. Twilight by William Gay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/dec/30/fiction.features4>
What is it about Southern noir that lends itself so readily to chase 
literature? In Gay’s novel, this gothic sensibility is rendered to stunning 
effect in the twisted realm of the Harrikin, a desiccated backwoods haunted by 
displaced eccentrics, and in the grotesque figure of local undertaker Fenton 
Breece. When Kenneth Tyler and his sister Corrie uncover photographic evidence 
of Breece’s perverse treatment of the dead and attempt to blackmail him, Breece 
sets the unhinged and relentless Granville Sutter on their trail. Gay’s prose 
is raw and poetic, and steeped in Southern atmospherics.

8. No Country for Old Men by Cormac McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/oct/29/featuresreviews.guardianreview16>
As with many of my choices, McCarthy’s novel opens with a crime that arises 
from a pre-existing offence – this time, a drug deal gone wrong. When Llewelyn 
Moss stumbles upon the bloody aftermath, he also finds a case filled with cash. 
His decision to take the money and run is one he makes with a clear-eyed 
estimate of the likely consequences. But the fallout from the lawless pursuit 
that follows is far more devastating and wide-ranging than he can begin to 
appreciate. McCarthy’s rethought western thriller has a timeless feel and, in 
Anton Chigurh, a truly unforgettable antagonist.

9. The Talented Mr Ripley by Patricia Highsmith 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/talented-mr-ripley-2.html>
Tom Ripley, the ultimate chameleon, is a man on the run; not simply from the 
repercussions of a minor postal scam in New York, but also the spectre of his 
own humdrum existence. Later, after he has murdered Dickie Greenleaf in Italy 
and assumed his identity, Tom finds himself hounded at various times by the 
police, an American private detective and by the suspicions of Dickie’s friends 
and family. As the net closes in, Tom finds that shedding his former shabby 
existence is as troublesome as evading justice.

10. Jaws by Peter Benchley <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/jaws.html>
I opened this list with a whale, so I’ll end it with a shark, and for sheer 
blockbuster thrills Peter Benchley’s iconic novel is tough to beat. As police 
chief Martin Brody hunts down the great white that is terrorising the small 
town of Amity, Long Island, the shark, in turn, haunts Brody’s thoughts.

• Long Time Lost by Chris Ewan is published by Faber & Faber, priced £12.99. 
It isavailable from the Guardian bookshop for £10.39 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400231/>.
 