
Iraq entered my life 25 years ago in the form of Scud missiles arcing west. I 
was an American student in Jerusalem, living on French Hill in a shared 
apartment with friends, books, guitars and future ex-girlfriends.


Back then, to my mind, the word Iraq evoked a place. A place where Saddam 
Hussein ruled; where a war against Iran had been fought, a war against Kuwait, 
and a war against a global UN coalition impending. It was place that was old 
and interesting but not one – as I understood it – connected to me in any 
direct way. In January 1991, the UN deadline passed, the air war began, and 
Saddam tried to provoke Israel into joining the war against him, hoping that it 
might break up the coalition. Evenings were spent in gas masks anticipating a 
biological or chemical attack as we listened to the radio for information. We 
learned the meaning (and then became practitioners) of black humour.

Twenty-five years later, the word Iraq no longer evokes a place to me. When I 
hear it in conversation, it cues up a problem – the problem, if you will, of it 
no longer being a place.

If one allows it to, the place or the problem can be allowed to drift away. We 
are weary, and it no longer invites attention. The story of Iraq has ended, we 
feel, because we see nothing but repetition. But the story is not over. If 
anything, it is only beginning.

These are books on my mind about Iraq – and the wider Middle East. I think 
they are good. Maybe essential.


1. The Corpse Washer by Sinan Antoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/03/sinan-antoon-iraq-ave-maria-isis>
 (2010)
According to Muslim tradition, the corpse washer prepares the bodies of the 
dead for burial. The Shias and Sunnis both do it, and the differences in 
practice are minor. This is a novel, originally written in Arabic, by a New 
York-based Iraqi writer who left the country in 1991. He translated it himself. 
No other book I’ve read takes us closer to the lives of the people there, 
breathing a much-needed human dimension to understanding life in Iraq.

2. The Iraq Study Group Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2006/dec/06/post247> (2006)
Ten years ago things were going badly in Iraq. There was a threat of civil 
war, insurgents were increasing in strength, Syria’s stability was threatened, 
and Iran was playing fast and loose with its involvement. The Iraq Study Group 
was established to take a hard look at the situation and form a strategy for US 
involvement. The bipartisan result was a solid piece of work and, with 
hindsight, suggested probably the only reasonable way the situation could have 
been salvaged.

3. Fobbit by David Abrams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/04/fobbit-david-abrams-review> 
(2012)
There is the world. And then there is the world that we would prefer the world 
to be. Most of us spend too much time in the latter. And when it comes to the 
American public and their views of soldiers and soldiering, it can seem like a 
permanent vacation. But in this wickedly funny novel, Abrams sees right past 
the self-aggrandising illusions and comforting fairytales that tuck the US in 
at night.

4. Strategic Intelligence and Statecraft: Selected Essays, Adda B Bozeman 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/12/10/obituaries/adda-bozeman-barkhuus-85-expert-in-international-relations.html>
 (1992)
Bozeman was a key academic in the development of intelligence studies in the 
US. In 1976, she wrote an article published in Orbis (Vol 20, No 1) called War 
and the Clash of Ideas. In that piece, reproduced in collection, Bozeman talks 
about how ideas both form and sustain communities through time, as commitments 
to ways of life. But these commitments can clash. Strategic intelligence 
becomes the discipline of knowing ourselves as a cultural system, seeing others 
on their own terms, and then crafting means of engagement to positive effect. 
Unfortunately, this profound insight was misrepresented in an inferior book 
calledWar and the Clash of Civilisations by Samuel Huntington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/oct/21/afghanistan.religion2>.

5. The Yellow Birds by Kevin Powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/31/the-yellow-birds-kevin-powers-review>
 (2012)
This is a soldier’s story turned into fiction and told with expressive power 
and remarkable intensity. The Yellow Birds is heartfelt and successful effort 
to witness and contribute to a war literature that we need. It is also a 
cracking story that pulls us in and wraps us in its own sense of wonder.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-iraq-war-chilcot-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec4b995246265af8e7cd7f24d5edd4e9fb2454a4%2F0_183_5483_3290%2F5483.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20Iraq%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-iraq-war-chilcot-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20Iraq%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-iraq-war-chilcot-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec4b995246265af8e7cd7f24d5edd4e9fb2454a4%2F0_183_5483_3290%2F5483.jpg>
 Essential insights... two men glance through the volumes of the Chilcot 
inquiry’s report. Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/AP 
6. Baghdad Burning: Girl Blog from Iraq by Riverbend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/jun/18/iraq.bookextracts> (2005)
This is not so much a book as a collection of blogs written by a young Iraqi 
woman using the handle Riverbend. It begins, casually and self-consciously 
with, “I’m female, Iraqi, and 24. I survived the war. That’s all you need to 
know.” Her witty and insightful writing is a corrective to our lopsided view of 
a world we know far too little about.

7. Imperial Life in the Emerald City by Rajiv Chandrasekaran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/jun/21/podcastimperiallifeinthee>
 (2006)
War in the west has – for a good 400 years – been a bloody game of capture the 
flag. Once we captured the other guy’s capital city, papers were exchanged and 
treaties were signed, and terms were given and accepted. Today, we are 
experiencing the end of the dominance of western military power and its system 
of rules. This excellent book laid bare, for me, how unprepared we are as a 
cultural system to turn that corner.

8. Nobody Told Us We Are Defeated: Stories from the New Iraq by Rory McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2006/aug/27/politics> (2006) 
Posted as a journalist to Iraq, McCarthy started collecting stories from 
ordinary people – stories that mostly began in 1991, during what they calledthe 
Shaaban intifada <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/6956080.stm>, or 
“the Separation”. Far too many accounts of modern Iraq omit this full-blown 
civil war. McCarthy draws a line from those wounds through to the next wars and 
beyond in stories that are revealing, shocking, human, and faithfully 
portrayed. He gives us an intimate “outside-in” view of the world as a 
professional writer, which brilliantly complements Riverbend’s “inside-out” 
blogging.

9. The Chilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/12/chilcot-report-reveals-lessons-forgotten-since-1945>
No, it’s not a book. No, I haven’t read it all – and neither will you. But as 
the years roll on, it will prove to be one of the most significant insights 
into the day-to-day functioning of the UK government and, indeed, any 
democratic government. Like the records of the Cuban missile crisis and 
WikiLeaks, these volumes will be pored over by graduate students for decades, 
trying to understand the mess these people stepped into (2001 was not the 
beginning and they didn’t create it); the mess they made; and the mess they 
left behind (some of which you can probably see from your window).

10. The Good Soldiers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/11/books/review/Stanton-t.html?pagewanted=all&_r=1>
 andThank You for Your Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/08/thank-you-service-david-finkel> 
by David Finkle (2009, 2013)
Yes, that’s two books but you are the country that gave us Spinal Tap, and 
should therefore be sympathetic tocranking things up to 11 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uMSV4OteqBE>. And together, these books do. 
The first is an engrossing story of the Iraq war from the perspective of 
American soldiers and, for me, illustrated how every high-level failure of 
politics, imagination, and planning lands on the shoulders of those who cannot 
possibly fix them – but are ordered to. The second book tells a far more rarely 
told, but equally vivid, story – of those same people coming home, broken, and 
how our abandonment of them changes them and defines us.

• The Girl in Green by Derek B Miller is published by Faber & Faber, priced 
£12.99.It is available from the Guardian bookshop for £10.65 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/girl-in-green.html>.
 