
Are history and literature no country for old men? The demographics of 
literary heroes can be a bit depressing for anyone over a certain age. It’s 
easy to find books about school days, comings of age, first kisses, great 
expectations, artists as young men, the faults in our stars. The middle-aged, 
especially middle-aged men in full crisis mode, likewise get their share of 
attention: thank you Richard Ford, Martin Amis, Nick Hornby, Jonathan Franzen, 
John Updike and several thousand others. But what about older people, those in 
their 60s, 70s and 80s, who don’t want merely to be plot devices in 
rocking-chairs, encumbered with memories and regrets, reminiscing about what 
happened many decades earlier when their lives were actually interesting?


As I researched and wrote Mad Enchantment, my biography of the last dozen 
years in the long life ofClaude Monet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/monet>, I was struck by the painter’s 
vigour, fortitude, ambition and (if I can declare some personal interest) sheer 
narrative traction. Monet in those years, his 70s and 80s, was very much an old 
man in a hurry, emerging from self-imposed retirement on the eve of the first 
world war to create some of the most daringly experimental pigmentary effects 
he had ever attempted. He offers proof that an eightysomething can propel a 
narrative without an author having to resort to wistful recollections of a 
vanished prime. So what other older men appear in literature on their own 
terms, holding our attention with all their wisdom, folly and singularity? 
Here, in random order, are some of my favourites.


1. The Knot of Vipers 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=T51bAgAAQBAJ&pg=PT1136&lpg=PT1136&dq=The+Knot+of+Vipers+(Le+N%C5%93ud+de+vip%C3%A8res)+(1932)+by+Fran%C3%A7ois+Mauriac&source=bl&ots=EgPZF_5N63&sig=PpIKC5h6257PYfx_CV47WxLGy9g&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjYi9_X3sDPAhXhCMAKHZBABokQ6AEIOzAG#v=onepage&q=The%20Knot%20of%20Vipers%20(Le%20N%C5%93ud%20de%20vip%C3%A8res)%20(1932)%20by%20Fran%C3%A7ois%20Mauriac&f=false>
(Le Nœud de vipères)  
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=T51bAgAAQBAJ&pg=PT1136&lpg=PT1136&dq=The+Knot+of+Vipers+(Le+N%C5%93ud+de+vip%C3%A8res)+(1932)+by+Fran%C3%A7ois+Mauriac&source=bl&ots=EgPZF_5N63&sig=PpIKC5h6257PYfx_CV47WxLGy9g&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjYi9_X3sDPAhXhCMAKHZBABokQ6AEIOzAG#v=onepage&q=The%20Knot%20of%20Vipers%20(Le%20N%C5%93ud%20de%20vip%C3%A8res)%20(1932)%20by%20Fran%C3%A7ois%20Mauriac&f=false>
by François Mauriac 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=T51bAgAAQBAJ&pg=PT1136&lpg=PT1136&dq=The+Knot+of+Vipers+(Le+N%C5%93ud+de+vip%C3%A8res)+(1932)+by+Fran%C3%A7ois+Mauriac&source=bl&ots=EgPZF_5N63&sig=PpIKC5h6257PYfx_CV47WxLGy9g&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjYi9_X3sDPAhXhCMAKHZBABokQ6AEIOzAG#v=onepage&q=The%20Knot%20of%20Vipers%20(Le%20N%C5%93ud%20de%20vip%C3%A8res)%20(1932)%20by%20Fran%C3%A7ois%20Mauriac&f=false>
 (1932) 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=T51bAgAAQBAJ&pg=PT1136&lpg=PT1136&dq=The+Knot+of+Vipers+(Le+N%C5%93ud+de+vip%C3%A8res)+(1932)+by+Fran%C3%A7ois+Mauriac&source=bl&ots=EgPZF_5N63&sig=PpIKC5h6257PYfx_CV47WxLGy9g&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjYi9_X3sDPAhXhCMAKHZBABokQ6AEIOzAG#v=onepage&q=The%20Knot%20of%20Vipers%20(Le%20N%C5%93ud%20de%20vip%C3%A8res)%20(1932)%20by%20Fran%C3%A7ois%20Mauriac&f=false>
Mauriac’s novel takes the form of a written confession by a wonderfully 
malevolent and calculating narrator, a miserly barrister whose final ambition, 
following a lifetime of avarice and hatred, is to disinherit his equally greedy 
children. Yet, as his plotting unfolds, this appalling paterfamilias slowly 
uncoils the knot of vipers in his heart and reveals his life to be one of 
haunting tragedy, deep pathos, and even a redeeming love. Not everyone will 
appreciate the whiff of incense at the end – Mauriac certainly had his share of 
detractors, including those on the Catholic right – but the journey is 
absolutely mesmerising.

 2. Barney’s Version by Mordecai Richler 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/barney-s-version.html> (1997) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/barney-s-version.html>
Here we have another gruesome protagonist propelled through the pages by a 
search for revenge. In response to the impending autobiography of a former 
friend, TV producer Barney Panofsky, in an act of self-exculpation, tries to 
piece together his life story. Both his life and the autobiography are, as he 
admits with diverting frankness, a shambles, encompassing a trio of wives, 
various cuckoldings and a possible murder. His attempts are marred by the fact 
that he’s in the early stages of Alzheimer’s, a diagnosis that results in an 
compellingly unreliable narrator. Wonderful, spleen-venting satire from a great 
literary curmudgeon.

 3. Inferno, Canto 26 by Dante 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/inferno-23.html> (circa 1314) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/inferno-23.html>
Ulysses may get only 52 lines of text, but he sets the canto alight. Dante 
manages to chronicle an epic voyage in this short passage, describing an aged 
Ulysses and his equally elderly seafaring companions leaving behind the 
comforts of home (Penelope apparently did all that waiting around for nothing) 
and daring to sail beyond the boundaries of the known world. Spoiler alert: 
this “foolish flight” ends badly, but the episode features some of the most 
affecting passages in the entire Divine Comedy. Ulysses is in hell, thanks to a 
certain trick with a wooden horse, but there’s no doubting Dante’s sympathy 
with and admiration for the old boy.

 4. On Old Age by Cicero <http://pinkmonkey.com/dl/library1/gp003.pdf> (44 BCE)
 <http://pinkmonkey.com/dl/library1/gp003.pdf>
Through his mouthpiece, Marcus Cato, Cicero talks about the techniques and 
benefits of ageing. Along the way, we get pleasing vignettes of many 
indefatigable ancients: Isocrates, who was still penning books in his 90s, and 
a certain Gorgias of Leontini, who lived to be 107 “without ever relaxing his 
diligence or giving up work”. He also tells the marvellous story of the aged 
Sophocles neglecting his household affairs so he can keep writing his plays. 
Hauled before the courts by his children, who want him declared mentally unfit 
to manage his property, Sophocles offers the ultimate riposte: he reads the 
judges his latest play, Oedipus at Colonus, then demands to know if it sounds 
like the work of a man of unsound mind. Case dismissed.

5. Lettres à une Amie, 1923-29 by Georges Clémenceau (1960)
Clémenceau met Marguerite Baldensperger when he was 81 and she was the 
40-year-old married wife of a Sorbonne professor grieving for her dead 
daughter. “We must recapture our zest for life,” he told her. “We must fight. I 
shall help you. Put your hand in mine. I’ll help you to live and you will help 
me to die.” But he was by no means ready to die. The two of them conducted a 
secretive (and platonic) liaison. He wrote almost 700 letters to her in the 
last six years of his life, chronicling a flourishing old age: gadding about 
the countryside in his Rolls-Royce, entertaining dignitaries at his seaside 
bungalow, and coaxing Claude Monet to finish his water lily paintings. A zest 
for life indeed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftop-10-books-about-old-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6618f1109467c9222b10e0f7db493a3ecdd8c18%2F0_174_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20old%20men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftop-10-books-about-old-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20old%20men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftop-10-books-about-old-men%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6618f1109467c9222b10e0f7db493a3ecdd8c18%2F0_174_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 A portrait of Gregorio Fuentes in 2001. Fuentes was captain, cook and friend 
to Ernest Hemingway and many say he was the inspiration for the protagonist in 
The Old Man and the Sea. Photograph: Jose Goitia/AP 
6. King Lear by William Shakespeare 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/king-lear-25.html> (circa 1606) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/king-lear-25.html>
The inevitable template for all stories of aged fathers dealing with selfish 
children, from Balzac and Mauriac to Akira Kurosawa’s Ran (1985) and Jane 
Smiley’s A Thousand Acres (1991). Recent speculation puts Lear’s difficulties 
down to Alzheimer’s disease or other forms of dementia. But his problems didn’t 
begin with age, and his senility – such as it might be – is hardly his defining 
trait (and, tellingly, it’s not deployed by either Kurosawa or Smiley). As 
Goneril and Regan pointedly note, their father was always a bit bonkers at the 
best of times and old age has only exacerbated “the imperfections of 
long-engrafted condition”.

7. Le Père Goriot by Honoré de Balzac 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pere-goriot-4.html> (1835) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pere-goriot-4.html>
Goriot is fond and foolish like Lear, but endlessly patient and loving. He 
impoverishes himself to help out his two greedy, frivolous daughters, Anastasie 
and Delphine, who almost make Goneril and Regan look like paragons of filial 
gratitude. Balzac lays it on thick in the deathbed and funeral scenes, giving 
us (like Mauriac) a bleak view of a money- and status-obsessed society 
tragically adrift from its familial moorings.

8. Pale Fire <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pale-fire-2.html> by Vladimir 
Nabokov <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pale-fire-2.html> (1962) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pale-fire-2.html>
The poet John Shade is not exactly old: he has died, we learn from the 
“Foreword”, a few weeks past his 61st birthday. But his 999-line poem is an 
eloquent and moving meditation on death, loss, age (including the logistics of 
shaving a dewlap) and the afterlife. The fantastical and famously baffling 
commentary – with its obsessions with political machinations in faraway Zembla 
– tends to make readers overlook the dastardly brilliance of the Shade/Nabokov 
poem. Here’s Shade on 40 years of marriage: “Four hundred thousand times/The 
tall clock with the hoarse Westminster chimes/Has marked our common hour. How 
many more/Free calendars shall grace the kitchen door?”

9. The Old Man and the Sea by Ernest Hemingway 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/old-man-and-the-sea-6.html> (1952) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/old-man-and-the-sea-6.html>
“Everything about him was old except his eyes and they were the same colour as 
the sea and were cheerful and undefeated.” How can we not cheer on Santiago, 
the luckless fisherman, 84 days without a catch, who on day 85 hooks the huge 
marlin far off the coast of Cuba? Hemingway was only in his early 50s when he 
wrote the novel, but it’s tempting to read his own plight – poor health, 
writer’s block, a spate of vicious reviews – in to that of the struggling 
Santiago. Luckily, The Old Man and the Sea turned out to be Hemingway’s 
literary marlin. He then landed the Pulitzer and, in 1954, the Nobel prize.

Top 10 stories of hubris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/28/top-10-stories-of-hubris> 
10. Old Filth <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/old-filth.html> by Jane Gardam 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/old-filth.html> (2004) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/old-filth.html>
The first in a wonderful trilogy (with The Man in the Wooden Hat and Last 
Friends) about the courteous but astringent Sir Edward Feathers. Gardam gives a 
pitch-perfect portrait of this long-time expat, retired QC, and bravely 
grieving widower whose shoes “shone like conkers”. His white-knuckle motorway 
odyssey to Teesside in his Mercedes in the wake of his wife’s death is a 
hilarious, poignant and impeccably unsentimental portrait of discombobulation, 
loss and unbowing determination.
 