
Probe Records

Don't be fooled by its modest size: Probe Records, running since 1971, is a 
Liverpool music legend. Members ofFrankie Goes to Hollywood 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frankie_Goes_to_Hollywood>, Echo and the Bunnymen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/echoandthebunnymen>, and The Teardrop 
Explodes are all said to have shopped here; Pete Burns did a stint on the 
shopfloor; and its one-time record label signed none other than Birkenhead 
post-punkers,Half Man Half Biscuit 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Half_Man_Half_Biscuit>. Today, Probe continues to 
stock new releases alongside rare vinyl, with CDs and street press magazines 
adding to the mix.
• The Bluecoat, School Lane, probe-records.com <http://www.probe-records.com/>
. Open Mon-Sat 9.30am-6pm, Sun 12.30pm-5pm

Cow & Co

There's something just-so about the crisp, clean lines of design emporium Cow 
& Co. Everything has exactly the right amount of space allocated to it; the 
colourways of its magazines and jewellery, and gifts and bags that align in 
perfect harmony. Housed in a Victorian terrace and run by the duo behind design 
agencySB Studio <http://sb-studio.co.uk/> – an outfit so cool it's about to 
launch its own craft beer – this spin-off shop sells the design wares they have 
handpicked. You should head here for sociable service (a cafe serves tea to 
allow for better browsing), or just to bathe in the Scandi-influenced design 
light.
• 15 Cleveland Square, cowandco.co.uk <http://www.cowandco.co.uk/>. Open 
Mon-Sat 10am-6pm

Whisky Business
 Photograph: Simon Price/Alamy 
Most shops do all they can to advertise their presence: neon signs, hideous 
hoardings, unhappy-looking souls bearing sandwich boards … Not so Whisky 
Business, a basement booze outfit so well hidden that, even equipped with GPS 
and the patience of an alcoholic saint, you may be hard-pressed to find it. 
Persist, however, as this specialist shop sells an astonishing array of whisky 
and other spirits, from Paul John Indian single malt whisky to Liverpool Gin. 
Staff who know their stuff can help make decisions. Just don't expect them to 
help you find your way home again.
• The Old Ropery, Fenwick Street, facebook.com/WhiskyBusinessLiverpool 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhiskyBusinessLiverpool>. Open Tues-Wed 11am-6pm, 
Thurs-Sat 11am-8pm

69A

Slightly musty and eternally dusty, 69A is the shop that time forgot. 
Established in 1976 and now in its third Liverpool location, it began life 
flogging 1950s clothing before expanding to cover the eclectic range of vinyl, 
19th-century porcelain, pottery and ceramics, collectables, jewellery, 
secondhand clothes, floppy hats, furniture and fabulously chunky 1980s 
telephones. This is vintage shopping as it used to be: no frills, no bunting 
and, apparently, no heating – but all the better for it.
• 75 Renshaw Street, 69aliverpool.co.uk <http://www.69aliverpool.co.uk/>. Open 
daily midday-6pm

Weavers Door

This Cavern Walks menswear boutique has been catering for shoppers hankering 
for British-made threads for the past 25 years. Supercool brands such asNorse 
Projects <http://www.norseprojects.com/> and Sheffield's Mamnick 
<http://www.mamnick.com/> (makers of stainless steel accessories) sit beside 
John Smedley knitwear, Jack Purcell sneakers and Wolsey shirts. Its impressive 
range – and quarterly journal – fly the flag for homegrown fashion in Liverpool.
• 1 Cavern Walks, Harrington Street, weaversdoor.com 
<http://www.weaversdoor.com/>. Open Mon-Sat 10am-6pm, Sun 11am-5pm

Bluecoat Display Centre

Tucked safely within the walls of the city centre's oldest building, this 
gallery showcases the work of some of Europe's finest craft-makers and has been 
here, doing its contemporary craft thing, since 1959. The Bluecoat continues to 
curate and sell handmade glassware, jewellery, sculpture and prints by emerging 
and established artists at prices that are sensible enough to make ownership a 
distinct possibility. Overlooking the Bluecoat's ever-popular courtyard garden, 
this unpretentious shop deserves that overused epithet (sorry) "hidden gem".
• The Bluecoat, College Lane, bluecoatdisplaycentre.com 
<http://www.bluecoatdisplaycentre.com/>. Open Mon-Sat 10am-5.30pm, Sun 
midday-5pm

Lost Art

This place may look small but it has an international following: in 2012, Lost 
Art won Best Skate Shop at the Bright European Skateboard Awards. Its 
floor-to-ceiling displays of boards and shoes – from brands such asThe Quiet 
Life <http://www.thequietlife.com/>, Palace <http://www.palaceskateboards.com/> 
and Etnies, sum up what this place is all about – and it's not the shoes or the 
artwork so much as skate culture itself, evidence for which can be found in 
Lost Art's early support of the skater-madeSkate Park on New Bird Street 
<http://skateliverpool.co.uk/New-Bird-Liverpool.html>.
• Unit 3, 5-11 Slater Street, lostartshop.co.uk <http://www.lostartshop.co.uk/>
. Open Mon-Sat 10am-6pm, Sun midday-5pm

Nook & Cranny

The Bluecoat is home to all manner of independents, including this design and 
print shop, which sits across a narrow passageway from the Bluecoat Display 
Centre. Nook & Cranny is run by Jen and John Kirby, the former an illustrator, 
the latter happy to admit to possessing no creative talent whatsoever. The shop 
successfully showcases artist-made cards, letterpress prints, 'zines, 
screen-printed wrap, soft furnishings and stationery, its stock the result of 
the Kirby's unceasing search for up-and-coming design talent in the north.
• The Bluecoat, College Lane Entrance, nookandcrannyshop.co.uk 
<http://www.nookandcrannyshop.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Fri 11am-5pm, Sat 10am-6pm

Reid of Liverpool

You don't get much more cultured than this: an antiquarian bookshop that 
counts as its neighbours two cultural "cathedrals", theEveryman 
<http://www.everymanplayhouse.com/content/Home/AboutUs/Everyman.aspx> and the 
Philharmonic Hall 
<http://www.liverpoolphil.com/376/our-history/liverpool-philharmonic-hall.html>
. Step forward Reid of Liverpool, a secondhand bookstore that has been selling 
"books on most subjects" for almost 40 years. Floor-to-ceiling bookcases 
contain more than 40,000 titles; books on art and sci-fi jostle for space 
alongside first editions. A handwritten sign deadpans "shoplifters welcome, 
exit uncertain", though with prices starting at 50p, there's no need to pocket 
that paperback without paying, is there?
• 105 Mount Pleasant, reidofliverpool.com <http://reidofliverpool.com/>. Open 
Mon-Sat midday-5.15pm (times can vary, call ahead to check, 0151 709 2312)

News from Nowhere

Alongside straightforward fiction and children's books, News from Nowhere 
categorises its titles under headings such as "activism", "black liberation" 
and the "politics of health". This self-styled radical and community bookshop 
has been selling political books, magazines and newspapers since 1974; 
alongside Reid's (see above), the newerKernaghan Books 
<http://kernaghanbooks.com/> (also in the Bluecoat) and Liverpool's gloriously 
revivedCentral Library 
<https://liverpool.gov.uk/libraries/find-a-library/central-library/>, its 
continued existence speaks volumes about a city determined to raise the 
literary stakes.
• 96 Bold Street, newsfromnowhere.org.uk <http://www.newsfromnowhere.org.uk/>. 
Open Mon-Sat 10am-5.45pm, Sun midday-4pm (times can vary)

Susie Stubbs is the editor and director of Creativetourist.com 
<http://www.creativetourist.com/>

For more information, go to the Visit Liverpool <http://www.visitliverpool.com>
 website
 