
In novels, a great city is a setting. But it’s also a character in itself, a 
huge compound being, that the individuals living in it react to, live in the 
shadow of, as if it were another actor in the story – a giant that somebody has 
smuggled into the cast list. New York has such a powerful mythic presence that 
it has generated whole genres and subgenres. There’s the story of the 
immigrant, arriving from the Old World and taking New York as the very 
archetype of the New World’s newness. There’s the story of the rube from 
Oklahoma or Texas, for whom on the contrary the city scarcely seems American at 
all. There’s the story in which the city stands for money, quicksilver and 
dangerous, a solvent of all possible desires. There’s the story of the New York 
childhood or the New York romance, often intensely nostalgic, in which the 
city’s pleasurable surfaces mould around the characters – a metropolitan cocoon.


There’s a whole, glittering kaleidoscope of New York fiction already in 
existence, which makes you hesitate before trying to add to it, especially if 
you’re an outsider. But I wanted, in my novelGolden Hill 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406003/>, to wind 
back deliberately to a time that scarcely features in Manhattan’s present 
iconography, when the giant was a baby. In 1746, when it is set, New York was a 
small town on the southernmost tip of Manhattan island. Its 7,000 people were 
English and Dutch merchants and west African slaves; it was xenophobic and 
aggressively pious; it was loyalist in its politics and provincial in its 
culture; and everybody knew everybody else’s business.

That’s the opposite, to an almost perverse degree, of what Manhattan would 
later become. And yet I mean the tiny unfamiliar city I’ve written to be 
insistently haunted by the giant to come – because despite all the differences, 
Golden Hill is still a story about an immigrant, and money, and a romance, and 
the clash between the values of the backwoods and the big city.

Golden Hill by Francis Spufford review – a frolicsome first novel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/01/golden-hill-by-francis-spufford-review>
In a city with as many moods as New York, and as many ethnic histories running 
in parallel, fiction is essential transportation. There are no original 
18th-century novels written in the city, so far as I know – that’s why I had to 
write my own – but once NY fiction gets going with Washington Irving, sparks 
and flutters with Herman Melville, and then expands into the confident 
literature of a metropolis, there are endless choices. These are only my best 
10. Your Manhattan may vary. No,will vary.

1. The Great Gatsby by F Scott Fitzgerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/10/great-gatsby-fitzgerald-jay-mcinerney>
 (1925)
Technically, a Long Island novel; but it’s the city in its bubble-economy 
euphoria that has been the scene for Jay Gatsby’s innocently criminal invention 
of himself, and it’s the city that turns out to control Gatsby’s fate. 
Fitzgerald’s is the classical statement of New York’s romance when seen from 
afar. “The city seen from the Queensboro Bridge is always the city seen for the 
first time, in its first wild promise of all the mystery and the beauty in the 
world.”

2. The Age of Innocence by Edith Wharton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/28/100-best-novels-age-of-innocence-edith-wharton-robert-mccrum>
 (1921)
There are other fictional ways into the rule-governed world of 19th-century 
Manhattan high society. But Wharton’s story of the prim socialite Newland 
Archer’s belated discovery of love with the separated, scandalous, Europeanised 
Ellen Olenska, just as he becomes irrevocably engaged to someone else, is 
wittier, sharper and more effervescent than anything you’ll find in Henry James.

3. The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay by Michael Chabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/oct/15/fiction.reviews1> (2000)
Jewish New York in the 30s and 40s, at the moment when local-born geeks in 
glasses and escapees from Hitler’s Europe were inventing the superhero. It is 
chronicled by Chabon in exquisite prose attuned to both the art deco magic and 
the nightmarishness of a city whereswastika-adorned zeppelins moored to the top 
of the Empire State Building 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/newly-uncovered-footage-emerges-of-hindenburg-airship-emblazoned-with-nazi-swastikas-flying-over-new-8607360.html>
.

'New York problems': literature puts a city on the couch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/14/new-york-problems-literature-city-emma-lee-moss>
4. Guys and Dolls and Other Stories by Damon Runyon 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/guys-and-dolls.html> (2005)
OK, this isn’t a novel, because Runyon, who died in 1946, never wrote one. But 
his Broadway stories <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/03/02/talk-it-up>, 
handily collected in this Penguin Modern Classic, are a gorgeous, indispensable 
parade of tough guys and molls from midtown. All of them talk their heads off 
in a patented Runyonese that, like Wodehouse’s language for the world of Bertie 
Wooster, is only half-anchored in the real world, and justifies itself as pure 
verbal performance. “If I have all the tears that are shed on Broadway by guys 
in love, I will have enough salt water to start an opposition ocean to the 
Atlantic and Pacific, with enough left over to run the Great Salt Lake out of 
business.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ftop-10-new-york-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd09beda3f46ab445c19d082f5c17424cbff5976d%2F0_118_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20New%20York%20novels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ftop-10-new-york-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20New%20York%20novels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ftop-10-new-york-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd09beda3f46ab445c19d082f5c17424cbff5976d%2F0_118_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Talking their heads off ...a still from Guys and Dolls, based on the stories 
of Damon Runyon. Photograph: Gjon Mili/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image 
5. Seize the Day by Saul Bellow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/apr/09/saulbellow> (1956)
Humiliated, desperate, marooned in a retirement hotel on the Upper West Side 
with his imperviously wealthy father, middle-aged Tommy Wilhelm struggles his 
way through a sweltering summer day of failed hustles. He reaches a vision of 
the city as a universal gathering “of every age, of every genius, possessors of 
every human secret, antique and future”.

6. The Golem and the Jinni by Helene Wecker 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/19/books/review/the-golem-and-the-jinni-by-helene-wecker.html?_r=0>
 (2013)
There’s a large constituency that swears by Mark Helprin’s Winter’s Tale as 
the defining NY novel of the fantastic, but I’d nominate this as better 
Manhattan magic, with its lovely turn-of-the-20th-century immigrant encounter 
between a woman of clay and a man of fire. Two mythologies meet on the Lower 
East Side, and catch theFifth Avenue El 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-Q5rtNltsbwE/T_HmKKK4mPI/AAAAAAAAAUQ/qZ0ydbfVQNc/s1600/img_112836%5B1%5D.jpg>
 together.

7. The Emperor’s Children by Claire Messud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/sep/03/fiction.features4> (2006)
A comedy of manners set among New York’s wealthy uptown, this is also a 
state-of-the-nation story, heavily shadowed by the impact of 9/11. The 
portraits of struggling millennials are sharply-etched and contemporary, but 
there’s Tolstoy hiding behind this story of innocence and ambition, and a 
proportionate seriousness.


Top 10 books to make you a better person
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/01/top-10-books-to-make-you-a-better-person-wg-sebald-roberto-bolano>
8. The Fortress of Solitude by Jonathan Lethem 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fortress-of-solitude.html> (2003)
The 70s and 80s’ racial crisis in the city, explored not via a shriekfest in 
the mould ofTom Wolfe’s Bonfire of the Vanities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/10/bonfire-of-vanities-tom-wolfe>, 
but through a brilliantly wise and painful bildungsroman about a 
graffiti-centred friendship between a black kid and a white kid in Brooklyn.

9. Random Acts of Senseless Violence by Jack Womack 
<https://rhizome.org/editorial/2011/dec/07/jack-womack/> (1993)
Criminally neglected, when it ought to be as celebrated as Lord of the Flies 
or A Clockwork Orange, this is the city’s moment of maximum danger and decay, 
projected forward as a brilliant dystopia, and then strained through a 
schoolgirl diary. When civilisation falls, her pampered parents founder. 
Twelve-year-old Lola adapts and thrives.

10. A Visit from the Goon Squad by Jennifer Egan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/may/07/jennifer-egan-life-goon-squad> 
(2010)
Time’s dilapidations and revenges on a group of friends in the Manhattan music 
business, as mimicked in a set of virtuoso fictions that themselves weave 
backwards and forwards and sideways in time, finally alighting in a 
climate-changed New York of the near future.
 