
Every book has its own texture, materiality, and topography. This is not only 
metaphorical; the process of creating a novel produces all sorts of 
flotsam–notes, sketches, research, drafts–and sifting through this detritus can 
provide insight both into the architecture of a work and into the practice of 
writing. Blunderbuss is excited to runthis series 
<http://www.blunderbussmag.com/tag/topography-of/>, in which we ask writers to 
select and assemble the artifacts of a book in a way that they find meaningful 
and revealing. In this installment, Garth Greenwell reflects on the summer he 
spent in Madrid revising his debut novel What Belongs to You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/25/garth-greenwell-new-book-what-belongs-to-you-interview>
.

Garth Greenwell on his debut novel: 'I've been cruising since I was 14'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/25/garth-greenwell-new-book-what-belongs-to-you-interview>
In What Belongs to You, an American teacher in Bulgaria finds himself ensnared 
in a torrid relationship with a young hustler. Their affair forces him to 
confront the shame he still carries from his childhood in the south, where his 
queer desires rendered him an outcast. This novel has already been lauded as a 
“masterpiece” (Edmund White) and a “rich, important debut, an instant classic 
to be savored by all lovers of seriousfiction” (New York Times Book Review 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/31/books/review/what-belongs-to-you-by-garth-greenwell.html?_r=0>
), and the New Yorker’s James Wood is already comparing Greenwell to Virginia 
Woolf and WG Sebald 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/02/08/unsuitable-boys>.

–The Editors at Blunderbuss Magazine

---

I worked on edits for my novel, What Belongs to You, over two months one 
summer in a succession of rented apartments in Madrid. I was in Spain to be 
with my boyfriend, the poet Luis Muñoz, but his apartment was too small to 
contain all the misery I felt while I worked. I needed my own space.
 Garth’s view from the balcony. Photograph: Garth Greenwell 
Looking back, it’s very hard for me to understand why the process was so 
dramatic. My editor, Mitzi Angel, lavished attention and care on the 
manuscript. She worked by hand, sending me scans of the pages with her 
markings; a new batch would arrive every few days. As soon as I got pages, I 
found I couldn’t do anything but work on them, often for ten hours a day.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-garth-greenwell-on-how-he-wrote-what-belongs-to-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98b0143f2efb382f2853bbf40ab132d51e5a594c%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Garth%20Greenwell%20on%20how%20he%20wrote%20What%20Belongs%20to%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-garth-greenwell-on-how-he-wrote-what-belongs-to-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Garth%20Greenwell%20on%20how%20he%20wrote%20What%20Belongs%20to%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-garth-greenwell-on-how-he-wrote-what-belongs-to-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98b0143f2efb382f2853bbf40ab132d51e5a594c%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
 Photograph: Garth Greenwell  Photograph: Garth Greenwell 
I worked by hand on a clean copy of the manuscript, with Mitzi’s marked copy 
on my iPad. All of the changes were at line level, none affected plot or 
structure, but they added up to a major edit: we cut 17,000 words from an 
83,000-word manuscript. Sometimes entire passages were struck, sometimes whole 
pages; often there would be a note telling me to condense several paragraphs to 
one. Mitzi seldom suggested particular language to fix problems, but she was 
eagle-eyed in spotting them. Painfully often, in the margins I found the 
notation “not good enough,” or “this needs to be better.”

I wasn’t sure I could make it better, and as we inched our way forward I felt 
I was losing my ability to make my own judgments, or my ability to see the 
manuscript at all. As I worked through each page I laid it face down, using the 
overleaf for rewrites, adding scraps and post-its as necessary. But slowly, 
revision came to feel more and more like composition, and the manuscript came 
to resemble the notebooks in which I wrote the first draft of the novel. The 
book, sections of which I had finished years before, became alive for me again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-garth-greenwell-on-how-he-wrote-what-belongs-to-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd35136af1e9bb07e5c7604c23d6a155e83b0c2b0%2F0_0_3024_4032%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Garth%20Greenwell%20on%20how%20he%20wrote%20What%20Belongs%20to%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-garth-greenwell-on-how-he-wrote-what-belongs-to-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Garth%20Greenwell%20on%20how%20he%20wrote%20What%20Belongs%20to%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-garth-greenwell-on-how-he-wrote-what-belongs-to-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd35136af1e9bb07e5c7604c23d6a155e83b0c2b0%2F0_0_3024_4032%2F3024.jpg>
 Photograph: Garth Greenwell 
I hardly saw Madrid at all that summer. I met Luis for dinner every evening, 
but my days were solitary. When I couldn’t bear to edit anymore, I walked the 
relatively short distance from my apartment on the Calle de las Huertas to the 
Prado. I have a difficult relationship to museums, which overwhelm me, and to 
visual art, which I know shamefully little about; all my education in the arts 
has been literary and musical. But that summer there was an extraordinary 
exhibition of El Greco, and I found that almost the only time the anxiety of 
editing fell away was when I stood or sat in front of one of his paintings, 
always only one per visit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-garth-greenwell-on-how-he-wrote-what-belongs-to-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1a026f2783d86287d2758d756a8736645939f69%2F0_0_1260_1617%2F1260.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Garth%20Greenwell%20on%20how%20he%20wrote%20What%20Belongs%20to%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-garth-greenwell-on-how-he-wrote-what-belongs-to-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Garth%20Greenwell%20on%20how%20he%20wrote%20What%20Belongs%20to%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-garth-greenwell-on-how-he-wrote-what-belongs-to-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1a026f2783d86287d2758d756a8736645939f69%2F0_0_1260_1617%2F1260.jpg>
 ‘That summer there was an extraordinary exhibition of El Greco at El Prado, 
and I found that almost the only time the anxiety of editing fell away was when 
I stood or sat in front of one of his paintings.’ Photograph: Garth Greenwell 
I’m drawn to art in which things are a little askew. Straight realism isn’t 
very interesting to me; I like to see the interference of consciousness, the 
way perception is muddied by a unique interpreting mind. El Greco’s paintings 
are eccentric, strange, willful; I loved them. Standing in front of his 
Portrait of Fray Hortensio, I couldn’t help wondering what an editor would make 
of it: the obviously strange angle of the back of the chair, for instance, or 
the weird positioning of the hands. Wouldn’t an editor want to make those less 
strange, to straighten those things out? And yet wasn’t their strangeness the 
key to the greatness of the painting?
 The finished book. 
A favorite teacher of mine in music school, a composer, used to talk about the 
importance of the right wrong note, the eccentricity that both surprises and 
feels immediately inevitable. I’m suspicious of the arguments we make to 
justify our opinions about art, especially art we’ve made. I’m not particularly 
given to confidence in my judgment; I can justify anything, I sometimes think. 
Working on revisions to my novel, I found that I couldn’t judge the validity of 
my editor’s criticisms until I had worked through a new version of a passage. 
Only then, when I had done the work—I always resist work, I’m the laziest 
person I know—could I see the virtues and flaws of what I had made.

I remember feeling, in the most difficult moments, that I was losing 
authorship over my work, that I was compromising some distinctive element that 
made the book mine. But now that seems terribly silly. When I read the finished 
book, I can’t remember most of the passages we cut; I don’t doubt anymore that 
the book is stronger without them. I know that I’m reading a collaboration, a 
book that would be very different without the interventions of a brilliant 
editor. But it feels like my book, the book I wanted to write.

 * What Belongs to You is out in the US 
<http://us.macmillan.com/whatbelongstoyou/garthgreenwell>, published by Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux; and upcoming in the UK in April via Picador. Preorder it at 
theGuardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387069/>

 * Garth Greenwell is the author of Mitko, which won the 2010 Miami University 
Press Novella Prize and was a finalist for the Edmund White Award for Debut 
Fiction and a Lambda Award. A native of Louisville, Kentucky, he holds graduate 
degrees from Harvard University and the Iowa Writers’ Workshop, where he was an 
Arts Fellow. His short fiction has appeared in The Paris Review and A Public 
Space. What Belongs to You is his first novel.  