
Every book has its own texture, materiality, and topography. This is not only 
metaphorical; the process of creating literature produces all sorts of 
flotsam–notes, sketches, research, drafts–and sifting through this detritus can 
provide insight both into the architecture of a work and into the practice of 
writing. Blunderbuss is excited to runthis series 
<http://www.blunderbussmag.com/tag/topography-of/>, in which we ask writers to 
select and assemble the artifacts of a book in a way that they find meaningful 
and revealing. In this installment, Jay Deshpande discusses how Magritte, a 
woodchuck (!), and merciless edits contributed to the writing of Love the 
Stranger <http://yesyesbooks.com/store/book/0000029/>, published by YesYes 
Books.

 The poems in Love the Stranger interrogate love and its elusiveness by 
invoking the erotic and the mysterious, the banal and the strange; Chet Baker, 
Jack Palance, Kim Kardashian, a golden beast lying in wait behind you. Out of 
his “intensifying linguistic gift,” Deshpande has written “a book of great 
beauty and of terrible suspicion regarding that beauty” (Josh Bell). Perhaps, 
Deshpande suggests, real intimacy, like a curving line of the Fontana di Trevi, 
is always moving away from us – but these poems will stay with you.

–The Editors at Blunderbuss Magazine

---

Image

I’ve never thought of my intelligence as being a highly visual one: I’m not 
great with faces and I think more in terms of word and sound and rhythm than 
images. That said, this book was very much contoured by a set of visual 
influences. On the cover is a photograph of Antonym, a sculpture byDiana 
Al-Hadid <http://www.dianaalhadid.com/>. I first came across Al-Hadid’s work in 
a group show at MassMOCA in summer 2012. I was really beguiled by the 
architectural elements of her larger works, and how she incorporated a sense of 
time and ruin and implied narrative while still making the body highly sensual 
and evocative. I was still stewing on that first piece of hers I’d seen when, a 
few months later, Al-Hadid’s next show opened just down the street from where I 
was living in Chelsea. I felt sure her work was following me for a reason. It 
was there that I found Antonym. I love the combination of threat and intimacy 
in the piece, and how (especially at this angle) it serves as a sort of 
invitation to the viewer and the reader. Maybe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7a71bb73f6adbc8a54ba57c7c6de27d7afb1fc2%2F0_0_1800_2400%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20Poetry%3A%20Love%20the%20Stranger%20by%20Jay%20Deshpande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20Poetry%3A%20Love%20the%20Stranger%20by%20Jay%20Deshpande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7a71bb73f6adbc8a54ba57c7c6de27d7afb1fc2%2F0_0_1800_2400%2F1800.jpg>
One of the most importance influences on the poems in the book was René 
Magritte. Magritte appeals to my penchant for a kind of dream realism where an 
inherent logic exists just below the surface but is not pronounced. My friend 
the poet and translatorEC Belli <http://ecbelli.tumblr.com/> encouraged me in 
this respect, and Magritte started to be a springboard for generating new work. 
I was also fascinated by his titles—I’m interested in the relationships between 
the title and the content or body of a work of art. And both Al-Hadid and 
Magritte generate remarkable titles.

There’s a lot of ways to write the ekphrastic poem: you can immerse yourself 
in description of the artwork, you can leap off of it into interpretation, you 
can narrativize it and propagate a story ... My way into ekphrasis is to work 
through the title of the piece and see what comes out, especially if I can turn 
away from the actual artwork a little and hear a voice that emerges from it, a 
sort of lyricI that wants to speak tangentially. So I started writing poems off 
of Magritte’s paintings. For a while I had a whole set of them – often very 
short pieces, forming little puzzles. The paintings I wrote out of includedThe 
Threshold of Liberty 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/3/3b/On_the_Threshold_of_Liberty_1937.jpg>
,The Difficult Crossing 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/6/62/The_Difficult_Crossing.jpg>, 
The Menaced Assassin 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/5/54/The_Menaced_Assassin.jpg> – and 
alsoThe Lovers <http://www.moma.org/collection/works/79933>.

 The Lovers is the basis for a poem in the first section of my book. I’ve 
always loved what this painting does with eros and limit; early on it became a 
kind of tuning fork for my work in the book as a whole. I was also really 
inspired by the paintingHomesickness 
<http://www.renemagritte.org/homesickness.jsp>. For a long time, Love the 
Stranger included a poem of mine with that title which worked as a sort of 
small hinge in the book. Late in the revision process it became clear to my 
editor and me that we could remove the poem and its presence would still be 
felt. A line of that poem then gave me the title for the last section of the 
book: “A Gold Beast Come to Rest Behind Me.”

Process

Here are some of my notebooks. I’m pretty journal-flexible, though I tend 
towards the 5 x 8-inch trim size, and I resist totally unlined pages. I’ve 
enjoyed using notebooks made byPublic Supply <http://public-supply.com/>. I 
kind of like having a range of sizes; I’m not a highly consistent person and my 
writing should reflect that. The variation definitely has informed how I write 
and what I go towards. I’m sure that the times when I’ve worked more in the 
prose poem than in verse has had something to do with the notebook atmosphere 
of the period.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2044a06ff1d6a374afa2f37f96656615d9790ab5%2F0_0_2930_2410%2F2930.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20Poetry%3A%20Love%20the%20Stranger%20by%20Jay%20Deshpande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20Poetry%3A%20Love%20the%20Stranger%20by%20Jay%20Deshpande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2044a06ff1d6a374afa2f37f96656615d9790ab5%2F0_0_2930_2410%2F2930.jpg>
Some poems, like “Reports of the Dream You’re Not Likely to Recover From” and “
Threatening Weather <http://brooklynpoets.org/poet/jay-deshpande/>”, came to me 
pretty whole. When I first drafted them, I could basically feel their shape. 
But there are at least a few that took awhile and then smacked me profoundly 
with their needed form. The best example is “On Voluptuousness at La Fontana di 
Trevi.” Here’s the version I brought into my thesis workshop:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8307e6d4489ad31e0cc114c121b8a487a7692097%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20Poetry%3A%20Love%20the%20Stranger%20by%20Jay%20Deshpande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20Poetry%3A%20Love%20the%20Stranger%20by%20Jay%20Deshpande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8307e6d4489ad31e0cc114c121b8a487a7692097%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
These notes are from Kirkwood Adams <http://thefanzine.com/foam-number-one/>; 
I think this was where I saw that everything the poem needed existed in that 
last utterance. So, painfully, thrillingly, I cut off all the rest:

ON VOLUPTUOUSNESS AT LA FONTANA DI TREVI

Some part of everything

curves away from you.

Place

I wrote Love the Stranger in a number of different locations over the course 
of the six years I’ve lived in New York City. But one of the most fertile 
places for me was theSaltonstall Arts Colony <http://www.saltonstall.org/> in 
Ithaca, NY. I had a residency there in summer 2013.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aeb412422364101f6db812dbf219d9c8d9b085d%2F0_57_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20Poetry%3A%20Love%20the%20Stranger%20by%20Jay%20Deshpande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20Poetry%3A%20Love%20the%20Stranger%20by%20Jay%20Deshpande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aeb412422364101f6db812dbf219d9c8d9b085d%2F0_57_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
I lived in the basement of the main house and woke up every morning to wide 
light over the field, the sun warming everything. In wind the linden trees 
flickered. I ate well, watched Battlestar Galactica, drank Shiner Bock, 
chocolate milk. I made sure there was nothing for me to do but run and read and 
write. I also made some friends I wouldn’t find in NYC.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fe59e2f672e5523a6cc9771dd47efaefa46471a%2F0_0_1623_1623%2F1623.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20Poetry%3A%20Love%20the%20Stranger%20by%20Jay%20Deshpande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20Poetry%3A%20Love%20the%20Stranger%20by%20Jay%20Deshpande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftopography-of-poetry-love-the-stranger-by-jay-deshpande%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fe59e2f672e5523a6cc9771dd47efaefa46471a%2F0_0_1623_1623%2F1623.jpg>
Ithaca helped me quiet the more extroverted parts of my mind. Each day I was 
able to dig in deeper to my work and generate more drafts. This was also the 
period when I set myself most seriously to the task of reading complete books 
of poems, each in a single sitting, and studying how they worked as total 
organisms. I stretched out during that month, pushing certain poems through 
dozens of versions and experimenting with other projects.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
The trip yielded so much insight into my manuscript that as soon as my 
residency ended I resolved to come back. I returned for a week at Saltonstall 
in early November of that year. At this point the house was quiet and snow was 
beginning to fall. The blissful company of four other artists and the colony 
director was replaced by almost total silence. So I laid out everything I had 
and rebuilt my manuscript, one more time, into the form of this book [see 
picture at the top]. When I came back to Brooklyn, I took one last night to 
make revisions and then it was ready; I started to send it out.

 * Jay Deshpande is the winner of the Scotti Merrill Memorial Award, selected 
by Billy Collins in 2015. He has held residencies at the Saltonstall Arts 
Colony and the Vermont Studio Center. Jay’s poems have appeared in Boston 
Review, Sixth Finch,Narrative, and elsewhere. His essays and reviews have been 
published in Slate, The New Republic, Boston Review, The Millions, Publishers 
Weekly, and Jacket2. Jay has previously worked for WatchTime Magazine and the 
Academy of American Poets, and served as poetry editor for AGNI. He lives in 
Brooklyn.
 