
Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Every book has its own texture, materiality, and topography. This is not only 
metaphorical; the process of creating a novel produces all sorts of 
flotsam–notes, sketches, research, drafts–and sifting through this detritus can 
provide insight both into the architecture of a work and into the practice of 
writing. Blunderbuss is excited to runthis series 
<http://www.blunderbussmag.com/tag/topography-of/>, in which we ask writers to 
select and assemble the artifacts of a book in a way that they find meaningful 
and revealing.In this installment, Julia Pierpont shares the bulletin boards 
and cut-and-paste jobs that helped her writeAmong the Ten Thousand Things 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/367072/>.

Among the Ten Thousand Things is the story of artist Jack Sanley; his wife, a 
retired dancer named Deb; and their two children Simon and Kay. When a 
cardboard box filled with printed emails threatens to reveal Jack’s secret 
life, it sets into motion an “expertly crafted story of a family in crisis” 
(Library Journal). This debut has earned rave reviews, with the New York Times 
Book Review calling Pierpont 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/12/books/review/among-the-ten-thousand-things-by-julia-pierpont.html>
“a blazingly talented young author whose prose is so assured and whose 
observations are so precise and deeply felt that it’s almost an insult to bring 
up her age.”

–The Editors at Blunderbuss Magazine

---

This is my terrible Trunk of Drafts, which is very heavy and very impractical 
to hang onto given the size of my apartment.
 The Trunk of Drafts. ‘The Converse in the corner included for scale.’ 
Photograph: Julia Pierpont 
Basically everything I workshopped in graduate school lives in here, every 
marked up copy of pages I got back from my professors and other students. I 
workshopped a number of stories in undergrad as well, so it’s not exclusively 
the novel, though a lot of it is. Line edits aren’t always so common in 
workshop, so a lot of these pages are probably unmarked. Someday I’ll go 
through them and decide what to keep, for sentimental or practical use. The 
Converse in the corner included for scale.

Most of the outlining for the book happened in my head, almost subconsciously. 
I didn’t actively consider what would happen next so much as found when I got 
to the next scene I seemed to know where it would go already. (There’s a great 
Doctorow quote about this: “Writing is like driving at night in the fog. You 
can only see as far as your headlights, but you can make the whole trip that 
way.”)

Perhaps counterintuitively, then, these two boards [see main picture above] 
were only drawn up after I’d finished a draft and had problems to fix. The 
bulletin board was especially useful for reordering scenes. The novel opens 
with the discovery of a husband and father’s affair and traces the aftermath 
for the family’s four members (Jack; his wife, Deb; and their kids, Simon and 
Kay). Because the narrative alternates perspective so frequently, having the 
flash cards color-coded made it easier to visualize the book as a whole. These 
are gathering dust under my sofa now; when I’m ready to problem-solve the next 
book I hope to wipe them clean and use them again. Jack Russell Terrier in the 
corner also included for scale.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-julia-pierpont-on-how-she-wrote-among-the-ten-thousand-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a4bba147a7911a2d7e0aa322b17086edcd84d01%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Julia%20Pierpont%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Among%20the%20Ten%20Thousand%20Things&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-julia-pierpont-on-how-she-wrote-among-the-ten-thousand-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Julia%20Pierpont%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Among%20the%20Ten%20Thousand%20Things&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-julia-pierpont-on-how-she-wrote-among-the-ten-thousand-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a4bba147a7911a2d7e0aa322b17086edcd84d01%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 This page is ‘the result of an all-nighter I pulled sometime in the spring of 
2012.’ 
The page on the left is the result of an all-nighter I pulled sometime in the 
spring of 2012, when I was working on part two of the book, which breaks from 
the more traditional narrative.

I had amassed all these lines about time passing and wound up cutting them 
into strips and rearranging them to find the best order. When I was done and 
the sun was coming up and I could hear the garbage truck making its morning 
rounds, it seemed like a good idea to glue-stick them onto a legal pad and call 
it art.

In part three of the novel, several members of the family travel to Jamestown, 
Rhode Island. I chose Jamestown after reading about it on Wikipedia and falling 
in love with the names of its surrounding islands (Prudence, Patience, 
Despair). I made two trips there just to wander around and get a feel for the 
place. It was in Jamestown that I realized that Jack and Deb weren’t going to 
stay together. I’d been rooting for them to find a way – or for myself to find 
a way – of making it work, only it wasn’t, and I remember standing on the docks 
around sunset and becoming very overcome with sadness over their fate. Here is 
a picture of the Chinese restaurant where Deb, Simon, and Kay eat their first 
night:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-julia-pierpont-on-how-she-wrote-among-the-ten-thousand-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa631e68165d2b3530368de2817c2fab1b4b8eae1%2F0_0_768_1024%2F768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Julia%20Pierpont%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Among%20the%20Ten%20Thousand%20Things&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-julia-pierpont-on-how-she-wrote-among-the-ten-thousand-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Julia%20Pierpont%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Among%20the%20Ten%20Thousand%20Things&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-julia-pierpont-on-how-she-wrote-among-the-ten-thousand-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa631e68165d2b3530368de2817c2fab1b4b8eae1%2F0_0_768_1024%2F768.jpg>
 ‘I chose Jamestown after reading about it on Wikipedia and falling in love 
with the names of its surrounding islands (Prudence, Patience, Despair).’ 
I got my novel’s title and its epigraph from Galway Kinnell’s poem Little 
Sleep’s-Head Sprouting Hair in the Moonlight. At some point I realized that 
Kinnell later edited the wording at the end of the poem in a way that surprised 
me. I decided to use the original version for the epigraph, but I find the 
difference very interesting. Here they are side by side (emphasis, of course, 
mine):
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-julia-pierpont-on-how-she-wrote-among-the-ten-thousand-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6479b9e63b1978e64eb259d477633506f3c4c517%2F0_201_1307_341%2F1307.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Julia%20Pierpont%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Among%20the%20Ten%20Thousand%20Things&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-julia-pierpont-on-how-she-wrote-among-the-ten-thousand-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Julia%20Pierpont%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Among%20the%20Ten%20Thousand%20Things&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-julia-pierpont-on-how-she-wrote-among-the-ten-thousand-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6479b9e63b1978e64eb259d477633506f3c4c517%2F0_201_1307_341%2F1307.jpg>
 * Among the Ten Thousand Things is out now in paperback in the UK from 
Oneworld 
<https://www.oneworld-publications.com/books/among-the-ten-thousand-things-1#.VuFloWThByo>
, andin the US from Random House 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/228436/among-the-ten-thousand-things-by-julia-pierpont/9780812995220/>
. Get it at theGuardian Bookshop here 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/367072/>. 
 * Julia Pierpont’s debut novel, Among the Ten Thousand Things, was published 
in the summer of 2015. She graduated from the MFA program at NYU as a Rona 
Jaffe Graduate Fellow. She works at The New Yorker and lives in Brooklyn with 
her dog.  