
Every book has its own texture, materiality, and topography. This is not only 
metaphorical; the process of creating a novel produces all sorts of 
flotsam–notes, sketches, research, drafts–and sifting through this detritus can 
provide insight both into the architecture of a work and into the practice of 
writing. Blunderbuss is excited to runthis series 
<http://www.blunderbussmag.com/tag/topography-of/>, in which we ask writers to 
select and assemble the artifacts of a book in a way that they find meaningful 
and revealing. In this instalment, Tracy O’Neill shares the soft pants and 
goddamn multiplication tables that helped her write The Hopeful 
<http://igpub.com/the-hopeful/>. 

In The Hopeful, 16-year-old figure skating prodigy Ali Doyle feels her Olympic 
dreams shatter along with of her two vertebrae. When she finds herself addicted 
to amphetamines, however, something more than a gold medal might be on the 
line. This debut novel has been described as “hypnotic” (KarolinaWaclawiak) and 
“brilliant and bold” (Julia Fierro), and earned O’Neill a spot on the National 
Book Foundation’s 5 Under 35 list.

–The Editors at Blunderbuss Magazine

--- 

You know how some people say that writing is revising? Well, I can say with 
certainty that most of my work on The Hopeful was, indeed, revision. This is 
mostly because I had no idea what “narrative structure” was. On the first 
draft, I would do things like think about how to write a single sentence for 
three hours but not do things like ask what the shape of the novel was. 
Consequently, I ended up revising more times than I can remember. I’d assign 
myself tasks that sometimes occasioned commentary, such as the remark below, 
“Jesus, this is a goddamn multiplication table.” In fact, I later followed 
through on those notes and made a matrix of characters’ positions on each 
other. This helped knit together the satellite figures so that they didn’t 
exist in vacuums.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-hopeful-by-tracy-oneill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F30%2F1446223740897%2Ff5e7aaee-4774-4699-84da-7583d704b0c7-1629x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20The%20Hopeful%20by%20Tracy%20O'Neill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-hopeful-by-tracy-oneill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20The%20Hopeful%20by%20Tracy%20O%27Neill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-hopeful-by-tracy-oneill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F30%2F1446223740897%2Ff5e7aaee-4774-4699-84da-7583d704b0c7-1629x2040.jpeg>
 Photograph: Tracy O'Neill 
During an initial revision, I somehow failed to grasp that all sections of 
text are not fungible. As such, I’d find holes and inconsistencies in the text. 
It wasn’t cute. Ali, the narrator, hadn’t yet met her drug dealer but was 
somehow popping pills. Mark, her tutor, hadn’t yet told her about the 
Defenestration of Prague, but there she was inexplicably riffing on windows. 
And there’s nothing less funny than a window joke removed of context. After 
writing myself a berating little screed, I used the “Compare Documents” 
function in Word, then jotted out a log of every change I’d made. The 
highlighted changes [see picture at the top] were new additions, not textual 
permutations.


Because the book’s protagonist is an ex-figure skater, I decided to weave in 
the history of the Tara Lipinski-Michelle Kwan rivalry. It was important that 
Ali describe these sporting events through a lover’s eyes, attending to the 
details the way one might notice the slope of a beloved nose. To write these 
passages, I watched footage of the events, thinking always of Elizabeth 
Bishop’s “a gesture/I love.” For Ali, these events would be parcels of loved 
gestures.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DokPRcajUQrM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DokPRcajUQrM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DokPRcajUQrM&media=>
When I was writing The Hopeful, I was working in nightlife. I determined that 
the disciplined thing to do was maintain the club schedule all week, staying up 
until at least four in the morning so that I wouldn’t tire during my shifts. A 
lot of friends, not for the first or last time, thought I was making an 
incredibly stupid decision. But it was great for writing. I’d work on the book 
on my nights off, very hopped up on caffeine. The beauty of night writing is 
that you cannot be distracted by business hours chores like going to the bank 
or grocery shopping. You fill the dark and silence with words. Each night, I’d 
make a pot of coffee, then drink from this huge mug whose capacity meant less 
time wasted refilling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-hopeful-by-tracy-oneill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F30%2F1446223891617%2Ff998860f-5875-4526-b733-65a82e87c2b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20The%20Hopeful%20by%20Tracy%20O'Neill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-hopeful-by-tracy-oneill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20The%20Hopeful%20by%20Tracy%20O%27Neill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-hopeful-by-tracy-oneill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F30%2F1446223891617%2Ff998860f-5875-4526-b733-65a82e87c2b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Tracy O'Neill 
Besides the big ass mug of coffee, I have another requirement for writing: 
soft pants. I cannot get work done wearing jeans. Denim conspires to make you 
aware of its texture at all times. So I have a drawer full of writing bottoms. 
Many of them have holes in exactly the same place in the butt from sitting. I 
call them my battle wounds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-hopeful-by-tracy-oneill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F30%2F1446223943994%2F62d8e7eb-b491-44c2-91c6-b2b7ca98db9d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20The%20Hopeful%20by%20Tracy%20O'Neill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-hopeful-by-tracy-oneill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20The%20Hopeful%20by%20Tracy%20O%27Neill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-hopeful-by-tracy-oneill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F30%2F1446223943994%2F62d8e7eb-b491-44c2-91c6-b2b7ca98db9d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Tracy O'Neill 
Amidst the revisions, I adopted my dog Cowboy. He and I took the flâneur 
approach to novel writing, walking and observing the city. Sometimes, our 
jaunts didn’t glean solutions to craft problems; they just unscrewed my head. 
When you’re laboring over fiction, it’s easy to imbue the process with 
solipsistic urgency. But there is little as urgent as a half-trained puppy’s 
full bladder. I needed that sense of perspective.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email>  
Photograph: Tracy O'Neill 
 * Tracy O’Neill is the author of The Hopeful <http://igpub.com/the-hopeful/>, 
for which she was named to theNational Book Foundation’s 5 Under 35 
<http://www.nationalbook.org/5under35.html#.VngZjWThByo> and long-listed for 
the Flaherty-Dunnan Prize. In 2012, she was awarded the Center for Fiction’s 
Emerging Writers Fellowship. Her fiction has appeared in Granta, LitHub, Vol. 1 
Brooklyn, The Literarian, andGuernica. She has published nonfiction online in 
The Atlantic, New Yorker, Bookforum, and Rolling Stone; in Grantland; and in 
the San Francisco Chronicle. She currently teaches at the City College of New 
York and is pursuing a PhD at Columbia University.
 <http://twitter.com/tracysoneill>
 