
Every book has its own texture, materiality, and topography. This is not only 
metaphorical; the process of creating a novel produces all sorts of 
flotsam–notes, sketches, research, drafts – and sifting through this detritus 
can provide insight both into the architecture of a work and into the practice 
of writing. Blunderbuss is excited to runthis series 
<http://www.blunderbussmag.com/tag/topography-of/>, in which we ask writers to 
select and assemble the artifacts of a book in a way that they find meaningful 
and revealing. In this installment, Carmiel Banasky explores the very literal 
pain involved in the writing of The Suicide of Claire Bishop 
<http://www.dzancbooks.org/our-books/the-suicide-of-claire-bishop-by-carmiel-banasky>
, released in September (US) and December (UK) by Dzanc Books.

In 1959, Claire Bishop sits for a portrait only to discover that the artist 
has painted her suicide. In 2004, a young man with schizophrenia becomes 
obsessed with a mysterious painting of a woman killing herself. What happens, 
then, when these two characters collide? Hailed as “daring, precise, and 
linguistically acrobatic” (Colum McCann) and a “magnificent, astute debut that 
portends greatness” (Claire Vaye Watkins),The Suicide of Claire Bishop stands 
as one of the most celebrated novels of the past year.

–The Editors at Blunderbuss Magazine

---

 I don’t have a body most of the time. That’s how it feels. I spend my days in 
my head – writing, meditating, walking around Echo Park. I bump into things and 
people often – that electrical box has sliced my shoulder more than once, it 
comes out of nowhere. It’s a problem. I’m working on it.

 But then there are the times when pain asserts itself. In 2009, when I was 
writing the first draft of my novel, I took a trip to Long Island, Bahamas—an 
out island with almost zero tourist industry. Sadly, it was recently devastated 
by Hurricane Joaquin. But it was paradise then. And it was the site of a major 
turning point for me: Long Island is where I broke my tailbone.

 It was the first and last time I ever cliff-jumped. Dean’s Blue Hole is the 
world’s deepest dive and where people travel to compete. From fifty feet up (I 
have verified that this isnot an exaggeration) I jumped with my then-partner. 
We separated somewhere on the way down. It was a long enough fall that I could 
articulately think, “I’m falling. Wow, interesting, I’m still falling.” And 
then I hit the water directly on my tailbone.

 From that height, water molecules bind like cement. I was in shock, I paddled 
to the shore. But I didn’t know how bad it was until the years that followed. I 
was in grad school; I didn’t have health insurance; the school nurse advised me 
to take extra-strength Advil, that there was nothing more to be done about it. 
I held my back, hips, and legs awkwardly to compensate for the pain, until my 
back, hips, and legs began to suffer. There is no longer a break in the bone, 
but the whole damn thing—I mean, my body – still causes me chronic pain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-suicide-of-claire-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16e6c51d2a676ac7f632f00ddcbaa4d9b4ad6b1f%2F1_96_643_386%2F643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20Novel%3A%20The%20Suicide%20of%20Claire%20Bishop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-suicide-of-claire-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20Novel%3A%20The%20Suicide%20of%20Claire%20Bishop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-the-suicide-of-claire-bishop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16e6c51d2a676ac7f632f00ddcbaa4d9b4ad6b1f%2F1_96_643_386%2F643.jpg>
 Every now and then, I’m lucky enough to bring a tent to the beach for the most 
wonderful makeshift writing office. Photograph: Carmiel Banasky 
This pain accompanied me through my novel writing process. The Suicide of 
Claire Bishop took six years from conception to bookshelf. Most of this time, I 
was on the road at writing residencies. I didn’t have a home, no desk to call 
my own. But it was the most luxurious homelessness you could imagine: a 
gorgeous view out every new window, lunch delivered to your door, a constant 
community of artists and writers. This lifestyle was addicting, and I didn’t 
stop until I had finished my novel. At my last residency, I looked around at 
the musty, supposedly haunted room – the Springfield Art Association’s Edwards 
Place, one of the oldest homes in America, which was beautiful but really not 
meant to be occupied – and thought: I think I need a home now.

 Turn-of-the-century dresser-cum-standing-desk in the residency/museum, 
Edwards Place. On top is a hundred-year-old can of “Eskay’s Albumenized Food” 
for infants and an “‘IDEAL’ Invalid’s Drinking Cup.” Photograph: Carmiel Banasky
 Brush Creek Wyoming residency cabin and standing desk (before I went 
ergonomic). Photograph: Carmiel Banasky 
I spent the first half of the Residency era hunched over my laptop at whatever 
desk or chair was around. I thought of it as being adaptable. But my pain 
increased the more I sat and wrote. I’ve seen acupuncturists, cranial sacral 
therapists, masseuses, and MDs. But the thing that really saved me was the 
discovery of THE STANDING DESK. I started asking for accommodations at each 
residency. They were more than happy to help, each with their own quirky 
resourcefulness.

At Ragdale, where I decided to excise a whole fifty-page section in which my 
character, West, is hospitalized, I wrote on a bookshelf. In Springfield, where 
I researched 19th-century prostitutes, I wrote on a 100-year-old dresser with a 
fold-down shelf that made the perfect desk. At Spiro Arts, where I queried 
agents and learned to think of my novel as a consumable object, I carried an AV 
cart up a couple flights of stairs and situated it in front of my big 
mountain-facing windows. At Brush Creek, where I polished the novel from 420 
pages to 380, they actually gave me an adjustable table.
 My current, awesome, totally ergonomic set up in LA, with fatigue mat. 
Photograph: Carmiel Banasky  And best of all, after being spoiled at writing 
residencies, I still get a view from my very own writing desk. Photograph: 
Carmiel Banasky 
I don’t mind proselytizing: standing or sitting, chronic pain or not, an 
ergonomic set up is essential for all writers. It will save your shoulders, 
back, chest, and neck down the road! All you need is a separate (wireless) 
keyboard and a stack of books to set your laptop on. (My stack of books was 
usually dictionaries and art reference. Now I use an adjustable riser, which 
you can find online.) Be kind to yourself!

 * Carmiel Banasky is the author of The Suicide of Claire Bishop, published by 
Dzanc Books. Her work has appeared in Glimmer Train, American Short Fiction, 
Slice, Guernica, PEN America, The Rumpus, and on NPR, among other places. She 
earned her MFA from Hunter College, where she taught Undergraduate Creative 
Writing. She is the recipient of awards and fellowships from Bread Loaf, 
Ucross, Ragdale, Artist Trust, I-Park, VCCA, and other foundations. After four 
years on the road at writing residencies, she now resides and teaches in Los 
Angeles. She is from Portland, Oregon.
 <http://twitter.com/CarmielBanasky>
 