
Forget the Tour de France, it's the Tour de Manche – an Anglo-French cycle 
route that launched last year – that really offers the best cycling on both 
sides of the Channel. Riders need never leave Devon to experience the most 
diverse and challenging landscapes on the entire route, though.

The 62-mile section through the heart of Devon from Okehampton to Axminster 
offers tumbling scenery, coastal views, unparalleled habitats for wildlife, 
thatched villages and the historic city of Exeter.

Hills are a theme from the start as the route scuffs along the northern edge 
of Dartmoor national park through undulating country roads and 
quiet villages, before a blissful long descent into Exeter, well worth a stop 
to explore the Cathedral and Quayside. Exeter to Budleigh Salterton is largely 
flat and traffic-free, along the wildlife-rich Exe estuary and seaside town of 
Exmouth, marking the start of the Jurassic Coast.
 Tour de Manche through Devon. Photograph: Tim Pestridge 
At just over halfway Budleigh Salterton is a natural place to stop for the 
night and the boutique B&BRosehill Rooms 
<http://www.rosehillroomsandcookery.co.uk/>, in a listed Victorian house, 
offers a spot of luxury and serious breakfast (doubles from £95 B&B). It's 
worth investing in a restful night for the climbs that await you the next day. 
A swooping long descent over Peak Hill into Sidmouth is blissful and if brakes 
allow, stop at theClock Tower Cafe <http://www.clocktowercafesidmouth.co.uk/> 
in the award-winning Connaught Gardens where the colossal slices of cake can be 
seen from space.

The gruelling climb out of Sidmouth is punishing, but offers gorgeous glimpses 
down to the coast, while a pretty ride through the quintessentially English 
villages of Branscombe andBeer <http://www.beer-devon.co.uk/> revives the 
senses for the final miles into Axminster.

Find out more about the Tour de Manche and get route maps from cycle-west.com 
<http://cycle-west.com/en/tour-de-manche.php>.

For more information on holidays in England, go to VisitEngland.com 
<http://www.visitengland.com/>
 