
The last time Tracey Emin opened an exhibition of her work – in Hong Kong in 
March – she caused international headlines by announcing that she hadmarried a 
stone in the garden of her house in the south of France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/mar/22/tracey-emin-married-rock-love-intimacy>
. The artist’s latest exhibition, atLehmann Maupin 
<http://www.lehmannmaupin.com/> in New York, continues the theme. It’s called 
Stone Love, although the title, picked out in one of her famous neons, is 
actually taken from the first line ofSoul Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h3dtDdO5Op4>, by her late friend David Bowie: 
“Stone love, she kneels before the grave / A brave son, who gave his life to 
save the slogans.”

Don’t mock the rock – Tracey Emin’s wedding is a message to single women | 
Gaby Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/25/dont-mock-rock-tracey-emin-single-women>
The morning the show opens, Emin meets a small group of journalists to take us 
through the exhibition and then give one-to-one interviews. Apologising 
profusely, she arrives half an hour late, having battled traffic across 
Manhattan from the East Village, where she has a home, after deciding years ago 
that she was spending too much money staying in the city’s hotels (she has a 
third house in London).

Once famous for being constantly out on the town, Emin says she hasn’t exactly 
embraced New York’s social life. “I’ve been coming here nearly 20 years and I 
don’t know hardly anybody,” she tells me. “It’s really friendly but 
everything’s a transaction. From the top to the bottom, that’s what America is 
– that’s why people came here. There was a gold rush. I’m friends with Princess 
Eugenie and we were joking about the fact that in London you don’t see anyone 
at the weekend, but here you’ve got your 8 o’clock breakfast, brunch, lunch 
then linner. I said, ‘What’s linner?’ and she said, ‘That’s between lunch and 
dinner.’” Emin laughs. “It’s all about a meeting.”

Resplendent in a black skirt and top, and gold jewellery subtly enhancing a 
somewhat piratical air, at 52 Emin is naturally less wild today than she was 
when she memorably turned up trashed to the live TV discussion programmeSixty 
Minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/1997/dec/04/20yearsoftheturnerprize.turnerprize>
 in 1997, but Margate’s most famous export still has lashings of charisma, with 
an attitude chaser. “Can you tell someone to stop walking with high shoes?” she 
demands as she assembles the dazzled hacks and attempts to collect her thoughts 
above the clomping of someone crossing the floor. “If I had a gallery, I 
wouldn’t allow people to wear high shoes because it’s too noisy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftracey-emin-the-stone-i-married-is-beautiful-and-dignified-it-will-never-let-me-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbfbdb6d52a0e55fc70f1766364b2376762b3d10%2F0_334_5714_3429%2F5714.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tracey%20Emin%3A%20'The%20stone%20I%20married%20is%20beautiful%20and%20dignified%20%E2%80%93%20it%20will%20never%20let%20me%20down'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftracey-emin-the-stone-i-married-is-beautiful-and-dignified-it-will-never-let-me-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tracey%20Emin%3A%20%27The%20stone%20I%20married%20is%20beautiful%20and%20dignified%20%E2%80%93%20it%20will%20never%20let%20me%20down%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftracey-emin-the-stone-i-married-is-beautiful-and-dignified-it-will-never-let-me-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbfbdb6d52a0e55fc70f1766364b2376762b3d10%2F0_334_5714_3429%2F5714.jpg>
 Emin with her work My Bed, which sold for £2.5m in 2014 Photograph: Nils 
Jorgensen/Rex/Shutterstock 
Stone Love includes three neons (the other two say Just Let Me Love You and 
It’s Different When You Are in Love), half a dozen bronze sculptures, four 
large embroidered calicos and a host of sparse, airy paintings, a step on from
her celebrated show at London’s White Cube in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/07/tracey-emin-review-the-last-great-adventure-is-you-white-cube-gallery-london>
. Almost all the works depict naked women in sprawled and anxious repose, their 
faces turned away or scribbled over – which doesn’t entirely disguise the fact 
that they are clearly self-portraits. Before we even knew what a selfie was, 
for a full decade Emin took Polaroids of herself – she has more than 5,000. 
“People presume I was narcissistic, but I’m not,” she says. “It’s just that I 
was much more open about myself and how I felt. But now everybody’s doing it – 
it’s part of culture.”

Tracey Emin is still the real thing – and that's why we love her
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/03/tracey-emin-is-still-the-real-thing-and-thats-why-we-love-her>
The figurative works are more traditional and the materials more classical 
than, for instance, the used condoms, stained knickers and empty vodka bottles 
that went into famous works such as 1998’s My Bed, which recently sold for 
£2.45m and is currently on show at Tate Britain,overlooked by two Francis 
Bacons handpicked by the artist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/30/tracey-emins-%20messy-bed-%20displayed-tate-%20britain-first-%20time-in-15-%20years>
. Nonetheless, Stone Love is still unmistakably Emin, from the swooping gouache 
curves of her women’s backs to the hot-and-heavy titles like I Just Wanted to 
Sleep With You, She Knelt Before Him and I Wanted More.

A year after a show at Austria’s Leopold Museum, where her work was hung with 
that ofEgon Schiele 
<http://www.leopoldmuseum.org/en/exhibitions/66/tracey-emin-egon-schiele>, and 
with exhibitions alongside Munch and Picasso to come, Emin seems to be engaging 
much more overtly with art history than her YBA contemporaries, though she says 
that has always been the case. “I went to the Royal College of Art, and when my 
peer group were doing Freeze” –the 1988 group show organised by Damien Hirst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/jun/01/art> – “I was in Turkey 
up a mountain doing watercolours of donkeys, looking at Chagall. I was not on 
their planet at all, and I’m still not.

“But now I think it’s become more evident to people, people are giving me a 
bit of slack, and they’ve stopped being so aggressive – how fucking horrible 
people were about me in the press in England. It was outrageous. Someone said 
to me, ‘A lesser artist would have given up.’ But I’m not going to give up.”

She might not be giving up, but Emin is going on a year’s sabbatical. She 
announced the break with an advert in Artforum magazine, which featured a 
picture of her and her four representatives, their contact details and a note 
in her famous handwriting that, read: “If you need anything call one of these 
people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftracey-emin-the-stone-i-married-is-beautiful-and-dignified-it-will-never-let-me-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50925db0b6f3506dacf9704240c6fdce1ef5453d%2F0_0_3000_2190%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tracey%20Emin%3A%20'The%20stone%20I%20married%20is%20beautiful%20and%20dignified%20%E2%80%93%20it%20will%20never%20let%20me%20down'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftracey-emin-the-stone-i-married-is-beautiful-and-dignified-it-will-never-let-me-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tracey%20Emin%3A%20%27The%20stone%20I%20married%20is%20beautiful%20and%20dignified%20%E2%80%93%20it%20will%20never%20let%20me%20down%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftracey-emin-the-stone-i-married-is-beautiful-and-dignified-it-will-never-let-me-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50925db0b6f3506dacf9704240c6fdce1ef5453d%2F0_0_3000_2190%2F3000.jpg>
 You Were Here Like the Ground Underneath My Feet by Tracey Emin. Photograph: 
Lehmann Maupin Gallery 
Having done two or three shows a year for the past nine years, Emin needs a 
rest – not from art, she says, but from everything that goes with it. “I don’t 
want to have an opening, I don’t want to do an interview, I don’t want to do 
any charity work, I don’t want to have any meetings about specifications and 
framing. I want to wake up every day and make art, and go to bed dreaming about 
art.”


She wants to exercise more, too. “My mind seems very agile and working well, 
but I’m not up to muscle. I used to swim a kilometre a day, but now I don’t, so 
I’d like to get back to that again. I like kayaking, I do some horse-riding and 
I just want to get physically and mentally fit for the next chapter.”

Tracey Emin's luxury penis bracelet works like a charm on me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/jan/20/tracey-emin-jewellery-range-stephen-webster>
At the Tate’s gala dinner a couple of days before, she says, one woman made 
the mistake of supposing to Emin that she was taking time off in order “to keep 
the market at bay” – in other words, that the sabbatical will have a beneficial 
effect on her work’s prices. Emin was not amused. “Oh my God. I said, ‘How dare 
you insult me? How dare you insult my passion? You know fuck all about art.’ 
This is my vocation in life. You wouldn’t say to a nun, ‘You’re going to be 
really quiet for a year, are you going to stop believing in God?’”

Her relationship with art, she says, only gets more intense over the years. 
Pointing at a bronze sculpture of two figures called The Wedding, Emin says 
gleefully that her studio manager had reservations about the piece because she 
said that the bride reminded her of Princess Fiona from Shrek. “And I said, ‘Oh 
wow, I watched it at Christmas and absolutely loved it.’ Subconsciously I must 
have taken in this supreme childlike character. My idea of marriage is like 
Princess Fiona, so I was so pleased when she said that.”

Emin points between the legs of a bronze, a figure on her side titled I Just 
Wanted to Sleep With You. “Her vagina’s just like this hole,” she says. “It’s 
not used, it’s a vacant thing. It should be a vortex, you go up inside it and 
come back the other side as another human being, but it’s no good. So it’s a 
different place, different space.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D15jVnBlt6e0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D15jVnBlt6e0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D15jVnBlt6e0&media=>
Tracey Emin talking about her work Everyone I Have Ever Slept With 1963-1995 on 
YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=15jVnBlt6e0> 
Emin has always expressed and explored her sexuality through her art. Everyone 
I Have Ever Slept With 1963-1995 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=15jVnBlt6e0> 
was a tent viewers could enter and ponder their own bedfellows; inWhy I Never 
Became a Dancer <https://vimeo.com/79687251> she recalls being “slut-shamed” as 
a teenager; and a series of artworks about a botched abortion she had in 1990 
formed the centrepiece of her 2011 retrospective at the Hayward in London.

This has earned her plenty of disapproval. Instead of an art critic, she 
snorts, one paper got a “vaudeville music hall-type theatre critic” to review 
her 2014 White Cube show (theDaily Mail’s Quentin Letts, who inevitably called 
it “vulgar” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2796506/tracey-emin-s-vulgar-proves- 
art-luvvies-dragging- 
civilisation-backwards-quentin-letts-finds-artist-s-latest- 
exhibition-embarrassing-infuriating.html>). “They shouldn’t have been allowed. 
But the images looked good – 45,000 people went to my show in four weeks.” If 
there’s a bad review illustrated with great images, she adds, “it makes a lot 
of people go to the show.”

Emin has been single for seven years. To coincide with her Hong Kong 
exhibition, a magazine commissioned her ex-boyfriendMat Collishaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/24/mat-collishaw-review-new-art-gallery-walsall>
 to photograph her, but then turned down the results as they didn’t look like 
the “Mad Tracey from Margate” of the Britart years. “They wanted the photos to 
look sexy like I did 20 years ago. But I was going, ‘No, I’m nearly 53, it’s 
not possible, it’s not happening.’ So there’s this kind of weird expectation of 
people wanting me to be how I was.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftracey-emin-the-stone-i-married-is-beautiful-and-dignified-it-will-never-let-me-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dae2615e3cdefab483425014a715b0c1294551a%2F42_0_3405_3404%2F3405.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tracey%20Emin%3A%20'The%20stone%20I%20married%20is%20beautiful%20and%20dignified%20%E2%80%93%20it%20will%20never%20let%20me%20down'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftracey-emin-the-stone-i-married-is-beautiful-and-dignified-it-will-never-let-me-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tracey%20Emin%3A%20%27The%20stone%20I%20married%20is%20beautiful%20and%20dignified%20%E2%80%93%20it%20will%20never%20let%20me%20down%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftracey-emin-the-stone-i-married-is-beautiful-and-dignified-it-will-never-let-me-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dae2615e3cdefab483425014a715b0c1294551a%2F42_0_3405_3404%2F3405.jpg>
 I Promise to Love You by Tracey Emin, from a 2015 show at the Lights of Soho 
gallery in London. Photograph: Nick Harvey/Rex/Shutterstock 
She doesn’t want Stone Love to be regarded as too sexual, saying that she 
loves the lyrics of the Bowie song “because they’re an expression of all the 
other different kinds of love that you can have”. Her loves, she says, are 
unconditional, and also unconventional. It doesn’t get much less conventional 
than marrying a stone – not a rock, she says, which has been cut by humans, but 
a stone.

Emin shows me a picture of the stone in question: it’s large, volcanic and 
covered in lichen, situated under a tree, with a magnificent sea view. She was 
amused by the furore her wedding created. “I was in Hong Kong and my mum said 
she put the news on and it said, ‘And the artistTracey Emin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/emin> was married this summer in a 
secret ceremony in France … to a stone.” Yet she says she was making a serious 
point, too, embracing her status as a single, middle-aged woman, as well as 
expressing the artist’s love of her materials, and her work.

The stone, she says, is “beautiful, it’s paleolithic, it’s monumental, it’s 
dignified, it will never, ever let me down. It’s not going anywhere: it’s a 
metaphor for what I prefer to live with. I prefer to be single, doing 
everything I want to do and how I want to do it.” Better than that, it cheers 
her up. “If I feel really low – anything from ‘I shouldn’t have said that’ to 
‘I don’t feel very well’, to ‘I feel a bit lonely’ – I think about the stone 
and it actually makes me feel better.”


In the UK, Emin’s public persona is so enormous, and often controversial 
(never more so than when she revealed thatshe was voting Conservative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/charlottehigginsblog/2009/may/05/tracey-emin-conservatives>
 at the 2010 election, though she was hardly alone in being disillusioned by 
the then Labour government), that it’s hard to detach it from her influence as 
an artist. Nonetheless, her impact is pretty clear, from her sexual frankness 
to her refusal to be hemmed into one medium. “Even if they reject or dislike 
what I do, the young generation can bounce against what I’ve done,” she says. 
“And I’d say that about the 70s, really hardcore feminists that worked really 
hard, they made it possible for me to do what I do.”

Just as she may have anticipated the selfie, Emin also made it more acceptable 
to explore one’s private – even abject – emotions in public, which is one of 
the reasons she is disliked by those who accuse her of narcissism. Look at 
journalism, she says. “Twenty years ago, people would never have said: ‘So, I 
was standing outside the school gates with my coffee, thinking about the 
Pilates that I’ve been doing this morning, about that fact that I shouldn’t 
have worn the purple leggings because they’re so unflattering … ’ This is how a 
serious piece of journalism would start now. The person could be about to write 
about fucking Isis or something. Before, it just would have been cold and 
analytical – especially serious newspapers like the Guardian. It’s brilliant!”

• Tracey Emin’s Stone Love is at Lehmann Maupin <http://www.lehmannmaupin.com>
, New York until 18 June
 