
Today we present an extract from Carlos Fonseca’s dazzling debut about the 
demented final project of a brilliant mathematician. Recalling the best of 
Bolaño, Borges, and Calvino, Colonel Lágrimas is an allegory of our 
hyperinformed age and of the clash between European and Latin American history.

—The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

--

The colonel aspires to have a thousand faces. The file endeavors to give him 
only one. Now that he’s sleeping we can remove the folder from the cabinet 
where it is stored, remove the blue band that protects the file, and thumb 
through it at our leisure, study the case history hidden behind this tired 
man’s dreams. On the first page in this heavy, grayish folder, we find the 
fundamentals of an identity: a name, date of birth, and place of origin. 
Strange inflexibility for a man who dedicated his life to being many, to 
seeking happiness through a schizophrenic multiplicity of personalities. The 
colonel inhabits his century with the anonymity of a fish in water. And, 
nonetheless, a name and a date bring continuity to the archive. Clearly, the 
sleeping man is only one. We are left with the magic of perspective, looking at 
him from a thousand different angles, drawing a kind of cubist portrait of this 
tired man. At times, asleep though he is, it would seem that the colonel is 
posing for us: he turns to one side, he turns to the other, he changes 
positions as often as he changes dreams. We tell ourselves that we must look at 
the file with the flexible gaze of one who catalogues dreams, we must analyze 
the colonel’s masks from the elusive position of happiness.

***

The colonel inhabits his century with the anonymity of a fish in water.

In the midst of war, the weight of his heritage upon him, the little colonel 
learned to play with his masks. We find in the file, in almost indecipherable 
handwriting, a note that establishes the precise moment of what would be one of 
the great realizations of his life: to don a mask was to refuse a destiny. 
Dated in 1943 and signed by a certain Jacques Truffaut, psychoanalyst at a 
Parisian orphanage, the note is summarized in the following lines: “The boy 
refuses to answer in his mother tongue. He rejects Russian with an alarming 
rage. He seems to want to annul his origins. On the other hand, he caresses 
Spanish with an angelic fluency.” Truffaut knows little of those rainy Chalco 
afternoons. For him, Mexico calls up ideas of erotic barbarism, of adventure 
and expeditions with no return, and so, in an attempt to feel at home, he 
chooses to write, on the line for birthplace, the French name, Mexique. But the 
little colonel doesn’t like homes: he prefers a theory he discovers in a French 
copy of National Geographic, in an article about the tribal use of masks in 
northeastern Africa. He prefers to think that civilization originated with the 
simulacrum, feigned identity, anonymity with a face, endless flux. He thumbs 
anxiously, happily, through the article that tells of a certain Johann Kaspar 
Lavater, father of physiognomy, who thought he had discovered the moral 
outlines of personalities in people’s faces. The colonel sketches precise and 
fantastic drawings in which different faces are juxtaposed with animal 
physiognomies: a man with a pointed snout compared to a long-nosed dog, a man 
with a small nose beside a buffalo. He laughs in the midst of war, and his 
laughter is the first of many masks. Years later, the colonel will find in his 
love of butterflies a kind of final mask, a homeopathic remedy for this, his 
solitude of grand, dramatic laughter.

***

We need only return to his Parisian years to find the first signs of the 
colonel’s adoption of anonymity. In the dawn of war, this boy with small hands 
and straight hair took on the palest, most profound orphanhood. Left behind, 
immersed in a nation of barbaric whispers, were his mother’s Russian lullabies 
and the anarchic memory of his deceased father. In a Spanish sanatorium, a 
widow would spend the war buried under a different kind of anonymity: the brave 
anonymity of madness would save her from the atrocities of this horrible 
theater, so different from the one that, in another country and in other times, 
she had loved. For her, the war will be a long summer of white geraniums and 
demented delusions, of small, pallid afternoons adorned with the tiny red 
points of a light forgetting. For Chana Abramov, one war—the one that snatched 
her husband away from her, which she lived through in a language that she still 
associated with Mexico—would be enough. The year is 1943. Finding himself 
alone, the colonel decides to leave behind his childhood, devise a tabula rasa, 
and start everything over. A period follows that is as dark and forgetful as 
the war itself. We won’t hear from him again until after the war’s end. The war 
— “that long night,” as he will call it later in his letters — is a kind of 
black hole in the archive, an empty space whose negative gravity we have to 
circumnavigate until we come around again on the other side of the story. When 
we see him again, he no longer has his straight hair; it’s now cut short, an 
ill-timed gonzo style that will be his distinctive look during the postwar 
years. The colonel has survived the war to become many, with the will to be 
always a little outside of time, prophet of the future with an anachronistic 
face.

His willful anachronism will guide him on his path through the century until 
it brings him here, to this bed where he now sleeps. The colonel enjoys one of 
the sweetest pleasures, though almost extinct: on this five-degree afternoon, 
while the lash of the cold front moves away northeastward, the colonel enjoys 
the anachronistic pleasure of a siesta. In one of his letters to Maximiliano, 
he puts it in writing:

The century in which we are living, my dear Maximiliano, is the age of work. 
The nineteenth century was merely a harbinger of what was headed our way. Man 
has lost the ability to take a nap. And, I tell you, the wars are the 
accumulated energy of a century that, worn out, decides to explode over itself. 
If only we knew the value of a siesta, the pleasure of the hours lost to 
leisure, we would understand that history needs to seek the counterweight of 
its energies in its respite. Or perhaps all this is to tell you to take your 
naps, that the moments of creation are different from those of work.

Now that he is taking his anachronistic nap, now that he again turns his torso 
in search of the perfect posture for dreaming, we might think that this was 
merely a retrospective excuse, a way of settling in more comfortably on his 
soft pillows, a legitimizing document that he invented when he saw that his 
energies were no longer enough and exhaustion was bearing down on him. Perhaps. 
But we, the ones who believe in that guilt that is also his salvation, we think 
differently. The colonel’s excuses are always valid jokes that hide the passion 
of a belief. In this, his prolonged and monastic withdrawal, the colonel 
devotes himself to paying homage to the most anachronistic of positions: that 
of honesty.

Translation Tuesday: Good People by Nir Baram – extract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/aug/09/translation-tuesday-good-people-by-nir-baram-extract>
In the little book of aphorisms that a small and timid Republican militiaman 
gave to Chana Abramov after her husband’s death, the following question 
appears: “How does one depict honesty in this age of disenchantment?” The 
father’s question returns us to the son’s dilemma. Because, though he doesn’t 
know it, we have surrounded the colonel with secret cameras and microphones, we 
have inundated him with mirrors in a final attempt to reproduce a cubist 
portrait of his anachronistic honesty. And, nevertheless, there is something we 
do not see, something hidden behind one of the stories and behind the multitude 
of faces, something sharp and latent; we feel a presentiment, the worst kind of 
malaise. Now that time is running out, we search among the dozens of faces the 
photographs display, search among the cameras that surround the colonel, and 
for just a moment, however brief, we believe we see something.

***

For example, here: a grimace emerges in the middle of a dream. A solitary hand 
dips into the archive, fumbles about for a few seconds, and rises to the 
surface again holding a photograph. If we turn it over, we see that it is has a 
place and date: Hanoi, 1969. It shows a man with the look of prison, a gaunt, 
cadaverous face in midgrimace: his eyes wide open as if posed in madness, his 
baldness already apparent, and his tongue to one side in a mocking gesture. We 
see a chalkboard behind him with symbols we can’t make out, and still further 
back, in what seems to be but is not a fake background, the verdure of the 
mountains. The hand sinks again into the sea of documents and reemerges holding 
another photograph. In this one, we see the same man, this time with a certain 
pleasing, New Age aura, less awkward in his pose this time, surrounded by a 
strange and sectarian assortment of what seem to be hippies and monks. A 
certain intellectual atmosphere mixes here with the deepest counterculture of 
Rastafarian braids, round spectacles, and enigmatic monks. Amid the sect, a 
woman with somewhat Asian features stands out. The man doesn’t look at her, but 
she seems to be looking at him. In these surroundings so of their time, the man 
at the center, with his glasses and his haunting gaze, seems so in his element 
that we sense he is a man who has finally managed to coincide with his age. But 
then we see, on the second look, in a third glance, the idiosyncratic grimace 
that characterizes him. The colonel’s grimaces deny the stability of faces with 
the same comic force with which they agree to disappear behind masks.

***

Did he love her? It’s a valid question. If we look carefully, if we get out 
the magnifying glass and observe the details in a kind of anachronistic and 
cautious close-up, we can discern a certain tenderness in his gaze. It isn’t 
clear, however, from the position of his face, whether it’s her he is looking 
at, or if he’s looking beyond her, his gaze lost in a cloudy Asian sunset. 
Perhaps, we think, his love was something written in code on chalkboards made 
wet by the misty rain of war, something written on that chalkboard where we can 
just make out an equation. Love, something like this:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftranslation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ftranslation-tuesday-colonel-lagrimas-by-carlos-fonseca-extract%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0534e231bc0eff531b53037d5ad6008a9acfafc%2F0_0_634_150%2F634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Translation%20Tuesday%3A%20Colonel%20L%C3%A1grimas%20by%20Carlos%20Fonseca%20%E2%80%93%20extract&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftranslation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ftranslation-tuesday-colonel-lagrimas-by-carlos-fonseca-extract%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Translation%20Tuesday%3A%20Colonel%20L%C3%A1grimas%20by%20Carlos%20Fonseca%20%E2%80%93%20extract&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftranslation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ftranslation-tuesday-colonel-lagrimas-by-carlos-fonseca-extract%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0534e231bc0eff531b53037d5ad6008a9acfafc%2F0_0_634_150%2F634.jpg>
Behind the symbols, a mocking love. The colonel hides secrets on chalkboards 
that he scatters over a landscape of war. The joke, the grimace, and the 
laugh—the colonel doesn’t distinguish between possible comedies. But there she 
is, undoubtedly her—almond-shaped eyes and dark hair—in the line of his 
stubborn vision. Now that she has entered this story, there is no way to omit 
her, her presence stays with us, forcing us to pose again the impossible 
question: Did he love her? The voice of reason demands the following: we can 
only love that which exists in tandem with us, at the same time as us. The 
colonel’s anachronism seems to condemn him to the deepest solitude. And it’s in 
the middle of that populous solitude that we see a hint of the first grimace of 
drowsy pleasure. We’ll have to tell the curious team to hurry up their work. 
The colonel is slowly beginning to wake up.

Translated from the Spanish by Megan McDowell

Click here <http://www.restlessbooks.com/bookstore/colonel-lagrimas> for more 
information about the book.

*****

 * Carlos Fonseca Suárez was born in Costa Rica in 1987 and grew up in Puerto 
Rico. His work has appeared in publications including The Guardian, BOMB, The 
White Review and Asymptote. He currently teaches at the University of Cambridge 
and lives in London. 
 * Megan McDowell has translated many modern and contemporary South American 
authors, including Alejandro Zambra, Arturo Fontaine, Carlos Busqued, Álvaro 
Bisama, and Juan Emar. Her translations have been published in The New Yorker, 
McSweeney’s, Words Without Borders, Mandorla, and VICE, among others.  