
Outside a cafe on the crossroads of a busy intersection in Asmara, three 
25-year-olds sip macchiatos and catch up on the latest gossip in the bright 
morning sunshine. The conversation soon turns to people who have “skipped”, a 
term for those who have fledEritrea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eritrea> 
to escape the indefinite national service programme.

Birhane, 25, who works as a mechanic in a government-owned garage, said: 
“Between us, we probably know about 300 people who have skipped in the last few 
years. They are leaving because we have to do what the government tells us to 
do.”

In 1991, when Birhane, Henok and Adonay were born, Eritrea had just gained 
independence fromEthiopia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia> after 30 
years of war. In the early years, many people were optimistic about their 
future and their leaders.

It's not at war, but up to 3% of its people have fled. What is going on in 
Eritrea?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/eritrea-migrants-child-soldier-fled-what-is-going>
Today, the atmosphere in Asmara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/18/eritrea-asmara-frozen-in-time-africas-little-rome>
 is markedly different. Isaias Afewerki, the former leader of the liberation 
struggle, is still in power 25 years later, and a resumption of hostilities 
with Ethiopia at the turn of the millennium inflicted huge human and economic 
damage on the country, exacerbating its slide into a military state.

In the capital, although bicycles and charming old European cars dot the roads 
and the ambitious Italian colonial-era architecture is well preserved, more 
than a dozen people said they were desperately gathering cash to pay forsigre 
dob (border crossing).

Gaim Kibreab, a professor of refugee studies at London South Bank University, 
says Eritrea is the world’s “fastest emptying nation”. About 400,000 people are 
estimated to have left the country in the past decade,from a population of just 
5.1 million 
<https://www.google.co.uk/publicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&met_y=sp_pop_totl&idim=country:ERI&hl=en&dl=en>
.

The UN and human rights activists estimate that as many as 5,000 Eritreans 
flee illegally every month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/23/eritrea-conscription-repression-and-poverty-recipe-for-mass-emigration>
, but the Eritrean government claims that the real number is closer to 1,000, 
because Ethiopians often pretend to be Eritrean when seeking asylum abroad.


Those left behind in Asmara say everyone is well aware of what is happening. 
“I know of thousands of people who have left,” said Demsas, 49, as he strolled 
down one of the main streets. “We can feel it.”
UNHCR European arrivals 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/sep/2016-09-26T14:12:58/embed.html>
The government acknowledges that people are leaving in droves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/eritrea-migrants-child-soldier-fled-what-is-going>
, but says it is part of an international conspiracy to weaken Eritrea. “The 
policy of the United States for the past 10 years has been to encourage the 
migration of Eritreans, especially Eritrean youth and especially Eritrean 
educated youth,” said Yemane Gebreab, the director of political affairs for the 
ruling People’s Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ) and a close advisor to 
Afwerki.

“If they can encourage migration and especially desertion from the Eritrean 
army, which has been a main objective of this policy, then they will have 
achieved their aim of weakening Eritrea,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Feritrea-military-service-life-people-left-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf1a74a3e119f5a3fce61a487b539fcd65f93a4e%2F0_147_2696_1617%2F2696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trapped%20and%20bereft%20in%20the%20world's%20'fastest%20emptying%20country'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Feritrea-military-service-life-people-left-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trapped%20and%20bereft%20in%20the%20world%27s%20%27fastest%20emptying%20country%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Feritrea-military-service-life-people-left-behind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf1a74a3e119f5a3fce61a487b539fcd65f93a4e%2F0_147_2696_1617%2F2696.jpg>
 Last year, the government put a limit on the amount of money that people could 
withdraw from their bank accounts. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
For law-abiding Eritreans, it is hard to avoid the national service programme. 
Hundreds of soldiers are known to storm neighbourhoods in Asmara every few 
months. Known as agiffa (raid), troops block off traffic and set up a cordon 
before going house to house in search of people who have not enlisted.

Young Eritreans say they feel trapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/eritreans-denied-freedom-25-years-after-independence>
 by these policies. If they are caught deserting, the government hands down 
brutal punishments. But if they stay, they are resigned to a life earning a 
monthly wage of 500 nakfa (£25). “All of us are still in national service. We 
don’t get enough [money] to live on,” Henok said.

The government has recently changed some elements of national service, a sign 
that the regime may be aware of the damage its policies are causing. Those 
drafted in 2001 or earlier are being allowed to leave active service, but they 
are still required to work for the government. The maximum salary offered after 
demobilisation is 4,000 nakfa, equivalent to $165 on the black market, 
according to Hagos Ghebrehiwet, the PFDJ director of economic affairs.

Last year, the government put a limit on the amount of money that people could 
withdraw from their bank accounts, saying it wanted to encourage citizens to 
use cheques and mobile money facilities. Hagos said: “Cash is the basis for 
illegal activities, like human trafficking.”

We would all leave tomorrow if we had the money
Adonay 
However, very few businesses accept cheques or credit cards, and since the 
introduction of the rule, the black market dollar exchange rate has halved, 
leading to speculation that the policy is a covert way to limit the number of 
people fleeing.

“With this new currency, people don’t have access to their money,” Demsas 
said. According to human rights activist Meron Estefanos, wealthy Eritreans can 
pay high-ranking government officials between $5,000 and $6,000 to be smuggled 
out of the country and driven to Khartoum inSudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>. The fee for a similar journey across 
the border with Ethiopia is $2,000 to $3,000, she said.

For most Eritreans, who do not have rich friends or relatives overseas, the 
journey to Europe is extremely expensive. Natnael Haile, who lives in Sweden, 
says he was drafted into the army aged 13. After spending seven years repairing 
army cars on a desolate military base, he crept out of his dormitory in 2008. 
Haile paid smugglers $400 to take him to Sudan, where he was kidnapped and sold 
to nomads in the Sinai desert.

Haile ended up paying a total of $7,100 to get on a boat heading for the 
Italian island of Lampedusa. But the account of his harrowing journey does not 
deter Adonay and his friends in Asmara. “We would all leave tomorrow if we had 
the money,” they say.

A version of this article first appeared in The Africa Report 
<http://www.theafricareport.com/East-Horn-Africa/inside-eritreas-exodus.html>
 