
Take me there: Adagio Aparthotel, Liverpool


One of Liverpool's best-loved buildings, the former Lewis's department store 
re-opens this weekend as the Adagio Aparthotel. Liverpudlians will be relieved 
to see that many of the building's original features remain intact, including 
the colourful 1950s tiled mural which graced the fifth-floor cafeteria and the 
statue of a naked man (known locally as Dickie Lewis) over the entrance. The 
126 apartments are equipped for self-catering, but guests also have access to 
hotel-style services, such as 24-hour reception, free internet service and 
housekeeping. A studio apartment costs from £70 a night, with cheaper rates 
available for longer stays (adagio-city.com 
<http://www.adagio-city.com/gb/aparthotel/concept.shtml>)

It's a good time to... celebrate Midsummer

If performing dawn rituals at Stonehenge sounds a bit too druidy, there are 
plenty of other ways to let your hair down on the longest day.

Nobody does midsummer better than the Swedes, dancing round maypoles and 
lighting bonfires. But the next best thing to getting on a flight to Stockholm 
next weekend will be to head to London's Victoria Park where a pop-up 
Swedish-style "summer house" will be dispensing cider cocktails and hot dogs 
with wild lingonberry ketchup (£10, 21 June-5 July,facebook.com/RekorderligUK 
<http://facebook.com/RekorderligUK>).

Elsewhere, the longest day will be celebrated with evening hikes and solar 
viewings. In Scotland, you can join a summer solstice wildlife hunt for bats 
and barn owls at Brodick Castle on Arran, followed by the chance to gather 
round an open fire in the Bronze Age roundhouse (21 June,nts.org.uk/events 
<http://www.nts.org.uk/Events>).

The Neolithic ruins at Bryn Celli Ddu on Anglesey will be hosting a family 
open day with rock-art workshops, living history displays and Neolithic food 
tastings (22 June,cadw.wales.gov.uk <http://cadw.wales.gov.uk>). And, in case 
you need reminding what the sun looks like, the Huddersfield Astronomical 
Society will offer an evening of solar-gazing through specially filtered 
telescopes (21 June,huddersfieldastronomy.org <http://huddersfieldastronomy.org>
).
 The five-star Chisel Barn Foxditch in Dorset Photograph: PR company handout 
Give me a break: the week's best deals

Home: Southwest savings Blue Chip Holidays is offering savings of up to 20% on 
summer holidays at its luxury self-catering houses in the West Country and the 
Isle of Wight. A week in June at Chisel Barn Foxditch, a five-star barn 
conversion sleeping four in Dorset, can currently be booked for £510, a saving 
of £119. Bookings must be made before the end of June (bluechipholidays.co.uk 
<http://bluechipholidays.co.uk>)

Away: Setting sail Children can travel for free with Irish Ferries on all 
sailings booked before 27 June. The offer applies to under-16s travelling with 
an adult by car on the Holyhead to Dublin and Pembroke to Rosslare routes for 
the rest of the year, including peak July and August dates – a saving of £30 
per child on a return journey. One-way self-drive ferry fares start at £79 for 
a car and driver (irishferries.com <http://irishferries.com>)
 