
Take me there: Manchester


Why go?
They say good things come in threes and that’s certainly true for Manchester 
this year: the city will celebrate the opening of two major new cultural 
spaces, followed this summer by the return of the Manchester International 
Festival (2-19 July,mif.co.uk <http://www.mif.co.uk/>). There’s also a trio of 
eclectic places to stay, from a classy townhouse to football fan nirvana. No 
wonder theNew York Times has flagged Manchester as one of its top places to 
visit for 2015.

What to do
First up is the unveiling of the revamped Whitworth Art Gallery in February, 
with its new art garden, landscape gallery and 10 exhibitions (
manchester.ac.uk/whitworth <http://www.whitworth.manchester.ac.uk/>). In April, 
Cornerhouse and the Library Theatre Company take up residence at Home, a £25m 
complex comprising art galleries, two theatres and five cinema screens (
homemcr.org <http://homemcr.org/>). Add to this a programme of talks and 
workshops at the renovated Central Library and Mancunians won’t be short of a 
culture fix (manchester.gov.uk/centrallibrary 
<http://manchester.gov.uk/centrallibrary>).

Where to stay
Gary Neville and Ryan Giggs open their Hotel Football in March, with rooms 
overlooking Old Trafford and a rooftop five-a-side pitch (hotelfootball.com 
<http://www.hotelfootball.com/>). The Hotel Gotham follows in April, with Art 
Deco styling, Prohibition-style bar and members’ club (
bespokehotels.com/hotelgotham <http://www.bespokehotels.com/hotelgotham>). 
Summer sees the launch of the King Street Townhouse, an intimate boutique hotel 
(kingstreettownhouse.co.uk <http://www.kingstreettownhouse.co.uk/>).

Where to eat
The quality of food on Rusholme’s Wilmslow Road (aka Curry Mile) is hit and 
miss but the Mughli is a gem, with a menu inspired by the street food of Mumbai 
and Lahore (08724 379 503).

Insider tip
Polly Checkland Harding of creativetourist.com 
<http://www.creativetourist.com/> suggests a visit to Elizabeth Gaskell’s home: 
“You can sit at the desk where novels such asCranford and North and South were 
penned. It’s almost as though the lady of the house were about to come back 
through the front door.”

Give me a break

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ftravel-tips-manchester-yorkshire-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422449274293%2Fb63e4244-9b7b-4ce5-bc05-557b27ff2e0c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20cultural%20weekends%20in%20Manchester%2C%20and%20deals%20of%20the%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ftravel-tips-manchester-yorkshire-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20tips%3A%20cultural%20weekends%20in%20Manchester%2C%20and%20deals%20of%20the%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ftravel-tips-manchester-yorkshire-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422449274293%2Fb63e4244-9b7b-4ce5-bc05-557b27ff2e0c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Coast to coast: the pretty village of Staithes. Photograph: Robin Whalley 
/Alamy 
Foraging in North Yorkshire
 A three-night walking/foraging trip along the North Yorkshire coast is one of 
a handful of new breaks being offered by Large Outdoors. Based in a Georgian 
townhouse hotel in the fishing village of Staithes, the trip includes guided 
walks around Runswick Bay and Whitby, a day’s beachcombing and foraging and a 
lobster lunch. Departs 17 April, £345pp including meals (largeoutdoors.com 
<http://www.largeoutdoors.com/>).
 Branching out: accommodation in the grounds of a Normandy chateau. 
Family fun in France
 The grounds of a château in Normandy are the setting for a new collection of 
tree-houses and yurts, with living roofs, eco loos and solar-powered lighting. 
There are activities from canoeing to bread-making. All-inclusive week-long 
holidays are available in July and August, from £395 per adult, £355 per child 
aged 6-15/£95 aged 2-5 years. Travel to France is extra (
familyadventureholidays.com <http://www.familyadventureholidays.com/>).
 