
Take me there: North Jutland, Denmark

Why go?
Fans of Danish TV dramas could be forgiven for picturing the country as a 
place of half light and unsolved crimes. But even the most hard-boiled 
Scandinavian detective needs a holiday from time to time and when they do 
they’re likely to head to North Jutland. With its powder-soft beaches and jolly 
seaside towns, this island in the far north of Denmark is the perfect antidote 
to Nordic noir. Its distinctive golden light has been attracting artists since 
the 19th century. More recently it’s become an outpost for some of 
Scandinavia’s most creative cuisine. The gateway to the region is the city of 
Aalborg, served by direct flights from Gatwick (norwegian.com 
<https://www.norwegian.com/>).

What to do
With its quaint fishermen’s cottages, art galleries, lively marina and great 
seafood restaurants, Skagen is the Scandinavian answer to St Ives. See the 
works of theSkagen Painters <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skagen_Painters> at 
the impressive Skagen Museum (skagensmuseum.dk <http://www.skagensmuseum.dk/>). 
Stand with your feet in two oceans at Grenen, a narrow sandspit where the 
Baltic and the North Sea meet. Aalborg is reinventing its waterfront as a 
cultural hub. Visit the Utzon Centre (utzoncenter.dk 
<http://www.utzoncenter.dk/en/welcome.htm>) dedicated to architecture and 
design, the Musikkens Hus concert hall (musikkenshus.dk 
<http://en.musikkenshus.dk/>) and Aalborg Havnebad, a lido in the fjord.

Where to stay
Hotel Plesner in Skagen is a charming seaside hotel kitted out in typical 
Scandi-style with divinely comfortable beds (doubles from £95,hotelplesner.dk 
<http://www.hotelplesner.dk/?lang=en>).

Where to eat
The restaurant which put North Jutland on the culinary map is Mortens Kro in 
Aalborg (mortenskro.dk <http://mortenskro.dk/frontpage.aspx>). But there’s 
stiff competition from the Svinkløv Badehotel, tucked behind the dunes in 
Fjerritslev (svinkloev-badehotel.dk <http://www.svinkloev-badehotel.dk/>), and 
the Restaurant de 2 Have in Skagen (restaurantde2have.dk 
<http://restaurantde2have.dk/>).

Insider tip
Ninna Seerup from Visit Denmark 
<http://www.visitdenmark.com/denmark/tourist-frontpage> recommends a trip to the
Rubjerg Knude Lighthouse 
<http://rubjergknude.dk/engelsk/net-exhibit/explore-rubjerg/the-lighthouse/the-lighthouses-history/>
. “It’s last-chance tourism as a sand dune is slowly covering the lighthouse 
and in a few years it will disappear. At the moment you can see only the top 
sticking out.”

Give me a break
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftravel-tips-north-jutland-denmark-yorkshire-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435671603884%2F2e1c48c8-c2fb-42f8-bc51-497e33367d81-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20North%20Jutland%2C%20Denmark%2C%20and%20this%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftravel-tips-north-jutland-denmark-yorkshire-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20tips%3A%20North%20Jutland%2C%20Denmark%2C%20and%20this%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftravel-tips-north-jutland-denmark-yorkshire-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435671603884%2F2e1c48c8-c2fb-42f8-bc51-497e33367d81-1020x612.jpeg>
 A celebration of nature writing at Niddfest in Nidderdale. Photograph courtesy 
of Niddfest 
Home: A way with words in Nidderdale
A new literary festival in the Yorkshire Dales will celebrate nature writing 
this summer. Among the programme highlights at Niddfest will be readings from 
the poets Carol Ann Duffy and Gillian Clarke, as well as moorland safaris, 
fairy hunts, foraging expeditions and birdwatching walks. The festival takes 
place in the beautiful Upper Nidderdale valley from 24-26 July (niddfest.com).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftravel-tips-north-jutland-denmark-yorkshire-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435671864955%2F590323bc-fdfb-4879-b178-c385ba09a321-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20North%20Jutland%2C%20Denmark%2C%20and%20this%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftravel-tips-north-jutland-denmark-yorkshire-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20tips%3A%20North%20Jutland%2C%20Denmark%2C%20and%20this%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftravel-tips-north-jutland-denmark-yorkshire-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435671864955%2F590323bc-fdfb-4879-b178-c385ba09a321-2060x1236.jpeg>
 See Capri by boat. Photograph: Melvyn Longhurst/Alamy 
Away: Adventure holidays in Italy
European activity holiday specialist UTracks has launched a handful of new 
breaks in Italy for this summer, including a family adventure from Rome to 
Amalfi. The eight-day trip includes a hike to the top of Mount Vesuvius, a boat 
trip to Capri and a pizza-making class. It’s suitable for children aged eight 
and over and is accompanied by a local guide. From £950 per adult and £870 per 
child (utracks.com).
 