
Take me there: Liverpool


Why go?
Not since it took over the mantle of European Capital of Culture in 1998 has 
there been such a buzz around Liverpool. From the recent unveiling of the new 
Everyman Theatre to the return of the animatronic giants which wowed the city 
two years ago, this summer's cultural calendar is a treat. Add to this a mini 
hotel-building boom, the opening of a Riba architecture centreand the 
tantalising possibility of league victory for Liverpool FC, and it's no wonder 
there's a whiff of excitement on Merseyside.

What to do
Pay your respects to the Fab Four (see visitliverpool.com 
<http://www.visitliverpool.com/>) and take a ferry across the Mersey. Then try 
one of Riba's walking tours (architecture.com 
<http://www.architecture.com/home.aspx>). The summer of culture kicks off with 
nocturnal arts festival Night Light on 16 May (lightnightliverpool.co.uk 
<http://www.lightnightliverpool.co.uk/>), followed by a feast of contemporary 
art at the Liverpool Biennial (from 5 July,biennial.com 
<http://www.biennial.com/>). But the real showstopper will be the arrival of 
the Royal de Luxe Giants, to mark the centenary of the First World War (23-27 
July,royal-de-luxe.com/en <http://www.royal-de-luxe.com/en/pictures-wall/>).

Where to eat
Hope Street is the city's foodie quarter, with the clear leader of the pack 
being 60 Hope Street, dishing up modern British classics in a lovely Georgian 
townhouse (60hopestreet.com <http://www.60hopestreet.com/>). Or try Camp and 
Furnace, a nightclub/gallery/restaurant with stalls serving street food (
campandfurnace.com <http://campandfurnace.com/>).

Where to stay
If your budget doesn't stretch to the swanky new 30 James Street hotel in the 
former HQ of the White Star cruise line (doubles from £89,rmstitanichotel.co.uk 
<http://www.rmstitanichotel.co.uk/>), check out "boutique hostel Hoax (dorm 
beds from £14.50, doubles from £54,hoaxliverpool.com <http://hoaxliverpool.com/>
). Hip hotel Aloft will open in the gold-domed Royal Insurance building this 
autumn (starwoodhotels.com <http://www.starwoodhotels.com/>).

Insider tip
"Head up to Everton Brow, a breezy summit a mile from the centre and you've 
not only got the whole city laid out beneath you, but a chunk of north Wales 
too," says David Lloyd, editor of Liverpool blogsevenstreets.com 
<http://www.sevenstreets.com/>.

Give me a break

 Authentic wartime living: the Land Girls Cottage. 
Home: Live like the Land Girls 
Given the current trend for all things vintage, the quirky new holiday home 
from Under the Thatch is sure to be a hit. The Land Girls House near 
Glastonbury in Somerset is an authentic wartime cottage built for the Women's 
Land Army, and comes with 1940s Utility furniture, functioning radiogram, 
Bakelite switches and its own Anderson shelter. From £157 for two nights (
underthethatch.co.uk/landgirls <http://underthethatch.co.uk/landgirls>)
 Europe on a budget: check out Ibis Hotels' flat rates. Photograph: Marc 
Bertrand 
Away: Affordable European city breaks
Looking for an affordable European city break this summer? Budget chain Ibis 
has launched a flat rate of €45 per night at all of its hotels in Italy, Spain 
and Portugal this summer. Bookings need to be made before 31 May for stays 
between 1 June and 31 August. The group has 74 hotels across the three 
countries, including city-centre bases in Madrid, Barcelona, Rome, Milan and 
Lisbon (ibishotel.com <http://ibishotel.com>)
 