
Personalised information about public transport and an Uber alternative that 
treats its drivers well are useful ideas that you might expect to hail from 
cities in Europe or the US.

But GoMetro is an app from South Africa and Careem is an Uber-style firm 
working across the Middle East and northAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. They are typical of some of the 
innovative partnerships in the global south producing ideas from which many 
western governments and companies could learn.

Why does it still take so long to drive across Africa? | Tunde Kehinde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/24/driving-africa-roads-infrastructure-ecommerce>


The GoMetro mobile app was developed by Justin Coetzee in 2011 after he was 
left standing on a Cape Town train platform, delayed again without explanation. 
This is not an uncommon problem in South Africa, where people using public 
transport spend on averagetwo and a half times longer commuting than Europeans 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/thetimes/article1788800.ece>. It occurred to 
Coetzee that real-time updates on a mobile device would make a big difference. 
Working closely with the Public Rail Agency of South Africa, Coetzee and his 
team developed the app to provide updated information and announcements on 
public transport timetables. GoMetro provides this service to the agency free 
of charge; its income comes from advertising on the app.

While many European countries do have transport apps, Coetzee says patchy 
mobile connectivity is a barrier to this technology – something highlighted in a
new report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/14/uk-4g-coverage-worse-than-in-romania-and-peru-watchdog-finds>
 from the National Infrastructure Commission on how poor UK mobile connectivity 
is affecting the country’s businesses. The UK is 54th in the world for 4G 
coverage, lagging behind countries such as Romania, Albania, Panama and Peru. 
The average UK user is able to connect to the network a mere 53% of the time.

But being innovative isn’t just about technology. Another approach to 
transport has been pioneered by Careem, a ride-hailing service founded in Dubai 
by two consultants, Mudassir Sheikha and Magnus Olsson, who had travelled 
widely and realised the need for quick, reliable transport. So far, so Uber, 
you might say. But Careem prides itself on treating its fleet of more than 
100,000 drivers, referred to as captains, fairly. Careem drivers are typically 
paid 30% more than comparable taxi drivers and the employees own around half 
the company, so they benefit when the company grows.

Jordan cracks down on Uber and Careem as congestion clogs its capital
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/18/amman-congestion-crisis-uber-careem-jordan-ride-sharing-apps>
Sheikha says the company has been successful by understanding local problems, 
such as a service for women in countries like Saudi Arabia, where they are not 
permitted to drive.





Careem is now turning its attention to public transport. “Our region does not 
have an elaborate public transport infrastructure,” explains Sheikha. They are 
working on driverless “pods” that he says will enable the firm to build a 
highly efficient public transport infrastructure that leapfrogs the traditional 
way public transport has been built in the rest of the world.

Other public transport solutions can be found elsewhere. A 21-metre-long 
straddling bus wasunveiled this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/03/china-transit-explore-bus-road-straddling-test-drive-qinhuangdao-hebei>
 in China that runs along tracks two metres above the road, allowing cars to 
pass underneath, at speeds of up to 37mph. Each bus can transport 1,400 
passengers at a time and several can be attached together. Those behind the 
project believe one straddling bus could replace 40 conventional buses.

Urban regeneration researcher Deborah Talbot says the rapidly growing hubs of 
the global south are “allowing for innovation in transportation with a wild 
imagination we don’t have in the UK”. Concepts like the microbus, for instance, 
could help solve the need for a more frequent, smaller capacity service in 
rural areas of the UK.

A team of students from Nairobi recently won the Hult prize 
<http://www.hultprize.org/en/compete/2016-prize/2016-finalists/> for their 
Magic Bus ticketing company, an offline app for bus drivers in rural 
communities which offers precisely this type of service. Previously, many 
minibuses would not leave the depot until they were at capacity, which meant 
subsequently passing people on the roadside who could be there for hours. This 
app allows drivers to see those who have booked along the route, so they do not 
have to wait to leave until the bus is full. Passengers also get to track the 
vehicle along the journey, which helps to combat the risk of rural isolation.

Soak it up: China’s ambitious plan to solve urban flooding with ‘sponge cities’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/oct/03/china-government-solve-urban-planning-flooding-sponge-cities>
Other developments in continental Africa include a new light rail system in 
Addis Ababa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/sep/22/new-tram-chinese-addis-ababa-ethiopia-uk-councils>
, the first fully electrified tram system in sub-Saharan Africa.



Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 