
Take me there: Akamas, Cyprus


Why go? Don't let the images of binge-drinking Brits in Ayia Napa put you off 
Cyprus. In the far west of the island, the Akamas peninsula is a protected area 
of juniper and pine forests, rocky gorges and wild beaches where you're more 
likely to spot a loggerhead turtle than a Union Jack beach towel.

What to do The peninsula is criss-crossed by hiking and biking trails. Popular 
walks include the signposted Adonis and Aphrodite trails and the Avakas gorge 
where, if you're lucky, you'll see wild goats. Take a boat trip from Latchi 
harbour to snorkel in the crystalline waters of the Blue Lagoon (
latchiwatersportscentre.com <http://latchiwatersportscentre.com/>). Look out 
for sea turtles on Lara Beach, a remote and untamed stretch of golden sand.

Where to stay The Aphrodite Beach Hotel is an unpretentious family-run hotel 
with sea-view rooms and its own taverna on a lovely beach. Tour operator Sunvil 
offers a week at the hotel with flights and car hire from £556pp (sunvil.co.uk 
<http://www.sunvil.co.uk/>).

Where to eat Arsinoe Fish Tavern in Polis is the place to go for fresh seafood 
– the owner's father is a fisherman (3 Griva Digeni Street). For traditional 
Cypriot home cooking, the Sunday lunch buffet at the Paradisos Hills Hotel in 
Lysos is something of a local institution (paradisoshills.com 
<http://paradisoshills.com/>).

Insider tip Sunvil rep Angela Richardson recommends a visit to Heaven on Earth 
Herbals in the beautiful village of Pano Akourdhalia (heavenonearthherbals.com 
<http://www.heavenonearthherbals.com/>): "It was set up by herbalist Caroline 
Evans to supply organic health products," she says. "You can relax in the herb 
gardens, visit the apothecary and enjoy a cup of herbal tea and slice of chilli 
and chocolate cake in the café. There's a monthly farmer's market and 
activities for children, too."

Dangerous liaisons: do we really want bed-and bondage romance breaks?

 The romantic weekend away gets a new twist. Photograph: Onoky - Fabrice 
Lerouge/Getty Images/Brand X 
It's February and my inbox is under siege from the usual barrage of cloying 
Valentine's Day hotel offers. Normally these consist of hotels inviting us to 
"rekindle the romance" by stumping up for champagne and chocolates. But this 
year the ante has been upped with the arrival of the bed-and-bondage break. 
We're not talking Soho knocking-shops here, but respectable boutique hotels, 
such as the South Place Hotel in London, which has devised a Valentine's 
package consisting of champagne, truffles and a Love Box, complete with 
vibrator, PVC bondage tape and teasing feather "for torturous play" (from £460,
southplacehotel.com <http://www.southplacehotel.com/>).

A similarly alarming box of tricks is on offer for guests checking in at 
myhotel properties in Chelsea, Bloomsbury and Brighton between 7 and 17 
February. The sex toys will be accompanied by a list of 25 "saucy assignments" 
should you run out of inspiration (Beloved package from £145 per night,
myhotels.com <http://myhotels.com/>).

Last but not least, (and proving that Fifty Shades of Grey really does have a 
lot to answer for) couples can arrange for a discreet suitcase of "accessories" 
to be delivered to a handpicked selection of hotels ahead of their stay via 
"erotic gifting service" Box of Grey (boxofgrey.com <http://boxofgrey.com/>). 
Which is all well and good if you believe that passion is something that can be 
pre-booked – like a round of golf or a spa treatment. In reality, the things 
that make a "romantic weekend" memorable are very unlikely to be found on 
a room-service menu.

If you're a sports fan, head for... Glasgow, host of the Commonwealth Games 
and Ryder Cup

 Making an entrance: Blythswood Square Hotel, Glasgow. 
easyHotel Having shut down last year after a shaky start, this city-centre 
hotel has been taken over by easyJet founder Stelios Haji-Ioannou (it was run 
by a franchise before) and reopens this weekend. The Ritz it ain't, but at 
these prices who's complaining? The usual no-frills price structure applies: 
you pay extra for housekeeping and breakfast, and the earlier you book, the 
cheaper the room. From £19,easyhotel.com <http://easyhotel.com/>

citizenM hotel The futuristic "pod-style" bedrooms at this sleek, budget hotel 
err on the side of functional, but the public areas pack a real design punch. A 
red spiral staircase leads from the entrance to a first-floor "living room", 
which is kitted out in a bold palette of black, red and white, and features 
designer furniture by Vitra, Eames and Panton. From £65,citizenm.com/glasgow 
<http://www.citizenm.com/glasgow/>

15 Glasgow Glasgow's desirable West End, this boutique b&b is a class act. The 
five spacious bedrooms in this handsome Victorian townhouse combine the best of 
traditional and modern: original fireplaces, cornicing and oak panelling sit 
alongside plasma screens, monsoon showers and divinely comfortable beds. From 
£99,15glasgow.com <http://15glasgow.com/>

Blythswood Square Hotel This grand Georgian building was once home to the 
Royal Scottish Automobile Club, but has since been tastefully converted into 
one of the city's best five-star boltholes. What sets it apart from other 
luxury digs is its seriously cosseting spa, which offers an impressive 
treatment list using mostly Scottish products. From £120,
townhousecompany.com/blythswoodsquare 
<http://www.townhousecompany.com/blythswoodsquare/>
 