
Instructing the Police Service of Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> to investigate British 
soldiers over deaths during the Troubles risks “polluting” policing in the 
region, a former envoy between the IRA and the UK government has warned.

Denis Bradley, who later co-chaired the Consultative Group on the Past tasked 
with dealing with the Troubles’ legacy, also predicted that full disclosure of 
all intelligence files relating to the conflict would expose the identities of 
thousands of informers both inside the IRA and loyalist terror groups.

Bradley said the squabbling over any retrospective prosecutions of British 
soldiers, republicans or loyalists found guilty of past crimes was 
“intensifying the collective” trauma Northern Irish society in general 
continued to endure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Ftroubles-envoy-damage-row-prosecuting-uk-troops-denis-bradley-northern-ireland-policing-informers-secret-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4763f0e6521ff06106810d1ffa836603790c777%2F0_9_3501_2101%2F3501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Troubles%20envoy%20warns%20of%20damage%20from%20row%20about%20prosecuting%20UK%20troops&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Ftroubles-envoy-damage-row-prosecuting-uk-troops-denis-bradley-northern-ireland-policing-informers-secret-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Troubles%20envoy%20warns%20of%20damage%20from%20row%20about%20prosecuting%20UK%20troops&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Ftroubles-envoy-damage-row-prosecuting-uk-troops-denis-bradley-northern-ireland-policing-informers-secret-files%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4763f0e6521ff06106810d1ffa836603790c777%2F0_9_3501_2101%2F3501.jpg>
 Denis Bradley co-chaired the Consultative Group on the Past. Photograph: 
Johnny Green/PA Images 
The PSNI on Thursday denied it had plans to launch a fresh inquiry into 
killings carried out by British troops during the Troubles.

The force issued the statement after a front-page report in the Sun that said 
officers would reinvestigate all 302 killings carried out by British troops. 
The newspaper said at least 500 former servicemen, many now in their 60s and 
70s, would be “viewed as suspects” during the process.

The PSNI is carrying out criminal inquiries into the actions of a number of 
British soldiers during the Bloody Sunday massacre in 1972 when troops opened 
fire on an anti-interment rally in Derry, killing 13 civilians.

Arguments over what the British state is prepared to disclose from its 
intelligence archive have even impacted on Anglo-Irish relations.


For the first time in years Dublin has criticised what it perceives as 
London’s foot-dragging over disclosures relating to the Troubles.

The Fine Gael-led minority government said on Thursday it “deeply regretted” 
the lack of visible progress on establishing institutions to deal with the 
fallout from more than a quarter of a century of violence in Northern Ireland.

Bradley told the Guardian the “mess” over how to deal with the Troubles’ 
legacy was having a toxic impact on society.

The former priest, who was a vice-chairman of Northern Ireland’s Policing 
Board and acted as a go-between between IRA leaders and the UK government in 
the early 1990s, chaired the Consultative Group on the Past with a former head 
of the Church of Ireland, Archbishop Robin Eames.

On the PSNI’s role in Troubles inquiries, he said: “We are still throwing 
police in the middle of this mess. I think part of the reason we should have 
done the task 10 years ago was to get the police out of it. Instead this is 
contaminating the police and policing.”

“In addition, it’s costing an absolute fortune where we have £50m being spent 
one case alone, ie Stakeknife,” he said, referring to the investigation into 
Freddie Scappaticci, who infiltrated the IRA and became head of its 
spy-catching unit. “There are hundreds of others. Our aim in the group was to 
take inquiries over the Troubles out of the policing and judicial system but 
this is polluting both.”

Bradley also expressed concern about the fate of thousands of one-time 
informers if there was “full disclosure” of all sensitive Troubles-related 
security files.

“What Robin Eames and I found out in our investigations leading to the 
Consultative Group on the Past report was that at any given time there were at 
least 800 informers working within the ranks not only of the loyalist 
paramilitaries but also the IRA. Others have said that figure was closer to 
1,000.

“If there was full disclosure of files you would be going around saying that 
your sons, daughters, friends were all informers. Full disclosure would mean 
that and our society needs that no more than a hole in the head. Do we want 
every name brought out there? I don’t think so. Maybe in a thematic sense there 
can be full disclosure but leaving individual names out of this, yes. It would 
be far worse than the actual reality.

“What you should not do is expose Joe Bloggs who might have been buried as a 
hero but was in fact an informant for the Brits. That is what would happen 
countless times. Republicans and nationalists used to believe that all the 
informers were on the loyalist side when in fact as we found out in having 
limited access to security file was it was nearly as big as on the republican 
side.”

Bradley added that an already traumatised society such as Northern Ireland was 
being further traumatised by the political disagreements over how to deal with 
its violent past.

“I honestly don’t know how the politicians and the two governments in London 
and Dublin are going to get around this mess but it keeps each other at our 
throats and maintains a low level of pain. It is intensifying the collective 
PTSD this society is suffering.”
 