
Robert F Kennedy Jr, a prominent skeptic regarding the use of vaccines, said 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> had asked him to 
chair a commission on vaccination safety – although the Trump team later denied 
it, saying instead the administration may create a commission on autism.

“President-elect Trump has some doubts about the current vaccine policies and 
he has questions about it,” said Kennedy, speaking with reporters after a 
meeting with the president-elect at Trump Tower on Tuesday.

“His opinion doesn’t matter but the science does matter, and we ought to be 
reading the science and we ought to be debating the science,” said Kennedy, the 
son of the late attorney general Robert Kennedy and nephew of late president 
John F Kennedy.


After asking the Trump transition team to confirm the commission on vaccine 
safety, Hope Hicks, the presidential transition national spokeswoman, played 
down Kennedy’s claims.

“The president-elect is exploring the possibility of forming a commission on 
autism, which affects so many families; however no decisions have been made at 
this time,” she said in a statement.

Childhood vaccines have been falsely linked to autism in recent years, despite 
multiple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/20/autism-link-to-vaccines-dismissed-by-studies-of-more-than-a-million-children>
scientific 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/21/no-link-between-mmr-and-autism-major-study-concludes>
 studies proving that incorrect.


“The president-elect looks forward to continuing the discussion about all 
aspects of autism with many groups and individuals,” added Hicks.

During a 2015 Republican debate, Trump claimed that a child of some employees 
of hishad become autistic after getting vaccinated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/17/donald-trump-vaccines-autism-debate>
.

Donald Trump on vaccines: ‘It’s not helpful’, experts say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/17/donald-trump-vaccines-autism-debate>
“People that work for me, just the other day, two years old, beautiful child 
went to have the vaccine and came back and a week later, got a tremendous 
fever, got very, very sick, now is autistic,” Trump said in September 2015.

According to Kennedy, an environmental activist, radio host and attorney who 
haswritten for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/robert-f-kennedy-jr>, Trump has created a 
commission “on vaccine safety and scientific integrity” and asked him to chair 
it.

“Everybody ought to be able to be assured that the vaccines that we have – 
he’s very pro-vaccine, as am I – but they’re as safe as they possibly can be,” 
Kennedy added.


Although Kennedy calls himself “pro-vaccine”, he has pushed hard against the 
use of thimerosal, a preservative used in vaccines made from mercury, launching 
a group called the World Mercury Project, backed by anti-vaxxers. He advocates 
that parents should choose whether their children are vaccinated.

In 2014, he edited a book titled Thimerosal: Let the Science Speak: The 
Evidence Supporting the Immediate Removal of Mercury – a Known Neurotoxin – 
from Vaccines.


In 2015, he said Congress was stalling on investigating links between autism 
and the mumps, measles, and rubella (MMR) vaccine because it was scared of Big 
Pharma, a trillion-dollar industry and the biggest employer of lobbyists.

When questioned what his father and uncle – leading lights in the 1960s 
Democratic party – would make of Trump as president, Kennedy said on Tuesday 
that Trump “can be any kind of president he wants to be”.

“He probably comes into office less encumbered by ideology or obligations than 
anybody that has been in political office or won the presidency,” Kennedy said.
 