
When President-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> enters the White House next 
year he will bring with him potential conflicts of interest across all areas of 
government that are unprecedented in American history.

Trump, who manages a sprawling, international network of businesses, has thus 
far refused to put his businesses into a blind trust the way his predecessors 
in the nation’s highest office have traditionally done. Instead he has said his 
businesses will be run by his own adult children.


Donald Trump Jr, Trump’s eldest child, has insisted that Trump’s holdings 
would go into a trust managed by him and his siblings Eric and Ivanka Trump.

“We’re not going to be involved in government,” Trump Jr told ABC’s George 
Stephanopoulos in September on Good Morning America. “He wants nothing to do 
with [the company]. He wants to fix this country.”
Candace Smith (@CandaceSmith_) 
.@realDonaldTrump <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump> 3 eldest children + 
son-in-law are on his Presidential Transition Team Executive Committee:
pic.twitter.com/SOXizI8rz7 <https://t.co/SOXizI8rz7>
 <https://twitter.com/CandaceSmith_/status/797159186572464128> November 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/CandaceSmith_/status/797159186572464128> 
Donald Jr, Eric and Ivanka Trump are all on the president-elect’s transition 
team executive committee, per ABC’s Candace Smith, as is Trump’s son-in-law 
Jared Kushner.

But according to regulators who have overseen potential conflicts of interests 
under two former presidents, Trump’s arrangements were unprecedented and 
present a host of issues.

This is in no way a blind trust, said Karl Sandstrom, former chairman of the 
Federal Election Commission (FEC), the regulatory body that oversees campaign 
finance, under Bill Clinton and George W Bush. “A blind trust is not anywhere 
near the same. You don’t still have access to the decision being made. That’s 
why you put assets in and don’t just have someone else manage the company,” he 
said. Trump’s assets will instead apparently remain united under his company, 
and operated under his name even if he is not directly in charge.

“Reagan spent some time in the private sector but he certainly wasn’t a CEO,” 
said Robert Lenhard, also a former FEC chair, appointed by George W Bush. “He 
wasn’t operating a set of companies like Trump is. Most of our presidents have 
come out of political careers – Eisenhower’s time out of office was mostly a 
hiatus between the military and the presidency.”

Trump owns hotels in Chicago, New York City, Las Vegas, Waikiki and, most 
recently, in Washington DC, just down Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House. 
As with any hotel chain, the Trump Organization will oversee power, water, 
maintenance, security, billing and any number of other logistical details that 
will now essentially be negotiated between the provider and the family of the 
president.


Abroad, Trump holds properties in Istanbul, where his election was met with 
satisfaction by that country’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, as well as 
Mumbai, Vancouver and Seoul, among many others. With Trump’s children running 
his businesses, there is also the matter of their bearing his name, and thus 
the name of the president, anywhere in the world when they arrive to negotiate 
leases and construction deals.

From his financial filings, the future US leader also appears to be a 
shareholder or beneficiary of several entities headquartered abroad, among them 
Excel Venture LLC in the French West Indies, and Caribusiness Investments SRL, 
based in the Dominican Republic. How Trump’s holdings in those countries will 
affect US relations with them remains to be seen; both are notable for their 
use in finance to avoid taxes. Trump has promised to cut the rate for 
repatriating cash into the US as an incentive for others who, like him, keep 
taxable funds overseas.


In Azerbaijan, Trump has a real estate project he said was “on hold” during 
the presidential campaign. His partner in the endeavor wasAnar Mammadov 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/06/04/tale-of-donald-trump-and-partner-in-azerbaijan-real-estate-project/>
, son of the Iranian transportation minister, Ziya Mammadov, who was accused in 
diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks in 2010 of laundering money.

In Russia, where Trump’s election has been met with congratulations by 
President Vladimir Putin, Trump worked closely with the Russian-born American 
financier Felix H Sater, managing director of the New York-based firm Bayrock 
LLC. Sater and Bayrock founder Tevfik Arif worked closely with Trump and others 
in his organization. In a deposition, Trump said that he had discussed 
“numerous deals all over the world” with Arif, and that Arif had brought 
potential Russian investors to meet Trump at his office, according toa report 
in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/06/us/politics/donald-trump-soho-settlement.html?_r=0>
.

Bayrock was examined closely during a lawsuit filed by its former finance 
director, Jody Kriss; the Times said the firm had “occasionally received 
unexplained infusions of cash from accounts in Kazakhstan and Russia”.

Also in Russia, there are Trump’s ties to Paul Manafort, who ran his campaign 
from March to August. Manafort, who helped to install Putin ally Viktor 
Yanukovych as president in Ukraine, wasnamed in a corruption investigation 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-trump-adviser-manafort-revived-his-career--and-business-fortunes--in-ukraine/2016/08/18/8bcfb144-648f-11e6-be4e-23fc4d4d12b4_story.html?hpid=hp_rhp-top-table-main_pp-manafort-1010am%3Ahomepage%2Fstory&tid=a_inl>
 by a Ukrainian authority working with the FBI.

Then there is the matter of the president-elect’s stock portfolio. Trump has 
holdings in Dakota Access pipeline company Energy Transfer Partners. In his 
first 100 days, Trump has pledged to remove every impediment to the pipeline, 
which has been the subject of protests violently suppressed by police in North 
Dakota. He also owns stock in Facebook, whose CEO Mark Zuckerberg posted that 
he was “feeling hopeful 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10103245877492281&set=a.529237706231.2034669.4&type=3&theater>
” on Wednesday, and in Bank of America – he has promised to deregulate the 
banking industry.



Michael Cohen, Trump’s attorney, defended Trump’s post-election business plans 
on Thursday. Speaking of Trump’s family, he said: “They’re really intelligent. 
They’re really qualified. That’s why he really didn’t run in 2012, because they 
were younger by four years,” he told CNN.

While conflicts of interest may cause scandals for the president, they are 
unlikely to add to hislong list of legal woes. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-lawsuits-university-washington-dc-hotel>
 In 1982 the supreme court gave Richard Nixon “absolute immunity” to 
prosecution for most kinds of crimes committed while in office, setting a 
precedent for administrations to come. “The president’s absolute immunity is a 
functionally mandated incident of his unique office, rooted in the 
constitutional tradition of the separation of powers and supported by the 
Nation’s history,” wrote Justice Lewis Franklin Powell in the majority opinion, 
adding that “diversion of his energies by concern with private lawsuits would 
raise unique risks to the effective functioning of government”.

As checks on that immunity, Powell wrote, “There remains the constitutional 
remedy of impeachment, as well as the deterrent effects of constant scrutiny by 
the press and vigilant oversight by Congress. Other incentives to avoid 
misconduct may include a desire to earn re-election, the need to maintain 
prestige as an element of Presidential influence, and a President’s traditional 
concern for his historical stature.”






Those checks and balances are likely to be tested when the business 
mogul-turned-president takes office. Public officials below the president and 
vice-president are subject to conflict of interest rules. “The standards of 
conduct are government-wide with respect to conflicts of interest, and they are 
to be found in the code of federal regulations, and whether those basic rules 
are going to apply throughout from the top down,” Sandstrom said. “How do you 
enforce rules on others that you don’t abide?”
 