
President-elect Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
has disavowed the white nationalist movement which dubs itself the “alt-right” 
and which rallied around his candidacy, but vigorously defended his former 
campaign chairman and newly appointed White House chief strategist, Stephen 
Bannon, a man accused of fanning the flames of white supremacy.

“I don’t want to energize the group, and I disavow the group,” Trump said at a 
meeting with a group of New York Times journalists, in response to a question 
from the newspaper’s executive editor, Dean Baquet.

“And if they are energized I want to look into it and find out why,” Trump 
said.
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/live/trump-at-the-new-york-times-the-tweets/?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=b-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&media=>
Stephen Bannon and the alt-right in the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/stephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
The selection of Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
, the executive chairman of the far-right website Breitbart News, deepened the 
fears of liberal activists that the Trump administration would embolden and 
enable antisemites, racists and misogynists of the so-called “alt-right”.

“I’ve known Steve Bannon <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/stephen-bannon> 
a long time. If I thought he was a racist or alt-right or any of the things, 
the terms we could use, I wouldn’t even think about hiring him,” said Trump on 
Tuesday, according to journalists in attendance.

“Breitbart is just a publication. They cover stories like you cover stories. 
They are certainly a much more conservative paper, to put it mildly, than the 
New York Times. But Breitbart really is a news organization that has become 
quite successful. It’s got readers, and it does cover subjects on the right, 
but it covers subjects on the left also. It’s a pretty big thing,” said Trump,
according to a tweet from Times political reporter 
<https://twitter.com/grynbaum/status/801133301813702657> Michael Grynbaum. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-steve-bannon-alt-right-white-nationalist-disavow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1d8ec39b6f6368dbe331c3e45caacbd8f762003%2F0_19_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20disavows%20the%20white%20nationalist%20'alt-right'%20but%20defends%20Steve%20Bannon%20hire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-steve-bannon-alt-right-white-nationalist-disavow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20disavows%20the%20white%20nationalist%20%27alt-right%27%20but%20defends%20Steve%20Bannon%20hire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-steve-bannon-alt-right-white-nationalist-disavow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1d8ec39b6f6368dbe331c3e45caacbd8f762003%2F0_19_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Demonstrators in New York protest Trump’s appointment of Steve Bannon, 
executive chairman of the far-right website Breitbart News, as his chief 
strategist. Photograph: Erik M / Pacific/Barcroft Images 
New York Times journalists also quizzed Trump on his commitment to free 
speech, the first amendment of the constitution. “I think you’ll be happy,” he 
replied.

The meeting, billed as a lunchtime discussion between New York Times 
journalists and five members of the Trump campaign including the 
president-elect, was contentious from its inception.

Hours before the meeting was scheduled to start, the president-elect abruptly 
canceled it,claiming on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801021596228091905> that the 
newspaper, which he called “failing” and “not nice”, had changed the “terms and 
conditions” of the meeting. The newspaper confirmed the meeting was back on 
just hours later.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
I cancelled today's meeting with the failing @nytimes 
<https://twitter.com/nytimes> when the terms and conditions of the meeting were 
changed at the last moment. Not nice
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801021596228091905> November 22, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801021596228091905> 
The on-the-record meeting was attended by 23 reporters, editors and columnists 
and four members of Trump’s campaign team. It covered topics ranging from what 
Trump perceives as the media’s “unfair” treatment of him, to the roles his 
children and business will play in his administration, to Syria and climate 
change.

Trump, who tweeted in 2012 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en> that 
global warming was a hoax “created by and for the Chinese” in order to harm US 
business, acknowledged on Tuesday that climate change had “some” connection to 
human activity.

“I think there is some connectivity. Some, something. It depends on how much,” 
he said, according to tweets from reporters. He also added he was concerned 
about climate change mitigation and “how much it will cost our companies”.

Paris climate deal: Trump says he now has an 'open mind' about accord
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-paris-climate-deal-change-open-mind>
When asked if Trump plans to withdraw from international climate deals, such 
as the Paris accord, he replied: “I’m looking at it very closely. I have an 
open mind to it.”

Trump also altered his stance on his former rival Hillary Clinton. Despite 
having regularly referred to Clinton as a criminal who deserved jail time 
during his campaign, a notion echoed by supporters’ chants of “lock her up” 
during his rallies, Trump confirmed hedoes not intend to jail Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-investigation-jail-dropped>
 for her use of a private email server during her time as secretary of state.

“My inclination would be for whatever power I have on the matter is to say 
let’s go forward. This has been looked at for so long, ad nauseum,” said the 
president-elect.


Locking up Clinton “would be very, very divisive for the country”, said Trump, 
according to reporters in attendance.

Trump was also quizzed by editors and reporters about his own conflicts of 
interest with his family’s business, a large real estate company.

“The law’s totally on my side, the president can’t have a conflict of 
interest,” said Trump,according to political reporter Maggie Haberman 
<https://twitter.com/maggieNYT/status/801129587581325313>.

“In theory I could run my business perfectly and then run the country 
perfectly. There’s never been a case like this,” said Trump, noting that he is 
delegating the day-to-day running to his children in order to focus on the 
presidency.
 