


Donald Trump’s transition to the White House appeared to be in disarray on 
Tuesday after the abrupt departure of a top national security adviser and amid 
continuing questions over the role of his three children and son-in-law.

Former Republican congressman Mike Rogers stepped down from the 
president-elect’s transition team without explanation, but one report 
attributed it to a “Stalinesque purge”.

Late on Tuesday, Trump attempted to paint a less chaotic picture, tweeting 
that the transition process was “very organized”. He also wrote that only he 
knew who “the finalists” were – seemingly an attempt to liken the process to 
his reality TV show The Apprentice.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Very organized process taking place as I decide on Cabinet and many other 
positions. I am the only one who knows who the finalists are!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/798721142525665280> November 16, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/798721142525665280> 
A week after his election, Trump and vice-president-elect Mike Pence were 
huddled at Trump Tower in New York to work on key appointments as the US Senate 
was due to resume business in a still shellshocked Washington.

Rogers chaired the House intelligence committee and is a former army officer 
and FBI special agent. He said he was proud of the work his team had done to 
produce policy and personnel guidance “on the complex national security 
challenges facing our great country”.

Loyalists and rivals tipped for powerful roles in Trump's cabinet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/loyalists-and-rivals-tipped-for-powerful-roles-in-trump-cabinet>
The departure offered the latest clue that the transition is going to be every 
bit as bumpy as feared. Last week the president-electditched the head of the 
team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/chris-christie-dropped-trump-transition-team>
, New Jersey governor Chris Christie, who is mired in political scandal, and 
replaced him with Pence.

NBC News quoted a source as saying Rogers was the victim of a “Stalinesque 
purge” of people close to Christie. “Two sources close to the situation 
described an atmosphere of sniping and backbiting as Trump loyalists position 
themselves for key jobs,” the network reported.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&media=>
Stephen Bannon and the alt-right in the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/stephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
Some Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> who 
previously ostracised Trump are returning to the fold but not always with 
success. Eliot Cohen, a senior state department official under George W Bush, 
launched a stinging attack on the transition effort. He tweeted:


“After exchange [with] Trump transition team, changed my recommendation: stay 
away. They’re angry, arrogant, screaming ‘you LOST!’ Will be ugly.”

A few days ago, Cohen had encouraged the suspicious Republican foreign policy 
establishment to rally around the president-elect.

Adding to the sense of chaos, both the state department and Pentagon said they 
were yet to hear from the incoming administration, while rumours swirled over 
whether Trump’s children – Donald Jr, Eric and Ivanka, and her husband Jared 
Kushner – would seek top security clearances. Kushner was said to have been 
instrumental in the departures of Christie and Rogers.

Barack Obama told reporters at the White House on Monday that he believed 
Trump was a pragmatist, not an ideologue, and reiterated his commitment to a 
smooth handover. But the Associated Press reported that coordination between 
Trump’s transition team and White House staff is on hold until Trump’s team 
signs a memorandum of understanding.

Speculation over cabinet appointments intensified on Tuesday. Ben Carson, a 
retired neurosurgeon and former Republican candidate for president tipped to be 
health secretary, has dropped out of the running. “I want to have the freedom 
to work on many issues and not be pigeonholed into one particular area,” 
Carson, who is Trump’s most prominent African American supporter,told the 
Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/11/15/ben-carson-unlikely-to-serve-in-trumps-cabinet/>
.

The New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/16/us/politics/donald-trump-cabinet-rudy-giuliani.html?smid=tw-share>
 reported that former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani, an old friend of Trump, is 
the frontrunner for the prize job of secretary of state. He has no foreign 
policy experience beyond strong advocacy for the war on terror following the 11 
September 2001 terror attacks, which gave him global prominence.

Samantha Bee on Trump's cabinet list: 'Deplorables, zealots and extremists'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/15/samantha-bee-donald-trump-cabinet-full-frontal>
But the political action committee Correct the Record argued that Giuliani, 
72, had a“long history of business ties to enemies of America” 
<http://correctrecord.org/rudy-giulianis-business-ties-to-enemies-of-the-united-states-disqualify-him-for-secretary-of-state/>
. He was reportedly paid to advocate on behalf of an Iranian dissident group 
while it was listed by the state department as a foreign terrorist organisation 
and worked for a law firm whose clients included Saddam Hussein, terrorist Abu 
Nidal and an oil company controlled by the then Venezuelan president, Hugo 
Chávez. All these are potential red flags if he goes before the Senate for 
confirmation.

Trump’s children will take over the running of his business while he is in the 
White House, raising the prospect of a conflict of interest. Responding to 
claims that they are already exploiting his new status for commercial ends, the 
former White House press secretaryAri Fleischer 
<https://twitter.com/AriFleischer> tweeted: “Free advice: Stop it. Don’t do 
this. The presidency is bigger than the family business. Just stop it.”


Trump, a tycoon, reality TV star and political novice, has a long history of 
pitting rivals against one another, both in business and during his election 
campaign. He has appointed Steve Bannon as chief strategist andReince Priebus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/reince-priebus> as chief of staff, an 
unprecedented arrangement that threatens to create competing centers of power.


The inclusion of Bannon, executive chairman of the far-right Breitbart News, 
provoked a furiousbacklash from progressives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
. The House Democratic leader, Nancy Pelosi, said: “There must be no 
sugarcoating the reality that a white nationalist has been named chief 
strategist for the Trump administration.”

Departing US Senate minority leader Harry Reid on Tuesday called on the 
president to rescind Bannon’s appointment, which he said has only “deepened” 
the country’s divisions since the election.

“By placing a champion of white supremacists a step away from the Oval Office, 
what message does Trump send to the young girl who woke up Wednesday morning in 
Rhode Island afraid to be a woman of color in America?” Reid said, speaking on 
the Senate floor.

Reid had previously lashed out at the businessman in a powerful statement last 
week that referred to the president-elect as “a sexual predator who lost the 
popular vote and fueled his campaign with bigotry and hate”.

In response to his criticism, Kellyanne Conway, Trump’s former campaign 
manager and current transition team adviser,appeared to threaten legal action 
against Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/kellyanne-conway-harry-reid-legal-threat>
 and warned that the Democrat should be “very careful” in his criticism of the 
president-elect.


But on Tuesday Paul Ryan, the House speaker who is attempting to overcome past 
disagreements with Trump, refused to condemn the appointment. “The president is 
going to be judged on his results,” he told reporters. “[Bannon] is a person 
who helped him win an incredible victory and an incredible campaign.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpaul-ryan-gop-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Ryan%3A%20GOP%20working%20'hand-in-glove'%20with%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpaul-ryan-gop-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Ryan%3A%20GOP%20working%20%27hand-in-glove%27%20with%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpaul-ryan-gop-donald-trump-video&media=>
Paul Ryan: GOP working ‘hand-in-glove’ with Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/paul-ryan-gop-donald-trump-video>
Ryan promised that Trump and a unified Republican Congress would mean that “a 
better way, better days lie ahead for our country”. He pledged to work “hand in 
glove” with the incoming administration.

The House speaker was on course to be re-elected by Republicans on Tuesday 
afternoon but House Democrats postponed leadership elections that had been 
scheduled for Thursday until 30 November amid signs of discontent with Pelosi.

Ongoing vote counts show Democrat Hillary Clinton pulling away from Trump in 
the popular vote, although he won the electoral college vote. Trump tweeted on 
Tuesday: “If the election were based on total popular vote I would have 
campaigned in NY, Florida and California and won even bigger and more easily.”

Despite previously labelling the electoral college a “disaster”, he tweeted 
that it was “actually genius in that it brings all states, including the 
smaller ones, into play. Campaigning is much different!”

Trump’s inauguration will take place in Washington on 20 January. 

Additional reporting by Lauren Gambino
 