
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will change 
Republican party rules to make the nomination process more uniform if he 
becomes the GOP presidential candidate, Ben Carson said on Thursday.

In response to a question from the Guardian, Carson – once a rival to Trump in 
the Republican race and now one of the billionaire’s most high-profile backers 
– said he thought Trump was committed to changing the rules of the Republican 
party so they would be “consistent across the country and not this way here and 
that way there”.

He added: “The only reason [for the current system] is if you wanted to 
manipulate the system.”

A source inside the briefing confirmed that Carson made similar remarks inside 
the room.

Carson, who was appearing as a surrogate for Trump at the RNC’s spring meeting 
in Hollywood, Florida, condemned the current system of nominating a Republican 
nominee as “corrupt”.

Trump has repeatedly bashed the delegate nominating processes in a number of 
states, such as Colorado and Wyoming, as rigged. He has also complained about a 
delegate selection process that has meant there have been relatively few 
delegates loyal to him in several states that he has won.

Trump turns to one of the few backroom dealers with success at a contested 
convention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/08/donald-trump-delegate-count-open-convention-paul-manafort>
The resulting issues with delegate selection prompted a shakeup in the 
Republican frontrunner’s campaign in recent weeks, with veteran operative Paul 
Manafort taking a much larger role and sidelining Trump’s longtime campaign 
manager Corey Lewandowski inthe midst of conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/19/donald-trump-campaign-rift-delegate-panic-paul-manafort>
 within the campaign.

By standardizing the rules of the Republican presidential primary, it would 
make the party’s system far more like that of the Democrats, where delegates 
are awarded proportionately by congressional district in every state. Currently,
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> have an array of 
rules in each state ranging from winner-take-all to absolutely proportional.
 