
Donald Trump’s golf resort in Aberdeenshire has admitted it failed to comply 
with strict data protection laws after not registering with the UK’s privacy 
watchdog, the Guardian can reveal.

The Information Commissioner’s Office contacted staff at the £30m resort near 
Aberdeen,Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, after it confirmed 
it was not registered under the Data Protection Act despite operating an 
extensive CCTV system and handling data on thousands of golfers and guests, its 
staff and suppliers.

The resort insisted the failure was a “clerical error”, but the ICO is now 
being urged to launch a full investigation by residents, opposition politicians 
at Holyrood, and the film-maker Anthony Baxter, who directed You’ve Been 
Trumped. They claim Trump’s history of conflicts with his opponents raises 
misgivings about the resort’s failure to comply with the legal requirement to 
register.

The MSP Liam McArthur, justice spokesman for the Scottish Liberal Democrats, 
said: “There is a strong case for the ICO to look into how the Trump 
organisation stored and used the data that it holds.

“This is an organisation which has been accused of bullying local people who 
disagree with it, and these substantive concerns cannot be brushed under the 
carpet. The Trump organisation failed to meet its data obligations for years. 
We need to know how data was collected, stored and used during this period.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ftrump-scottish-golf-resort-admits-breaching-data-protection-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa12be8297bd88829e4b3b61008e2a259f6e62f56%2F753_312_5007_3004%2F5007.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20golf%20resort%20in%20Scotland%20admits%20breach%20of%20data%20protection%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ftrump-scottish-golf-resort-admits-breaching-data-protection-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20golf%20resort%20in%20Scotland%20admits%20breach%20of%20data%20protection%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ftrump-scottish-golf-resort-admits-breaching-data-protection-law%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa12be8297bd88829e4b3b61008e2a259f6e62f56%2F753_312_5007_3004%2F5007.jpg>
 The club house and course of Donald Trump’s Menie golf course. Photograph: 
Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
The property tycoon, running as the Republican candidate for US president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/11/donald-trump-calls-barack-obama-the-founder-of-isis>
, owns a boutique hotel at the resort, employs 95 people and has spent more 
than £30m on construction and golfing contractors building the course, its 
clubhouse and converting the hotel since he bought it in 2006.

Trump International Golf Course Scotland also says tens of thousands of people 
have played golf there since 2012, using its restaurant and club house. The 
company is seeking permissionto build 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/23/donald-trump-faces-wall-of-opposition-as-he-returns-to-scotland>
 850 homes and 1,900 holiday flats on the estate.

Donald Trump faces wall of opposition as he returns to Scotland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/23/donald-trump-faces-wall-of-opposition-as-he-returns-to-scotland>
The ICO, which can fine companies up to £500,000 for data protection breaches, 
told the Guardian last week it had no record of the resort being registered as 
a data holder. The only alternative route was to register through a third 
party, but it had no information that the company had done so.

Businesses that store or use confidential personal data, including bank 
records, credit card details and mobile phone numbers must register with the 
ICO, unless they qualify for an exemption.

“The Data Protection Act requires every organisation that processes personal 
information to register with the ICO, unless it is exempt. Failure to do so is 
a criminal offence,” the commissioner’s office said last week. “We’ll be 
writing to the company, asking it to clarify how it is registered.”

The ICO said on Thursday morning it had received a valid registration for 
Trump International Golf Course Scotland and was not minded to investigate 
further saying this would “not be proportionate”. Smaller companies have been 
prosecuted in the past for failing to register under the DPA.

The ICO said: “An organisation must still comply with the rest of the Data 
Protection Act. If people feel an organisation is not handling their 
information in line with the law, they can complain to the ICO, irrespective of 
whether that organisation is registered.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ftrump-scottish-golf-resort-admits-breaching-data-protection-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c57cdb42a8f484b364f263c2a646aeaf26c656b%2F0_88_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20golf%20resort%20in%20Scotland%20admits%20breach%20of%20data%20protection%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ftrump-scottish-golf-resort-admits-breaching-data-protection-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20golf%20resort%20in%20Scotland%20admits%20breach%20of%20data%20protection%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ftrump-scottish-golf-resort-admits-breaching-data-protection-law%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c57cdb42a8f484b364f263c2a646aeaf26c656b%2F0_88_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 A CCTV camera at Donald Trump’s golf resort in Scotland points directly down a 
public access road, leading to the homes of two of his opponents. Photograph: 
Severin Carrell for the Guardian 
The golf course also risks censure for failing to display prominent signs 
warning guests, golfers, staff and general public that CCTV cameras were in use 
– a requirement under the ICO’s code of conduct. “The public expect CCTV to be 
used responsibly with proper safeguards in place,” the ICO said last week.

The Guardian has identified nine visible CCTV cameras at the resort, including 
two recording the vehicles driving through its main entrance, three at the main 
club house and one recording outside the hotel. Of three cameras visible in its 
maintenance compound, one points directly at the access road to the home of 
David Milne, one of Trump’s fiercest critics, who lives in a former coastguard 
station overlooking the course, and his neighbour Susie Munro, another 
opponent. As of last week, there was no visible sign warning visitors that CCTV 
was being used.

Trump’s critics fear the resort could use its CCTV systems to track their and 
guests’ movements, even though Scotland’s robust right to roam law entitles the 
public have a legal right to walk across the resort. Trump’s staff vigorously 
denied using CCTV covertly.

In a statement responding to questions from the Guardian about its use of CCTV 
cameras and storage of confidential data, Trump International Golf Course 
Scotland said: “We take the security of our employees and guests’ personal data 
very seriously and comply with all aspects of the Data Protection Act. A 
clerical oversight has just been brought to our attention which is now being 
rectified.”


Asked about allegations that CCTV was used to track legitimate activity by the 
public on or next to the course, the company said: “As a public facility open 
to all, Trump International has CCTV cameras located at its entrance and around 
the public buildings within the estate, for the safety and security of its 
members, guests and staff.

“The company has no need for cameras outwith those areas and has never had any 
cause to supply CCTV footage in any criminal proceedings. No other CCTV 
activity has ever taken place in or around the Trump estate and the allegation 
of intrusive surveillance of neighbouring properties is unfounded and 
categorically untrue.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ftrump-scottish-golf-resort-admits-breaching-data-protection-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F777b91d6dfbc2787049b56cced82ca97e7388eee%2F636_400_2955_1773%2F2955.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20golf%20resort%20in%20Scotland%20admits%20breach%20of%20data%20protection%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ftrump-scottish-golf-resort-admits-breaching-data-protection-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20golf%20resort%20in%20Scotland%20admits%20breach%20of%20data%20protection%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ftrump-scottish-golf-resort-admits-breaching-data-protection-law%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F777b91d6dfbc2787049b56cced82ca97e7388eee%2F636_400_2955_1773%2F2955.jpg>
 David Milne lives in an old coast guard station near Trump’s Aberdeenshire 
golf course. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Milne and Baxter have demanded that the course release any data it holds on 
them, and protested about the company’s failure to register, despite buying the 
Menie estate 10 years ago andopening the 18-hole golf course in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jul/10/donald-trump-scotland-golf-course>
.

Trump’s opponents and neighbours claim security staff or managers have 
repeatedly challenged them on the course, appearing close to where they are 
walking or monitoring them visiting neighbours next to the resort by driving 
close to its boundary.

Baxter was arrested with a colleague for breach of the peace next to Trump’s 
resort after staff accused them of filming without permission while they were 
making a documentary on the tycoon’s quest to build the resort. Their treatment 
by the police, including being thrown against a car, was featured in the film.

A rambler called Rohan Beyts, a retired social worker active in the Tripping 
Up Trump campaign group, wascharged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/12/film-makers-arrested-donald-trump-scottish-golf-resort>
 under the Civic Government (Scotland) Act for allegedly urinating in the dunes 
while she was out walking on the course with a fellow campaigner, Sue Edwards, 
in April.

Beyts was told by police that she had been filmed by Trump staff 
<https://theferret.scot/woman-charged-peeing-trump-golf-course/> using their 
mobile phones ducking down behind a dune. As she and Edwards walked off the 
course, a photographer believed to work for a local paper jumped out of a car 
and photographed them.

Beyts said prosecutors advised her in a statutory warning letter that the 
unproven charges would be put on record. She has refused to admit the charges 
and challenged the decision to issue a warning letter. “I find it very 
uncomfortable,” she said last week. “We always thought we were being watched. 
When they were building the course, every time we set foot on it [there were] 
security guards there instantly.”

Milne said the resort’s failure to register under the DPA was “symptomatic of 
the [resort’s] entire approach to UK legislation”. It had repeatedly built on 
the course without getting planning permission, only applying after buildings, 
walls or two flagpoles were in place.

“An ICO investigation is required because of the track record of the 
organisation, because of the way it has harassed and attempted to intimidate 
both those who live on or near the estate and those who walk on to it,” Milne 
said. “The ICO needs to investigate because it has done so elsewhere, when 
similar things have happened. It should be one law for all.”

Baxter, who was not prosecuted for allegedly threatening Trump staff during 
his filming – a charge he disputed – said he had made a subject access request 
under the Data Protection Act asking for all the information the company holds 
on him.

“I have on a number of occasions filmed around and near the Trump links 
property and am concerned that my image may have been captured on numerous 
occasions and I am concerned also how these images are being stored and used,” 
he said.


 * This article was amended on 11 August to replace a picture showing Trump’s 
other golf course in Scotland.  