
2.25am BST 02:25  <> 

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, apparently 
displeased with the Washington Post’s publication of Trump Revealed: An 
American Journey of Ambition, Ego, Money, and Power - out tomorrow!
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
The @WashingtonPost <https://twitter.com/washingtonpost> quickly put together 
a hit job book on me- comprised of copies of some of their inaccurate stories. 
Don't buy, boring!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/767889674530594816> August 23, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/767889674530594816> 
For the record, Trump gave more than 20 hours of interviews to the journalists 
who wrote the book.

Updated at 2.26am BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a%23block-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a%23block-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a%23block-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a%23block-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a%23block-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a%23block-57bba5fae4b0b7e64900228a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.05am BST 02:05  <> 

Sam Levin

Sheldon Adelson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sheldon-adelson>, the 
Nevada casino mogul and conservative mega-donor, is leading a campaign against 
pro-Palestine groups on US college campuses and has funded posters that accuse 
individual students of supporting terrorism and promoting “Jew Hatred”.

The multimillion-dollar effort, which has launched 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/la-me-uc-israel-palestinian-adv-snap-story.html> 
at six campuses in California, is targeting the boycott, divestment and 
sanctions (BDS) movement that has become increasingly popular among American 
university students protesting the Israeli government.

At the University of California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, Los Angeles (UCLA), recent 
Adelson-funded posters named 16 students and professors, saying they “have 
allied themselves with Palestinian terrorists to perpetuate BDS and Jew Hatred 
on this campus”. It further claimed BDS was a “Hamas-inspired genocidal 
campaign to destroy Israel”.

Robert Gardner, a 25-year-old UCLA senior, saw his name on one of the posters 
outside a grocery market. “I was really shocked and felt really disturbed,” he 
said.

“They are trying to cast us as antisemitic, that we are somehow a 
discriminatory group,” said the political science student, who is a member of 
the college’s Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) organization. “That is a 
completely spurious accusation. One of our core principles is anti-oppression 
and anti-racism.”

Tensions surrounding Israel-Palestine campus activism have escalated in recent 
years, but SJP leaders said the posters identifying specific students were 
particularly aggressive and had led some of them to face online harassment and 
death threats.

GOP mega-donor funds group calling pro-Palestine US students 'Jew haters'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/22/sheldon-adelson-palestine-jew-haters-colleges-campuses>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c%23block-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c%23block-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c%23block-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c%23block-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c%23block-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c%23block-57bba159e4b0b7e64900227c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.29am BST 01:29  <> 

Speaking on Bill O’Reilly’s program on Fox News, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> again declined to elaborate 
on his now-obscure position on immigration, telling the host that “I just want 
to follow the law” and dismissing reports from multiple outlets that detailed 
remarks he made to a Latino organization over the weekend in which he implied 
support for a path to legal status for undocumented immigrants.

“I just want to follow the law,” Trump said. “What I’m doing is following the 
law. You know, this was put out - we had a great meeting over the weekend with 
Hispanics and leaders of the Hispanic community, and we discussed a lot of 
different things. And this was one of the many things that was discussed.”

“And one of the groups, one of the media outlets that have gotten everything 
about me wrong, including the fact that I would never run and the reporter 
actually said he would give up his salary if he did. I don’t think I have ever 
held him to that but one of these media outlets said that they had word from 
one of the people. It turned out to be false. In fact, the people all denied 
it, Bill, and I think you probably have seen that.”

When asked again for specifics, Trump focused on deporting criminals, saying 
that undocumented immigrants who haven’t broken laws while in the country will 
go through “a process.”

“We are going to obey the existing laws. now the existing laws are very 
strong. The existing laws, the first thing we are going to do if and when I 
win, is we are going to get rid of all of the bad ones. We have gang members, 
we have killers, we have a lot of bad people that have to get out of this 
country. We are going to get them out. And the police know who they are - they 
are known by law enforcement who they are, we don’t do anything. They go around 
killing people and hurting people, and they are going to be out of this country 
so fast your head will spin. We have existing laws that will allow you to do 
that.”

“As far as everybody else, we are going to go through the process. What people 
don’t know is Obama got tremendous numbers of people out of the country. Bush, 
the same thing. Lots of people were brought out of the country with the 
existing laws. Well, I’m going to do the same thing and I just said that. At 
the same time, we want to do it in a very humane, we want to do it in a very 
humane manner.”

Updated at 1.36am BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b%23block-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b%23block-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b%23block-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b%23block-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b%23block-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b%23block-57bb9896e4b047b85f602a9b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.19am BST 01:19  <> 

Ben Jacobs

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> veered off the 
teleprompter on Monday night to claim that “inner cities run by the Democrats” 
were more dangerous than countries such as Iraq and Afghanistan.
 Donald Trump Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
The Republican nominee was meant to be delivering a scripted speech calling for
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> be 
investigated by a special prosecutor. However, once again he veered off message 
in an attempt to appeal to minority voters in apocalyptic terms.

“You can go to war zones in countries that we are fighting and it is safer 
than living in some of our inner cities that are run by theDemocrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats>,” Trump said. The Republican 
nominee also promised if elected, “we’ll get rid of the crime. You’ll be able 
to walk down the street without getting shot. Now, you walk down the street, 
you get shot.”

Trump has made increased appeals for support from African Americans in recent 
days. Despite that, arecent NBC/Wall Street Journal poll 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/first-read/nbc-wsj-poll-clinton-jumps-nine-point-lead-over-trump-n623131>
 showed Trump receiving the support of only 1% of African American voters, a 
historically low total. The poll did have a margin of error of plus or minus 
3.5%. The Republican nominee has repeatedly argued that African American voters 
should support him in the past week,saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/what-do-you-have-to-lose-donald-trump-appeals-for-black-vote>
: “What have you got to lose?” In contrast, the New York real estate developer 
has railed against what he called “the bigotry of Hillary Clinton, who sees 
people of color only as votes and not as human beings worthy of a better 
future”.

The intended focus of the Republican nominee’s message on Monday was his call 
for a special prosecutor to investigate Clinton’s leadership of the state 
department. Trump claimed that the FBI and Department of Justice could not be 
trusted to investigate “Hillary Clinton’s crimes”. The FBI in Julydecided not 
to pursue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/05/fbi-no-charges-hillary-clinton-email-investigation>
 criminal charges against Clinton for her use of an unsecured private email 
server while secretary of state. However, in doing so, FBI Director James Comey 
rebuked Clinton for the “extremely careless” way in which she handled her 
emails.

In the speech, Trump also said he was “fighting for peaceful regime change in 
our country” and warned gravely of potential election fraud. “You got to go out 
and watch. You know what I’m talking about.” Trumphas long made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/13/trump-recruits-election-observers-voter-intimidation-fears>
 unsubstantiated claims about “a rigged election” and warned of in-person voter 
fraud recently at a campaign stop in Pennsylvania. However, anexhaustive 
investigation 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/08/06/a-comprehensive-investigation-of-voter-impersonation-finds-31-credible-incidents-out-of-one-billion-ballots-cast/>
 of in-person voter fraud in the United States found only 31 cases since 2000 
out of more than 1bn ballots cast.

Trump spoke in the blue collar city of Akron, Ohio. The Buckeye State has 18 
electoral votes, and no Republican has ever won the White House without winning 
Ohio. According todata complied by Real Clear Politics, 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/oh/ohio_trump_vs_clinton-5634.html#polls>
 Clinton has not trailed in a single statewide poll of Ohio since April. 
However, despite these sagging poll numbers and cryptic warnings about election 
fraud, Trump was still confident of victory: “I just get the feeling that we’re 
going to win in a landslide.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92%23block-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92%23block-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92%23block-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92%23block-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92%23block-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92%23block-57bb9628e4b047b85f602a92&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.15am BST 01:15  <> 

The Democratic party’s nominee for governor in West Virginia declared today 
that he can’t support his party’s presidential nominee, citing her positions on 
coal mining.

“I cannot be a supporter of Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>,” billionaire coal 
magnate Jim Justice told West Virginia MetroNews’s radio show Talkline. “The 
reason I can’t be is her position on coal is diametrically, completely wrong in 
many, many different ways.”

In May, Clinton ad-libbed remarks declaring that, if elected, “we’re going to 
put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334%23block-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334%23block-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334%23block-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334%23block-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334%23block-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334%23block-57bb8f89e4b0377cf1119334&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.34am BST 00:34  <> 

Speaking to an audience in Akron, Ohio, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> encouraged his followers to 
survey polling places during the general election - “you know what I’m talking 
about, right?”

“You’ve gotta get everyone of your friends,” Trump said. “You’ve gotta get 
everyone of your family. You’ve gotta get everybody to go out and watch and go 
out and vote. And when I say watch, you know what I’m talking about, right? You 
know what I’m talking about. I think you gotta go out and you gotta watch.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327%23block-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327%23block-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327%23block-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327%23block-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327%23block-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327%23block-57bb8bc1e4b0377cf1119327&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.30am BST 00:30  <> 

David Smith

Bill Clinton will quit the board of his charitable foundation but not disband 
it ifHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> wins 
the US presidency, he said on Monday, as Republicans pressed allegations of a 
conflict of interest.


The announcement came as newly disclosed emails revealed how Huma Abedin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/06/hillary-clinton-huma-abedin-marriage-politics>
 coordinated a meeting for a Bahraini prince with officials at the Clinton 
Foundation during Hillary Clinton’s tenure as secretary of state.
 Former president Bill Clinton, founder of the Clinton Foundation. Photograph: 
Earl Gibson III/WireImage 
Amid intensifying political controversy, Bill Clinton told foundation staff 
last week that it will stop accepting foreign or corporate donations in the 
event of his wife reaching the White House.In a blog post 
<https://www.clintonfoundation.org/blog/2016/08/22/empowering-people-build-better-futures-themselves-their-families-and-their>
 on Monday, he put flesh on the bones.


He defended the foundation’s work, saying it had “improved millions of lives 
around the world”, for example, by providing HIV/Aids drugs at vastly reduced 
cost, but admitted it would need to change if his wife wins.


“If Hillary is elected president, the foundation’s work, funding, global 
reach, and my role in it will present questions that must be resolved in a way 
that keeps the good work going while eliminating legitimate concerns about 
potential conflicts of interest. Over the last several months, members of the 
foundation’s senior leadership, Chelsea, and I have evaluated how the 
foundation should operate if Hillary is elected,” the 70-year-old former 
president wrote.

In the event of a Clinton victory in November, he added, the foundation will 
accept contributions only from US citizens, permanent residents and US-based 
independent foundations, whose names will be made public. Many of its 
international activities will be transferred to other organisations and its 
official name will change from the Bill, Hillary & Chelsea Clinton Foundation 
to the Clinton Foundation.

Bill Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clinton>, who set up the 
foundation at the end of his presidency 15 years ago, wrote: “While I will 
continue to support the work of the foundation, I will step down from the board 
and will no longer raise funds for it.”

Clinton Foundation: Bill to quit board if Hillary becomes president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/22/bill-clinton-hillary-president-clinton-foundation-future-trump>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f%23block-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f%23block-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f%23block-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f%23block-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f%23block-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f%23block-57bb85b8e4b047b85f602a5f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.03am BST 00:03  <> 

Donald Trump speaks in Akron

Watch it live here:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e%23block-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e%23block-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e%23block-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e%23block-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e%23block-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e%23block-57bb849ce4b047b85f602a5e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.56pm BST 22:56  <> 

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> said today 
that, if elected president, he would give back to police departments the 
controversial military equipment the Obama administration forced them to return,
the Guardian’s Jon Swaine and Ben Jacobs report.
 Donald Trump. Photograph: Gerald Herbert/AP 
Speaking with police officers in Ohio, the Republican presidential nominee 
indicated he would reverse a recall of tanks, heavy weaponry and other 
equipment carried out by the federal government after the 2014 unrest in
Ferguson, Missouri <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ferguson>.

During discussions at a fraternal order of police lodge in Akron, Trump was 
asked by one questioner if he would return “military equipment” to law 
enforcement, according to a pool reporter who observed the event.

“Yes I would,” said Trump, who added that the current situation facing law 
enforcement was “ridiculous”.

In May last year, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> banned the transfer of some 
surplus military equipment from the US defense department to regional police 
departments. Millions of dollars’ worth of gear was transferred under a 
longstanding program not widely noticed until heavily armored police clashed 
with protesters in Ferguson.

Obama’s prohibition applied to items such as grenade launchers, armored 
vehiclesand large-caliber weapons. Police departments have remained free to buy 
the equipment commercially but chiefs say they are deterred by high prices.

Some departments complained after receiving notices from the Obama 
administration 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/27/us/some-sheriffs-bristle-at-recall-of-military-equipment.html?_r=0>
 recalling vehicles and other equipment.Police leaders said 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-police-gear-exclusive-idUSKCN1012KW> 
that following the fatal shooting of officers in Dallas, Texas, in July, the 
Obama administration had agreed to revisit its executive order and consider 
taking some items off its banned list.

Trump has wrapped himself in the mantle of law enforcement in recent months and
proclaimed himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/21/donald-trump-republican-national-convention-speech>
 to be “the law and order candidate” in his acceptance speech at the Republican 
national convention.

Donald Trump backs return of military weaponry to police forces
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/22/donald-trump-return-military-equipment-police>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9%23block-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9%23block-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9%23block-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9%23block-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9%23block-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9%23block-57bb74d0e4b0377cf11192d9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.46pm BST 22:46  <> 

On the heels of news that Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has postponed an impending 
address on immigration in Denver, Colorado, the campaign has also announced 
that it has cancelled a rally and fundraising trump set to take place in 
Portland, Oregon, on August 31.

“The campaign has decided to cancel the Aug. 31 fundraiser and rally in 
Portland as Mr. Trump has had to make changes to his calendar in the wake of 
the Louisiana flood disaster,” Trump’s Oregon campaign director, Jacob Daniels,
told Oregon Public Broadcasting 
<http://www.opb.org/news/series/election-2016/donald-trump-portland-visit-cancel/#.V7tt-Fc7wQU.twitter>
.

Left-leaning Portland, the largest city in a state that hasn’t voted for a 
Republican presidential nominee in more than three decades, was always an odd 
choice for a Trump rally, although Daniels vowed that Trump will reschedule: 
“We look forward to having Mr. Trump and Gov. Pence in Oregon at a later date.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7%23block-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7%23block-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7%23block-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7%23block-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7%23block-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7%23block-57bb71bce4b0b7e6490021e7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.36pm BST 22:36  <> 

As the new school year approaches, a federal court in Texas has blocked new US 
school rules for accommodating transgender students. This legal battle with the 
White House may soon head to the supreme court. Reed O’Connor, a district judge 
in Fort Worth, issued the injunction on Sunday night to keep public schools 
from having to allow equal access to bathrooms and changing facilities.
Transgender bathroom laws receive legal setback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/aug/22/transgender-bathroom-laws-setback-federal-court-texas>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4%23block-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4%23block-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4%23block-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4%23block-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4%23block-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4%23block-57bb705ee4b0b7e6490021e4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.27pm BST 22:27  <> 

Ben Jacobs

Lawyers for Melania Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melania-trump> 
are pursuing legal action against the Daily Mail for reporting “100% false” 
rumors that she worked as an escort in the 1990s as well as raising questions 
about her immigration status at the time.
 Melania Trump. Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
While Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has a 
reputation for threatening and pursuing litigation, it is unusual for a major 
party nominee or their spouse to mount legal action against a publication only 
months before an election.

The Republican nominee’s wife had previously denied 
<https://twitter.com/MELANIATRUMP/status/761212858944421888?lang=en> a story in 
Politico in which questions about her immigration status were first reported 
but had not previously addressed the other accusations.

The suit comes in the wake of Trump launching an offensive against many media 
outlets, banning some such as Politico and the Washington Post from covering 
his rallies as well ascalling for libel laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/26/trump-pledges-curb-press-freedom-libel-laws-first-amendment>
 in the US to be opened up. He alsobanned the Guardian from attending an event 
in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/25/donald-trump-media-ban-guardian-denied-entry-campaign-event>
 after Trump took offence when reporter Ewen MacAskill questioned the 
Republican nominee about his allegedly “toxic” politics.

In a statement to the Guardian, Charles Harder, an attorney at the firm of 
Harder, Miller and Abrams which is representing Trump, said: “This law firm is 
litigation counsel for Melania Trump. Mrs Trump has placed several news 
organizations on notice of her legal claims against them, including Daily Mail 
among others, for making false and defamatory statements about her supposedly 
having been an ‘escort’ in the 1990s. All such statements are 100% false, 
highly damaging to her reputation, and personally hurtful. She understands that 
news media have certain leeway in a presidential campaign, but outright lying 
about her in this way exceeds all bounds of appropriate news reporting and 
human decency.”

Harder’s not-quite-four-year-old Beverly Hills firm, Harder Mirell & Abrams 
LLP, is perhaps best known for representing Hulk Hogan in the lawsuit that 
eventuallybankrupted Gawker Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/10/gawker-media-bankruptcy-auction-hulk-hogan-lawsuit>
, which was sold at auction to media company Univision earlier in August. The 
suit was funded by Silicon Valley billionaire Peter Thiel, who spoke on behalf 
of Trump at the Republican national convention in Cleveland. Harder has also 
represented a number of other plaintiffs against Gawker as well; most recently, 
Harder has threatened a lawsuit against the now-defunct website because ofan 
investigative report 
<http://gawker.com/now-peter-thiels-lawyer-wants-to-silence-reporting-on-t-1781918385>
 about Donald Trump’s hair.


A spokesperson for the Daily Mail did not respond to a request for comment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13%23block-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13%23block-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13%23block-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13%23block-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13%23block-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13%23block-57bb6e07e4b047b85f602a13&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.17pm BST 22:17  <> 

They are not all, however, run by pre-teens. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/aug/22/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live?page=with:block-57bb0a2ee4b047b85f602855#block-57bb0a2ee4b047b85f602855>
Katy Tur (@KatyTurNBC) 
Trump has 15 field offices in Ohio but none in the 2 biggest counties that 
include Cleveland and Cincy.pic.twitter.com/QjuYT4YXlt <https://t.co/QjuYT4YXlt>
 <https://twitter.com/KatyTurNBC/status/767719735735754753> August 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/KatyTurNBC/status/767719735735754753> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7%23block-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7%23block-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7%23block-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7%23block-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7%23block-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7%23block-57bb6bcbe4b0377cf11192b7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.01pm BST 22:01  <> 

Lucia Graves

Donald Trump’s pivot is a tale of two hirings, and which one he gives more 
weight to will have a dramatic impact on the outcome of his campaign.
 Kellyanne Conway. Photograph: Gerald Herbert/AP 
Most analysis thus far has revolved around Breitbart News chairman Stephen K 
Brannon, who last week wasnamed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/17/donald-trump-stephen-bannon-breitbart-news-kellyanne-conway>
 the campaign’s chief executive. It was a move widely seen as a rebuke to the 
more traditional presidential campaign that the recently ousted Paul Manafort 
sought to implement.

But the hiring of Manafort’s actual replacement, seasoned GOP operative 
Kellyanne Conway, tells a very different story. Namely, that Trump is going to 
remain true to himself, only this time in a winning way.

Conway, who started with the Trump campaign in July as an adviser to Manafort, 
has promised to do what Manafort could not: to “sharpen the message” put 
forward by Trump, rather than try to rebuild his personality from scratch with 
a teleprompter – something she’s previously described as being less about 
changing Trump than giving him choices. (In a July interview with theWashington 
Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/07/20/meet-the-woman-trying-to-fix-donald-trumps-image-with-women/>
, Conway compared her approach to the time she persuaded her daughter to swap 
out a turquoise Memorial Day outfit for a more flattering blue alternative.)

That means Conway listening to Trump as much as he listens to her. And unlike 
a lot of women, conservative and otherwise, she’s been willing to give him the 
benefit of the doubt,recently telling MSNBC 
<http://www.msnbc.com/hardball/watch/conway-all-issues-are-women-s-issues-746954819988>
 “I think you should judge people by their actions, not just their words on a 
political campaign trail”. Whether Trump will be able to listen to and learn 
from Conway’s guidance, however, remains to be seen.

Listening to women has never exactly been Trump’s strong suit, but now his 
entire campaign may hang in the balance of his ability – or more likely, lack 
of ability – to do just that.

Kellyanne Conway is Donald Trump's last, best chance | Lucia Graves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/22/kellyanne-conway-is-donald-trumps-last-chance-winning>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe%23block-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe%23block-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe%23block-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe%23block-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe%23block-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe%23block-57bb67f8e4b047b85f6029fe&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.57pm BST 21:57  <> 

The Clinton campaign is really pushing this new campaign advert:
Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) 
In times of crisis, America depends on steady leadership, clear thinking, and 
calm judgment.https://t.co/Tpo3Sp7Ri1 <https://t.co/Tpo3Sp7Ri1>
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/767827749063057409> August 22, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/767827749063057409> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa%23block-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa%23block-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa%23block-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa%23block-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa%23block-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa%23block-57bb672ce4b0377cf11192aa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.35pm BST 21:35  <> 

Donald Trump postpones immigration speech

Donald Trump’s highly anticipated speech on immigration, originally set to 
take place on Thursday in Denver, Colorado, has been postponed.

A Trump campaign spokesperson told the Denver Post 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/08/22/donald-trump-immigration-plan-aspen-colorado/>
 that although the candidate will be appearing in at a big-dollar fundraiser in 
Aspen, Colorado, the trip will not be accompanied by a much-ballyhooed policy 
address on Trump’s signature issue: immigration.

Rumors flourished this weekend 
<http://www.univision.com/univision-news/politics/trump-now-says-he-plans-to-legalize-some-undocumented-immigrants>
 that Trump had softened his stance on deporting the estimated 11 million 
undocumented immigrants currently living in the US, including openness to 
creating a pathway to legal status, after a meeting with Latino leaders in 
which Trump reportedly admitted that deporting millions of US residents “is 
neither possible nor humane”.

In an interview with Fox & Friends this morning, a defiant Trump dismissed the 
reports, but did not come out and say that he would, as he’s previously 
suggested, implement a “deportation force” to hunt down undocumented immigrants 
living in the United States,

“I’m not flip-flopping,” Trump said. “We want to come up with a really fair, 
but firm answer. That’s - it has to be very firm.”

Updated at 9.37pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8%23block-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8%23block-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8%23block-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8%23block-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20'I'm%20not%20flip-flopping'%20on%20immigration%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8%23block-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8%23block-57bb608ce4b0b7e6490021a8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, apparently 
displeased with the Washington Post’s publication of Trump Revealed: An 
American Journey of Ambition, Ego, Money, and Power - out tomorrow!
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
The @WashingtonPost <https://twitter.com/washingtonpost> quickly put together 
a hit job book on me- comprised of copies of some of their inaccurate stories. 
Don't buy, boring!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/767889674530594816> August 23, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/767889674530594816> 
For the record, Trump gave more than 20 hours of interviews to the journalists 
who wrote the book.
 
Sheldon Adelson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sheldon-adelson>, the 
Nevada casino mogul and conservative mega-donor, is leading a campaign against 
pro-Palestine groups on US college campuses and has funded posters that accuse 
individual students of supporting terrorism and promoting “Jew Hatred”.

The multimillion-dollar effort, which has launched 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/la-me-uc-israel-palestinian-adv-snap-story.html> 
at six campuses in California, is targeting the boycott, divestment and 
sanctions (BDS) movement that has become increasingly popular among American 
university students protesting the Israeli government.

At the University of California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, Los Angeles (UCLA), recent 
Adelson-funded posters named 16 students and professors, saying they “have 
allied themselves with Palestinian terrorists to perpetuate BDS and Jew Hatred 
on this campus”. It further claimed BDS was a “Hamas-inspired genocidal 
campaign to destroy Israel”.

Robert Gardner, a 25-year-old UCLA senior, saw his name on one of the posters 
outside a grocery market. “I was really shocked and felt really disturbed,” he 
said.

“They are trying to cast us as antisemitic, that we are somehow a 
discriminatory group,” said the political science student, who is a member of 
the college’s Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) organization. “That is a 
completely spurious accusation. One of our core principles is anti-oppression 
and anti-racism.”

Tensions surrounding Israel-Palestine campus activism have escalated in recent 
years, but SJP leaders said the posters identifying specific students were 
particularly aggressive and had led some of them to face online harassment and 
death threats.

GOP mega-donor funds group calling pro-Palestine US students 'Jew haters'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/22/sheldon-adelson-palestine-jew-haters-colleges-campuses> 
Speaking on Bill O’Reilly’s program on Fox News, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> again declined to elaborate 
on his now-obscure position on immigration, telling the host that “I just want 
to follow the law” and dismissing reports from multiple outlets that detailed 
remarks he made to a Latino organization over the weekend in which he implied 
support for a path to legal status for undocumented immigrants.

“I just want to follow the law,” Trump said. “What I’m doing is following the 
law. You know, this was put out - we had a great meeting over the weekend with 
Hispanics and leaders of the Hispanic community, and we discussed a lot of 
different things. And this was one of the many things that was discussed.”

“And one of the groups, one of the media outlets that have gotten everything 
about me wrong, including the fact that I would never run and the reporter 
actually said he would give up his salary if he did. I don’t think I have ever 
held him to that but one of these media outlets said that they had word from 
one of the people. It turned out to be false. In fact, the people all denied 
it, Bill, and I think you probably have seen that.”

When asked again for specifics, Trump focused on deporting criminals, saying 
that undocumented immigrants who haven’t broken laws while in the country will 
go through “a process.”

“We are going to obey the existing laws. now the existing laws are very 
strong. The existing laws, the first thing we are going to do if and when I 
win, is we are going to get rid of all of the bad ones. We have gang members, 
we have killers, we have a lot of bad people that have to get out of this 
country. We are going to get them out. And the police know who they are - they 
are known by law enforcement who they are, we don’t do anything. They go around 
killing people and hurting people, and they are going to be out of this country 
so fast your head will spin. We have existing laws that will allow you to do 
that.”

“As far as everybody else, we are going to go through the process. What people 
don’t know is Obama got tremendous numbers of people out of the country. Bush, 
the same thing. Lots of people were brought out of the country with the 
existing laws. Well, I’m going to do the same thing and I just said that. At 
the same time, we want to do it in a very humane, we want to do it in a very 
humane manner.”
 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> veered off the 
teleprompter on Monday night to claim that “inner cities run by the Democrats” 
were more dangerous than countries such as Iraq and Afghanistan.
 Donald Trump Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
The Republican nominee was meant to be delivering a scripted speech calling for
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> be 
investigated by a special prosecutor. However, once again he veered off message 
in an attempt to appeal to minority voters in apocalyptic terms.

“You can go to war zones in countries that we are fighting and it is safer 
than living in some of our inner cities that are run by theDemocrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats>,” Trump said. The Republican 
nominee also promised if elected, “we’ll get rid of the crime. You’ll be able 
to walk down the street without getting shot. Now, you walk down the street, 
you get shot.”

Trump has made increased appeals for support from African Americans in recent 
days. Despite that, arecent NBC/Wall Street Journal poll 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/first-read/nbc-wsj-poll-clinton-jumps-nine-point-lead-over-trump-n623131>
 showed Trump receiving the support of only 1% of African American voters, a 
historically low total. The poll did have a margin of error of plus or minus 
3.5%. The Republican nominee has repeatedly argued that African American voters 
should support him in the past week,saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/what-do-you-have-to-lose-donald-trump-appeals-for-black-vote>
: “What have you got to lose?” In contrast, the New York real estate developer 
has railed against what he called “the bigotry of Hillary Clinton, who sees 
people of color only as votes and not as human beings worthy of a better 
future”.

The intended focus of the Republican nominee’s message on Monday was his call 
for a special prosecutor to investigate Clinton’s leadership of the state 
department. Trump claimed that the FBI and Department of Justice could not be 
trusted to investigate “Hillary Clinton’s crimes”. The FBI in Julydecided not 
to pursue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/05/fbi-no-charges-hillary-clinton-email-investigation>
 criminal charges against Clinton for her use of an unsecured private email 
server while secretary of state. However, in doing so, FBI Director James Comey 
rebuked Clinton for the “extremely careless” way in which she handled her 
emails.

In the speech, Trump also said he was “fighting for peaceful regime change in 
our country” and warned gravely of potential election fraud. “You got to go out 
and watch. You know what I’m talking about.” Trumphas long made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/13/trump-recruits-election-observers-voter-intimidation-fears>
 unsubstantiated claims about “a rigged election” and warned of in-person voter 
fraud recently at a campaign stop in Pennsylvania. However, anexhaustive 
investigation 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/08/06/a-comprehensive-investigation-of-voter-impersonation-finds-31-credible-incidents-out-of-one-billion-ballots-cast/>
 of in-person voter fraud in the United States found only 31 cases since 2000 
out of more than 1bn ballots cast.

Trump spoke in the blue collar city of Akron, Ohio. The Buckeye State has 18 
electoral votes, and no Republican has ever won the White House without winning 
Ohio. According todata complied by Real Clear Politics, 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/oh/ohio_trump_vs_clinton-5634.html#polls>
 Clinton has not trailed in a single statewide poll of Ohio since April. 
However, despite these sagging poll numbers and cryptic warnings about election 
fraud, Trump was still confident of victory: “I just get the feeling that we’re 
going to win in a landslide.”
 
The Democratic party’s nominee for governor in West Virginia declared today 
that he can’t support his party’s presidential nominee, citing her positions on 
coal mining.

“I cannot be a supporter of Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>,” billionaire coal 
magnate Jim Justice told West Virginia MetroNews’s radio show Talkline. “The 
reason I can’t be is her position on coal is diametrically, completely wrong in 
many, many different ways.”

In May, Clinton ad-libbed remarks declaring that, if elected, “we’re going to 
put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business.”
 
Speaking to an audience in Akron, Ohio, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> encouraged his followers to 
survey polling places during the general election - “you know what I’m talking 
about, right?”

“You’ve gotta get everyone of your friends,” Trump said. “You’ve gotta get 
everyone of your family. You’ve gotta get everybody to go out and watch and go 
out and vote. And when I say watch, you know what I’m talking about, right? You 
know what I’m talking about. I think you gotta go out and you gotta watch.”
 
Bill Clinton will quit the board of his charitable foundation but not disband 
it ifHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> wins 
the US presidency, he said on Monday, as Republicans pressed allegations of a 
conflict of interest.


The announcement came as newly disclosed emails revealed how Huma Abedin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/06/hillary-clinton-huma-abedin-marriage-politics>
 coordinated a meeting for a Bahraini prince with officials at the Clinton 
Foundation during Hillary Clinton’s tenure as secretary of state.
 Former president Bill Clinton, founder of the Clinton Foundation. Photograph: 
Earl Gibson III/WireImage 
Amid intensifying political controversy, Bill Clinton told foundation staff 
last week that it will stop accepting foreign or corporate donations in the 
event of his wife reaching the White House.In a blog post 
<https://www.clintonfoundation.org/blog/2016/08/22/empowering-people-build-better-futures-themselves-their-families-and-their>
 on Monday, he put flesh on the bones.


He defended the foundation’s work, saying it had “improved millions of lives 
around the world”, for example, by providing HIV/Aids drugs at vastly reduced 
cost, but admitted it would need to change if his wife wins.


“If Hillary is elected president, the foundation’s work, funding, global 
reach, and my role in it will present questions that must be resolved in a way 
that keeps the good work going while eliminating legitimate concerns about 
potential conflicts of interest. Over the last several months, members of the 
foundation’s senior leadership, Chelsea, and I have evaluated how the 
foundation should operate if Hillary is elected,” the 70-year-old former 
president wrote.

In the event of a Clinton victory in November, he added, the foundation will 
accept contributions only from US citizens, permanent residents and US-based 
independent foundations, whose names will be made public. Many of its 
international activities will be transferred to other organisations and its 
official name will change from the Bill, Hillary & Chelsea Clinton Foundation 
to the Clinton Foundation.

Bill Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clinton>, who set up the 
foundation at the end of his presidency 15 years ago, wrote: “While I will 
continue to support the work of the foundation, I will step down from the board 
and will no longer raise funds for it.”

Clinton Foundation: Bill to quit board if Hillary becomes president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/22/bill-clinton-hillary-president-clinton-foundation-future-trump> 
Watch it live here:
 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> said today 
that, if elected president, he would give back to police departments the 
controversial military equipment the Obama administration forced them to return,
the Guardian’s Jon Swaine and Ben Jacobs report.
 Donald Trump. Photograph: Gerald Herbert/AP 
Speaking with police officers in Ohio, the Republican presidential nominee 
indicated he would reverse a recall of tanks, heavy weaponry and other 
equipment carried out by the federal government after the 2014 unrest in
Ferguson, Missouri <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ferguson>.

During discussions at a fraternal order of police lodge in Akron, Trump was 
asked by one questioner if he would return “military equipment” to law 
enforcement, according to a pool reporter who observed the event.

“Yes I would,” said Trump, who added that the current situation facing law 
enforcement was “ridiculous”.

In May last year, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> banned the transfer of some 
surplus military equipment from the US defense department to regional police 
departments. Millions of dollars’ worth of gear was transferred under a 
longstanding program not widely noticed until heavily armored police clashed 
with protesters in Ferguson.

Obama’s prohibition applied to items such as grenade launchers, armored 
vehiclesand large-caliber weapons. Police departments have remained free to buy 
the equipment commercially but chiefs say they are deterred by high prices.

Some departments complained after receiving notices from the Obama 
administration 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/27/us/some-sheriffs-bristle-at-recall-of-military-equipment.html?_r=0>
 recalling vehicles and other equipment.Police leaders said 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-police-gear-exclusive-idUSKCN1012KW> 
that following the fatal shooting of officers in Dallas, Texas, in July, the 
Obama administration had agreed to revisit its executive order and consider 
taking some items off its banned list.

Trump has wrapped himself in the mantle of law enforcement in recent months and
proclaimed himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/21/donald-trump-republican-national-convention-speech>
 to be “the law and order candidate” in his acceptance speech at the Republican 
national convention.

Donald Trump backs return of military weaponry to police forces
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/22/donald-trump-return-military-equipment-police> 
On the heels of news that Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has postponed an impending 
address on immigration in Denver, Colorado, the campaign has also announced 
that it has cancelled a rally and fundraising trump set to take place in 
Portland, Oregon, on August 31.

“The campaign has decided to cancel the Aug. 31 fundraiser and rally in 
Portland as Mr. Trump has had to make changes to his calendar in the wake of 
the Louisiana flood disaster,” Trump’s Oregon campaign director, Jacob Daniels,
told Oregon Public Broadcasting 
<http://www.opb.org/news/series/election-2016/donald-trump-portland-visit-cancel/#.V7tt-Fc7wQU.twitter>
.

Left-leaning Portland, the largest city in a state that hasn’t voted for a 
Republican presidential nominee in more than three decades, was always an odd 
choice for a Trump rally, although Daniels vowed that Trump will reschedule: 
“We look forward to having Mr. Trump and Gov. Pence in Oregon at a later date.”
 
As the new school year approaches, a federal court in Texas has blocked new US 
school rules for accommodating transgender students. This legal battle with the 
White House may soon head to the supreme court. Reed O’Connor, a district judge 
in Fort Worth, issued the injunction on Sunday night to keep public schools 
from having to allow equal access to bathrooms and changing facilities.
Transgender bathroom laws receive legal setback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/aug/22/transgender-bathroom-laws-setback-federal-court-texas> 
Lawyers for Melania Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melania-trump> 
are pursuing legal action against the Daily Mail for reporting “100% false” 
rumors that she worked as an escort in the 1990s as well as raising questions 
about her immigration status at the time.
 Melania Trump. Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
While Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has a 
reputation for threatening and pursuing litigation, it is unusual for a major 
party nominee or their spouse to mount legal action against a publication only 
months before an election.

The Republican nominee’s wife had previously denied 
<https://twitter.com/MELANIATRUMP/status/761212858944421888?lang=en> a story in 
Politico in which questions about her immigration status were first reported 
but had not previously addressed the other accusations.

The suit comes in the wake of Trump launching an offensive against many media 
outlets, banning some such as Politico and the Washington Post from covering 
his rallies as well ascalling for libel laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/26/trump-pledges-curb-press-freedom-libel-laws-first-amendment>
 in the US to be opened up. He alsobanned the Guardian from attending an event 
in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/25/donald-trump-media-ban-guardian-denied-entry-campaign-event>
 after Trump took offence when reporter Ewen MacAskill questioned the 
Republican nominee about his allegedly “toxic” politics.

In a statement to the Guardian, Charles Harder, an attorney at the firm of 
Harder, Miller and Abrams which is representing Trump, said: “This law firm is 
litigation counsel for Melania Trump. Mrs Trump has placed several news 
organizations on notice of her legal claims against them, including Daily Mail 
among others, for making false and defamatory statements about her supposedly 
having been an ‘escort’ in the 1990s. All such statements are 100% false, 
highly damaging to her reputation, and personally hurtful. She understands that 
news media have certain leeway in a presidential campaign, but outright lying 
about her in this way exceeds all bounds of appropriate news reporting and 
human decency.”

Harder’s not-quite-four-year-old Beverly Hills firm, Harder Mirell & Abrams 
LLP, is perhaps best known for representing Hulk Hogan in the lawsuit that 
eventuallybankrupted Gawker Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/10/gawker-media-bankruptcy-auction-hulk-hogan-lawsuit>
, which was sold at auction to media company Univision earlier in August. The 
suit was funded by Silicon Valley billionaire Peter Thiel, who spoke on behalf 
of Trump at the Republican national convention in Cleveland. Harder has also 
represented a number of other plaintiffs against Gawker as well; most recently, 
Harder has threatened a lawsuit against the now-defunct website because ofan 
investigative report 
<http://gawker.com/now-peter-thiels-lawyer-wants-to-silence-reporting-on-t-1781918385>
 about Donald Trump’s hair.


A spokesperson for the Daily Mail did not respond to a request for comment.
 
They are not all, however, run by pre-teens. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/aug/22/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-us-election-news-campaign-live?page=with:block-57bb0a2ee4b047b85f602855#block-57bb0a2ee4b047b85f602855>
Katy Tur (@KatyTurNBC) 
Trump has 15 field offices in Ohio but none in the 2 biggest counties that 
include Cleveland and Cincy.pic.twitter.com/QjuYT4YXlt <https://t.co/QjuYT4YXlt>
 <https://twitter.com/KatyTurNBC/status/767719735735754753> August 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/KatyTurNBC/status/767719735735754753>  
Donald Trump’s pivot is a tale of two hirings, and which one he gives more 
weight to will have a dramatic impact on the outcome of his campaign.
 Kellyanne Conway. Photograph: Gerald Herbert/AP 
Most analysis thus far has revolved around Breitbart News chairman Stephen K 
Brannon, who last week wasnamed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/17/donald-trump-stephen-bannon-breitbart-news-kellyanne-conway>
 the campaign’s chief executive. It was a move widely seen as a rebuke to the 
more traditional presidential campaign that the recently ousted Paul Manafort 
sought to implement.

But the hiring of Manafort’s actual replacement, seasoned GOP operative 
Kellyanne Conway, tells a very different story. Namely, that Trump is going to 
remain true to himself, only this time in a winning way.

Conway, who started with the Trump campaign in July as an adviser to Manafort, 
has promised to do what Manafort could not: to “sharpen the message” put 
forward by Trump, rather than try to rebuild his personality from scratch with 
a teleprompter – something she’s previously described as being less about 
changing Trump than giving him choices. (In a July interview with theWashington 
Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/07/20/meet-the-woman-trying-to-fix-donald-trumps-image-with-women/>
, Conway compared her approach to the time she persuaded her daughter to swap 
out a turquoise Memorial Day outfit for a more flattering blue alternative.)

That means Conway listening to Trump as much as he listens to her. And unlike 
a lot of women, conservative and otherwise, she’s been willing to give him the 
benefit of the doubt,recently telling MSNBC 
<http://www.msnbc.com/hardball/watch/conway-all-issues-are-women-s-issues-746954819988>
 “I think you should judge people by their actions, not just their words on a 
political campaign trail”. Whether Trump will be able to listen to and learn 
from Conway’s guidance, however, remains to be seen.

Listening to women has never exactly been Trump’s strong suit, but now his 
entire campaign may hang in the balance of his ability – or more likely, lack 
of ability – to do just that.

Kellyanne Conway is Donald Trump's last, best chance | Lucia Graves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/22/kellyanne-conway-is-donald-trumps-last-chance-winning> 
The Clinton campaign is really pushing this new campaign advert:
Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) 
In times of crisis, America depends on steady leadership, clear thinking, and 
calm judgment.https://t.co/Tpo3Sp7Ri1 <https://t.co/Tpo3Sp7Ri1>
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/767827749063057409> August 22, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/767827749063057409>  
Donald Trump’s highly anticipated speech on immigration, originally set to 
take place on Thursday in Denver, Colorado, has been postponed.

A Trump campaign spokesperson told the Denver Post 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/08/22/donald-trump-immigration-plan-aspen-colorado/>
 that although the candidate will be appearing in at a big-dollar fundraiser in 
Aspen, Colorado, the trip will not be accompanied by a much-ballyhooed policy 
address on Trump’s signature issue: immigration.

Rumors flourished this weekend 
<http://www.univision.com/univision-news/politics/trump-now-says-he-plans-to-legalize-some-undocumented-immigrants>
 that Trump had softened his stance on deporting the estimated 11 million 
undocumented immigrants currently living in the US, including openness to 
creating a pathway to legal status, after a meeting with Latino leaders in 
which Trump reportedly admitted that deporting millions of US residents “is 
neither possible nor humane”.

In an interview with Fox & Friends this morning, a defiant Trump dismissed the 
reports, but did not come out and say that he would, as he’s previously 
suggested, implement a “deportation force” to hunt down undocumented immigrants 
living in the United States,

“I’m not flip-flopping,” Trump said. “We want to come up with a really fair, 
but firm answer. That’s - it has to be very firm.”
 