
The Cuban government must give greater freedom to its people and “something in 
return” to the US if it wants to keep the new era of warmer relations with 
Washington alive, top aides toDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> warned on Sunday, as the 
death of Fidel Castro three weeks after the US election thrust Cuba into 
uncharted territory.

Reince Priebus <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/reince-priebus>, Trump’s 
incoming chief of staff, said the president-elect would “absolutely” reverse 
Barack Obama’s stance on Cuba unless there was “some movement” from Havana.

“Repression, open markets, freedom of religion, political prisoners: these 
things need to change in order to have open and free relationships, and that’s 
what President-elect Trump believes, and that’s where he’s going to head,” 
Priebus said.

Kellyanne Conway, another top adviser to Trump, who denounced Fidel as a 
“brutal dictator” on Saturday, said any future deal would have to be in the 
interest of Americans.

“To the extent that President Trump can open up new conversations with Cuba, 
it would have to be a very differentCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>,” she told ABC television.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftrump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd7fcb6c05d45a1d165403d1a48ca54588175592%2F0_107_2950_1159%2F2950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20aides%20threaten%20hard%20line%20as%20Cuba%20steps%20into%20the%20unknown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftrump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20aides%20threaten%20hard%20line%20as%20Cuba%20steps%20into%20the%20unknown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftrump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd7fcb6c05d45a1d165403d1a48ca54588175592%2F0_107_2950_1159%2F2950.jpg>
 Barack Obama, Michelle Obama and their daughters with Cuban president Raúl 
Castro at a baseball game in Havana. Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/Reuters 
“He wants to make sure that when the United States of America, when he’s 
president, engages in any type of diplomatic relations or trade agreements … 
that we as America are being protected and we as America are getting something 
in return.”

The historic agreement to revive diplomatic relations between the US and Cuba 
started in December 2014 with a surprise announcement by Obama and Raúl Castro. 
This was followed byvisits to Cuba by John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/aug/14/us-cuba-john-kerry-flag-embassy-havana-video>
, the US secretary of state, andlater by Obama himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/21/raul-castro-demands-return-guantanamo-bay-obama-visit>
, then theresumption of commercial flights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/us-cuba-first-flight-jetblue-fort-lauderdale>
 and thelifting of restrictions on Cuban rum and cigars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/cuban-rum-cigars-us-travelers-obama-eases-restrictions>
.

However, many restrictions remain in place and can only be removed by 
Congress. During the fight for presidential votes in Florida, home to many 
Cuban exiles, Trump and his running mate,Mike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence>, promised to reverse the 
executive orders that relaxed the half-century US embargo on the island.

Trump unlikely to reinstate embargo after death of Fidel Castro, analysts say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/donald-trump-fidel-castro-cuba-embargo>
But, although both men marked Fidel Castro’s death by denouncing his human 
rights record, they did not repeat the call to reinstate sanctions. Foreign 
policy analysts said that despite the trenchant tone of some of the comments 
from the Trump camp, the opening to Cuba was unlikely to be thrown away any 
time soon.

“He’s sending very strong signals that he’s going to take a hard line on Cuba 
but without giving specifics,” said Gregory Weeks, an expert on US-Cuban 
relations at the University of North Carolina in Charlotte.

“At the same time, he’s a businessman. He’s been interested in doing business 
in Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/29/donald-trump-cuba-embargo-violation-clinton-allegation>
. There is not a whole lot of interest in rolling back Cuba policy. The 
business side of the Republican party is very much in favour of it.”

The restoration of relations with the US and an easing of travel restrictions 
are two key ways in whichRaúl Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/raul-castro> has made his mark on Cuban 
history since formally assuming power in 2008. He has cemented his personal 
power, maintained the hegemony of the Communist party and laid to rest the once 
widely held belief that Cuba would implode with the death of his brother.

But Fidel’s death and Trump’s impending presidency will test Raúl’s nerve and 
judgment as never before.

“Raúl is a transitional president between the old guard and the future … in 
that sense he has performed well. He has kept the country stable,” said Volker 
Skierka, a Fidel biographer and Cuba expert.

Cuba needs modernising – but it can manage without McDonald's
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/cuba-needs-modernising-but-it-can-manage-without-mcdonalds>
Like his brother, he has ensured that the small island maintained a 
disproportionate amount of global attention. Groundbreaking visits to Havana by 
Obama andPope Francis made headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/20/pope-francis-cuba-mass-message-beyond-the-faithful>
 around the world and drove home the message that Cuba was changing – albeit on 
its own terms. Under Raúl,Cuba also hosted peace talks between the Colombian 
government and Farc insurgents. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/24/farc-colombia-rebel-leaders-negotiations-havana>

US policymakers have been forced to abandon their cherished theory that the 
Communist party’s grip on power would slip without Fidel. “As much as we wish 
otherwise, I don’t see it happening,” said a US diplomat in the region.

European diplomats went further, with one saying: “We won’t see a huge shift 
of Cuban politics … more significant would be if Raúl dies, because he put his 
leadership on the line for reform.”

Dissidents pose little threat to the government. They resonate internationally 
as symbols of opposition but foreign diplomats in Havana write them off as 
politically irrelevant on the island.

Raúl has released most political prisoners and allowed leading critics such as 
Rosa María Payá and Yoani Sánchez to travel abroad. But organised opposition at 
home is often met with arrests and beatings.

Raúl’s main test is raising living standards for the island’s 11.2 million 
people. The average monthly wage is less than £15, obliging people to scrabble 
for decent food and basics such as soap, and there are severe shortages of 
housing and transport.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftrump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8a981efde7f9c9059b000bc982064d70b5221b6%2F0_210_3820_2293%2F3820.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20aides%20threaten%20hard%20line%20as%20Cuba%20steps%20into%20the%20unknown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftrump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20aides%20threaten%20hard%20line%20as%20Cuba%20steps%20into%20the%20unknown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftrump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8a981efde7f9c9059b000bc982064d70b5221b6%2F0_210_3820_2293%2F3820.jpg>
 Pope Francis meeting Fidel Castro in 2015. Photograph: Alex Castro/AP 
“The economy is what’s most on people’s minds,” said Susan Kaufman Purcell, 
the director of the centre for hemispheric policy at the University of Miami.

Raúl, who studied Vietnam and China as models of communist parties which have 
retained control while freeing their economies, has trimmed the vast state 
bureaucracy and laid off hundreds of thousands of workers.

He has licensed hundreds of different types of micro-businesses, and told 
Cubans to stop blaming the embargo for their ills and to be “fearless” in 
criticising corruption, bureaucracy and inefficiency.

The reforms have allowed small new businesses to bloom, notably restaurants, 
guesthouses and stalls which have livened up Havana’s sleepy streets, but 
efforts to boost agriculture have fallen flat. Shortages of basic foodstuffs 
remain the norm.

The challenge is to deliver material improvements while retaining the free 
universal access to education and healthcare that is the revolution’s proudest 
boast and main pillar of legitimacy.

In contrast to Fidel’s marathon speeches and nocturnal habits, Raúl is a 
family man who speaks briefly and likes to be home for dinner. He delegates 
decisions to a small, trusted cabal. Raúl’s power base is the military, an 
institution he forged during 47 years as defence minister.

For the past decade, Venezuelan oil subsidies have been crucial to Cuba’s 
economy. President Nicolás Maduro is close to Raúl but Venezuela’s economy is 
collapsing. Should Maduro fall, alarm bells will sound across Havana.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftrump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e5951b8164db2fb774ccc04ea4006df1f2f09f8%2F0_70_2689_1663%2F2689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20aides%20threaten%20hard%20line%20as%20Cuba%20steps%20into%20the%20unknown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftrump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20aides%20threaten%20hard%20line%20as%20Cuba%20steps%20into%20the%20unknown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftrump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e5951b8164db2fb774ccc04ea4006df1f2f09f8%2F0_70_2689_1663%2F2689.jpg>
 Raúl Castro with Nicolas Maduro in 2016. Photograph: Enrique de la Osa/Reuters 
Cuba learned the hard way not to become too dependent on a single sponsor. In 
the 1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the island’s economy was in 
tatters. Ever the pragmatist, Raúl has spent his years as president hedging 
against this possibility by nurturing ties with China, Russia, Latin America, 
the European Union and even the US.

But nobody should mistake that for a shift of ideology. In his 2016 speech to 
the party congress, Raúl echoed his brother’s calls for unity in the face of 
capitalist US influence. “If one day they manage to fragment us, that would be 
the beginning of the end of the revolution, of socialism and independence in 
our homeland,” he said.

Raúl’s other outstanding task is grooming a successor. He has repeatedly 
insisted a generational change is long overdue, but for the moment his inner 
circle is dominated by octogenarians. One reason is that younger colleagues 
lack the cachet of involvement in the 1959 revolution which overthrewthe 
Batista dictatorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/mar/11/cuba-batista-fifth-revolution-1952>
.

Nonetheless, Raúl has said he will stand down as president in 2018 and his 
first vice-president, Miguel Díaz-Canel, is widely tipped to assume his mantle.

Fidel’s death – expected to prove more of an emotional than political 
earthquake for Cuba – is unlikely to change that, but it could make change 
easier for the next generation of Cuban leaders.
 