
Donald Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner was named senior adviser to the 
president on Monday, an appointment that would further entanglethe incoming 
White House team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/jeff-sessions-confirmation-hearing-attorney-general-racism>
 in a web of potential conflicts of interest and accusations of nepotism.

Jeff Sessions confirmation hearing to shine light on history of racism claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/jeff-sessions-confirmation-hearing-attorney-general-racism>
For months, Kushner has had Trump’s ear in an informal role alongside the 
businessman’s three grown children: Donald Jr, Eric and Kushner’s wife, Ivanka. 
In a statement, Trump’s transition team said that Kushner had “formed an 
effective leadership team” with the president-elect’s chosen chief of staff, 
Reince Priebus, and his chief strategist, Steve Bannon.

Kushner, 35, will need to argue that a federal anti-nepotism law does not 
apply to him. The law,enacted in 1967 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/11/18/502637785/jared-kushner-and-the-anti-nepotism-statute-that-might-keep-him-from-the-white-h>
 after John F Kennedy appointed his brother as attorney general, prohibits any 
federal official from hiring family members to an agency or office which he or 
she leads.

The law has loopholes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/donald-trump-nepotism-ivanka-jared-kushner-is-it-legal>
, however. Ethics experts say that Kushner could retain a technically 
unofficial role, for instance as a “consultant”, in order to skirt the law. 
Trump’s transition team said Kushner “has chosen to forego his salary while 
serving in the administration”.

Attorneys for Kushner reportedly want to argue that the White House is 
technically not an agency, and that therefore Trump and Kushner would be exempt 
from nepotism rules. Trump’s transition team has argued that this loophole 
would also make Trump exempt from his own possible conflicts of interest.

WilmerHale, a law firm contracted by Kushner, has said in a statement that he 
is “committed to complying with federal ethics laws” and has coordinated with 
the Office of Government Ethics.

Trump could also try to argue that he has wide authority to select his 
advisers, using Hillary Clinton’s work in the White House in the 1990s as a 
precedent. At the time, an appeals court ruled that Clinton could work in 
government because she already held an official title, first lady.


Bannon, Kushner and Priebus: rivals for power at the heart of Trump's team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/stephen-bannon-jared-kushner-reince-priebus-trump-administration>
More traditional conflicts of interest also appear strewn across Kushner’s 
path to the White House. More so than his father-in-law, who has for years 
turned away from real estate in favor of branding deals, Kushner is a major 
figure in New York real estate, the scion of an extraordinarily wealthy family 
with business interests around the world.

Kushner Companies <http://kushner.com/> has invested billions in real estate 
around the US in the last decade, and relies heavily on foreign investment and 
lenders.

Experts have said that even should Kushner place holdings in a blind trust, he 
would still test ethics laws. Kushner will be required to make some financial 
disclosures, and would continuously test the limits of the law in the White 
House.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20guide%20to%20Donald%20Trump's%20potential%20cabinet%20of%20billionaires%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20guide%20to%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20potential%20cabinet%20of%20billionaires%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video&media=>
A guide to Donald Trump’s potential cabinet of billionaires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/22/donald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video>
Kushner Companies is in talks with a huge Chinese conglomerate, Anbang 
Insurance Group, the New York Timesreported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/07/us/politics/jared-kushner-trump-business.html>
 on Saturday. A spokeswoman for the real estate firm said the US government had 
not determined that Anbang is a state-owned company, despite its possible links 
to Beijing, which could threaten to break the constitution’semolument clause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/donald-trump-violate-us-constitution-inauguration-day>
. That rule bars payments and gifts from foreign governments.

The spokeswoman also said Kushner intends to resign from his post as head of 
the company, and to substantially divest.

The Kushner family has a sprawling web of businesses and creditors, and its 
lenders include Goldman Sachs, Blackstone and Deutsche Bank. Last month the 
German bankagreed to pay the US government $7.2bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/23/deutsche-bank-credit-suisse-us-mortgage-securities-barclays>
 for its part in selling toxic mortgage securities in the run-up to the 2008 
financial crisis. Deutsche Bank also holdsabout $300m 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-12-22/deutsche-bank-s-reworking-a-big-trump-loan-as-inauguration-nears>
 of debt owed by Trump.

Donald Trump will violate the US constitution on inauguration day | Laurence H 
Tribe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/donald-trump-violate-us-constitution-inauguration-day>
Kushner also has stakes in private equity 
<http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/subjects/p/private_equity/index.html?inline=nyt-classifier>
 andventure capital 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/19/business/dealbook/thrive-capital-raises-700-million-for-fifth-fund.html>
 firms co-founded by his brother and atech company  <https://cadre.com/>which 
counts Russian and Chinese billionaires as investors. He also owns theNew York 
Observer <http://observer.com/>, a small New York City paper.

Norman Eisen, the former lead ethics attorney for Barack Obama, told the 
Guardian that he and his predecessor Richard Painter, who served George W Bush, 
“think the anti-nepotism law is murky”.

“We take a strict approach, but reasonable people may disagree,” Eisen said, 
adding that Kushner “should submit himself to all ethics, conflicts and 
disclosure laws. His representatives say he will do that. That is a positive 
step, and I welcome it.

“That said, we need to see the details of how he will do that. And I hope his 
father-in-law takes a page from his book and does the same, as presidents have 
for the past four decades, by divesting into a blind trust or the equivalent.”

Painter added that, should Kushner take the post with his real estate 
investments and financial holdings intact, “it will be important for him to 
recuse from matters involving financial services regulation and the proposed 
repeal of Dodd-Frank”.

“Too many financial bubbles have been caused by loose regulation of bank 
lending secured by real estate,” Painter said. “I believe the conflict of 
interest statute would prohibit a real estate developer with substantial bank 
debt from getting involved in that area.”

Trump’s son-in-law played a large role throughout the campaign, for instance 
cutting out one of the businessman’s early allies and advisers, New Jersey 
governor Chris Christie. Kushner’s father,convicted more than a decade ago 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2016/11/16/trump-kushner-christie-transition/93992468/>
 on counts of tax evasion and illegal campaign donations, was sent to prison by 
Christie, then a prosecutor.

Kushner has advised Trump to bring Wall Street veterans into his team, and the 
president-elect has suggested that his son-in-law could help lead talks in 
foreign relations. In November, he said Kushner, an Orthodox Jew, could help “
do peace in the Middle East 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/world/middleeast/jared-kushner-cast-as-potential-player-on-israel-is-little-known-there.html>
” .
 