
Donald Trump’s campaign allies joined his baseless accusation 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/787699930718695425> of a “rigged 
election” on Sunday, with Rudy Giuliani speaking in racially charged terms amid 
growing fears of a violent backlash from supporters of the Republican 
presidential nominee.


Donald Trump 'grabbed me and went for the lips', says new accuser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations-cathy-heller>
Trump himself furthered the charge, tweeting 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/787699930718695425>: “The election 
is absolutely being rigged by the dishonest and distorted media pushing Crooked 
Hillary – but also at many polling places – SAD.”

A request for clarification from the Trump campaign about which polling places 
he meant was not immediately returned.

The move appeared to be a concerted effort to deflect attention from 
allegations of sexual harassment or assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations-cathy-heller>
 by nine women, following the release of a video in which Trump boasted about 
groping.

The ninth woman to accuse Trump of sexual misconduct, Cathy Heller, told the 
Guardian on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations-cathy-heller>
 that at an event at Trump’s Mar-a-Lago Florida resort in 1997, the businessman 
“took my hand, and grabbed me, and went for the lips”.

Trump, who said in the second presidential debate he had never done the things 
he boasted about, has denied all the claims and blamed a media conspiracy.

At campaign events over the weekend, as controversy over the groping claims 
continued, Trump described US democracy as “an illusion” and repeated his calls 
for people to watch polling stations, which have raised concerns of illegal 
voter intimidation on election day and possible violent unrest after the result 
is known.

Allies including running mate Mike Pence and top adviser Giuliani, a former 
mayor of New York, backed up his claim.

Pence dodged Trump’s outright accusation, telling NBC’s Meet the Press 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/meet-the-press/meet-press-october-16-2016-n667251>: “So 
many Americans feel like this election is being rigged.” For months, the 
Indiana governor has tried to bridge Trump’s extreme positions with the more 
conventional wing of the Republican party. His support for the “rigged 
election” claim puts him well outside the mainstream.

Pence did say he and Trump would “absolutely accept the results of the 
election”.

On Saturday, House speaker Paul Ryan said he did not have any doubts about the 
American electoral system. “Our democracy relies on confidence in election 
results, and the speaker is fully confident the states will carry out this 
election with integrity,” his spokeswoman AshLee Strong said.

On Sunday, as Trump attacked Ryan via Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/787758668565581824>, 
representatives for the Republican National Committee and Senate majority 
leader Mitch McConnell did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

But on Sunday, Newt Gingrich, a former House speaker and a periodic adviser to 
Trump, embraced Trump’s more conspiratorial tone, blaming the press for the 
nominee’s plummeting poll numbers. “Fourteen million people picked Donald 
Trump,” he toldFox News 
<http://www.foxnews.com/on-air/fox-news-sunday-chris-wallace/>. “Twenty TV 
executives decided to destroy him.”

He claimed: “Without the unending, one-sided assault of the news media, Trump 
would be beating Hillary Clinton by 15 points.”

Since last week, when a 2005 video leaked to the Washington Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 showed Trump bragging about groping women without consent, the candidate’s 
poll numbers have collapsed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fdonald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump's%20sex%20boasts%3A%20'When%20you%20are%20a%20star%20they%20let%20you%20do%20anything'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fdonald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%27s%20sex%20boasts%3A%20%27When%20you%20are%20a%20star%20they%20let%20you%20do%20anything%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fdonald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video&media=>
Donald Trump’s sex boasts: ‘When you are a star they let you do anything’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/08/donald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video>
On Sunday, a NBC/WSJ 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/first-read/clinton-holds-11-point-national-lead-over-trump-nbc-wsj-n666986>
 poll showed Clinton ahead nationally with 48%, Trump with 37% and the 
Libertarian and Green party candidates with 7% and 2% respectively. In a new 
Washington Post/ABC poll, Clinton had only a four-point lead, but nearly 70% of 
voters said Trump had probably sexually harassed women.

A CBS poll showed Clinton up 46%-40% in 13 key states, with a 15-point 
advantage among women.

Trump, who spent the week launching tirades at Clinton, journalists and his 
own party, continued on Sunday to portray himself as the victim.He tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/787618207444131840>: “Polls close, 
but can you believe I lost large numbers of women voters based on made up 
events THAT NEVER HAPPENED. Media rigging election!”

In another post <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/787632098794467328>
, he said: “Election is being rigged by the media, in a coordinated effort with 
the Clinton campaign, by putting stories that never happened into news!”

He goes head-to-head with Clinton in the final presidential debate in Las 
Vegas on Wednesday evening.

Giuliani at first argued that the candidate was merely speaking about bias in 
journalism,telling CNN’s State of the Union 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/politics/2016/10/16/rudy-giuliani-trump-rigged-election-sotu-sot.cnn>
: “When he talks about a rigged election, he’s not talking about the fact that 
it’s going to be rigged at the polls. What he’s talking about is that 80% to 
85% of the media is against him.”

But then he jumped from media criticism into racially charged territory, 
saying “there have been places where a lot of cheating going on”, citing two 
cities with large black populations, Philadelphia and Chicago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-rigged-election-poll-giuliani-gingrich-pence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01c86391521876d1246dad7c656958a99c25d904%2F251_423_3338_2003%2F3338.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20warns%20of%20'rigged'%20election%20as%20Giuliani%20makes%20racially%20charged%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-rigged-election-poll-giuliani-gingrich-pence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20warns%20of%20%27rigged%27%20election%20as%20Giuliani%20makes%20racially%20charged%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-rigged-election-poll-giuliani-gingrich-pence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01c86391521876d1246dad7c656958a99c25d904%2F251_423_3338_2003%2F3338.jpg>
 Former New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani speaks in Bangor, Maine. Photograph: 
Sarah Rice/Getty Images 
Giuliani claimed, without evidence, that Pennsylvania Democrats bussed voters 
in from Camden, New Jersey, and that “dead people generally vote for 
Democrats”. To back up his claims of voter fraud, he said the Republican 
president of the New York Yankees had stopped bussing voters around the deeply 
Democratic city’s boroughs.

“To tell me that I think the election in Philadelphia and Chicago is going to 
be fair, I would have to be a moron to say that,” Giuliani said. “I would have 
to dislearn everything I learned in 40 years of being a politician.”

The claims about Philadelphia appear to be drawn from a conspiracy theory born 
in 2012 afterMitt Romney failed to win a single vote 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/romney-earned-zero-votes-in-some-urban-precincts/> 
in 59 almost wholly black precincts of its 1,687 total. Obama won 85% of the 
city, 52% of Pennsylvania, and 93% of black voters nationwide.

Trump camp shows signs of fracture over sexual misconduct allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/trump-campaign-supporters-sexual-misconduct-allegations-women>
Conversely, he could not win a single vote in whole counties in deeply 
conservative Utah that year. John McCain failed to win votes in Chicago and 
Atlanta precincts in 2008.

Philadelphia’s Republican party and an investigation by the city’s Inquirer 
newspaper found claims of fraud or wrongdoing were baseless, and larger studies 
have found cases of in-person voter fraud have been exceedingly rare over the 
last six years.

Giuliani and Trump, however, have continued to argue that it does exist, and 
blamed “inner cities”, which Giuliani saidRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> “don’t control”.

That phrase has offended many African Americans, who hear in it a outdated and 
hyperbolic vision of their lives that does not match with rising quality of 
life for many minorities.

Trump has repeatedly said that black and Hispanic Americans are “living in 
hell”. When a black voter asked him in the second debate whether he would serve 
“all” Americans as president, he began speaking of “inner cities”, unprompted 
by anything in the man’s question.

Gingrich also said, without evidence, that fraud had taken place in cities 
such as Philadelphia, Chicago and St Louis,telling ABC’s This Week 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/week-transcript-sen-tim-kaine-newt-gingrich/story?id=42829884>
 that Ryan knows only “honest elections” in his midwest state of Wisconsin.

Gingrich said he thought Ryan should “go and look at the history of 
Philadelphia, including four years ago, the intimidation”.

Some of Trump’s own supporters have said they intend to go to polls to 
intimidate voters. Steve Webb, a 61-year-old Ohio voter,told the Boston Globe 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/politics/2016/10/15/donald-trump-warnings-conspiracy-rig-election-are-stoking-anger-among-his-followers/LcCY6e0QOcfH8VdeK9UdsM/story.html>
 this week: “Trump said to watch your precincts. I’m going to go, for sure. I’m 
going to go right up behind them. I’ll do everything legally. I want to see if 
they are accountable. I’m not going to do anything illegal. I’m going to make 
them a little bit nervous.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Ftrump-says-clinton-may-have-taken-drugs-before-debate-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20says%20Clinton%20may%20have%20taken%20drugs%20before%20debate%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Ftrump-says-clinton-may-have-taken-drugs-before-debate-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20says%20Clinton%20may%20have%20taken%20drugs%20before%20debate%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Ftrump-says-clinton-may-have-taken-drugs-before-debate-video&media=>
Trump says Clinton may have taken drugs before debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/16/trump-says-clinton-may-have-taken-drugs-before-debate-video>
Giuliani tried to downplay such remarks about a “coup” and “bloodshed”. “You 
can find just as many wacko nuts on her side,” he said.


Asked if he believed that every one of the women accusing Trump of sexual 
misconduct was lying, Giuliani told CNN: “No, I believe my friendDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> when he tells me he didn’t do 
it. I know Donald. I have been with him for 28 years. I have never seen him do 
anything like that.”

Some analysts have warned that, by stoking anger and fuelling conspiracy 
theories, Trump poses an unprecedented threat to America’s democratic 
stability. His supporters have become increasingly hostile and abusive towards 
the media.

Life after Trump: Republicans brace for betrayal and civil war after 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/republican-party-after-donald-trump-paul-ryan>
On Saturday, Milwaukee county sheriff David Clarke, a backer of Trump, tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/SheriffClarke/status/787314656641712128>: “It’s incredible 
that our institutions of gov, WH, Congress, DOJ, and big media are corrupt & 
all we do is bitch. Pitchforks and torches time.”

A narrow Clinton victory would put pressure on Republican leaders such as Ryan 
to quickly declare the result free and fair. The supreme court, forced to rule 
on the disputed 2000 election between George W Bush and Al Gore, iscurrently 
depleted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/sep/07/richard-blumenthal-supreme-court-merrick-garland-republican>
 by the death of Antonin Scalia, raising the prospect of a 4-4 split.

Clinton’s running mate, Tim Kaine, a senator for Virginia, accused Trump of 
looking for a scapegoat as he faces defeat.

“Donald Trump has kind of started to go wilder and wilder,” he said on ABC. “I 
think after – by all accounts – losing the first two debates, he started to 
make wild claims, kind of scorched earth claims about the election being 
rigged. He shouldn’t be engaging in those scare tactics.”

He added: “We have to keep putting out a message, and we need to call on 
everybody to speak out about the fact that we run elections and we run them 
well here. And we ask the GOP leaders also to stand up for the integrity of the 
American electoral process.”

Additional reporting by Ben Jacobs
 