
The surprise pick of Rex Tillerson as Donald Trump’s nominee for secretary of 
state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-named-as-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-chief-putin>
 has led to excitement in Moscow – and trepidation in other eastern European 
capitals – at the prospect of a “friend of Putin” becoming America’s top 
diplomat.

US allies meanwhile reacted anxiously to the news, but many diplomats said 
they would wait for Tillerson’s Senate hearings to discover whether he would 
make the conversion from oilman to statesman.

Donald Trump's secretary of state pick faces questions over preparedness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-experience>
Tillerson’s nomination is likely to add further fuel to the issue of alleged 
Russian intervention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/donald-trump-russia-vladimir-putin-us-election-hack>
 in the election in favour of Trump.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Donald%20Trump's%20secretary%20of%20state%20nominee%20Rex%20Tillerson%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20secretary%20of%20state%20nominee%20Rex%20Tillerson%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile&media=>
Who is Donald Trump’s secretary of state nominee Rex Tillerson? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/13/who-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
Tillerson, the outgoing ExxonMobil chief, has a warm relationship with the 
Russian president. He also counts Igor Sechin,considered the second-most 
powerful man in Russia, after Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/oct/18/igor-sechin-rosneft-kremlin-hard-man-shadows>
, as a personal friend.

In the month since the election, both hopes in Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/macho-election-russia-usa-putin-trump-negotiations>
 andfears in central and eastern European capitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/ukraine-trump-presidency-russia-putin>
 were tempered by an expectation that Trump’s key nominations would follow a 
more conventional policy on Russia than the president-elect had espoused.

Two weeks ago, when the leading candidates for secretary of state appeared to 
be Mitt Romney, David Petraeus and Rudy Giuliani – all of whom had spoken 
critically of Russia and Putin – a Ukrainian official told the Guardian there 
was “no need for doom and gloom” around theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>, stressing that 
Republican administrations were traditionally tougher on Russia than Democratic 
ones.

Tillerson’s nomination changes all that.

Vladimir Milov, a Russian opposition politician who was briefly deputy energy 
minister during the early Putin years, said Tillerson’s appointment was “100% 
good news” for Putin.

“This is a clear sign that US foreign policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-foreign-policy> will move from 
principles, values and strategic partnerships towards a more transactional 
approach,” said Milov.

Tillerson, 64, has spent much of his career working on Russian deals and has 
known Putin since 1999. His work in Russia culminated in a 2011 agreement giving
ExxonMobil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/exxonmobil> access to the huge 
resources under the Russian Arctic in return for giving the giant state-owned 
Russian oil company, Rosneft, the opportunity to invest in ExxonMobil’s 
operations overseas.

As a result of the deal, Tillerson became close to Rosneft’s chief, Sechin, a 
hawkish hardliner who is feared even by many Russian government officials. 
Sechin wasbelieved to have been behind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/oct/18/igor-sechin-rosneft-kremlin-hard-man-shadows>
 the carving up of the private oil company Yukos and the jailing of its owner, 
Mikhail Khodorkovsky, then Russia’s richest man, in 2003.

Milov said Tillerson was known in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> as a pragmatist willing to do 
business with Rosneft and Sechin even after the Yukos saga.


“I heard personally from top managers of American companies that after Yukos, 
Russia was not worth investing billions of dollars in, because the risks that 
came with it were too great. But not Exxon.”

Tillerson referred to him as “my friend Mr Sechin” at an economic forum in St 
Petersburg earlier this year, while Sechinhas said 
<http://www.vedomosti.ru/business/articles/2014/06/27/den-sobranij-akcionerov-onlajn>
 that one of his ambitions is to “ride the roads in the United States on 
motorcycles with Tillerson”.

The 2011 Exxon-Rosneft agreement was frozen when sanctions were imposed on 
Russia in 2014, following the annexation of Crimea and covert military 
intervention in eastern Ukraine. ExxonMobil estimated the sanctionscost it $1bn 
<http://www.gasandoil.com/news/2015/02/exxon-mobil-loses-1-billion-due-to-sanctions-against-russia>
 and Tillerson has argued strenuously for the measures to be lifted.


“We always encourage the people who are making those decisions to consider the 
very broad collateral damage of who are they really harming with sanctions,” he 
said, at a shareholders’ meeting.

Maxim Suchkov, an analyst at the Russian International Affairs Council, said: 
“Tillerson’s ties with Sechin and Putin were predominantly driven by lucrative 
oil deals rather than personal warmth.”

“As a head of an oil giant, he was preoccupied with making profits for his 
company –even if that involved growing cosy with people that are critically 
assessed in the US. Secretary of state position demands a different set of 
drivers – safeguarding national interests.


“Right now, Russians expect the personal chemistry Tillerson seems to have 
with Putin might be helpful in switching the relationship with Washington from 
a confrontation to a cooperation mode,” Suchkov, who is also the Russia and 
Middle East editor for Al-Monitor, added. “Americans fear this ‘chemistry’ will 
make Tillerson trade US interests for Moscow. Both are somewhat fractured 
expectations, in my view. Tillerson may have more empathy for Russia’s position 
but that will be unlikely to change the systemic differences between the two 
countries.”

European diplomats in Washington cautioned against the presumption that 
Tillerson would bring his outlook as head of the world’s biggest publicly 
traded oil company to his new job.


“Secretary of state is a different job, with a different set of priorities,” 
said a senior diplomat. “You only know how he is going to approach being 
secretary of state when he goes before the Senate and answers questions on the 
key issues.”


US allies in Europe will be watching the confirmation hearings in particular 
for Tillerson’s views on Russia, western sanctions over Moscow’s intervention in
Ukraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>, and most of all his 
expression of his view of Nato – whether he sees the alliance primarily as a 
counterterrorist force, or as the guarantor of European security right up to 
Russia’s borders.

Tillerson will not take over the state department with a free hand to rewrite 
policy, however. He is likely to face a striking culture clash with the 
institution, the bastion of foreign policy orthodoxy, which would have an ally 
in the secretary of defence nominee, the retired generalJames Mattis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/james-mattis-secretary-of-defense-donald-trump>
, who is likely to oppose any erosion of Nato solidarity in the face of 
Moscow’s assertiveness in Europe.


However, the nomination as head of the state department of a man who knows 
Putin better than most western politicians, and who appears sympathetic to 
Kremlin talking points, has the potential to radically shake up US policy on 
Russia.

“Of course people in the Kremlin would prefer to deal with people they know 
for a long time, and people they know positively,” said Konstantin von Eggert, 
a journalist and foreign policy analyst who from 2009-2010 was a vice-president 
of ExxonMobil Russia, but left before its deal with Rosneft.


By extension, it will lead officials in Ukraine and other eastern European 
countries to worry that Trump and Tillerson will end the sanctions regime and 
do a “big deal” with Moscow that throws them under the bus.


“Trump’s choice of Rex Tillerson suggests he wants to make good on his promise 
to cut deals with Russia instead of containing it,” said Thomas Wright, who has 
written extensively on Trump’s foreign policy at the Brookings Institution.


“Tillerson has a relationship with Putin and he opposed the sanctions imposed 
on Russia after the annexation of Crimea. This will alarm those worried about 
Russian intentions inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.”

In a series of Twitter posts on Tuesday, the former ambassador to Russia, 
Michael McFaul, questioned Tillerson’s nomination.


“US & our allies sanctioned Russians because of Putin intervention in Ukraine. 
Will Tillerson lift sanctions without Russian policy change?” McFaulwrote 
<https://twitter.com/McFaul/status/808679073773821953>. He also suggested 
<https://twitter.com/McFaul/status/808679485201465344> Tillerson’s personal 
links to the Kremlin inner circle could affect his decision-making: “Tillerson 
closest business associate in Russia, Igor Sechin, is on sanctions list. Can he 
separate personal from national interests?”

Even before Trump announced his decision on Tuesday, leading Democrats were 
painting Tillerson as a Moscow stooge. With a slim 52-48 majority in the 
Senate, it would only take threeRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> in revolt to cast Tillerson’s 
job in doubt. He would face aggressive questioning from Republican foreign 
policy hawks, led by John McCain.

“I have, obviously, concerns about his relationship with Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, who is a thug and a 
murderer, but obviously we will have hearings on that issue and other issues 
concerning him will be examined and then it’s the time to make up your mind on 
whether to vote yes or no,” the Arizona senator told CNN on Saturday.

McCain’s former chief of staff, Mark Salter, was far more blunt on Twitter. 
“Tillerson would sell outNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> for 
Sakhalin oil and his pal, Vlad,” he wrote. “Should be a rough confirmation 
hearing, and a no vote on the Senate floor.”
 