
Donald Trump was accorded a chilly but deferential welcome at the White House 
on Thursday as the president-elect metBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> for a 90-minute private 
meeting in the Oval Office.

In the first stage of a 72-day transition process between Tuesday’s unexpected 
election victory and Trump’s inauguration on 20 January, Obama said the two men 
discussed “foreign and domestic policy” and how to ensure the handover of power 
went smoothly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video>
“I want to emphasise to you, Mr President-elect, that we now are going to do 
everything we can to help you succeed because if you succeed, then the country 
succeeds,” Obama told his successor during a brief photo opportunity afterwards.

A grinning Trump gave Obama a pat on the back as they got up to leave, and 
boasted to reporters of how long he had just spent in the Oval Office, though 
the president – more sombre-faced until then – jokingly advised him not to take 
any questions.

While they spoke, Trump’s wife Melania was shown around their new home in the 
official residence and East Wing by Michelle Obama, reportedly discussing what 
it was like to raise children in the White House.

Trump appeared to relish the welcome, though White House officials did not 
allow photographs of the traditional greeting outside. Obama appeared stiff and 
subdued throughout.

“This was a meeting that was going to last for maybe 10 or 15 minutes, and we 
were just going to get to know each other,” said Trump in the brief remarks to 
reporters he gave from an ornate armchair usually occupied by world leaders.

“We had never met each other. I have great respect. The meeting lasted for 
almost an hour and a half. And it could have – as far as I’m concerned, it 
could have gone on for a lot longer.”

Asked if he would seek advice from Obama in the future, despite intense 
criticism from both of them toward the other in the past, Trump described his 
political opponent as a “very good man”.

“We discussed a lot of different situations, some wonderful and some 
difficulties,” said the president-elect, according to the official White House 
transcript of their remarks. “I very much look forward to dealing with the 
president in the future, including counsel. He explained some of the 
difficulties, some of the high-flying assets and some of the really great 
things that have been achieved.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftop-priorities-for-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20top%20priorities%3A%20immigration%2C%20healthcare%20and%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftop-priorities-for-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20top%20priorities%3A%20immigration%2C%20healthcare%20and%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftop-priorities-for-donald-trump-video&media=>
Trump’s top priorities: immigration, healthcare and jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/top-priorities-for-donald-trump-video>
Briefing reporters afterwards, press secretary Josh Earnest said he did not 
know what Trump had meant by “high-flying assets” and denied the Republican’s 
claim that only 10 minutes had originally been scheduled.

But he insisted the meeting was “a little less awkward than some might have 
expected” and tried to explain Obama’s comment that the meeting had been 
“excellent”.

“When you consider the profound differences between the two gentlemen and the 
fact they have never met before ... I think that qualifies as ‘excellent’,” 
said Earnest.

Washington has quickly adopted a deferential approach toward the future 
commander-in-chief, despitewidespread demonstrations in major US cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/anti-donald-trump-protests-new-york-chicago-san-francisco>
 since Tuesday’s election and reports of an increase in racist attacks aimed at 
immigrants.

US elections 2016 live results: track who is winning, county by county
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-results-live-clinton-trump>
As votes from California and other Democratic-leaning states on the west coast 
were slowly processed on Thursday, Clinton was on track to exceed Trump’s share 
of the popular vote by1.2% <http://www.nytimes.com/elections/forecast/president>
, fueling concern about the mandate for sweeping change.

Yet there were no protest 
<https://twitter.com/RobertsDan/status/796733009676431360>s visible 
<https://twitter.com/RobertsDan/status/796733009676431360> outside the White 
House in the hour leading up to Trump’s arrival. Onewoman with a placard 
<https://twitter.com/RobertsDan/status/796733510061060096> saying “stand up to 
racism” laid it on the ground as she was interviewed by a succession of media 
crews, though other protesters were expected during the meeting.
Dan Roberts (@RobertsDan) 
This was the only sign of dissent I could find outside the White House 45 mins 
before Trump arrives. Too busy being interviewed to pick up.
pic.twitter.com/XndlSKvu8N <https://t.co/XndlSKvu8N>
 <https://twitter.com/RobertsDan/status/796733510061060096> November 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RobertsDan/status/796733510061060096> 
Instead, the traditional Marine guard stood stiffly outside the West Wing as 
Trump’s motorcade swept in from Ronald Reagan airport, where he left his 
trademark Boeing 757-200. The US Secret Service has announced atemporary no-fly 
zone 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3923346/Trump-Tower-no-fly-zone-Massive-security-operation-springs-Donald-s-Manhattan-home-election-victory.html>
 for commercial aircraft over Trump Tower in New York, where the 
president-elect will continue to live for the next few weeks.

Trump’s motorcade arrived on the South Lawn at the White House, which is not 
visible to journalists or the public. He also refused to allow the usual 
presence of a pooled media representative with him as he travelled. Spokeswoman 
Hope Hicks said Trump would travel back to New York on Thursday night.

In a sharp change of tone, much of the US news media has treated Trump with 
the respectful approach usually granted to the US head of state when performing 
ceremonial duties, referring to the president-elect informally as PEOTUS.

During the Oval Office meeting, Ivanka Trump’s husband Jared Kushner – a 
likely top aide in the next administration – was escorted through the Rose 
Garden by White House chief of staff Denis McDonough.

Vice-president Joe Biden was due to meet with his successor, Mike Pence, while 
Trump headed to meet Republican congressional leaders Mitch McConnell and Paul 
Ryan on Capitol Hill. They have pledged to give him full support in repealing 
key Democratic legislation such as Obamacare and international climate change 
accords.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpaul-ryan-donald-trump-meeting-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=House%20speaker%20Paul%20Ryan%20meets%20with%20Trump%20in%20Washington%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpaul-ryan-donald-trump-meeting-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=House%20speaker%20Paul%20Ryan%20meets%20with%20Trump%20in%20Washington%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpaul-ryan-donald-trump-meeting-video&media=>
House speaker Paul Ryan meets with Trump in Washington – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/paul-ryan-donald-trump-meeting-video>
Trump’s election win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
 has already ignited protests across the US, withthousands of demonstrators 
crowding into streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/anti-trump-protests-election-president-new-york-chicago>
 and surrounding his buildings in major American cities during the first night 
after the result.

The protests – in cities including New York City, Chicago, San Francisco, 
Oakland, Philadelphia and Seattle – erupted after the Democratic candidate, 
Hillary Clinton, lost the electoral college and presidential race on Tuesday 
night despite almost certainlywinning the popular vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-popular-vote-electoral-college-donald-trump>
.

I didn't protest during the presidential race. I will now | Yuko Kodama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/protest-trump-tower-leader>
As night fell in midtown Manhattan, people took over Sixth Avenue 
<https://twitter.com/feministabulous/status/796515927017881601> and marched by 
Trump Tower, carrying signs that read “Not my president”, “She got more votes 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/huge-protest-over-donald-trump-in-new-york-city-2016-11?utm_source=feedburner&amp%3Butm_medium=referral&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+businessinsider+%28Business+Insider%29>
” and “Hands off my pussy”, a reference to a leaked recording where Trump
bragged that he could sexually assault women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 because of his fame. A number of arrests were made.

Protesters who had marched all the way from Union Square – 35 blocks downtown 
– continued past Trump Tower, with a crowd congregating in front of the 
president-elect’s building.

Behind the scenes there is also a bleak mood among many Democrats in the 
outgoing administration, but officially it has decided to emphasise small signs 
of progress in the tone adopted by Trump since his victory.

“I have been very encouraged by the, I think, interest in President-elect 
Trump’s wanting to work with my team around many of the issues that this great 
country faces,” said Obama. “And I believe that it is important for all of us, 
regardless of party and regardless of political preferences, to now come 
together, work together, to deal with the many challenges that we face.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbarack-obama-donald-trump-white-house-meeting-transition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e011233290dbe00d99321c2535fe730e0b40816%2F0_174_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20and%20Obama%20put%20differences%20aside%20in%20first%20White%20House%20meeting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbarack-obama-donald-trump-white-house-meeting-transition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20and%20Obama%20put%20differences%20aside%20in%20first%20White%20House%20meeting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbarack-obama-donald-trump-white-house-meeting-transition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e011233290dbe00d99321c2535fe730e0b40816%2F0_174_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Donald Trump’s victory on Tuesday night has sparked demonstrations in major 
cities across the US. Photograph: Lucas Jackson/Reuters 
The two also had specific conversations about how Obama would handle 
discussions with foreign leaders on an upcoming overseas trip. They also 
discussed ways of organising an effective team around the new president to 
handle future crises.

“They spent a large portion of the meeting discussing the importance of 
properly staffing and organising a White House,” Earnest, the press secretary, 
told reporters after the meeting.

He declined to answer questions about whether they discussed Trump’s promise 
to unwind much of the outgoing administration’s achievements over the last 
eight years.

“President Obama came away from the meeting with renewed confidence in the 
commitment of the president-elect to ensure a smooth transition,” said Earnest.

No staff were in the room during the meeting, but Earnest stressed it was 
unrealistic to expect the meeting to smooth over all that had gone beforehand.

“I feel confident in telling you that they did not resolve all of their 
differences, but I also feel confident in telling you that they did not try to 
resolve all of their differences.”

He said he was not aware of any additional meeting that has been scheduled but 
“wouldn’t rule out anything” after Trump spoke of wanting to hear Obama’s 
counsel.

It is thought the meeting in Washington on Thursday was the only time they 
have been in same room since Obama ridiculed Trump’s claims about his 
birthplace at a White House correspondents’ dinner in 2011.

Additional reporting by Sam Levin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sam-levin> in San Francisco, Zach Stafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/zach-stafford> in Chicago and Scott Bixby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/scott-bixby> in New York
 