
A fair number of people are implacably opposed to seeing any hope for the 
future after the election ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> to the presidency of the 
United States. But there’s one good reason to be hopeful. Many observers saw 
quite quickly that Trump’s personality washighly disordered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/05/donald-trump-psychology-personality-republicans-election>
. People with yet more dangerous personality disorders have gained power many 
times in human history – probably far more often than not. This time, however, 
the phenomenon is being scrutinised on those terms. The opportunity for 
everyone to learn a lot about this domineering, exploitative, unstable and 
superficially charismatic personality type has presented itself on a grand 
scale.

In fact, there has never been a better time than now for human beings to start 
gaining far greater insight into ourselves, what makes us so creative and what 
makes us so destructive. And it’s not just a matter of information. All the 
neuroimaging, all the psychological theorising, all the psychiatric 
experimentation with pharmacology, it’s already prompting a huge need for 
careful, scientifically anchored engagement with theethical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethics> and philosophical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philosophy> debate about what it is to be 
human.

Related: What is giving you hope for 2017? | Sarah Marsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/what-is-giving-you-hope-for-2017>

There’s no doubt that people are wary. For some, calling a serial killer a 
psychopath is somehow excusing them. In the judicial system, where brain scans 
have been used by defence lawyers, the “it wasn’t me, it was my brain” defence 
is mistrusted. It is odd, this idea that we are anything at all, if not our 
brains. We like to believe we have free will, and have become used to judging 
criminality as a moral failing rather than a neurological failing. Yet 
scientific evidence that ethical choices are the consequence of the processing 
of information through an adequately developed mind, is mounting.

The idea that every human brain is mechanically perfect – with cruel or 
annihilating impulses somehow separate from it, as if repugnant thoughts were 
like stagnant water running through an infallibly reliable plumbing system – is 
silly but somehow comforting.

Donald Trump regularly advertises the marvellous health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/27/donald-trump-doctor-letter-health-harold-bornstein>
 and tip-top functioning of his brain. Even relatively benign neurological 
quirks – say, learning disabilities such as dyslexia – attract cynicism and 
suspicion. They are seen by some as deluded excuses rather than helpful 
explanations.

Related: Another, more beautiful America is rising. Trump will be resisted | 
Rebecca Solnit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/america-trump-californian-senate>

A New Zealand study reported earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/12/high-social-cost-adults-can-be-identified-from-as-young-as-three-says-study>
 that “high social cost” adults could be predicted from as young as three from 
a 45-minute survey of their brain. It has long been known that early 
intervention is important for vulnerable children. But the Dunedin Longitudinal 
study is a real wake-up call. It signposts how catching early developmental 
problems and helping children develop their minds more fully is of benefit to 
all of society, if only we have the will.

Humans find threatening the idea that thought is the product of complex, 
robust, yet highly plastic physical processes, that can be flawed from birth 
and can develop, repair or compensate for flaws, depending on environment. 
Somehow, even in our secular age, we prefer to believe we have souls. Yet our 
potential for understanding that it’s all in our minds, and working out how 
individual minds can develop in a well-adjusted way, has never been greater. 
That, to me, gives great hope for the future.
 