
11.32pm BST 23:32  <> 

Today in Campaign 2016
 Donald Trump. Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images 
 * A co-founder of Facebook said to be worth around $10bn has announced 
donations to multiple Democratic groups. Among Dustin Moskovitz’s aims is 
electing Hillary Clinton, whom he apparently has never met, president. 
Moskovitz was college roommates with Mark Zuckerberg and just became, itlooks 
like <https://twitter.com/teddyschleifer/status/774244794012954625>, the 
third-biggest Democratic donor out there. In a statementon Medium 
<https://medium.com/@moskov/compelled-to-act-1413930041ee#.dskec1h72>, 
Moskovitz and his wife, whose cool name is Cari Tuna, and who together arenoted 
and precocious philanthropists 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/billionaire-couple-give-plenty-to-charity-but-they-do-quite-a-bit-of-homework/2014/12/26/19fae34c-86d6-11e4-b9b7-b8632ae73d25_story.html>
, said they feel hesitant to try to buy elections but the “fear and hostility” 
with which the Republicans have conducted this campaign has compelled them to 
act.

 * Bill Clinton, the Arkansas native and former governor who won Appalachia 
and Georgia at Carter ’76 levels, has said that Trump’s slogan “make America 
great again” is racist dog whistling: “That message – I’ll give you America 
great again – if you’re a white southerner, you know exactly what it means, 
don’t you?” Clinton said to an audience in Orlando: 
It means I’ll give you the economy you had 50 years ago and I’ll move you back 
up the social totem pole and other people down,. What Hillary wants to do is 
take the totem pole down and let us all go forward together!

 * Texas Representative Louie Gohmert, who came to Washington playing the Tea 
Party piccolo, and who has a reputation for sayingall kinds of crazy stuff 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4XXXRVI0uJI> about “terror babies” and Muslim 
Brotherhood members in the White House and death squads and asparagus, has said 
further crazy things about Hillary Clinton, this time to attendees of a values 
voters summit in Washington, DC, where Donald Trump is scheduled to appear 
later today. “You don’t make fun of people who are impaired, have special 
needs,” Gohmert, a Republican, said. 
 * Who was the top recipient of funds from Donald Trump’s charitable 
foundation in 2014? Would you believe an activist group suing the New York 
attorney general who was suing Trump University for fraud? It appears that 
Trump gave $100,000, as charity, to an effort to take down a public official 
accusing him of fraud. The man who ran the activist group now works on the 
Trump campaign. The revelation,reported by Yahoo 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/trump-charity-gave-100000-to-david-bossies-citizens-united-that-helped-fund-lawsuit-against-moguls-foe-151337835.html?soc_src=mail&soc_trk=ma>
, comes as questions build about a separate donation the Trump charity made to 
the Florida attorney general’s reelection effort in 2013. Reelecting attorneys 
general, or bringing federal lawsuits against them, does not count as 
charitable activity.

 * One year after Trump was booed at the Values Voters Summit 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/2015/sep/25/donald-trump-booed-conservatives-marco-rubio>
 for calling Marco Rubio “a clown,” the Republican nominee gave a more polished 
speech where he ignored politically divisive issues like abortion and same-sex 
marriage and instead focused on school vouchers and changing federal law to 
allow tax exempt churches to engage in political advocacy. To Trump, school 
choice, which he advocated for in a speech on Thursday was a needed innovation. 
“The education can’t get worse,” he said as Trump also pledged to “campaign to 
get the states to re-allocate another $110 billion of their education budgets 
to school choice programs”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33%23block-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33%23block-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33%23block-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33%23block-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33%23block-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33%23block-57d336c0e4b013613fffbc33&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.11pm BST 23:11  <> 

Trump campaign releases 10 years of Mike Pence's tax returns

Donald Trump’s presidential campaign has released 10 years of running mate 
Mike Pence’s tax returns, covering the years2006 through 2015 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/governor-mike-pence-tax-returns>, 
despite having not released any tax information of the presidential candidate 
himself.

The Indiana governor’s latest tax filings 
<https://assets.donaldjtrump.com/2015_Pence_Tax_Return.pdf> show that he paid 
an effective tax rate of 12.4% on an income of $113,026 in 2015, the 
second-lowest tax rate of the past decade for the governor and his family. In 
2015, Pence made a total of $8,923 in donations to charity, almost equal to the 
$8,956 he paid in federal income tax.

“The Pence family has been honored to serve their state and their nation for 
the past 16 years, while raising three great children and putting them through 
college,” Marc Lotter, Pence’s press secretary, said in a statement.

“These tax returns clearly show that Mike and Karen Pence have paid their 
taxes, supported worthy causes, and, unlike the Clintons, the Pences have not 
profited from their years in public service.”

Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton has released her 2015 personal 
tax return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/12/hillary-clinton-tim-kaine-tax-returns>
 in August, as well as that of running mate Tim Kaine and his wife, Anne 
Holton, who additionally released 10 years of their returns.

Those figures showed that Hillary and Bill Clinton earned nearly $11m in 2015, 
paying an effective federal income tax rate of 34.2%. Adding an effective state 
and local income tax rate of 9.0%, the couple’s total tax rate totaled 43.2%. 
The Clintons donated $1,042,000, or 9.8%, of their adjusted gross income to 
charity.

Also revealed in the latest tax filings is Karen Pence’s unsuccessful stint as 
a small business owner: That’s My Towel Charm, Inc., which sold towel charms so 
that bathers do not confuse their towels, lost $3,407 last year.

Updated at 11.29pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27%23block-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27%23block-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27%23block-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27%23block-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27%23block-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27%23block-57d33278e4b013613fffbc27&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.58pm BST 22:58  <> 

Reaction to Donald Trump's Value Voters Summit speech: 'He doesn’t seem 
maniacal'

Ben Jacobs

Practice may not make perfect for Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, but the Republican nominee 
clearly has refined his appeal to evangelical voters in the past year.
 Donald Trump. Photograph: Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA 
One year after Trump was booed at the Values Voters Summit 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/2015/sep/25/donald-trump-booed-conservatives-marco-rubio>
 for calling Marco Rubio “a clown,” the Republican nominee gave a more polished 
speech where he ignored politically divisive issues like abortion and same-sex 
marriage and instead focused on school vouchers and changing federal law to 
allow tax exempt churches to engage in political advocacy. To Trump, school 
choice, which he advocated for in a speech on Thursday was a needed innovation. 
“The education can’t get worse,” he said as Trump also pledged to “campaign to 
get the states to re-allocate another $110 billion of their education budgets 
to school choice programs”

Speaking from teleprompters, it served as a pointed contrast to his speech a 
year ago 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/2015/sep/27/donald-trump-bible-christmas-voter-values-summit-social-conservatives>
 which seemed to focus on the importance of saying “Merry Christmas” instead of 
“Happy Holidays.” Trump still was by no means a natural in front of a crowd of 
ardent social conservatives. He referred to attendees as “you people” at one 
point. Trump also railed against the Obama administration for not admitting 
Christian refugees from Syria into the United States, a major cause of concern 
for evangelicals who have long advocated for minority Christian communities in 
the Middle East. The problem is that Trump’s own refugee policy would be a 
blanket ban on anyone from the region entering the United States.

He did seem cognizant that no one would mistake him for a devout evangelical. 
At one point in the speech he joked that his support for repealing the Johnson 
Amendment, which would allow churches to engage in partisan politics while 
keeping their tax exempt status, was the only way he could get into heaven. But 
the biggest applause was not for Trump himself but for when he proclaimed 
“Hillary Clinton is unfit to be president.” The room exploded in applause and 
one attendee could be seen waving his tricorn hat in support.

Values Voter Summit is sponsored by the Family Research Council and has a 
constellation of conservative groups represented. Even the far-right John Birch 
Society had a table in the group’s exhibition hall.

But Trump’s performance seemed to ease the concerns of attendees who 
represented some of the most ardent cultural warriors in the party, a group 
that has long been uncomfortable with the nominee and preferred other 
candidates like Ted Cruz in the primary.

Dylan Miller, a rising community college freshman from Northwest Florida said 
the speech changed his mind about Trump. “He doesn’t seem maniacal” said the 
teenager, in contrast to the Republican nominee’s performances on television. 
Miller had said he had always planned on voting for Trump “because he wasn’t 
Hillary,” but Trump’s performance made him feel far more comfortable with his 
vote.

Another attendee, Sarah Ocker, a student at Tulsa Community College in 
Oklahoma, said she was “more there” now than she was before the speech. She 
“agreed with a lot” of what Trump said, particularly about “religious liberty.” 
Ocker still had major hesitations about Trump and still couldn’t commit to 
voting for the Republican nominee though but was “hoping” she could find a 
reason to vote for him in November.

Vernon Lewis of Marshall, Texas was further along in the process. Lewis had 
once thought he would have to hold his nose to vote for Trump. But after a 
private meeting with other Christians with Trump in New York as well as seeing 
his speech Friday, Lewis was enthusiastic. “He is a very gentle guy.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e%23block-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e%23block-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e%23block-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e%23block-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e%23block-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e%23block-57d3303be4b013613fffbc1e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.47pm BST 22:47  <> 

David Smith

On Friday, in blazing sunshine, about 200 members of Congress stood on the 
steps beneath the recently restored Capitol dome and prayed, observed a 
moment’s silence and, accompanied by a marine band, sang God Bless America to 
mark the imminent anniversary of the September 11 terrorist attacks.
 Paul Ryan, joined by House members, speaks on Capitol Hill in Washington 
during a ceremony marking the 15th anniversary of Sept. 11 attacks. Photograph: 
Molly Riley/AP 
The remembrance ceremony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CMKvLqwdD-w&feature=youtu.be&Source=GovD>, 
with Democrats and Republicans standing side by side, was heartening toEmanuel 
Lipscomb <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/author/emanuel-lipscomb>, 57, who was 
in New York on business that day and narrowly survived the disaster. “It’s good 
to see it’s brought a spark of bipartisanship,” he said. “It’s bringing the 
United States together because we all suffered together as one.”

For these crisp nine minutes, at least, the toxic wrangling and inertia of 
Congress could be put aside, along with its legacy of war in Afghanistan and 
Iraq. TheHouse speaker, Paul Ryan <https://paulryan.house.gov/>, who was 31 on 
9/11, reflected on a generation of teenagers who have no memory of it.

“Today, I can’t help but think of my own children – and all the children born 
after 9/11,” the Republican said. “Do they fully understand what happened that 
day? Will they ever? Can they? They can watch the old footage. They can see 
clips of the towers falling. They can hear the great roar as a landmark comes 
crashing down –and with it, an era. But can they actually feel it?

“I’ve had so many conversations with my own kids about this, about the shock, 
the terror, the outrage. Can they feel the sense of bereavement – at losing 
almost 3,000 Americans in a single morning? I don’t think they can. But that 
makes it our generation’s burden. We lived through that terrible day. And we 
will never forget that terrible day.”


Ryan spoke of the firefighters who rushed into danger and the flags that 
appeared on overpasses as if “to bind up the nation’s wounds”. He added: “These 
are the stories that we can pass on. We can turn our burden of grief into a 
gift of grace – because our children may not fully understand the horror of it 
all. But they can admire the heroism.”

'9/11 belongs to compassion': Congress marks 15th anniversary on Capitol steps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/09/congress-911-rememberance-ceremony-capitol>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97%23block-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97%23block-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97%23block-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97%23block-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97%23block-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97%23block-57d32dcbe4b07ac3d446aa97&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.32pm BST 22:32  <> 

Tom Kutsch

Having a newly discovered parasitic flatworm named after you may not be the 
world’s most illustrious honor, but it’s somethingBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> nonetheless has the pleasure 
of adding to his presidential legacy.

Enter Baracktrema obamai, the flatworm that infects Malaysian freshwater 
turtles, a species and genus of parasite discovered by Dr Thomas R Platt, an 
expert on turtle parasites, who wanted to bestow the president with a gift of 
adding his namesake to the animal kingdom.

“This is clearly something in my small way done to honor our president,” 
Platt, who recently discovered that he was also a distant relative of Obama, 
told the Associated Press.


“I have named a number of species after people I admire, from my 
father-in-law, my PhD adviser, and good friends who are academics and/or 
amateur naturalists,” Platt said in a press release. “Baracktrema obamai will 
endure as long as there are systematists studying these remarkable organisms.”

Barack Obama's latest honor: a parasitic flatworm to bear his name
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/barack-obama-parasitic-flatworm-name-honor>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06%23block-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06%23block-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06%23block-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06%23block-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06%23block-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06%23block-57d32a72e4b013613fffbc06&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.18pm BST 22:18  <> 

David Smith

Senator John McCain gave Donald Trump’s military credibility a wide berth 
during an appearance at the Heritage Foundation, a Thatcherite free market 
think tank in Washington. After delivering a speech about America’s role in 
Asia, McCain, the Republican nominee in 2008, was asked about Trump’s recent 
appearance in a televised “commander-in-chief” forum. At first he offered his 
usual reply: “I support the nominee of the party.”

After a pause, perhaps considering this will no longer suffice, McCain added: 
“Honestly, I am not here to talk aboutDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. The election will be in 
November. The issues we’re discussing today will be with us for a long time.”

Those issues included Chinese aggression in Asia which, the Arizona senator 
argued, must be opposed through military strength and free trade, in particular 
the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP). BothHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and Donald Trump have 
vowed to scrap the deal. But McCain warned: “If TPP fails, American leadership 
in the Asian Pacific may well fail with it.” He contended that not passing the 
TPP would mean China “rewrites the rules at our expense”.

The former prisoner of war in Vietnam also lambasted Barack Obama’s handling 
of the crisis in Syria, claiming that president’s failure to enforce the “red 
line” over using chemical weapons “destroyed” American credibility in the 
region and around the world.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81%23block-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81%23block-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81%23block-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81%23block-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81%23block-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81%23block-57d326dde4b07ac3d446aa81&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.51pm BST 21:51  <> 

Hillary Clinton speaks after attending a national security meeting
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e%23block-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e%23block-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e%23block-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e%23block-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e%23block-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e%23block-57d320aee4b07ac3d446aa6e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.38pm BST 21:38  <> 

The chair of NBC News has emailed the network’s staffers to congratulate Matt 
Lauer on a job well-done during this week’s “Commander-in-Chief” forum aboard 
the aircraft carrier Intrepid, despite wide criticism of Lauer’s performance as 
the forum’s moderator.

Andy Lack, the head of NBC News, emailed Lauer’s colleagues that “Matt did a 
tremendous job – driving one of the most serious discussions to date on these 
topics,” despite criticism of the TODAY Show host for spending more than a 
third of his time with Democratic presidential nomineeHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> on her use of private 
email servers and declining to fact-check Donald Trump’s incorrect assertion 
that he was opposed to the invasion of Iraq.

The email, obtained by the Guardian, called the forum a “remarkable 
achievement”.

Here’s the letter in full:

Dear Colleagues,

Before this week comes to an end, I wanted to take just a moment to share how 
proud I am of all the work our teams produced together this week. After a 
summer of success at the Conventions and the Olympics, we broke more new ground 
Wednesday night with the first ever Commander-in-Chief Forum.

Against all odds we were able to bring the two presidential nominees together 
for the first time and presented an important examination of what each would 
bring to the role of Commander-in-Chief. Because of our event, national 
security has dominated the news cycle for days. Every major paper and news 
broadcast around the world has led with headlines about Putin, Iraq, ISIS, and 
intelligence briefings. Matt did a tremendous job – driving one of the most 
serious discussions to date on these topics. Nearly 15 million people watched 
the event, and over 26 million tuned in at some point during the hour.

My deepest thanks to everyone who helped pull off this remarkable achievement.

Have a wonderful weekend! With much respect and affection,

Andy
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60%23block-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60%23block-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60%23block-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60%23block-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60%23block-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60%23block-57d31ceee4b07ac3d446aa60&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.29pm BST 21:29  <> 

This is Hillel the Elder, not Emma Watson.
Ivanka Trump (@IvankaTrump) 
See more #ITwisewords <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ITwisewords?src=hash>: 
https://t.co/KzEUXBsXFb <https://t.co/KzEUXBsXFb> #quote 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/quote?src=hash> #inspiration 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/inspiration?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/mWFdLSxaL3 
<https://t.co/mWFdLSxaL3>
 <https://twitter.com/IvankaTrump/status/774321513927364608> September 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/IvankaTrump/status/774321513927364608> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3%23block-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3%23block-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3%23block-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3%23block-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3%23block-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3%23block-57d31b96e4b013613fffbbd3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.25pm BST 21:25  <> 

Donald Trump to reveal 'health regimen' on Dr. Oz show

Donald Trump’s campaign has promised to reveal his full health records, but 
that promise - made after questions were raised about a letter penned by his 
gastroenterologist in just five minutes while a Trump limousine idled outside 
his office - has been moderated to entail a one-hour sitdown interview on The 
Dr. Oz Show’s season premiere next week.

Trump will appear on the show - hosted by the eponymous Dr. Mehmet Oz, a 
cardiothoracic surgeon and Columbia University professor - with daughter Ivanka 
Trump to “reveal his own personal health regimen,” as well as address “why the 
health of the candidates has become such a serious issue in this campaign,” 
according to a teaser for the interview released by the show.

Oz himself has been criticized by fellow doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/23/dr-mehmet-oz-gmo-labeling-public-health-columbia-university>
 on the grounds that he promotes “quack treatments” and “has repeatedly shown 
disdain for science and for evidence-based medicine, as well as baseless and 
relentless opposition to the genetic engineering of food crops”.

The episode will air on 15 September, next Thursday.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58%23block-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58%23block-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58%23block-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58%23block-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58%23block-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58%23block-57d31958e4b07ac3d446aa58&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.05pm BST 21:05  <> 

Donald Trump: Antonin Scalia 'the ultimate example' of a supreme court justice

“The next president will not only have to fill this seat, but as many as four 
others. We could even end up with a total of five judges,”Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> said at the Value Voters 
Summit of Christian conservatives in Washington, DC. “And you pick the wrong 
people, you have a country that is no longer your country. It will be a 
disaster.”

“We’re going to pick great judges,” he continued. “Maybe we use Judge Scalia 
as the ultimate example of what we’re looking for, okay? This will determine 
whether or not we remain a constitutional republic, frankly.”

“The extremist judges she would pick would be rejected by the overwhelming 
majority of the American public,” Trump said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168%23block-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168%23block-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168%23block-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168%23block-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168%23block-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168%23block-57d315fde4b08465d44ff168&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.52pm BST 20:52  <> 

Donald Trump, on allowing tax-exempt churches to endorse politicians:

I figure, it’s the only way I’m getting to heaven.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba%23block-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba%23block-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba%23block-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba%23block-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba%23block-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba%23block-57d312e7e4b013613fffbbba&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.46pm BST 20:46  <> 

“Our politicians have really abandoned you, to a large extent. And Hillary 
Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>? You can forget 
about her.”

“In Trump administration, our Christian heritage will be cherished, protected, 
defended like you’ve never seen before,” Trump said. “Believe me.”

“And that includes religious liberty - remember,” Trump added, a winking 
reference to so-called “religious freedom” bills that would allow Christian 
business owners to refuse service to those whose lifestyles, marriage statuses 
or sexual orientations ran counter to their religious beliefs.

“Our nation today is divided,” Trump said. “Nobody likes to say it, but we’re 
living in a very, very divided nation,” which will be brought to unity only 
through “our faith in God.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1%23block-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1%23block-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1%23block-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1%23block-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1%23block-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1%23block-57d31197e4b013613fffbbb1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.43pm BST 20:43  <> 

Speaking at the Value Voters Summit in Washington, DC, Republican presidential 
nomineeDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> told the 
audience of Christian conservatives thanked host Tony Perkins for his “years of 
leadership” at the Family Research Council.

Trump was introduced by actor Jon Voight, who lambasted Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and professional football 
player Colin Kaepernick before announcing that “if God allows truth to be said 
and heard, then we will see Donald Trump the president of this great America.”

“The support they gave me in those primaries was absolutely incredible,” Trump 
said of evangelical voters, who helped him to victory in the South Carolina 
Republican primary. “I’m gonna make it up to you, too - you watch!”

Telling the audience that there are “no more decent or devoted people” in the 
country than evangelical Christians, Trump told the audience of religious 
activists that despite mockery from “our media culture,” their values “built 
this nation.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac%23block-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac%23block-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac%23block-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac%23block-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac%23block-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac%23block-57d310efe4b013613fffbbac&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.40pm BST 20:40  <> 

Donald Trump addresses Values Voter Summit

Watch it live here:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17%23block-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17%23block-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17%23block-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17%23block-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17%23block-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17%23block-57d30780e4b07ac3d446aa17&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.02pm BST 20:02  <> 

With T-minus thirty minutes until Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump 
is expected to take the stage at the Value Voters Summit - basically the 
Christian Right’s version of the Gathering of the Juggalos, except instead of 
turning over cars they call for thecriminalization of homosexuality 
<http://www.advocate.com/news/world-news/2012/11/29/tony-perkins-will-not-back-down-claim-uganda-example-god>
 - let’s turn back the clock to September 2015, when Trump was speaking to a 
muchmore skeptical audience... 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/27/donald-trump-bible-christmas-voter-values-summit-social-conservatives>
 Donald Trump holds up his bible as he speaks during the Values Voter Summit 
in Washington. Photograph: Jose Luis Magana/AP 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, a thrice-married New 
York billionaire fond of high society and lavish living, has to appeal to the 
social conservatives who make up the GOP’s base. This does not come naturally.

The unsteady nature of this awkward, fumbling relationship was made clear at 
the Values Voter Summit in Washington.


On Friday, Trump brandished his Sunday school Bible at a crowd of thousands in 
a subterranean hotel ballroom. It was clear why he has yet to be embraced as 
the candidate of the religious right. In a speech which prompted his firstboos 
from a conservative audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/25/donald-trump-booed-conservatives-marco-rubio>
 – because he called fellow candidate Marco Rubio “a clown” – Trump tried to 
appeal to social conservatives. It didn’t work.

In front of an ardently anti-abortion crowd, his only reference to babies was 
as a description of establishment Republicans. He also left same-sex marriage 
unmentioned, hours before Kim Davis was scheduled to accept a “Cost of 
Discipleship award”. A county clerk from rural Kentucky, Davis refused to grant 
marriage licenses to same-sex couples, adecision for which she was jailed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/08/kentucky-clerk-kim-davis-released-from-jail>
.

Aside from the context-less statement “freedom of religion, so important”, 
Trump’s pitch was to cast himself as a frontline fighter in the war against 
Christmas.

“The word ‘Christmas’ – I love Christmas,” Trump said, repeating: “I love 
Christmas.

“You go to stores now, you don’t see the word ‘Christmas’. It says ‘Happy 
Holidays’ all over. I say, ‘Where’s Christmas?’ I tell my wife: ‘Don’t go to 
those stores. I want to see Christmas. No, I want to see Christmas.’ And you 
know, other people can have their holidays, no. But Christmas is Christmas. I 
want to see ‘Merry Christmas’.”

Trump pledged: “You’re going to see it if I get elected, I can tell you right 
now.”

Donald Trump goes by the Book but social conservatives unconvinced
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/27/donald-trump-bible-christmas-voter-values-summit-social-conservatives>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f%23block-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f%23block-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f%23block-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f%23block-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f%23block-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f%23block-57d3057ae4b07ac3d446aa0f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.46pm BST 19:46  <> 

A new Trump ad – not a phrase we find ourselves typing too frequently – says 
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is 
failing veterans but that would not be the case if Trump were president.

Here’s a transcript of the voiceover:

In Hillary Clinton’s America, veterans are left behind, kept on long wait 
lists at VA hospitals, only to get second-rate medical care. It’s more of the 
same but worse.

Donald Trump’s America will be great again and will be respected by all. 
Veterans are treated with the dignity and respect they deserve. The VA 
reformed. Our soldiers treated like heroes. Change that makes America great 
again.Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> for 
president.

Trump leads Clinton by 19 points among active military and military veterans, 
according topolling 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/poll-trump-leads-clinton-among-military-veteran-voters-n643501>
 published this week. That sounds pretty good but not so much when you consider
May 2012 polling 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/154904/veterans-give-romney-big-lead-obama.aspx> 
showing Mitt Romney leading Barack Obama among vets by 24 points.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d%23block-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d%23block-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d%23block-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d%23block-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d%23block-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d%23block-57d2fc46e4b08465d44ff10d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.00pm BST 19:00  <> 

Trump charity gave $100,000 to group targeting Trump University prosecutor

Who was the top recipient of funds from Donald Trump’s charitable foundation 
in 2014? Would you believe an activist group suing the New York attorney 
general who was suing Trump University for fraud?

It appears that Trump gave $100,000, as charity, to an effort to take down a 
public official accusing him of fraud. The man who ran the activist group now 
works on the Trump campaign.

The revelation, reported by Yahoo 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/trump-charity-gave-100000-to-david-bossies-citizens-united-that-helped-fund-lawsuit-against-moguls-foe-151337835.html?soc_src=mail&soc_trk=ma>
, comes as questions build about a separate donation the Trump charity made to 
the Florida attorney general’s reelection effort in 2013.

Reelecting attorneys general, or bringing federal lawsuits against them, does 
not count as charitable activity.

Michael Isikoff writes 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/trump-charity-gave-100000-to-david-bossies-citizens-united-that-helped-fund-lawsuit-against-moguls-foe-151337835.html?soc_src=mail&soc_trk=ma>
:

The size and timing of the donation to the Citizens United Foundation, an arm 
of the sprawling conservative network run by David Bossie, who is now Trump’s 
deputy campaign manager, could raise fresh questions about whether Trump has 
used his tax-exempt charity to further political and personal causes. [...]

While the donation to Bossie’s group has been mentioned in some media accounts 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/political-capital/donald-trumps-charity-didnt-give-conservative-groups-until-2010-citizens-united>
, what has gone unnoticed until now is a major project of Citizens United at 
the time: a lawsuit it filed that year — since dismissed by a federal judge — 
against [NY state attorney general Eric] Schneiderman, New York’s Democratic 
attorney general, over his efforts to require nonprofit groups such as Citizens 
United to disclose the identity of their donors under seal to the New York 
State Charities Bureau.

Schneiderman by then had become a major political nemesis of Trump...

Updated at 7.02pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e%23block-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e%23block-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e%23block-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e%23block-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e%23block-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e%23block-57d2f73de4b013613fffbb3e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
6.40pm BST 18:40  <> 

The Trump campaign has released a statement calling North Korea’s nuclear test 
“one more example of Hillary Clinton’s catastrophic failures as secretary of 
state”:
Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) 
INBOX: Statement On North Korean Nuclear Test pic.twitter.com/9MPpACuzmA 
<https://t.co/9MPpACuzmA>
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/774300054471532546> September 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/774300054471532546> 
North Korea has continued development of its nuclear weapons program despite 
steadily tightening sanctions by the US and allies and increasing global 
isolation. Trump has said he would get China to fix the problem. That’s not a 
summarizing of his position, that’s it. This morning his campaign managersaid 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2016/09/09/trumps-secret-north-korea-plan/90114788/>
 he had a secret plan they can’t disclose.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc%23block-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc%23block-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc%23block-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc%23block-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20interview%20broadcast%20on%20Russian%20propaganda%20outlet%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc%23block-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-russia-tv-campaign-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc%23block-57d2f316e4b07ac3d446a9cc&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close   Donald Trump. Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images 
 * A co-founder of Facebook said to be worth around $10bn has announced 
donations to multiple Democratic groups. Among Dustin Moskovitz’s aims is 
electing Hillary Clinton, whom he apparently has never met, president. 
Moskovitz was college roommates with Mark Zuckerberg and just became, itlooks 
like <https://twitter.com/teddyschleifer/status/774244794012954625>, the 
third-biggest Democratic donor out there. In a statementon Medium 
<https://medium.com/@moskov/compelled-to-act-1413930041ee#.dskec1h72>, 
Moskovitz and his wife, whose cool name is Cari Tuna, and who together arenoted 
and precocious philanthropists 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/billionaire-couple-give-plenty-to-charity-but-they-do-quite-a-bit-of-homework/2014/12/26/19fae34c-86d6-11e4-b9b7-b8632ae73d25_story.html>
, said they feel hesitant to try to buy elections but the “fear and hostility” 
with which the Republicans have conducted this campaign has compelled them to 
act.

 * Bill Clinton, the Arkansas native and former governor who won Appalachia 
and Georgia at Carter ’76 levels, has said that Trump’s slogan “make America 
great again” is racist dog whistling: “That message – I’ll give you America 
great again – if you’re a white southerner, you know exactly what it means, 
don’t you?” Clinton said to an audience in Orlando: 
It means I’ll give you the economy you had 50 years ago and I’ll move you back 
up the social totem pole and other people down,. What Hillary wants to do is 
take the totem pole down and let us all go forward together!

 * Texas Representative Louie Gohmert, who came to Washington playing the Tea 
Party piccolo, and who has a reputation for sayingall kinds of crazy stuff 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4XXXRVI0uJI> about “terror babies” and Muslim 
Brotherhood members in the White House and death squads and asparagus, has said 
further crazy things about Hillary Clinton, this time to attendees of a values 
voters summit in Washington, DC, where Donald Trump is scheduled to appear 
later today. “You don’t make fun of people who are impaired, have special 
needs,” Gohmert, a Republican, said. 
 * Who was the top recipient of funds from Donald Trump’s charitable 
foundation in 2014? Would you believe an activist group suing the New York 
attorney general who was suing Trump University for fraud? It appears that 
Trump gave $100,000, as charity, to an effort to take down a public official 
accusing him of fraud. The man who ran the activist group now works on the 
Trump campaign. The revelation,reported by Yahoo 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/trump-charity-gave-100000-to-david-bossies-citizens-united-that-helped-fund-lawsuit-against-moguls-foe-151337835.html?soc_src=mail&soc_trk=ma>
, comes as questions build about a separate donation the Trump charity made to 
the Florida attorney general’s reelection effort in 2013. Reelecting attorneys 
general, or bringing federal lawsuits against them, does not count as 
charitable activity.

 * One year after Trump was booed at the Values Voters Summit 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/2015/sep/25/donald-trump-booed-conservatives-marco-rubio>
 for calling Marco Rubio “a clown,” the Republican nominee gave a more polished 
speech where he ignored politically divisive issues like abortion and same-sex 
marriage and instead focused on school vouchers and changing federal law to 
allow tax exempt churches to engage in political advocacy. To Trump, school 
choice, which he advocated for in a speech on Thursday was a needed innovation. 
“The education can’t get worse,” he said as Trump also pledged to “campaign to 
get the states to re-allocate another $110 billion of their education budgets 
to school choice programs”.
 
Donald Trump’s presidential campaign has released 10 years of running mate 
Mike Pence’s tax returns, covering the years2006 through 2015 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/governor-mike-pence-tax-returns>, 
despite having not released any tax information of the presidential candidate 
himself.

The Indiana governor’s latest tax filings 
<https://assets.donaldjtrump.com/2015_Pence_Tax_Return.pdf> show that he paid 
an effective tax rate of 12.4% on an income of $113,026 in 2015, the 
second-lowest tax rate of the past decade for the governor and his family. In 
2015, Pence made a total of $8,923 in donations to charity, almost equal to the 
$8,956 he paid in federal income tax.

“The Pence family has been honored to serve their state and their nation for 
the past 16 years, while raising three great children and putting them through 
college,” Marc Lotter, Pence’s press secretary, said in a statement.

“These tax returns clearly show that Mike and Karen Pence have paid their 
taxes, supported worthy causes, and, unlike the Clintons, the Pences have not 
profited from their years in public service.”

Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton has released her 2015 personal 
tax return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/12/hillary-clinton-tim-kaine-tax-returns>
 in August, as well as that of running mate Tim Kaine and his wife, Anne 
Holton, who additionally released 10 years of their returns.

Those figures showed that Hillary and Bill Clinton earned nearly $11m in 2015, 
paying an effective federal income tax rate of 34.2%. Adding an effective state 
and local income tax rate of 9.0%, the couple’s total tax rate totaled 43.2%. 
The Clintons donated $1,042,000, or 9.8%, of their adjusted gross income to 
charity.

Also revealed in the latest tax filings is Karen Pence’s unsuccessful stint as 
a small business owner: That’s My Towel Charm, Inc., which sold towel charms so 
that bathers do not confuse their towels, lost $3,407 last year.
 
Practice may not make perfect for Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, but the Republican nominee 
clearly has refined his appeal to evangelical voters in the past year.
 Donald Trump. Photograph: Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA 
One year after Trump was booed at the Values Voters Summit 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/2015/sep/25/donald-trump-booed-conservatives-marco-rubio>
 for calling Marco Rubio “a clown,” the Republican nominee gave a more polished 
speech where he ignored politically divisive issues like abortion and same-sex 
marriage and instead focused on school vouchers and changing federal law to 
allow tax exempt churches to engage in political advocacy. To Trump, school 
choice, which he advocated for in a speech on Thursday was a needed innovation. 
“The education can’t get worse,” he said as Trump also pledged to “campaign to 
get the states to re-allocate another $110 billion of their education budgets 
to school choice programs”

Speaking from teleprompters, it served as a pointed contrast to his speech a 
year ago 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/2015/sep/27/donald-trump-bible-christmas-voter-values-summit-social-conservatives>
 which seemed to focus on the importance of saying “Merry Christmas” instead of 
“Happy Holidays.” Trump still was by no means a natural in front of a crowd of 
ardent social conservatives. He referred to attendees as “you people” at one 
point. Trump also railed against the Obama administration for not admitting 
Christian refugees from Syria into the United States, a major cause of concern 
for evangelicals who have long advocated for minority Christian communities in 
the Middle East. The problem is that Trump’s own refugee policy would be a 
blanket ban on anyone from the region entering the United States.

He did seem cognizant that no one would mistake him for a devout evangelical. 
At one point in the speech he joked that his support for repealing the Johnson 
Amendment, which would allow churches to engage in partisan politics while 
keeping their tax exempt status, was the only way he could get into heaven. But 
the biggest applause was not for Trump himself but for when he proclaimed 
“Hillary Clinton is unfit to be president.” The room exploded in applause and 
one attendee could be seen waving his tricorn hat in support.

Values Voter Summit is sponsored by the Family Research Council and has a 
constellation of conservative groups represented. Even the far-right John Birch 
Society had a table in the group’s exhibition hall.

But Trump’s performance seemed to ease the concerns of attendees who 
represented some of the most ardent cultural warriors in the party, a group 
that has long been uncomfortable with the nominee and preferred other 
candidates like Ted Cruz in the primary.

Dylan Miller, a rising community college freshman from Northwest Florida said 
the speech changed his mind about Trump. “He doesn’t seem maniacal” said the 
teenager, in contrast to the Republican nominee’s performances on television. 
Miller had said he had always planned on voting for Trump “because he wasn’t 
Hillary,” but Trump’s performance made him feel far more comfortable with his 
vote.

Another attendee, Sarah Ocker, a student at Tulsa Community College in 
Oklahoma, said she was “more there” now than she was before the speech. She 
“agreed with a lot” of what Trump said, particularly about “religious liberty.” 
Ocker still had major hesitations about Trump and still couldn’t commit to 
voting for the Republican nominee though but was “hoping” she could find a 
reason to vote for him in November.

Vernon Lewis of Marshall, Texas was further along in the process. Lewis had 
once thought he would have to hold his nose to vote for Trump. But after a 
private meeting with other Christians with Trump in New York as well as seeing 
his speech Friday, Lewis was enthusiastic. “He is a very gentle guy.”
 
On Friday, in blazing sunshine, about 200 members of Congress stood on the 
steps beneath the recently restored Capitol dome and prayed, observed a 
moment’s silence and, accompanied by a marine band, sang God Bless America to 
mark the imminent anniversary of the September 11 terrorist attacks.
 Paul Ryan, joined by House members, speaks on Capitol Hill in Washington 
during a ceremony marking the 15th anniversary of Sept. 11 attacks. Photograph: 
Molly Riley/AP 
The remembrance ceremony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CMKvLqwdD-w&feature=youtu.be&Source=GovD>, 
with Democrats and Republicans standing side by side, was heartening toEmanuel 
Lipscomb <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/author/emanuel-lipscomb>, 57, who was 
in New York on business that day and narrowly survived the disaster. “It’s good 
to see it’s brought a spark of bipartisanship,” he said. “It’s bringing the 
United States together because we all suffered together as one.”

For these crisp nine minutes, at least, the toxic wrangling and inertia of 
Congress could be put aside, along with its legacy of war in Afghanistan and 
Iraq. TheHouse speaker, Paul Ryan <https://paulryan.house.gov/>, who was 31 on 
9/11, reflected on a generation of teenagers who have no memory of it.

“Today, I can’t help but think of my own children – and all the children born 
after 9/11,” the Republican said. “Do they fully understand what happened that 
day? Will they ever? Can they? They can watch the old footage. They can see 
clips of the towers falling. They can hear the great roar as a landmark comes 
crashing down –and with it, an era. But can they actually feel it?

“I’ve had so many conversations with my own kids about this, about the shock, 
the terror, the outrage. Can they feel the sense of bereavement – at losing 
almost 3,000 Americans in a single morning? I don’t think they can. But that 
makes it our generation’s burden. We lived through that terrible day. And we 
will never forget that terrible day.”


Ryan spoke of the firefighters who rushed into danger and the flags that 
appeared on overpasses as if “to bind up the nation’s wounds”. He added: “These 
are the stories that we can pass on. We can turn our burden of grief into a 
gift of grace – because our children may not fully understand the horror of it 
all. But they can admire the heroism.”

'9/11 belongs to compassion': Congress marks 15th anniversary on Capitol steps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/09/congress-911-rememberance-ceremony-capitol> 
Having a newly discovered parasitic flatworm named after you may not be the 
world’s most illustrious honor, but it’s somethingBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> nonetheless has the pleasure 
of adding to his presidential legacy.

Enter Baracktrema obamai, the flatworm that infects Malaysian freshwater 
turtles, a species and genus of parasite discovered by Dr Thomas R Platt, an 
expert on turtle parasites, who wanted to bestow the president with a gift of 
adding his namesake to the animal kingdom.

“This is clearly something in my small way done to honor our president,” 
Platt, who recently discovered that he was also a distant relative of Obama, 
told the Associated Press.


“I have named a number of species after people I admire, from my 
father-in-law, my PhD adviser, and good friends who are academics and/or 
amateur naturalists,” Platt said in a press release. “Baracktrema obamai will 
endure as long as there are systematists studying these remarkable organisms.”

Barack Obama's latest honor: a parasitic flatworm to bear his name
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/barack-obama-parasitic-flatworm-name-honor> 
Senator John McCain gave Donald Trump’s military credibility a wide berth 
during an appearance at the Heritage Foundation, a Thatcherite free market 
think tank in Washington. After delivering a speech about America’s role in 
Asia, McCain, the Republican nominee in 2008, was asked about Trump’s recent 
appearance in a televised “commander-in-chief” forum. At first he offered his 
usual reply: “I support the nominee of the party.”

After a pause, perhaps considering this will no longer suffice, McCain added: 
“Honestly, I am not here to talk aboutDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. The election will be in 
November. The issues we’re discussing today will be with us for a long time.”

Those issues included Chinese aggression in Asia which, the Arizona senator 
argued, must be opposed through military strength and free trade, in particular 
the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP). BothHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and Donald Trump have 
vowed to scrap the deal. But McCain warned: “If TPP fails, American leadership 
in the Asian Pacific may well fail with it.” He contended that not passing the 
TPP would mean China “rewrites the rules at our expense”.

The former prisoner of war in Vietnam also lambasted Barack Obama’s handling 
of the crisis in Syria, claiming that president’s failure to enforce the “red 
line” over using chemical weapons “destroyed” American credibility in the 
region and around the world.

  
The chair of NBC News has emailed the network’s staffers to congratulate Matt 
Lauer on a job well-done during this week’s “Commander-in-Chief” forum aboard 
the aircraft carrier Intrepid, despite wide criticism of Lauer’s performance as 
the forum’s moderator.

Andy Lack, the head of NBC News, emailed Lauer’s colleagues that “Matt did a 
tremendous job – driving one of the most serious discussions to date on these 
topics,” despite criticism of the TODAY Show host for spending more than a 
third of his time with Democratic presidential nomineeHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> on her use of private 
email servers and declining to fact-check Donald Trump’s incorrect assertion 
that he was opposed to the invasion of Iraq.

The email, obtained by the Guardian, called the forum a “remarkable 
achievement”.

Here’s the letter in full:

Dear Colleagues,

Before this week comes to an end, I wanted to take just a moment to share how 
proud I am of all the work our teams produced together this week. After a 
summer of success at the Conventions and the Olympics, we broke more new ground 
Wednesday night with the first ever Commander-in-Chief Forum.

Against all odds we were able to bring the two presidential nominees together 
for the first time and presented an important examination of what each would 
bring to the role of Commander-in-Chief. Because of our event, national 
security has dominated the news cycle for days. Every major paper and news 
broadcast around the world has led with headlines about Putin, Iraq, ISIS, and 
intelligence briefings. Matt did a tremendous job – driving one of the most 
serious discussions to date on these topics. Nearly 15 million people watched 
the event, and over 26 million tuned in at some point during the hour.

My deepest thanks to everyone who helped pull off this remarkable achievement.

Have a wonderful weekend! With much respect and affection,

Andy
 
This is Hillel the Elder, not Emma Watson.
Ivanka Trump (@IvankaTrump) 
See more #ITwisewords <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ITwisewords?src=hash>: 
https://t.co/KzEUXBsXFb <https://t.co/KzEUXBsXFb> #quote 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/quote?src=hash> #inspiration 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/inspiration?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/mWFdLSxaL3 
<https://t.co/mWFdLSxaL3>
 <https://twitter.com/IvankaTrump/status/774321513927364608> September 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/IvankaTrump/status/774321513927364608>  
Donald Trump’s campaign has promised to reveal his full health records, but 
that promise - made after questions were raised about a letter penned by his 
gastroenterologist in just five minutes while a Trump limousine idled outside 
his office - has been moderated to entail a one-hour sitdown interview on The 
Dr. Oz Show’s season premiere next week.

Trump will appear on the show - hosted by the eponymous Dr. Mehmet Oz, a 
cardiothoracic surgeon and Columbia University professor - with daughter Ivanka 
Trump to “reveal his own personal health regimen,” as well as address “why the 
health of the candidates has become such a serious issue in this campaign,” 
according to a teaser for the interview released by the show.

Oz himself has been criticized by fellow doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/23/dr-mehmet-oz-gmo-labeling-public-health-columbia-university>
 on the grounds that he promotes “quack treatments” and “has repeatedly shown 
disdain for science and for evidence-based medicine, as well as baseless and 
relentless opposition to the genetic engineering of food crops”.

The episode will air on 15 September, next Thursday.
 
“The next president will not only have to fill this seat, but as many as four 
others. We could even end up with a total of five judges,”Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> said at the Value Voters 
Summit of Christian conservatives in Washington, DC. “And you pick the wrong 
people, you have a country that is no longer your country. It will be a 
disaster.”

“We’re going to pick great judges,” he continued. “Maybe we use Judge Scalia 
as the ultimate example of what we’re looking for, okay? This will determine 
whether or not we remain a constitutional republic, frankly.”

“The extremist judges she would pick would be rejected by the overwhelming 
majority of the American public,” Trump said.
 
Donald Trump, on allowing tax-exempt churches to endorse politicians:

I figure, it’s the only way I’m getting to heaven.
 
“Our politicians have really abandoned you, to a large extent. And Hillary 
Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>? You can forget 
about her.”

“In Trump administration, our Christian heritage will be cherished, protected, 
defended like you’ve never seen before,” Trump said. “Believe me.”

“And that includes religious liberty - remember,” Trump added, a winking 
reference to so-called “religious freedom” bills that would allow Christian 
business owners to refuse service to those whose lifestyles, marriage statuses 
or sexual orientations ran counter to their religious beliefs.

“Our nation today is divided,” Trump said. “Nobody likes to say it, but we’re 
living in a very, very divided nation,” which will be brought to unity only 
through “our faith in God.”
 
Speaking at the Value Voters Summit in Washington, DC, Republican presidential 
nomineeDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> told the 
audience of Christian conservatives thanked host Tony Perkins for his “years of 
leadership” at the Family Research Council.

Trump was introduced by actor Jon Voight, who lambasted Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and professional football 
player Colin Kaepernick before announcing that “if God allows truth to be said 
and heard, then we will see Donald Trump the president of this great America.”

“The support they gave me in those primaries was absolutely incredible,” Trump 
said of evangelical voters, who helped him to victory in the South Carolina 
Republican primary. “I’m gonna make it up to you, too - you watch!”

Telling the audience that there are “no more decent or devoted people” in the 
country than evangelical Christians, Trump told the audience of religious 
activists that despite mockery from “our media culture,” their values “built 
this nation.”
 
Watch it live here:
 
With T-minus thirty minutes until Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump 
is expected to take the stage at the Value Voters Summit - basically the 
Christian Right’s version of the Gathering of the Juggalos, except instead of 
turning over cars they call for thecriminalization of homosexuality 
<http://www.advocate.com/news/world-news/2012/11/29/tony-perkins-will-not-back-down-claim-uganda-example-god>
 - let’s turn back the clock to September 2015, when Trump was speaking to a 
muchmore skeptical audience... 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/27/donald-trump-bible-christmas-voter-values-summit-social-conservatives>
 Donald Trump holds up his bible as he speaks during the Values Voter Summit 
in Washington. Photograph: Jose Luis Magana/AP 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, a thrice-married New 
York billionaire fond of high society and lavish living, has to appeal to the 
social conservatives who make up the GOP’s base. This does not come naturally.

The unsteady nature of this awkward, fumbling relationship was made clear at 
the Values Voter Summit in Washington.


On Friday, Trump brandished his Sunday school Bible at a crowd of thousands in 
a subterranean hotel ballroom. It was clear why he has yet to be embraced as 
the candidate of the religious right. In a speech which prompted his firstboos 
from a conservative audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/25/donald-trump-booed-conservatives-marco-rubio>
 – because he called fellow candidate Marco Rubio “a clown” – Trump tried to 
appeal to social conservatives. It didn’t work.

In front of an ardently anti-abortion crowd, his only reference to babies was 
as a description of establishment Republicans. He also left same-sex marriage 
unmentioned, hours before Kim Davis was scheduled to accept a “Cost of 
Discipleship award”. A county clerk from rural Kentucky, Davis refused to grant 
marriage licenses to same-sex couples, adecision for which she was jailed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/08/kentucky-clerk-kim-davis-released-from-jail>
.

Aside from the context-less statement “freedom of religion, so important”, 
Trump’s pitch was to cast himself as a frontline fighter in the war against 
Christmas.

“The word ‘Christmas’ – I love Christmas,” Trump said, repeating: “I love 
Christmas.

“You go to stores now, you don’t see the word ‘Christmas’. It says ‘Happy 
Holidays’ all over. I say, ‘Where’s Christmas?’ I tell my wife: ‘Don’t go to 
those stores. I want to see Christmas. No, I want to see Christmas.’ And you 
know, other people can have their holidays, no. But Christmas is Christmas. I 
want to see ‘Merry Christmas’.”

Trump pledged: “You’re going to see it if I get elected, I can tell you right 
now.”

Donald Trump goes by the Book but social conservatives unconvinced
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/27/donald-trump-bible-christmas-voter-values-summit-social-conservatives> 
A new Trump ad – not a phrase we find ourselves typing too frequently – says 
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is 
failing veterans but that would not be the case if Trump were president.

Here’s a transcript of the voiceover:

In Hillary Clinton’s America, veterans are left behind, kept on long wait 
lists at VA hospitals, only to get second-rate medical care. It’s more of the 
same but worse.

Donald Trump’s America will be great again and will be respected by all. 
Veterans are treated with the dignity and respect they deserve. The VA 
reformed. Our soldiers treated like heroes. Change that makes America great 
again.Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> for 
president.

Trump leads Clinton by 19 points among active military and military veterans, 
according topolling 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/poll-trump-leads-clinton-among-military-veteran-voters-n643501>
 published this week. That sounds pretty good but not so much when you consider
May 2012 polling 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/154904/veterans-give-romney-big-lead-obama.aspx> 
showing Mitt Romney leading Barack Obama among vets by 24 points.
 
Who was the top recipient of funds from Donald Trump’s charitable foundation 
in 2014? Would you believe an activist group suing the New York attorney 
general who was suing Trump University for fraud?

It appears that Trump gave $100,000, as charity, to an effort to take down a 
public official accusing him of fraud. The man who ran the activist group now 
works on the Trump campaign.

The revelation, reported by Yahoo 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/trump-charity-gave-100000-to-david-bossies-citizens-united-that-helped-fund-lawsuit-against-moguls-foe-151337835.html?soc_src=mail&soc_trk=ma>
, comes as questions build about a separate donation the Trump charity made to 
the Florida attorney general’s reelection effort in 2013.

Reelecting attorneys general, or bringing federal lawsuits against them, does 
not count as charitable activity.

Michael Isikoff writes 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/trump-charity-gave-100000-to-david-bossies-citizens-united-that-helped-fund-lawsuit-against-moguls-foe-151337835.html?soc_src=mail&soc_trk=ma>
:

The size and timing of the donation to the Citizens United Foundation, an arm 
of the sprawling conservative network run by David Bossie, who is now Trump’s 
deputy campaign manager, could raise fresh questions about whether Trump has 
used his tax-exempt charity to further political and personal causes. [...]

While the donation to Bossie’s group has been mentioned in some media accounts 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/political-capital/donald-trumps-charity-didnt-give-conservative-groups-until-2010-citizens-united>
, what has gone unnoticed until now is a major project of Citizens United at 
the time: a lawsuit it filed that year — since dismissed by a federal judge — 
against [NY state attorney general Eric] Schneiderman, New York’s Democratic 
attorney general, over his efforts to require nonprofit groups such as Citizens 
United to disclose the identity of their donors under seal to the New York 
State Charities Bureau.

Schneiderman by then had become a major political nemesis of Trump...
 
The Trump campaign has released a statement calling North Korea’s nuclear test 
“one more example of Hillary Clinton’s catastrophic failures as secretary of 
state”:
Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) 
INBOX: Statement On North Korean Nuclear Test pic.twitter.com/9MPpACuzmA 
<https://t.co/9MPpACuzmA>
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/774300054471532546> September 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/774300054471532546> 
North Korea has continued development of its nuclear weapons program despite 
steadily tightening sanctions by the US and allies and increasing global 
isolation. Trump has said he would get China to fix the problem. That’s not a 
summarizing of his position, that’s it. This morning his campaign managersaid 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2016/09/09/trumps-secret-north-korea-plan/90114788/>
 he had a secret plan they can’t disclose.
 