
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has jumped on reports that the 
US paid $400m in cash 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-sent-cash-to-iran-as-americans-were-freed-1470181874>
 to Iran after the country’s historic nuclear deal, saying that the episode was 
a “scandal” for Hillary Clinton, who started the talks as secretary of state.


The Wall Street Journal reported on Wednesday that US officials secretly sent “
wooden pallets stacked with euros, Swiss francs and other currencies 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-sent-cash-to-iran-as-americans-were-freed-1470181874>
” to Iran, carried into the country by an unmarked cargo plane, suggesting that 
it may have been linked to the release of a group of Americans held in Iran. 
The US state department has denied this.


The WSJ quoted Tom Cotton, a Republican senator from Arkansas, as accusing the 
Obama administration of paying a “ransom to the ayatollah for US hostages” – 
even though the payment related to the money the US owed toIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> from before the country’s 1979 
revolution.

Cotton and a number of Republicans critical of the nuclear deal have often 
characterized the release of billions of dollars in frozen assets as financial 
rewards to Tehran following the nuclear deal.

On Wednesday, Trump seized the opportunity to attack his election rival. 
Although the nuclear agreement was reached under the current secretary of 
state, John Kerry,Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is credited with 
initiating the talks.


Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Our incompetent Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, was the one who started 
talks to give 400 million dollars, in cash, to Iran. Scandal!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/760783130978648064> August 3, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/760783130978648064> 
However, although the cash payment to Iran coincided with the release of a 
group of Iranian American prisoners, there is no evidence to suggest any link 
between the two events.

The release of the US prisoners was announced in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/iran-end-nuclear-sanctions-after-prisoner-swap-agreed>
, as Iran and the world’s six major powers, announced the lifting of sanctions 
as part of the implementation of the landmark nuclear accord.

The detainees, who included Washington Post journalist Jason Rezaian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jason-rezaian>, were freed as part of a 
prisoner swap for a number of Iranian nationals held in the US for crimes 
including violating sanctions regulations.

Tehran and Washington also announced that they had also reached settlements 
over a number of historical disputes, including a longstanding tribunal at the 
Hague surrounding arm sales to Iran.

It was agreed that the Obama administration would pay Tehran $1.7bn to 
recompense Iran for an aborted arms deal drawn up before the 1979 Islamic 
revolution.

The deal was agreed between Washington and the government of the late shah, 
but the military equipment was never delivered to Iran.

The court settlement had more of a symbolic significance to Iran and $400m 
paid in cash was insignificant compared with tens of billions that were about 
to be released from unfrozen assets. The payment was made in cash because at 
the time, Iran’s financial institutions were still completely cut off from the 
global electronic banking system.

“As we’ve made clear, the negotiations over the settlement of an outstanding 
claim at the Hague tribunal were completely separate from the discussions about 
returning our American citizens home,” said John Kirby, a state department 
spokesperson.


“Not only were two negotiations separate, they were conducted by different 
teams on each side, including, in the case of the Hague claims, by technical 
experts involved in these negotiations for many years. The funds that were 
transferred to Iran were related solely to the settlement of a longstanding 
claim at the US-Iran Claims Tribunal at The Hague.”


Trita Parsi, the president of the National Iranian American Council (NIAC) 
said the WSJ article had revealed nothing new for him. “The president already 
mentioned on Implementation Day [in January] that an outstanding claim between 
the US and Iran had been resolved, with the US paying back Iran $1.7bn,” he 
told the Guardian.


“The article never makes a direct link between that and the prisoner swap. The 
only potentially new thing it reveals is that part of the payment was made in 
cash. That’s probably only newsworthy because it’s an election year in the US.”

Hooman Majd, the author of The Ayatollah Begs to Differ: The Paradox of Modern 
Iran, said on Twitter: “Important point is that it can’t technically be 
‘ransom’ if the money was Iran’s to begin with.”

Last month marked the first year since the nuclear accord. Iran’s president, 
Hassan Rouhani, complained on Tuesday, during a live interview broadcast on the 
national television, that the US was not complying with its side of the 
agreement. Despite the removal of sanctions, tier-one European banks are still 
reluctant to handle Iranian payments because of existing US sanctions relating 
to terrorism and human rights.


Iran has faced huge problems in capitalising on the deal, with ordinary people 
expressing disappointment about the deal’s result.

Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said earlier this week that 
ordinary Iranians had not benefited from the deal, seeing it as a vindication 
for his numerous statements that the US could not be trusted.

 