
Any shift the public may detect in immigration proposals advanced by Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is a figment of the 
imagination, top Trump surrogates said in a coordinated maneuver on Sunday.

Welcome to Iowa, where Trump's purple patch could turn a blue state red
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/28/donald-trump-iowa-republican-red-state>
After a week in which multiple conflicting statements by the candidate drew 
expressions 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/439336/trumps-amnesty-election-loser> of 
concern 
<https://twitter.com/AnnCoulter/status/768663835377078273?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
from the anti-immigration right that Trump was softening on the issue, the 
Trump campaign spoke with one voice: Trump’s position has not changed.

Yet no Trump aide would say on Sunday that Trump still proposes, as he did 
last fall 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/11/11/politics/donald-trump-deportation-force-debate-immigration/>
, to follow through on perhaps his most radical suggestion, to use a 
“deportation force” to eject the estimated 11 to 12 million undocumented 
migrants living in the United States.

Trump’s promise through the primary campaign season of a quick expulsion of 
millions of people helped him strike a contrast with competitors, who backed 
more inflected reform policies, and establish his bona fides as an extreme 
change agent.

With polls in the presidential race mostly static 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/2016-general-election-trump-vs-clinton>
 over the last month, however, and a quickly diminishing store of days until 
the election, the candidate and his advisers appear to have recognized that 
moderation on issues such as immigration may be necessary to compete with 
Hillary Clinton.

A few recent, decent polling results in a miserable month of numbers have 
given Trump backers hope that there is still time to turn his campaign around. 
A Morning Consult surveyreleased 
<https://morningconsult.com/2016/08/28/trump-gains-ground-clinton-black-voters-still-wary/>
 on Sunday found Clinton leading by only three points, 43-40, in a head-to-head 
matchup. The same poll found her ahead by nine points at the start of the month.

No such tightening was visible in polling averages, however, which have 
steadilydescribed 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/2016-general-election-trump-vs-clinton>
 a Clinton lead of between six and eight points since the conclusion of the 
national conventions. This squares with a Quinnipiacsurvey last week 
<https://www.qu.edu/images/polling/us/us08252016_U88mxwn.pdf> finding that 90% 
of likely voters have already made up their minds.

The defibrillator now attached to the Trump campaign is in some ways plain to 
see. In the past two weeks,the campaign leadership has been remade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-florida-registered-vote-donald-trump>
, the candidate has redoubledoutreach to non-white voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/27/donald-trump-dwyane-wade-cousin-shooting-reaction>
 and the campaign has spent its first millions on TV ads in battleground states.

A shift by Trump on immigration, particularly given the influence of Hispanic 
voters in a number of battleground states, would seem of a piece with those 
changes. But a day after Trump ran through a number of proposalsin a speech at 
an Iowa fundraiser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/27/donald-trump-immigration-policy-deportation>
 – but did not mention deportation – his top surrogates insisted he had not 
shifted on the issue.


“Let’s be very clear, nothing has changed about Donald Trump’s position on 
dealing with illegal immigration,” Indiana governor Mike Pence, Trump’s running 
mate, told CNN’s State of the Union. “He put this issue at the center of this 
presidential campaign in the Republican primaries, and his position and his 
principles have been absolutely consistent.”

In an interview with ABC’s This Week, New Jersey governor Chris Christie said 
of Trump: “This is a guy who’s been very consistent on no amnesty, no 
legalization, for folks who have been coming to the country illegally.”

Christie denied that he had personally advised Trump to moderate on 
immigration, as former the New York City mayor Rudy Giulianitold 
<http://www.nj.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/08/giuliani_christie_urged_trump_to_soften_on_deporta.html>
 a reporter last week.

Trump’s perceived backing down last week from his “deportation force” proposal 
has inspired unease among some of his most vocal supporters. Former Alaska 
governor Sarah Palinwarned 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/washwire/2016/08/25/sarah-palin-warns-of-massive-disappointment-if-donald-trump-eases-immigration-policy/>
 of “massive disappointment” and shock artist Ann Coulterdisparaged 
<https://twitter.com/AnnCoulter/status/768663835377078273?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
Trump on Twitter.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-extreme-vetting-immigrants-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20says%20no%20immigration%20to%20US%20without%20'extreme%20vetting'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-extreme-vetting-immigrants-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20says%20no%20immigration%20to%20US%20without%20%27extreme%20vetting%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-extreme-vetting-immigrants-video&media=>
Trump says no immigration to US without ‘extreme vetting’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/16/donald-trump-extreme-vetting-immigrants-video>
Mike Pence praises 'plainspoken' Trump amid furor over Dwyane Wade remarks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/28/mike-pence-donald-trump-dwyane-wade-comments>
“Trump probably just threw away his only remaining chance to win in November,” 
wrote 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/439336/trumps-amnesty-election-loser> 
Mark Krikorian of the conservative Center for Immigration Studies.

The hazard, for Trump, is that some supporters may decide that he is not after 
all the extreme change agent they took him for, and subsequently decide to stay 
home on election day or not do as much on behalf of his candidacy.

The Republican national committee chairman, Reince Priebus, has predicted that 
Trump will catch up in the polls by early September, but he refused a question 
about Trump’s immigration stance on Sunday, telling NBC’s Meet the Press: “I 
just don’t speak for Donald Trump.”

The Trump campaign continues to say that Trump will soon deliver a speech that 
will confirm his immigration policy in all its detail.

“You’re going to find out from Donald Trump very shortly,” Priebus said. “He’s 
going to be giving prepared remarks on this issue very soon. I don’t want to 
give a date. I’ve heard a date.

“He is reflecting on it, and his position is going to be known.”
 