
Donald Trump has in effect dropped his threat to jail Hillary Clinton, a 
prospect that frequently roused supporters to chant “lock her up!” and led 
critics tocompare him to leaders of authoritarian regimes. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/trump-jail-hillary-clinton-private-email-server-us-election>

Donald Trump drops threat of criminal investigation into Hillary Clinton – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-news-transition-hillary-clinton-live>
The president-elect told the New York Times on Tuesday that it would be 
“divisive” to pursue criminal investigations into the former secretary of state 
over her use of a private email server or conflicts of interest involving her 
foundation. His conciliatory tone provoked a backlash from some conservatives.

“I don’t want to hurt the Clintons, I really don’t,” Trump said, according to 
a tweet by Times journalist Mike Grynbaum. “She went through a lot and suffered 
greatly in many different ways.”

Trump was then pressed on whether he had definitively ruled out a prosecution, 
Grynbaum reported. The president-elect replied: “It’s just not something that I 
feel very strongly about.”

As a candidate, Trump invariably encouraged his supporters’ raucous cries of 
“lock her up!” at rallies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/donald-trump-voters-rally-election-crowd>
, where T-shirts and badges showed Clinton’s face behind bars, often with 
profane slogans. He told her at a debate that if he was president she would “be 
in jail” and vowed to appoint a special prosecutor.

That remark provoked an outcry from critics, who accused Trump of behaving 
like a dictator. Legal experts argued that, while he could suggest to the 
Department of Justice that it bring a case, as president Trump would have 
little constitutional power to make it happen.

In his conversation at the New York Times office, he rejected the idea that 
his supporters would be upset by his letting Clinton off the hook. “I don’t 
think they will be disappointed,” he said, according to a tweet by reporter 
Maggie Haberman. “I think I will explain it that we in many ways will save our 
country.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-new-york-times-office-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20booed%20as%20he%20leaves%20the%20New%20York%20Times%20office%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-new-york-times-office-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20booed%20as%20he%20leaves%20the%20New%20York%20Times%20office%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-new-york-times-office-video&media=>
Trump booed as he leaves the New York Times office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-new-york-times-office-video>
Haberman said Trump made clear he did not favour prosecution when he 
continued: “My inclination would be for whatever power I have on the matter is 
to say let’s go forward. This has been looked at for so long, ad nauseum.”

Apparently aware that the election campaign had been extraordinarily 
polarising, Trump said a prosecution would be “very, very divisive for the 
country”. Clinton’s lead in the popular vote now exceeds 1.5 million.

The comments were a far cry from the vicious campaign in which Trump branded 
his Democratic rival “Crooked Hillary”, claimed that foreign entities gave 
money to the Clinton Foundation in return for favors from the state department 
when she was secretary of state, and condemned theFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> for refusing to recommend prosecuting 
her for mishandling classified information.

Clinton suffered a low rating for trustworthiness in opinion polls during the 
contest. Kellyanne Conway, a senior adviser to Trump, told MSNBC’s Morning Joe 
on Tuesday: “I thinkHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> still has to face the 
fact that a majority of Americans don’t find her to be honest or trustworthy, 
but if Donald Trump can help her heal then perhaps that’s a good thing.”


The gap between the brash billionaire’s taunts on the campaign trail and his 
approach now, Conway suggested, is part of a conscious shift away from the tone 
of his past rhetoric. “I think he’s thinking of many different things as he 
prepares to become the president of the United States and things that sound 
like the campaign aren’t among them,” she said.

But the dramatic climbdown earned the wrath of conservatives who had pushed 
hard for Clinton’s prosecution.Tom Fitton, president of Judicial Watch, said: 
<http://www.judicialwatch.org/press-room/press-releases/judicial-watch-calls-trump-administration-investigation-hillary-clinton/>
 “If Mr Trump’s appointees continue the Obama administration’s politicized 
spiking of a criminal investigation of Hillary Clinton, it would be a betrayal 
of his promise to the American people to ‘drain the swamp’ of out-of-control 
corruption in Washington, DC.

“President-elect Trump should focus on healing the broken justice system, 
affirm the rule of law and appoint a special prosecutor to investigate the 
Clinton scandals.”

Breitbart, the rightwing website where Trump’s chief strategist Steve Bannon 
is executive chairman, headlined its article on the subject “Broken promise 
<https://twitter.com/mckaycoppins/status/801086077503033344>”. 

Ann Coulter <https://twitter.com/AnnCoulter>, a commentator and author of In 
Trump We Trust, tweeted: “Whoa! I thought we elected@realDonaldTrump 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump> president. Did we make him the FBI, & 
DOJ? His job is to pick those guys, not do their jobs.”

The FBI investigated Clinton’s use of a private email server while she was 
secretary of state during Barack Obama’s first term, concluding earlier this 
year that her actions were “extremely careless” but not corrupt.

Republicans in Congress have been hammering Clinton for years over issues such 
as the terrorist attack in Benghazi, Libya. Representative Jason Chaffetz, 
Republican chairman of the House oversight and government reform committee, has 
saidhe will continue investigating 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/house-republicans-are-already-preparing-for-years-of-investigations-of-clinton/2016/10/26/e153a714-9ac3-11e6-9980-50913d68eacb_story.html>
Clinton’s use of a private server.

Conway indicated that Trump would not favour such a move. “When the 
president-elect, who’s also the head of your party now, tells you before he’s 
even inaugurated he doesn’t wish to pursue these charges, it sends a very 
strong message – tone and content – to the members,” she added.

Others, however, indicated that the saga might not yet be over. Senator 
Lindsey Graham of South Carolinatold Fox News: 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5d9EAkjvg64&feature=youtu.be&t=12s> “Well, so 
much for ‘locking her up’, I guess. The bottom line is that I think the Clinton 
Foundation, the whole mess, should be looked at with an independent view, not a 
political agenda.

“I never believed Obama’s justice department would seriously look at what she 
may have done. I can understand wanting to put the election behind us and heal 
the nation, but I do hope all the things President-elect Trump said about how 
crooked she was – well, we just don’t let it go without some serious effort to 
see if the law was truly violated. I think that would be a mistake.”

Legal analysts agreed that Congress could still try to intervene. Henry 
Chambers <http://law.richmond.edu/faculty/hchamber>, a professor at the 
University of Richmond’s school of law, said: “Congressional committees can 
investigate all they want. At the end of the day you don’t want presidents 
spiking investigations, so we may not be out of the woods in terms of the 
Clinton investigations.”

But Trump’s decision might be calculated to his own benefit, Chambers added. 
“There are interesting issues as to whether he’s playing presidential jujitsu 
here: ‘I’ve said Hillary Clinton should not be investigated, therefore no one 
should investigate me.’”

Among the most vocal Clinton critics was Rudy Giuliani, a former New York 
mayor, who said before the election that he could see her in an“orange” or 
“striped” jumpsuit. 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/rudy-giuliani-hillary-clinton_us_580f9d7be4b000d0b158f14f>
 But on Tuesday, at Trump Tower, he too appeared to backtrack.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Frudy-giuliani-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giuliani%20supports%20Trump%20decision%20not%20to%20prosecute%20Clinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Frudy-giuliani-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giuliani%20supports%20Trump%20decision%20not%20to%20prosecute%20Clinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Frudy-giuliani-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-video&media=>
Giuliani supports Trump decision not to prosecute Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/22/rudy-giuliani-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-video>
“Look, there’s a tradition in American politics that after you win an 
election, you sort of put things behind you,” he told reporters. “And if that’s 
the decision he reached, that’s perfectly consistent with sort of a historical 
pattern of things come up, you say a lot of things, even some bad things might 
happen, and then you can sort of put it behind you in order to unite the 
nation.”

Clinton has frequently acknowledged her use of a private email server was a 
mistake and denied links between foundation donors and her work as secretary of 
state.
 