
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and Theresa May 
have “agreed on the importance” of Nato as they spoke on the phone for the 
second time since the US election, according to Downing Street.

May called Trump on Monday afternoon in an effort to “establish a regular 
dialogue” with the Republican US president-elect before he takes office in 
January.

No 10 said the pair also agreed to meet at the earliest possible opportunity. 
It comes after a previous phone call in which Trump is alleged to have taken a
casual approach to the idea of a visit from May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/civil-servants-befuddled-trump-casual-invitation-may>
, suggesting: “If you travel to the US you should let me know.”

“They discussed how the president-elect’s transition plans were progressing 
and agreed that their teams should continue to build close relationships 
through this period, including with a meeting of their national security 
advisers in the United States before Christmas,” Downing Street said.

Steve Bell on the new brand of special relationship – cartoon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/nov/17/steve-bell-new-special-relationship-trump-may-farage-cartoon>
“They discussed Nato, agreeing on the importance of the alliance, the need for 
more Nato members to meet the target of spending 2% of GDP and the role thatNato
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> can play in addressing diverse 
threats. They agreed to stay in close touch and to meet at the earliest 
possible opportunity.”

The exchange is likely to be regarded as significant given Trump’s scepticism 
about Nato during the US election campaign, which he has sincepartially 
backtracked on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/barack-obama-donald-trump-nato-commitment>
.

The phone call comes against a backdrop of strained relations with the UK 
after Trump tweeted that he thought May’s political rivalNigel Farage should be 
appointed the British ambassador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
 to Washington.

Trump’s friendliness with the former Ukip leader has been interpreted as a 
humiliating snub to May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/theresa-may-is-nuts-not-to-use-nigel-farages-hotline-to-the-white-house>
, who was only 11th on the list of world leaders to receive a call after his 
victory.


In contrast, Farage was the first foreign politician to get a meeting with 
Trump, who posed with the Ukip politician and his entourage in a golden lift.

Since then, Downing Street appears to have stepped up efforts to engage with 
Trump’s team, confirming that the Queen was considering whether to invite him 
for a state visit.

In their first phone call, which lasted only about 10-15 minutes, May had 
congratulated Trump on his victory and agreed that the “US-UK relationship was 
very important and very special, and that building on this would be a priority” 
for them both.
 