


Is it an alarming prelude, a nonsensical distraction, or simply an improbable 
work of pop-up theater with a daily run in the outsized lobby of a gaudy 
Manhattan skyscraper?

After winning a presidential election like no other, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has turned the period of 
transition, one of the world’s more sober and serious mass hiring programs, 
into a reality show set against a backdrop of 1980s brass and marble.

In Trump Tower, at the base of the lobby’s five-storey, dribbling waterfall, 
an unprecedented drama of American politics is playing out. The hundreds of 
tourists from around the world who drop by each day sense it. The metal 
detectors and cordoned media scrum signal it. And the frequent appearance in 
the lobby of immediately recognizable stars – even if you don’t know who they 
are, you know they’re stars – confirms it.

Related: Donald Trump's presidential transition is basically reality 
television | Richard Wolffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/donald-trump-president-transition-reality-television-the-apprentice>

Only the Starbucks employees on the mezzanine level, and the guy who runs the 
souvenir shop in the basement next to the bathrooms, seem unimpressed.

Trump could have done things differently, more discreetly. Barack Obama ran 
his transition from an anonymous headquarters in Chicago. George W Bush ran his 
from hastily requisitioned office space in Washington DC.

Trump, whose résumé is padded with television producer credits, has chosen to 
run his as a mini-series, in which contestants must pass through the silent 
doors of a Trump-branded elevator and make an invisible ascent to meet their 
destinies. At the end of each meeting, the elevators deliver the contestants 
back to Earth, where some make a beeline for the cameras, while others scurry 
for the Fifth Avenue exits.

Since November, those elevators have swallowed and disgorged an improbable 
procession of Americans glamorous and grotesque, plus assorted hangers-on: 
elected officials, an ebullient Nigel Farage, at least four National Football 
League heroes, two former vice-presidents, a bunch of generals, the founder of 
the World Economic Forum, a passel of Silicon Valley billionaires, and the 
rapper/entrepreneur Kanye West, who explained to fans on Twitter afterward: “I 
feel it is important to have a direct line of communication with our future 
President if we truly want change.”

Some of them came for job interviews. The main work of any White House 
transition, after all, is to field a team for the work ahead, running a 
superpower. Thus the presence in the lobby of Mitt Romney, the previous 
Republican presidential nominee, who was hoping for a nod as secretary of 
state, it turns out pitifully; and of Ben Carson, the retired neurosurgeon, who
declared 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/politics/trailguide/la-na-trailguide-updates-ben-carson-won-t-be-joining-donald-1479231990-htmlstory.html>
 himself unqualified to lead any federal agency and was promptly handed the 
urban development file.
 The next album cover? Trump and West meet at Trump Tower. Photograph: Drew 
Angerer/Getty Images 
What is Trump up to? He has not merely been parading erstwhile enemies, with 
the intent of publicly shaming them, the way American police parade criminal 
suspects. Why should Trump force stalwarts such as Rudy Giuliani, the former 
mayor of New York City, and Laura Ingraham, a conservative radio host, to walk 
past cameras to apply for jobs not reserved for them? There are, after all, 
back entrances to the tower, which Trump himself mostly uses to slip in and out.

Romney had to sit through dinner with Trump and make his way through an 
expensive plate of scallops as he grimaced for the camera, realizing he had 
lost all opportunity to ever again take a credible principled stand against the 
“phoney” he had called too dangerous to be allowed inside the Oval Office.

Al Gore, the former vice-president turned global warming Cassandra, met with 
Trump for 90 minutes in early December, describing to reporters afterwards an 
“extremely interesting conversation”. Two days later, Trump tapped a climate 
change denier who has worked as a state-levelhatchet man 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/07/us/politics/energy-firms-in-secretive-alliance-with-attorneys-general.html>
 for fossil fuel companies to run the environmental protection agency. A week 
later, Trump picked the head of ExxonMobil to run the state department (sorry, 
Romney).
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. A 
guide to Donald Trump’s potential cabinet of billionaires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/22/donald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video>
The president-elect’s instinct has been to encourage spectacle, at a level 
other presidents-elect have reserved for inauguration day. That explains, if 
anything can, the persistent and apparently welcome presence in the Trump tower 
lobby of the street performer known as the Naked Cowboy, who at some point over 
the course of the last year began modifying his trademark underwear with a 
single bold word painted across his ass: “Trump.” (The joke is lost on 
Americans.)

Related: American democracy is being derailed. Can faith be restored? | 
Richard Wolffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/american-democracy-derailed-donald-trump>

Notes by a reporter, assigned one day on behalf of the media at large to 
surveil the scene at the tower, capture one cowboy encounter. “Naked Cowboy 
came over and sang a song about Trump that included lyrics about blue lives 
mattering and Trump putting thugs in jail,” wrote the reporter, John Stanton, 
of BuzzFeed. “Also about how bad Obamacare is. And how Trump Tower is the 
greatest place on earth.

“He then picked up a tourist, cradled her in his arms, and kissed her. There’s 
not acid strong enough for this to be a hallucination, I assure you.”

To say that Trump appreciates a spectacle is not to say that he is always 
eager to face the cameras. At the end of November, he announced a press 
conference to take place two weeks hence, in which he would describe his plan 
for divesting from his businesses to foreclose any conflicts of interests 
potentially arising from his assumption of a role in which his words – or, more 
likely,his tweets 
<http://fortune.com/2016/12/06/donald-trump-tweet-boeing-air-force-one/> – 
might move the US economy.

Trump canceled the press conference, explaining, again on Twitter, that these 
were “busy times!” In this, he has struck another contrast with his immediate 
predecessors, who frequently addressed the country as they prepared to lead it. 
Obama held 18 news conferences during his transition. Bush, whose transition 
was unusually short owing to the Florida recount, held 11. Trump has held zero.

During the 1828 US presidential transition, Andrew Jackson’s wife died, his 
steamboat was mobbed, and partygoerstrampled mud 
<https://www.whitehousehistory.org/not-a-ragged-mob-the-inauguration-of-1829> 
in the White House. Hundreds of savings banks collapsed during Franklin 
Roosevelt’s transition. Seven states seceded from the union during Abraham 
Lincoln’s.

To date, Trump has merely installed a friend of Vladimir Putin as America’s 
top diplomat and successfully provoked China. But his transition still has 
almost one month to run.











 