
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> ran an outsider 
campaign that seemingly violated every convention of American politics, but the 
team he is assembling for government looks increasingly like a conventional 
Republican cabinet.

Few of these picks could be considered moderate. “From the point of view of 
liberals, most of the appointments are abhorrent,” Whit Ayres, a top Republican 
political consultant and pollster, told the Guardian, “but they would have been 
with any Republican president.”

Trump's cabinet picks: here are all of the appointments so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/donald-trump-administration-cabinet-picks-so-far>
Despite the eyebrows raised by his early appointment of Steve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
 – a top adviser during the president-elect’s campaign and the former CEO of 
the far-right news site Breitbart –to be a close White House aide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
, the Trump administration’s personnel picks have stayed within the Republican 
mainstream.

The relative lack of bombthrowers and firebrands in Trump’s populist mould is 
in part a tribute to the surprise nature of his victory. Trump’s campaign had 
devoted relatively little attention to a transition effort and also to the 
roles that traditional Republican power players like vice-president elect Mike 
Pence and the incoming White House chief of staff, Reince Preibus, would play 
in Trump’s inner circle.

The result is that many of Trump’s cabinet picks bear the imprimatur of the 
Republican party and the conservative movement. Few are Trump cronies or 
explicitly associated with his most controversial views. In fact, some like 
South Carolina governor Nikki Haley, Trump’s pick to be ambassador to the 
United Nations, were vocal opponents of the president-elect in the Republican 
primary.

Ayres said: “In many ways the appointments so far could very well have been 
named by a President Jeb Bush or President Marco Rubio. This is not for the 
most part revolutionary.”

Trump has made some of his least ideological picks in the area of national 
security and foreign policy. Trump has picked two generals,James Mattis to lead 
the Department of Defense and 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/james-mattis-secretary-of-defense-donald-trump>
 John Kelly to lead theDepartment of Homeland Security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/john-kelly-homeland-security-secretary-trump-cabinet>
. Both men possess sufficient support from the defense community to temper the 
criticism Trump received on the campaign trail.

Mattis, who had been promoted as a potential third party candidate by Never 
Trump conservatives earlier in 2016, led the United States Central Command for 
three years under Barack Obama. A gruff intellectual alternately nicknamed “Mad 
Dog” and “the warrior monk,” Mattis is deeply respected in much of the foreign 
policy establishment, despite notably clashing with the Obama administration 
over his more hawkish views on Iran.

Kelly, whose son Robert was killed in combat in Afghanistan in 2010, led the 
United States Southern Command, which is responsible for American military 
operations in Central America, South America and the Caribbean. But some human 
rights advocates have expressed concern over his oversight of Guantánamo Bay 
while leading southern command. Kelly developed a reputation for opposition to 
Obama’s intended closure of the detention facility.

 Both of these picks have received bipartisan praise. One well-connected Never 
Trump conservative saw the picks as “sending a reassuring message to the Never 
Trump national security community ... that it might be OK to go in and serve”.

However, Trump also selected Michael Flynn to be his national security 
adviser, which is not a cabinet position. A former military intelligence chief 
who has been a vocal critic of the Obama administration and became a close 
Trump ally over the course of the campaign, Flynn has embraced a number of 
conspiracy theories and tweeted out controversial statements like “fear of 
Muslims is rational” since leaving the army.

“There are big concerns regarding his judgment and capability for 
forward-looking thought,” the Never Trump conservative noted, although he said 
Flynn did have a “consummate pedigree” and had the potential to be effective in 
his position.

Many of Trump’s other selections have been longtime conservative stalwarts who 
would have been contenders for positions in the administration of any 
Republican president.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-republican-appointments-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd15dc974c9a446842baa3fea0bd5be3dff867648%2F0_0_3500_1602%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20cabinet%20looks%20increasingly%20conventional%20but%20far%20from%20moderate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-republican-appointments-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20cabinet%20looks%20increasingly%20conventional%20but%20far%20from%20moderate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-republican-appointments-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd15dc974c9a446842baa3fea0bd5be3dff867648%2F0_0_3500_1602%2F3500.jpg>
 Trump’s choices, left to right: Tom Price (health and human services), Scott 
Pruitt (EPA) Steven Mnuchin (Treasury) and Jeff Sessions (attorney general). 
Photograph: Reuters 
Haley has been considered a rising star for some time within the GOP and is 
considered by many to be a potential presidential candidate in the future. 
Trump’s pick for secretary of health and human services, Rep Tom Price of 
Georgia, is a healthcare policy wonk who has long been one of the most vocal 
opponents to Obama’s Affordable Care Act. His choice for transportation 
secretary, Elaine Chao, served for eight years as George W Bush’s secretary of 
Labor. Chao, who is married to Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell, also 
served in the administrations of George HW Bush and Ronald Reagan. Betsy DeVos, 
whom Trump has tapped for education secretary, is a major GOP donor who served 
chair of the Michigan Republican party. Further, Andy Puzder, Trump’s selection 
for secretary of Labor, is a fast food CEO and longtime Republican donor who 
actively campaigned for Mitt Romney.

All of these picks have solid conservative credentials. They are ardent 
opponents of regulation and government involvement in the economy. Puzderis 
skeptical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/andrew-puzder-labor-secretary-trump-unions-wages>
 about the need for a federal minimum wage, Price supports steps to privatize 
Medicare and DeVos is an ardent advocate for school vouchers.

As Rich Galen, a Republican strategist told the Guardian, “He appears to be 
picking people who generally conform to his business sense of less regulation 
and more laissez-faire.” But another president of a party that finds many 
government regulations repugnant could have selected all these picks as well.

However, Trump has made several cabinet choices who conform to his unique 
sensibilities and campaign promises.

His choice for attorney general is Alabama senator Jeff Sessions, an ardent 
opponent of immigration and free trade whohas been accused of using racist 
language 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>
 and was the first federal elected official to endorse Trump. Top Sessions 
aides have long played key roles in helping Trump define his policy positions 
throughout his campaign.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%3A%20five%20dangerous%20views%20held%20by%20the%20housing%20secretary%20nominee%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%3A%20five%20dangerous%20views%20held%20by%20the%20housing%20secretary%20nominee%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video&media=>
Ben Carson: five dangerous views held by the housing secretary nominee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/05/ben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video>
The president-elect has also picked former rival and longtime surrogate Ben 
Carson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson> to be secretary of 
housing and urban development. A retired neurosurgeon with little political 
experience, Carson has long been a loyal Trump ally. As Bill Galston, a senior 
fellow in governance studies at the Brookings Institution told the Guardian, 
although “Carson grew up in an inner city [he] has no known qualifications for 
the job.”

In addition, Trump has pegged Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman Sachs banker 
and producer of a number of Hollywood movies, to be secretary of treasury.

Mnuchin was Trump’s finance chairman during the campaign but has little other 
political experience. Although two former Treasury secretaries, Robert Rubin 
and Henry Paulson, also previously worked at Goldman Sachs, both had served as 
chairmen of the major investment bank.

Yet even those unconventional choices consist of a four-term senator, a former 
presidential candidate and a top campaign donor who spent nearly two decades at 
Goldman Sachs.

The picks ultimately raise the specter that Trump’s administration could be 
more conventional than many had anticipated, following Trump’s repeated pledges 
to “drain the swamp.” In fact, Puzder has even been attacked by a number of 
Trump allies, including Breitbart, for his past support of immigration reform.

But, even if many of Trump’s picks for cabinet wouldn’t have been out of place 
in a Cruz or even a Rubio or Kasich administration, there is still one big 
difference: the ultimate decisions will not be made by an establishment 
Republican politician or a movement conservative: they’ll be made by Donald 
Trump.
 