
Donald Trump’s name will be permanently removed from a series of New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City buildings on Wednesday, in 
an apparent repudiation of his divisive presidential campaign.

The name “Trump” has been displayed prominently on 140, 160 and 180 Trump Place
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/04/trump-place-polling-site-new-york-city-voters-election-day>
, in Manhattan’s Upper West Side, for more than a decade. Trump developed the 
apartment buildings in the 1990s.

'Trump Place' polling site irks New York City voters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/04/trump-place-polling-site-new-york-city-voters-election-day>
But Equity Residential, which owns the building, told the Guardian that the 
Trump signage would be removed – and the actual street names changed – because 
it would make the apartments more appealing to renters.

“We are in the process of rebranding the buildings using their street 
addresses as the property names,” said Marty McKenna, a spokesman for Equity 
Residential.

“The goal is to assume a more neutral building identity that will appeal to 
all current and future renters.”

An employee at the leasing office at 140 Trump Place said the work would begin 
on Wednesday – just eight days after Trump won the presidential election.

The move comes after hundreds of residents signed a “Dump the Trump name” 
petition <https://www.change.org/p/dump-the-trump-name> calling for “Trump” to 
be removed from the buildings.

The petition, which was launched in October, cited Trump’s “appalling 
treatment of women, his history of racism, his attacks on immigrants, his 
mockery of the disabled, his tax avoidance [and] his outright lying”.

Juliet Herman, 52, has lived in one of the Trump Place buildings for nine 
years. She said she was “thrilled” at the news.


“I couldn’t be happier,” Herman said. “Because honestly I believe in treating 
people equally, so to me I’d say to feel that my building is no longer a part 
of the political atmosphere makes me feel good.”

Herman said in the past month there had been incidents in which people had 
thrown eggs at the outside of the buildings. She said she had experienced 
negative reactions when she told people her address.

“I’m looking forward to people not bringing politics into it any more when 
they come visit or see where I live.”

Erin Kelly, who has lived in Trump Place for eight years, was among those who 
campaigned for the name to be removed.

“It demonstrates more respect for the diverse community of residents and 
employees who live and work here than anything the buildings’ now-former 
namesake has ever said or done,” Kelly said of the decision.

“I’m personally grateful to Equity for truly hearing the many voices who spoke 
out in support of ridding our homes and workplaces of a name that is 
permanently synonymous with bigotry, misogyny, xenophobia and dishonesty.”

The apartment buildings will no longer use the address “Trump Place”, Equity 
Residential said, instead adopting the formal street address of Riverside 
Boulevard. Trump-branded doormats were removed from the buildings in the days 
before the presidential election.

Signs saying “Trump Place” – in large gold letters – will be removed from the 
three buildings on Wednesday.

Trump developed the apartments, between 59th Street and 71st Street on the 
west side of Manhattan, in partnership with investors from Hong Kong in the 
1990s,according to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/25/nyregion/trump-place-buildings-name-change.html?_r=0>
.

Seven buildings bear the Trump name. While some are managed by the Trump 
Organization, the three apartment buildings at 140, 160 and 180 Riverside 
Boulevard are now controlled by Equity Residential.

Trump’s home, Trump Tower, is located just a mile and a half east of Trump 
Place.

Since Trump won the election, thousands of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/anti-trump-protests-new-york-portland-shooting>
 have taken part in anti-Trump rallies outside his tower. It has been a jarring 
contrast, with Trump hunkered down inside planning his presidency and tens of 
thousands of people outside protesting against his rhetoric.


A spokeswoman for the Trump organization described the change as an 
“enforcement of a pre-existing agreement”.
 