
Before he even won, Donald Trump had already threatened civil liberties and 
the central tenets of democracy when he said he wanted tojail his political 
opponent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/debate-donald-trump-threatens-to-jail-hillary-clinton>
 andsue 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/us/politics/donald-trump-lawsuit-threat.html>
 the New York Times. Now Congress has made it possible for him to undermine 
something even bigger: government writ large.

An arcane procedural rule allowing lawmakers to slash the pay of specific 
federal workers down to as low as $1 wasquietly revived 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/virginia-politics/house-republicans-revive-obscure-rule-that-could-allow-them-to-slash-the-pay-of-individual-federal-workers-to-1/2017/01/04/4e80c990-d2b2-11e6-945a-76f69a399dd5_story.html?utm_term=.8e97810e71b1>
 as part of appropriations negotiations last week. The so-called Holman Rule, 
named for the congressman who dreamed it up in 1876, is just the latest sign 
the Trump administration might target members of the civil service – the 
nation’s single largest employer – for politically motivated reasons.

While such amendments would still have to be approved by majorities in the 
House and US Senate, with Republicans in control of both chambers and voting in 
unison, that’s not an implausible scenario. Take, for instance, the fact that 
all but three Republican members of the House ultimately voted for the passage 
of this rule as part of the spending package, despite early Republican 
grumblings behind closed doors.

It’s not just this newly revived rule that makes federal workers vulnerable. 
As Maureen Gilman, legislative director for the National Treasury Employees 
Union, told the Washington Post last week 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/virginia-politics/house-republicans-revive-obscure-rule-that-could-allow-them-to-slash-the-pay-of-individual-federal-workers-to-1/2017/01/04/4e80c990-d2b2-11e6-945a-76f69a399dd5_story.html?utm_term=.17938209b5cd>
: “This is part of a very chilling theme that federal workers are seeing right 
now.”

We were ethics lawyers for Bush and Obama. Trump's cabinet hearings must be 
delayed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/ethics-lawyers-bush-obama-trumps-cabinet-nominations-must-be-delayed>
The rule’s reinstatement follows a string of chilling moves by the Trump 
administration’s transition team, which already announced afreeze 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/11/15/the-faulty-logic-behind-trumps-plan-to-freeze-federal-hiring/?utm_term=.dfbb8700364c>
 on federal hiring during Trump’s first 100 days, and a series of cabinet 
nominations that are antithetical to the agencies represented. (Consider, for 
starters 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/07/us/politics/scott-pruitt-epa-trump.html>, 
the climate denier who Trump would have lead the Environmental Protection 
Agency). Last week, the New York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/05/us/politics/trump-ambassadors.html?_r=0> 
that the Trump administration, in a break with precedent, would be denying 
politically appointed ambassadors a grace period in vacating their posts.

That doesn’t begin to cover all the norms that may be violated, or federal 
benefits that may be at risk, under the new administration. Pension plans could 
be slashed and automatic raises eliminated; even the modest 2.1% raise 
President Obama awarded federal workers in January last year could be rolled 
back.

Regardless of whether any of that comes to pass, the implicit threat is clear.

And relatedly, even if the Holman rule is never once enacted, its chilling 
effect will be significant. Employees whose job description makes them 
politically vulnerable are already leaving government and there’s expected to 
be something of an exodus in the weeks and months ahead. As one federal worker 
told the writer Marin Cogan 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/12/liberal-civil-servants-horrified-at-trump.html>
: “I have no doubt, that what we will see is the purge of good, committed, and 
competent talent out of federal service.”

For those who opt to stay, the pressure to self-censor in certain departments 
will be tremendous. Whether government employees admit this to themselves or 
not, the law of self-preservation dictates anyone working on potentially 
partisan issues, like women’s health or climate, will have a tremendous 
incentive to make their work politically palatable – or simply disappear.

Donald Trump didn't save the ethics committee. You did | Richard Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/donald-trump-ethics-committee-you-did>
It’s difficult to say with much precision which individuals or teams within 
agencies will be targeted using this provision. When asked this very question, 
House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy refused to say. But last month many of 
those who work on climate change were quietly put on notice that their jobs are 
at risk.

This was the subtext of the Trump transition team’s demand that the EPA hand 
over alist of names 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/12/09/trump-transition-team-for-energy-department-seeks-names-of-employees-involved-in-climate-meetings/?utm_term=.62ac7dc64f42>
 for all the people in their agency working on international climate change 
treaty negotiations. That the department pointedly refused to cooperate doesn’t 
insulate employees from the knowledge that their names would have been on that 
list. It’s especially cold comfort given that their protection from the Trump 
administration will last, at this point, less than two more weeks.

Most insidious of all, perhaps, is the fact that there’s no way of knowing how 
pervasive this chilling effect will be – only that it will be pervasive. Sure, 
we can know how many federal employees opt to leave government, but there’s no 
way to measure how many of those who stay will submit to having their hands 
tied or accept being blindfolded to science in the interest of saving their 
jobs.

And that, perhaps, is the one silver lining to the resurfacing of what’s been 
called 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/virginia-politics/house-republicans-revive-obscure-rule-that-could-allow-them-to-slash-the-pay-of-individual-federal-workers-to-1/2017/01/04/4e80c990-d2b2-11e6-945a-76f69a399dd5_story.html?utm_term=.17938209b5cd>
 the “Armageddon rule”. It may spell the end of a politically insulated federal 
government – but if lawmakers use it, at least Trump and the Republican party’s 
witch-hunt will be visible to the public eye. Then, everyone will be able to 
see their bullying for what it is.
 