
Tunisia’s parliament passed a vote of no confidence in prime minister Habib 
Essid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/05/habib-essid-tunisian-prime-minister>
 on Saturday, effectively disbanding the government of the US-trained 
agricultural economist.

The no-confidence motion was passed by 118 votes, easily crossing the 
country’s 109-vote threshold after a debate that stretched late into the night. 
Out of the 191 MPs present for the vote, only three supported Essid and others 
abstained.

UK considers easing travel warning imposed after Tunisia attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/uk-considers-easing-travel-advice-tunisia-attack-security-demands-tourism>
Although the result was expected as Essid had faced criticism from across 
Tunisia’s political spectrum, the vote was a mark of the instability which has 
bedevilled the north African country since it kicked off a wave of 
pro-democracy rebellions across the Arab world in 2011.

Parliament president Mohamed Ennaceur told MPs Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> was “living through a difficult 
situation that demands sacrifices from all” and added that “we must now look to 
the future to return hope to all Tunisians”.

Unlike fellow Arab countries such as Egypt, Yemen, Syria and Libya whose 
revolts have degenerated into coups or anarchic civil conflicts, Tunisia has 
maintained its parliamentary democracy in the face of jihadi attacks, inflation 
and stubbornly high unemployment rates.

But the difficulties have steadily sapped the authority of Essid, whose 
position has also been undermined by political maneuvering within Tunisia’s 
secular Nida Tounis party and pressurefrom the country’s president, Beji Caid 
Essebsi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/22/tunisia-elections-veteran-politician-beji-caid-essebsi-wins-vote>
, who called for a new national unity government last month.

Essid said he would do his best to make sure the transition to the new 
government was a tranquil one. Despite fierce criticism of his government 
during an extraordinary parliamentary session, he said the debate “consecrated 
Tunisia’s nascent democracy”.

The strong north African heritage behind the attacks | Imen Yacoubi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/17/killings-nice-truck-attack-tunisian-link-france-immigration>
“Despite the serious problems our country faces, we have no fear for Tunisia 
which has the resources to face up to the challenges,” he said, before being 
given a standing ovation by those who had ousted him.


Constitutional law expert Nawfel Saied said the no confidence vote, although 
unprecedented in the country’s short history with democracy, was a positive 
point. Similar mechanisms exist in other parliamentary democracies, he said.

He suggested the move could result in a more prominent role for the more 
religiously oriented Ennahda party, which currently has the largest number of 
seats in parliament following defections and splits within Nida Tounis.

Essebsi now has a month to pick a new prime minister, who in turn has a month 
to appoint a cabinet which has to be presented to parliament.

The president “will have a central role to play in this delicate political 
operation, which needs the support of various political parties, especially the 
Islamist Ennahda party,” he said.
 