
The fact that birds are the direct descendants of dinosaurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/lost-worlds/2012/sep/06/dinosaurs-garden-birds>
 is now and overwhelmingly supported theory in palaeontology, though most will 
not know much beyond the recent plethora of discoveries of feathered dinosaurs. 
While these are obviously a wonderful example, the ancestry of birds is more 
than skin (or feather) deep and since mostly palaeontologists work from bones 
it may not be a surprise to learn that you can see plenty of dinosaurian traits 
in your Christmas dinner.

A typical roasting turkey is already missing the head, probably the neck and 
the feet, all of which contain some key traits to identify them as dinosaurs. 
Still, as you carve your way through your dinosaurian dinner there are plenty 
of features remaining that can point you to the evolutionary history of the 
main course. Although birds have the best part of 140 million years of 
adaptation to flight behind them (and then quite a lot of change wrought by 
domestic breeders) there are multiple features that can easily be traced 
between them and their predecessors. Let’s start with one that should be 
familiar to everyone – the wishbone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fyour-christmas-dinner-dinosaur-turkey-birds-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00a5ab996df4e5fa330c26bbda1859581373b84f%2F134_0_3313_1988%2F3313.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%3A%20your%20delicious%20Christmas%20dinner%20dinosaur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fyour-christmas-dinner-dinosaur-turkey-birds-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%3A%20your%20delicious%20Christmas%20dinner%20dinosaur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fyour-christmas-dinner-dinosaur-turkey-birds-evolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00a5ab996df4e5fa330c26bbda1859581373b84f%2F134_0_3313_1988%2F3313.jpg>
 The wishbone (furcula) of aTyrannosaurus rex Photograph: David Hone 
Properly called the furcula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/11/the-fabulous-flight-facilitating-furcula-dinosaur-origins-birds-evolution>
, this is actually a fusion of two bones into one the collarbones or clavicles. 
For a long time this was considered to be absent in dinosaurs as none could be 
found even though other reptiles retained clavicles. However, a plethora of 
recent discoveries shows that in fact it was common in dinosaurs and multiple 
animals close to birds possessed this unusual bone. In fact we now even have 
multiple examples ofTyrannosaurus with a furcula, and while it obviously has a 
few differences, the characteristic V or U-shape and little paddle-like plates 
at the ends, mark this clearly as a bone shared by birds and their antecendents.

Sticking to the chest, the huge breastbone of birds is linked to the huge 
flight muscles that anchor there, but this is also, albeit rather smaller, a 
feature of the more bird-like dinosaurs. The small feathered dinosaurs like
Velociraptor and Microraptor and quite unlike earlier forms had a huge pair of 
plate-like bones that sat below the furcula in the chest. Other dinosaurs lack 
this feature but those closest to the origins of the birds expanded this area 
considerably and the huge, and now keeled, sternum of birds harks back to this.

Lastly in the torso are the ribs with their unusual reversed processes. Few 
may see this normally, but boil down your carcass for soup or a stew and the 
rib cage should become clear of the remnants of lunch and show off the bizarre 
shape. Each rib rather than the simple curved rod of most animals has a little 
(or even quite large) extension from them, making the long piece like a very 
odd and stretched out lower case ‘t’. These go by the name of uncinated 
processes and are another feature seen in birds, their nearest dinosaurian 
predecessors (includingVelociraptor again) and, well, not much else (oddly a 
few digging mammals also have these, they help strengthen the ribcage).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fyour-christmas-dinner-dinosaur-turkey-birds-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ab549aa9cad613101e55cf23160bb3c9747d61%2F138_0_2272_1364%2F2272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%3A%20your%20delicious%20Christmas%20dinner%20dinosaur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fyour-christmas-dinner-dinosaur-turkey-birds-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%3A%20your%20delicious%20Christmas%20dinner%20dinosaur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fyour-christmas-dinner-dinosaur-turkey-birds-evolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ab549aa9cad613101e55cf23160bb3c9747d61%2F138_0_2272_1364%2F2272.jpg>
 The backwards pointing uncinate processes on the ribs of a turkey - a feature 
also seen in some dinosaurs Photograph: David Hone 
Anyone who ends up with a wing can also have a look at the end of the humerus 
(upper arm bone) closest to the shoulder joint. If you clean it up a bit there 
should be a rather obvious large cavity going into the bone. This is one of 
many pneumatic openings in birds (you may find a few others if you hunt around, 
including on the various bits of the backbone but this is a nice and obvious 
one) which allows extensions of the lungs to penetrate into the bones which are 
thin and hollow. Yes, birds literally have air-filled bones and if you crack 
one open you will see just how thin the bones are and in part why birds are so 
light for their size.

Finally the feathers might be present in your dinner (unless something went 
rather badly wrong) but their presence can still be seen, or at least felt. If 
you get hold of the wing bones and locate the ulna (the larger and straighter 
of the two bones below the humerus) run your finger along its outer edge. 
Unlike the shafts of other long bones in your turkey this will not be smooth 
and straight but will have a series of humps along the surface. These are 
called quill knobs and mark the point at which some of the largest flight 
feathers in the wing actually articulate with the bones.These are also found in 
some dinosaur fossils <http://science.sciencemag.org/content/317/5845/1721/F1>, 
so even when the feathers are not preserved we can see the traces in the bones 
of their original presence.

These are the easiest features to spot though a few more like the very wide 
range of motion in the shoulder and the shape of the wrist bones (if you can 
dig them out) are also key features of some of the most bird-like dinosaurs. 
Incidentally, it’s not just the turkeys that have these traits either, all 
birds share these features at some level so those sitting down with a goose, 
duck or chicken will also see the same things, although anyone plumping for 
lamb might struggle to find uncinated processes or a furcula.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fyour-christmas-dinner-dinosaur-turkey-birds-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e4e92b590ca3160178814e593582080ddd89f3%2F0_0_1925_1476%2F1925.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%3A%20your%20delicious%20Christmas%20dinner%20dinosaur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fyour-christmas-dinner-dinosaur-turkey-birds-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%3A%20your%20delicious%20Christmas%20dinner%20dinosaur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fyour-christmas-dinner-dinosaur-turkey-birds-evolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e4e92b590ca3160178814e593582080ddd89f3%2F0_0_1925_1476%2F1925.jpg>
 A bird-like dinosaur showing the furcula (upper arrow) and enlarged sternum 
(lower arrow) also seen in modern birds Photograph: David Hone 
That birds really are dinosaurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/lost-worlds/2012/oct/25/dinosaurs-fossils> 
is a critical part of our understanding of the evolution of these amazing 
groups but it can be hard to comprehend so hopefully this will make things a 
little more clear with some nice anatomy to help while away the post-lunch 
respite while we all wait for the inevitable Bond film to start up.

Merry Christmas to all the Lost Worlds Revisited readers and more 
palaeontological features will be appearing in the coming week and new year. 
For more details on dinosaurian traits in a turkey,try this feature by 
palaeontologist Dr Tom Holtz. 
<https://archosaurmusings.wordpress.com/2009/11/28/guest-post-your-thanksgiving-christmas-theropod/>

 