
Turkey has set out its terms for cooperation with Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, saying it expects the new US 
administration to halt the supply of weapons to Syrian Kurdish forces – which 
Washington has denied it is doing.

“The United States should not allow this strategic partnership [with Turkey] 
to be overshadowed by a terrorist organisation,” Binali Yıldırım, the Turkish 
prime minister, said in a speech in parliament.

Washington sees the Kurdish YPG militia, the largest element of the Syrian 
Democratic Forces (SDF), as one of the most effective partners in the fight 
againstIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> in Syria.

The US president-elect has yet to set out his position on how best to defeat 
Isis and whether he considers theKurds <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kurds>
 an ally.

Trump's response to recent attacks risks adding confusion to dangerous 
situation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/20/trumps-response-to-terror-attacks-risks-adding-confusion-to-dangerous-situation>
US officials confirmed in September that they were supplying light weapons to 
the SDF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/syria-us-arms-supply-kurds-turkey>
, but said they were only going to its Arab contingent. This week Washington 
again insisted it had not supplied weapons to the YPG.

But Turkey’s foreign minister, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, said his government had 
documents to prove the supply, adding: “Everyone in the world knows it.”

Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, has previously said 
he has seen evidence of US planes carrying arms landing at the 
Kurdish-controlled town of Kobani.

Turkey regards the YPG as a terrorist group and indistinguishable from the 
Kurdish militants inTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> who have 
been waging a 30-year war for independence.

Kurdish officials linked to the YPG said they had been promised the US would 
arm them directly if they led the battle for Isis’s Syrian stronghold in Raqqa.

On Monday Syrian rebel groups announced they had decided to freeze any talks 
about their possible participation in Syrian peace negotiations being prepared 
by Russia in Kazakhstan unless the Syrian government and its Iran-backed allies 
ended what it said were violations of a ceasefire.

The rebel groups said the Syrian army and its allies had repeatedly violated 
the ceasefire in Wadi Barada valley and the eastern Guta region near Damascus, 
as well as in Hama and Dara’a provinces.

The Syrian government claims it was attacking only the positions of Isis and 
Jabhat Fateh al-Sham (formerly the al-Nusra Front), two groups that are not 
party to the ceasefire. The argument underlines the difficulty of enforcing a 
ceasefire when groups party to it are physically close to groups that are 
excluded.

The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said government forces 
were attacking with helicopters and artillery fire after advancing on Monday to 
the outskirts of the Ain al-Fijah spring, the main water source in the area, 
including for Damascus.

Syria’s government accuses rebels in Wadi Barada of deliberately targeting 
infrastructure there, causing fuel to poison the water supply and then cutting 
the flow to Damascus altogether.
 