
The recent earthquake in New Zealand was a good example of the way many 
governments use social media, with the country’s ministry of civil defence and 
emergency managementproviding updates on vital information 
<http://www.civildefence.govt.nz/resources/active-emergencies/cheviot-earthquake/>
 and tweeting from@EQKalkoura <https://twitter.com/EQKaikoura/>.

But now that organisations in all sectors, public and commercial, have gone 
beyond using social media for basic communication and are instead exploiting it 
for sophisticated campaigns, government departments and local authorities 
around the world are looking at how to use social media more creatively, for 
themselves and their citizens.


Kaikoura: state of emergency declared in town cut off by New Zealand earthquake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/new-zealand-earthquake-two-dead-as-tsunami-alert-issued>
 One country leading the way is Canada, including the cities of Toronto, 
Calgary and Vancouver, which have made great strides in “devising capacities 
for interaction and engagement, rather than merely informing the public,” 
according to author Jeffrey Roy, who has written about the use of social media 
in Canadian local government.

Toronto’s public health division runs an annual condomTO campaign 
<http://www1.toronto.ca/wps/portal/contentonly?vgnextoid=9c21bf190e1ad410VgnVCM10000071d60f89RCRD>
, which uses social media to address a public health issue, and which has won 
several prizes for its social media efforts.

Vancouver uses social media to inform citizens about emergencies 
<http://vancouver.ca/home-property-development/how-vancouver-prepares-for-emergencies.aspx>
. Following a fire at the city’s port in March 2015, the local government’s 
main Facebook post on the incident reached nearly 250,000 people – almost half 
of the city’s population – and its tweets were trending across Canada.

Calgary has made social media its “primary communication tactic”. It puts out 
relatively few posts but aims for more interactions of engagement per post, 
which it says has been effective. This month it put out a blog witha map 
<http://www.calgarycitynews.com/2016/11/sunny-side-up-new-map-shows-solar.html> 
showing the potential amount of sunshine on roofs of Calgary homes. It was the 
city’s most popular blog of the year, with 35,000 visits.

In Australia, Brisbane council uses social media to raise awareness of areas 
of civic pride in the area, as it felt people didn’t know enough about its 
cultural sites. It has begun anInstagram campaign 
<https://www.instagram.com/brisbanecity/>, which has 57,000 followers. 




A survey 
<https://www.bdo.co.uk/en-gb/insights/industries/public-sector/a-review-of-social-media-usage-in-uk-local-governm>
 by consultancy BDO in 2015 found that 74% of UK councils believed there was a 
moderately or extremely high appetite within their organisations to maintain a 
strong social media presence – an increase of 7% from the previous year .

The way UK councils use social media is also changing. One example is 
Shropshire council’sWhatsApp a councillor 
<http://shropshire.gov.uk/news/2014/11/whatsapp-a-shropshire-councillor/>, 
which lets residents use the messaging app to ask their local councillors 
questions.

At the London borough of Camden, interim chief information officer Omid 
Shiraji says his council uses anumber of social platforms 
<http://camden.gov.uk/ccm/content/council-and-democracy/about-the-council/about-this-site/camden-social-media-accounts/>
 to communicate with residents on specific issues. “We’re using it for targeted 
campaigns – such as for raising awareness on issues like domestic violence,” he 
says. This enables the borough to highlight relevant details and direct people 
to services. Social media has also been used for voter registration: by 
targeting people by age and location, the council was able to boost electoral 
registrations to “record levels”, says Shiraji.

The next step, according to Shiraji, could be to reinventsome services with 
social media at their centre.

Cost-effective recruitment 

For lessons on how to use social media, local authorities can look to police 
and fire departments. Vancouver’spolice department 
<https://twitter.com/vancouverpd?lang=en-gb> uses Twitter to seek information 
on wanted criminals, whileCambridgeshire Fire & Rescue 
<https://www.facebook.com/cambsfrs/> has used Facebook advertising to encourage 
more women to become firefighters.

“It was a hugely successful campaign which didn’t cost us much, as we were 
able to target the age group, gender, and ensure candidates lived within a 
10-mile radius of Cambridgeshire,” says Hayley Douglas, head of media and 
communications at Cambridgeshire Fire & Rescue. Five of the 21 recruits who 
joined after the campaign were women, a jump in number from the previous year.

Most forms of digital technologies come attached with huge costs, but social 
media is an exception. It is free to use for organisations and citizens alike, 
which makes it attractive for public sector bodies. But it is hard to analyse 
whether social media use has been successful or not. Some local authorities, 
such asSuffolk county council <https://twitter.com/suffolkcc>, have decided to 
focus more on engagement than views or shares. “We used to use Twitter because 
we thought it was getting us the most reach, but we have now understood that it 
isn’t all about reach, it’s about how many people are going to find value in 
the posts we put out, and that’s where Facebook is having more of an effect,” 
says Matt Woor, social media channel manager at the council.

At Cambridgeshire Fire & Rescue, Douglas says they look at how certain social 
posts are faring and use this information to decide which type of content to 
share. This is also the howHolly Springs 
<https://www.facebook.com/HollySpringsGov/>, a small town of 30,000 people in 
Wake County, North Carolina, claims to have increased its number of followers 
on Facebook] andTwitter <https://twitter.com/tohollysprings> last year. The 
town, whose strapline is “Best place to raise kids in North Carolina” uses its
Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/HollySpringsGov/> to talk to residents 
about local events or traffic holdups.

It may, right now, be a trial and error approach to new social media, but as 
new apps and features emerge, it’s clear there’s plenty government 
organisations can learn from one another and other public organisations what 
will work best for them and their citizens.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 