
Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> is testing a new 
feature on its iOS app which turns on Apple’s “Reader” mode by default on every 
link opened in its in-app browser.

First introduced in 2010, and ported to iOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> in 2011, Reader mode is a 
oft-forgotten feature in Safari that strips out most of the formatting from a 
webpage, removing adverts, navigation links, comments, and almost everything 
else except for the main content of a text-based article.

In the new test from Twitter, rolled out for a small number of users – 
including one Guardian reporter – the company has enabled Reader mode by 
default on every single link clicked.

While the new feature can be a boon for those navigating badly designed 
web-pages, it also manages to mangle the presentation of almost as many sites. 
While the feature works well for traditional news articles, anything that isn’t 
a chunk of text-heavy content in the middle of a page falls apart.

The change will also be worrying for many media organisations: unlike similar 
light-weight webpage options, such as Facebook Instant Articles and Google’s 
Amp project, there’s no option to customise the appearance of the Reader 
version of the page, nor any ability to monetise the views.

Reader still requires the original version of the page to be loaded before it 
can display, however, which may mean advertising figures are still counted – at 
least until advertisers realise that some proportion of readers aren’t viewing 
the adverts.

A Twitter spokesperson confirmed that the change is “just a test for some”, 
but it comes in the middle of a number of other large changes being tested by 
the company. Most notably, Twitter is also testing a new system for replies on 
the site,which has been received with extraordinarily negative response 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/10/28/complaining-about-twitter-on-twitter/> from 
those in the test. “I understand completely that this is just a test of 
something Twitter might do,” wrote TechCrunch’s Matthew Panzarino, “I am just 
encouraging them very strenuously not to.”

The new replies functionality, among other things, makes it much harder to 
remove people from threads, hides who else is in a thread, and removes from 
notification tabs any mention of whether or not there is a broader conversation 
at all.
 