 James Hugonin's Three Fluctuations in Contrary Rhythm at Hatton Gallery 
Photograph: courtesy of the artist 
Visitors coming up to see the Turner Prize exhibition 
<http://www.balticmill.com/turnerprize> at the Baltic should not be surprised 
to find that there's a wealth of other cutting edge art showing in the area, in 
venues from the traditional galleries to a bank vault, the top floor of a night 
club and Stephenson's Works, where the Rocket was made. The area has a history 
of fostering the avant garde going back decades – it can be argued that it was 
this history that led to the Baltic being here, rather than the Baltic being 
the "onlie begetter" of the current enthusiasm for contemporary art on Tyneside.

In Stephenson's Works <http://www.robertstephensontrust.com/page16.html>, 
arguably one of the most important cradles of the Industrial Revolution, where 
the Rocket and Locomotion were first fired into action, there is a sculpture 
exhibition, "Passengers and Goods". In the main factory space Andrew Stonyer's 
brightly colourful neon rods flicker on and off during the course of each hour, 
while Andrew Burton's clay-fired brick sculptures are juxtaposed with works 
still being created by Theo Harper and a giant "Wing" by Diane Maclean. 
Upstairs Diane Maclean has suspended several kite-like structures from the 
ceiling.

In a gallery off the main factory floor, Kate Liston, until recently Circa 
Contemporary Art Projects' 
<http://ccaprojects.org.uk/index.php?/past/kate-liston/> artist-in-residence at 
Stephenson's Works, shows video works, one of which is inspired by the fact 
that almost the only thing George Stephenson actually invented – as opposed to 
improved, or co-patented – was a tapered glass tube that enabled him to grow 
straight cucumbers.

Globe Gallery <http://www.globegallery.org> is based in the former Co-op Bank 
just opposite theDiscovery Museum <http://www.twmuseums.org.uk/discovery>. It's 
spread over the basement and three floors, making an amazingly flexible place 
to show all sorts of art. Underground in the basement, in the echoing bank 
vault still with its claustrophobic double steel doors is Victoria Rance's 
"Space for a Woman", a cage-like structure in a corner of the vault made up of 
silicon, bronze and steel acorn-pods. In the brighter upstairs galleries can be 
seen "The Coollection", a series of prints by 18 artists from the North East, 
commissioned by theSponsors' Club <http://www.sponsorsclub.org.uk/> to 
encourage local businesses to show art on their office walls, while on the top 
floor is an exhibition of works donated to the gallery for an auction as part 
of its fundraising efforts, including works by Mike Nelson, this year's British 
Council representative at theVenice Biennale 
<http://venicebiennale.britishcouncil.org/about/1201> and former Turner 
Prize-winnerDouglas Gordon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2010/may/17/douglas-gordon-artist>.

 At Curtis Mayfield House, not far from the city wall's Plummer Tower, you can 
see"Seeing in the Dark". 
<http://ccaprojects.org.uk/index.php?/past/seeing-in-the-dark/> This draws on 
the archive of Newcastle-based commissioning agency Locus+ 
<http://www.locusplus.org.uk> to look at the time in the 1980s when the city 
was the base for some of the pioneers of performance and video art in the early 
1980s.
 Simon Le Ruez at the Vane Gallery Photograph: courtesy of the artist 
At the Literary & Philosophical Society  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2009/sep/25/newcastle-lit-and-phil?INTCMP=SRCH>
- where Joseph Swann first demonstrated the electric light bulb – and the next 
doorMining Institute <http://www.mininginstitute.org.uk> is "The Profane Myth" 
<http://www.theprofanemyth.org/about.html>, which looks at the place of 
mythology in contemporary society. Alasdair Gray's graphic works are not as 
well known as his novels, so it was fascinating to see some of hisillustrations 
for Lanark <http://www.lanark1982.co.uk/> – Gray is giving a reading at the Lit 
& Phil on November 19th at noon. Installed in the library of the Mining 
Institute isAdam Chodzko's <http://www.adamchodzko.com> beautiful kayak 
"Ghost", made of cedar, oak, ash, mahogany, olive and walnut. The artist takes 
it up-river on occasion, videoing the trip from water level, with the results 
shown on a monitor back in the Mining Institute.

Vane Gallery, <http://www.vane.org.uk> recently moved to a new space in the 
former Commercial Union building in the city centre, is showing work by two 
artists, Adam Burns, who shows abstract works demonstrating his fascination 
with colour prisms, and Simon Le Ruez, who shows a mixture of sculpture, 
painting, installation and drawing. For their exhibition, both artists have 
produced a limited edition print as part of the International Print Biennale – 
which is on until November 19h.
 Dawn Cole's Men had Eyes Removed at Northern Print Photograph: courtesy of 
the artist 
 The International Print Biennale 
<http://www.internationalprintbiennale.org.uk/home.html> is a revival of the 
Bradford International Print Biennale which was successful in the 1960s and 70s 
(the first poster, in 1968, being designed by a youthfulDavid Hockney 
<http://www.hockneypictures.com/> but which ended in the late 1980s. With 15 
participating galleries, this is by some way the largest printmaking festival 
in the UK.

23 print-makers from 10 countries show at the Hatton Gallery 
<http://www.twmuseums.org.uk/hatton/>. Amongst them, Mariana Moranduzzo's "From 
Earth" rock-like sculpture is an "etching and drawing in tri-dimensional form" 
showing how much more than "just" woodcuts or lithographs prints can be.James 
Hugonin's <http://www.inglebygallery.com/artists/james-hugonin/> "Three 
Fluctuations in Contrary Rhythm" is an abstract works consisting of a series of 
meticulously coloured rectangles.

Next to Kurt Schwitters' 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2009/apr/28/kurt-schwitters-dadaism-barn-cumbria>
 Merz, Debi Keable's "Illusory Nature" shows a group of 12 tree-like patterns 
on transparent acrylic suspended from the ceiling.

Also at the Hatton are posters of exhibitions there from the 50s and 60s, when 
the likes of Richard Hamilton, Victor Pasmore and Eduardo Paolozzi helped 
ensure that Newcastle University was one of the hot-beds of avant garde art

At the Laing, the Print Biennale shows a gigantic woodcut by Katsutoshi Yuash 
called "Pseudo-Mythology #3", a container ship on its side taking up most of 
one of the larger gallery's walls, while Ian Brown's "Tornado Weakening 
(Natural Disasters Series" shows six screen prints of a twister slowly 
diminishing in ferocity (he also does good volcanoes).

Other venues taking part in the Print Biennale include:

- Northern Print <http://www.northernprint.org.uk>, organisers of the 
International Print Biennale, where you can see work by the winner of the V&A 
Purchase Prize Dawn Cole and by the Polish artist Marta Lech, who won the 
Northern Print International residency Award, so will be returning to Newcastle 
next summer.

- the Queen's Hall, Hexham 
<http://www.queenshall.co.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/475>, where tailpieces by 
local lad Thomas Bewick (www.bewicksociety.org) are being shown alongside 
contemporary artists who were inspired by his woodcuts (a display of Bewick's 
works can also be seen atNewcastle City Library 
<http://www.internationalprintbiennale.org.uk/whats-on/2011/09/17/the-bewick-collection.html>
.

- the Durham Art Gallery 
<http://county.durham.gov.uk/sites/dli/Pages/Exhibitions.aspx> shows see works 
from the Tamarind Institute of Lithography (http://tamarind.unm.edu/)
from New Mexico, one of the world's most important training centres for 
master-printmakers. Works by artists just as Jim Dine and Kiki Smith will be 
shown alongside a series of prints created by Tamarind Institute graduate Lee 
Turner of Newcastle'sHole Editions <http://www.holeeditions.co.uk/> for artists 
including this year's Turner Prize nominee George Shaw.

As Newcastle is a relatively compact city, most of the exhibitions are within 
walking distance of each other within the line of the mediaeval city walls, a 
short stroll across the Millennium Bridge from the Turner Prize exhibition at 
the Baltic in Gateshead – where visitor numbers are expected to top 50,000 by 
the end of this week. Details on these and the many other exhibitions not 
listed here can befound on this website <http://www.contemporaryartNE.com>.
 