
It is a monument to the age of steam, a gateway to the breathtaking beaches of 
the North East and an architectural achievement that has stood firm for 130 
years. Now the long-neglected railway station atTynemouth 
<http://www.tynemouth.org.uk> is receiving the loving touch that it deserves.

A multi-million pound renovation project promises to return the Victorian 
station <http://www.thetrams.co.uk/tyneandwear/stations/Tynemouth> to its 
former glory. Close to completion, the transformation of Tynemouth station is, 
according to the council and planners, a "true tale of a heritage phoenix 
rising from the ashes".

Steve Bishop, arts, tourism and heritage manager at North Tyneside council 
<http://www.northtyneside.gov.uk>, says:

The only barrier to restoration over the past 20 years was funding. Now we 
have found about £2 million from the Government combined with other 
contributions.

The conservation area in Tynemouth has been invested in before. The station is 
the last piece in the jigsaw.



The station was built in 1882 by the North Eastern Railway 
<http://www.ner.org.uk/> using designs by its chief architect, William Bell 
<http://www.railwayarchitecture.org.uk/Introduction.htm>. His vision is still 
clear today: a dazzling array of ironwork and glass, crafted in the form of 
glazed canopies that radiate out from the gently curving track and wide 
platforms. Once decorated with a rich display of horticulture, Tynemouth 
station was a destination in itself.

But the soaring popularity of the motor car, the advent of cheap foreign 
holidays and a drop in investment in seaside resorts contributed to its gradual 
decline. Although it has always functioned as a working station, the place fell 
into disrepair. The once gleaming canopies were dirty and cracked while paint 
peeled from the ornate ironwork.
 Another view of the renovations which will host festivals and market stalls 
as well as trains. Courtesy of North Tyneside council 

The fall from grace was such that the building was threatened with demolition 
in 1986. Following a public campaign, it was finally purchased by North 
Tyneside council. Seven years later, the council joined forces withMillhouse 
Developments <http://www.millhousedevelopments.co.uk/history.html> to form a 
joint company –Station Developments 
<http://www.tynemouth-market.com/station-re-development/>. Together they 
pledged to complete the station's restoration and development. That commitment 
became a reality when money from the Government's Sea Change programme became 
available a couple of years ago.

Bishop says: 

We want to get back to that sense of vibrancy at the station and restore its 
place as a gateway to the coast. We want to encourage people to see the station 
as a destination once again.



Despite the years of neglect, the faded grandeur of the station failed to dent 
its appeal for many local residents. For some years,a thriving market  
<http://www.tynemouth-market.com/>has been held at the station every weekend. 
Six businesses are trading within station buildings and Tynemouth more widely 
remains a popular place for visitors.

Now the council intends to broaden the building's retail and entertainment 
potential. It is hoped that additional exhibition and performance space will 
attract more people to the station, Tynemouth and the coast. The grand old - 
and new - place will be an all-year-round cultural venue for the region with 
opportunities for heritage events, fairs and festivals.

While the substantive restoration work has now been completed, the council and 
local groups are looking forward to a major Diamond Jubilee event at the 
station on June 4. A Tyne festival will follow and a number of other 
activities. Tynemouth Station is going celebrate its 130th anniversary in style.
 