
There isn't a better place in the world for bridges than Newcastle upon Tyne 
<http://www.newcastle.gov.uk> and Gateshead <http://www.gateshead.gov.uk>; the 
sheer variety and concentration of them has no equal.

So it's good to see that the weekend of 13 and 14 August marks a new – and 
free – festival <http://www.BridgesFestival.com> based on all 11 crossings, 
from the magnificentHigh Level of 1849 
<http://www.bridgesonthetyne.co.uk/highlev.html> to the 'winking' Millennium 
Bridge <http://www.bridgesonthetyne.co.uk/gmb.html>and the most recent of all, 
the twin arch crossing of the side stream, theLemington Gut 
<http://www.bridgesonthetyne.co.uk/leming.html>.

Frolics include the planting of a garden based on Lord Armstrong's Cragside 
estate <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/main/w-cragsidehousegardenandestate> on 
theSwing Bridge <http://www.bridgesonthetyne.co.uk/swingbr.html>, one of the 
most characterful of them all. It is painted with a special heat-reflecting 
pigment which stops the metal swelling on warm summer days and jamming the 
mechanism. In former times, the fire brigade had to come and soak it until 
things contracted enough to release the cogs and allow big ships through.
 Not beautiful maybe, but Gateshead's car park had a presence all of its own. 
The festival continues the growing and sensible embrace of Newcastle and 
Gateshead which has been helped by the latter's brilliance at commissioning 
iconic work. Although the battle to save thebrutalist Get Carter car park 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/local/tyne/hi/front_page/newsid_8858000/8858759.stm> was 
sadly lost, it was Gateshead which brought us the Millennium bridge, theBaltic 
gallery <http://www.balticmill.com>, the Sage concert hall 
<http://www.thesagegateshead.org> and the Angel of the North 
<http://www.gateshead.gov.uk/angel>.

Events include a nautical photo booth, recreating Geordie navigation all over 
the world, and a 'temporary tattoo' parlour run by an alarming-sounding lass 
called Inky Jenny. Fireworks engulf the city centre bridges on the night of 
Saturday, 13 August, 100 model boats take part in a miniature Tyne regatta and 
5000 yellow plastic ducks in a river race (not at the same time).

There's also going to be a temporary restaurant whose menu changes every 
half-hour as the Tyne tide ebbs and flows. And most memorable of all, an 800 
square metre sandy beach on theQuayside 
<http://www.newcastlequayside.co.uk/frameset.html>, complete with palm trees, 
volleyball and buckets and spades for sandcastles.
 