
On one level it is a journey through magical caves, beaches and forests 
inhabited by lovable, strange creatures that resemble tiny hippos. On another 
it is an existential journey touching on some of the biggest subjects including 
gender, sexuality, tolerance and freedom.

The first major UK exhibition dedicated to the Moomins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/moomins> and the life of their Finnish 
creator, Tove Jansson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tove-jansson>, will 
open to the public on Friday.

Staged in London’s Royal Festival Hall, 
<https://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/119314-southbank-centres-adventures-moominland-explore-moomins-through-life-201617>
 Adventures in Moominland is animmersive and interactive exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/21/beyond-the-moomins-tove-jansson-art-gets-first-uk-exhibition>
 that takes visitors on a journey through the stories, with recreated scenes 
from the books, and exhibits of more than 40 original drawings and other 
archive materials.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuks-first-major-moomins-exhibition-open-london-tove-jansson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93ab5052367572fe3f60bd86d15f1e9f80d2b770%2F0_76_834_500%2F834.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK's%20first%20major%20Moomin%20exhibition%20set%20to%20open%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuks-first-major-moomins-exhibition-open-london-tove-jansson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%27s%20first%20major%20Moomin%20exhibition%20set%20to%20open%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuks-first-major-moomins-exhibition-open-london-tove-jansson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93ab5052367572fe3f60bd86d15f1e9f80d2b770%2F0_76_834_500%2F834.jpg>
 As well as complete artwork, the exhibition also features sketches and other 
previously-unseen material. Photograph: © Moomin Characters™ 
Curators say children will love it, but so will adults, as scenes often have 
more to them.

“She weaves real-life drama into her stories, you get things between the 
lines,” said Jansson’s niece Sophia Jansson. “The books are so rewarding 
because it is not just what you see, it is all that’s in between as well. She 
had a fantastic skill to express things that seem current and touching to 
everyone.”

A case in point are the inseparable characters Thingumy and Bob who speak in 
their own strange language and carry a secret suitcase which contains a shiny 
ruby. For Thingumy and Bob, read Jansson and Vivicka Bandler, with whom the 
author had a brief and passionate affair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuks-first-major-moomins-exhibition-open-london-tove-jansson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7cb6bb774277dbd21cab3d1d6281863124f33e6%2F0_159_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK's%20first%20major%20Moomin%20exhibition%20set%20to%20open%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuks-first-major-moomins-exhibition-open-london-tove-jansson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%27s%20first%20major%20Moomin%20exhibition%20set%20to%20open%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuks-first-major-moomins-exhibition-open-london-tove-jansson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7cb6bb774277dbd21cab3d1d6281863124f33e6%2F0_159_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Despite writing primarily for children, Jansson was not afraid to hide deeper 
subtext in her work. Photograph: LEHTIKUVA OY/REX 
Homosexuality was illegal in Finland at the time, meaning their affair had to 
be conducted in secrecy, their love hidden like the ruby in the suitcase.

The Moomins <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/moomins> were written in the 
aftermath of the second world war, offering a tolerant, happy world and a 
refuge from the harshness of reality.

It is a world that is still needed, said Sophia Jansson. “You look at what is 
happening and the polarisation of wealth and opinion ... it is really important 
to have these books.

“You get solace from the fact she paints a world that is different and 
emphasises the values of treating everyone with respect, including nature. Tove 
is still so current which is the secret behind the Moomins being still so 
appealing.”

Visitors will be taken on one-hour guided tours through the world of the 
Moomins with an audio narrative written by the children’s author Laura Dockrill 
and voiced by broadcaster Sandi Toksvig.

The Moomins have many fans, including the actor Samuel West, who said he had 
felt at home in Jansson’s Moominvalley since he was seven.

“The sensuous melancholy, the odd cast and the wisdom of the worldview 
fascinates me,” he said. “This new exhibition captures both the textures and 
the emotions of Moominland, and the way ordinary things are transformed into 
magical strangeness by Jansson’s joyful sideways look.”

The exhibition is part of the Southbank Centre’s year-long exploration of 
Nordic arts and culture 
<https://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/festivals-series/nordic-matters> 
throughout 2017, which will feature everything from visual art to contemporary 
music to Lego.


• Adventures in Moominland, 16 December - 23 April at the Royal Festival Hall
 