
Tucked in between the boulders above an unnamed lake near the foot of a peak 
called Cnicht in north Wales is a collection of rocks that make up a stone 
hotel – or, to be more accurate, a cosy chamber that comfortably accommodates 
one or two people. Rugged it may be, but the view towards what some call the 
Matterhorn of Wales more than makes up for it.

This was once a huge quarrying area, with workers living on the lower flanks – 
their spoils are visible from the walk to your rocky hotel. On arrival at the 
car park in the village of Croesor, you’ll see a collection of slates that have 
been lovingly decorated by the local schoolchildren, almost all showing the 
mountain in some way. A walk to the summit when you visit the area is 
practically mandatory – and, as it’s only a little over 500 metres, it’s not 
long before you’re reaping the rewards. From the top of this glaciated U-shaped 
valley are views over the Glasglyn river, out to Cardigan Bay and beyond. And 
after taking in the landscape, there’s no better way to feel a part of it than 
to sleep in its bosom, in your very own cave hotel. Here, you’re assured of no 
unwelcome early wake-up calls, except for the creeping sunlight at dawn; no 
noisy neighbours, unless you count the shrill cry of a peregrine falcon 
overhead; and definitely no hefty bill on check out.

Top tip

 Cnicht in winter. Photograph: /flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/gizmo_bunny/8138237591/> 
The cave sleeps one person comfortably, two if you’re friends. Any more than 
that is a bit tight. Be prepared with a tent or bivvy in case someone has 
beaten you to it.

Pre-trip

The nearest towns for camping supplies are Porthmadog (if coming from the 
coast), Beddgelert (small, but close for emergency food/drink), Blaenau 
Ffestiniog and Betws-y-Coed. Take plenty of warm layers whenever you go. With a 
bivvy, you could also sleep outside the cave, although the ground is sloping.

Public transport

Unfortunately this route is impossible to do using public transport. The 
nearest you can get to the start is by taking the train to Blaenau Ffestiniog 
then a taxi up to Croesor, about 6km away.

The plan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsnowdonia-walking-adventure-cnicht%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426699616260%2F4fc170ab-9a36-4ff9-9598-413a3cc06c08-1020x779.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20wilderness%20adventures%3A%20sleep%20in%20a%20%E2%80%98stone%20hotel%E2%80%99%20in%20Snowdonia%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsnowdonia-walking-adventure-cnicht%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20wilderness%20adventures%3A%20sleep%20in%20a%20%E2%80%98stone%20hotel%E2%80%99%20in%20Snowdonia%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsnowdonia-walking-adventure-cnicht%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426699616260%2F4fc170ab-9a36-4ff9-9598-413a3cc06c08-1020x779.jpeg>
 The route to Cnicht 
Day 1
1. As you exit the car park, turn right to follow the minor road uphill. Take 
a minute to enjoy the slate spikes in the ground (on your right after you pass 
the car park), decorated with pictures by children from the local school – most 
with Cnicht as their theme. Carry on through the gate, the going becoming 
steeper under the trees, until the path splits into two.

2. Turn right to pass through the gate and onto the main track up Cnicht (not 
marked on the OS map but very clear on the ground). It’s steady going at first, 
as you tick off the contour lines, with small rocky outcrops protruding from 
the otherwise smooth grass as though trying to compete with the peak itself.

3. A rather odd section of level ground – known by some as the football pitch 
– opens before you. Walk over to the spiky rocks on your left. From this point, 
you can see down to the small lake and the cave where you’ll be heading for the 
night. The path now becomes a little scrambly – nothing too challenging but you 
will need to use your hands at times. Continue heading up, gaining height more 
quickly now. Soon you’ll find yourself on the summit of Cnicht.

4. Congratulations! You’ve conquered the Welsh Matterhorn – and no 
supplementary oxygen, months of training or qualified guide were required! 
Enjoy the views then continue along the ridge for about 500 metres. Where the 
path drops to a fairly flat section, make your break downhill to the west.

5. Be careful; rabbit holes are hidden by long grass on this off-piste route. 
There is no path – you’ll be following sheep tracks – so assess the terrain 
carefully to plan your way forward. You want to head roughly west to reach 
Bwlch y Battel.

6. From Bwlch y Battel, descend towards the lake, bearing southwest where a 
faint path begins to appear. Follow this to the water and then cut around its 
edge, on the west side. Up to your right, you will see a boulder field. Your 
cave is in here, made up of fallen slabs. Look out for the chalk inscription, 
where someone has scribbled “4* Hotel” (and more recently “Heartbreak Hotel”). 
This is your bed for the night.

Day 2
7. Leaving the comfort of your cave, head downhill, southwest, towards the 
rocky slope in front of you. Almost immediately, you will pick up a path. 
Follow it as you edge alongside the stream, losing height as you go. You’ll 
soon need to cross this stream (it’s not wide) and head for the rocks where the 
path contours around them.

8. Don’t be tempted to turn at the wall line and head towards Cnicht again. 
Instead, continue on your grassy, often boggy, path, heading south then 
southwest. You’ll pass through a couple of gates as you start to make your way 
back towards the path you used for your ascent. The easiest option is to join 
this and retrace your steps to the start.

Further information

visitsnowdonia.info <http://www.visitsnowdonia.info/>, eryri-npa.gov.uk 
<http://www.eryri-npa.gov.uk/home>, blaenauffestiniog.org 
<http://blaenauffestiniog.org/home.php>


Taken from Wilderness Weekends: Wild Adventures in Britain’s Rugged Corners, 
published by Bradt <http://www.bradtguides.com/wilderness-weekends-pb.html> for 
£14.99. The publisher is offering Guardian readers a 35% discount on the book; 
visitbradtguides.com <http://www.bradtguides.com/wilderness-weekends-pb.html> 
and enter the code GUARDIAN at the checkout. Offer valid until 31 May 2015
 