
Being the Black Mountains can’t be easy. In fact, it must be like being the 
youngest in a family with four siblings. Making up just a quarter of the ranges 
that define theBrecon Beacons national park <http://www.breconbeacons.org/>, it 
has to fight to be noticed. It seems that this range – which spreads east of 
the park as far as the border with Herefordshire in England – is forever cast 
in the shadow of the Brecon Beacons, Black Mountain (in the west and with 
virtually the same name) andFforest Fawr <http://www.fforestfawrgeopark.org.uk/>
. This, however, is good news for wilderness lovers. Thanks to the 
crowd-pulling appeal of the others, it’s actually the perfect place to spend 
your own secluded night watching the stars.

Top 10 hotels, B&Bs and hostels in Wales for walkers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/sep/25/top-10-hotels-b-and-bs-inns-in-wales-for-walkers>
Physically separated from its siblings by the river Usk, there is no denying 
that the Black Mountains landscape looks a little different. There are fewer 
crashing waterfalls and steep escarpments. Instead, you’ll find high, rolling 
sandstone, studded with lumps of limestone and plenty of silty riverbeds.

The best thing about this area – aside from the lack of crowds – is its 
topography, which means that once you get up high, you stay high. So, planning 
a high-level meander is easy, as is pitching your tent on one of the many 
flattened summits. It also scores points on natural history grounds: its slopes 
support unusual plants such as whitebeams, liverworts and various lichens, plus 
such breeding upland birds as red grouse and golden plover.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fwalking-camping-brecon-beacons-black-mountains-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427306109041%2F6a199f91-225f-477d-b99f-fb6204a03b44-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20wilderness%20adventures%3A%20a%20walk%20on%20high%20in%20the%20Black%20Mountains%2C%20south%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fwalking-camping-brecon-beacons-black-mountains-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20wilderness%20adventures%3A%20a%20walk%20on%20high%20in%20the%20Black%20Mountains%2C%20south%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fwalking-camping-brecon-beacons-black-mountains-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427306109041%2F6a199f91-225f-477d-b99f-fb6204a03b44-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Phoebe Smith takes in the wild and remote splendour of the Black Mountains. 
Photograph: Neil S Price/Phoebe Smith 
And it’s not only birds that take to the air up here: this area is also 
popular with gliders. As you make your way along the tops that line the Grwyne 
valley, listen out for the whoosh from those manmade wings. And later, as you 
watch the day turn to dusk, fire up your camping stove and watch the lights 
begin to twinkle in the villages at your feet.

Pre-trip

Snowdonia’s dark side – the mega zip wire trip beneath north Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/15/wales-snowdonia-zip-wire-caving>
There is nothing in the way of shops at the start, so you will need to collect 
supplies before you arrive. Abergavenny is the nearest town; other options are 
Crickhowell, Hay-on-Wye (north) or Hereford (north-west). Any one of these is 
also an option for an overnight if you fancy a B&B or hotel pre-trip.

Public transport

This is another wild weekend that lies beyond public transport. The nearest 
you can get to the start is Wern Gifford (via bus from Abergavenny or 
Hereford). But it’s still a 15km walk from there so you may consider a taxi or 
else have to bring your car.

Top tip

Take plenty of water with you. There is nowhere easy to collect it on this 
route – without climbing a long way down and then back up again. If you get 
stuck after Rhos Dirion you can descend to Grwyne Fawr to collect some, though 
it will be a pain.

The plan
 The Black Mountains route 
Day 1
1. From the car park follow the path which will lead you temporarily out onto 
the road. Turn right and follow it for a few steps then take the path on your 
right leading uphill. Soon afterwards, take the less-defined path that heads up 
sharply in a northerly direction and follow it for just over half a mile up 
onto the ridge above the valley.

2. Here you’ll join a much more defined track that runs north-west to 
south-east. Turn left onto it and follow it north-west. Already the views are 
spectacular and though it can be boggy up here the going is straightforward, so 
continue all the way to Twyn Talycefn and beyond, staying true to the 
north-west line. You will reach the top of Rhos Dirion. It’s a fairly flat 
summit but its position right on the edge of this huge plateau allows 
commanding views into the towns and villages beyond – and also of the route 
you’ll take tomorrow. On a windy day you might want to consider moving on to 
the next stage and finding one of the hollows around Mynydd Bychan that offer a 
little more shelter. Otherwise pitch your tent/bivvy, get the stove on and 
enjoy the views.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fwalking-camping-brecon-beacons-black-mountains-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427306346447%2F3fd989e5-4434-4021-9e13-8e18b5fe371d-1351x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20wilderness%20adventures%3A%20a%20walk%20on%20high%20in%20the%20Black%20Mountains%2C%20south%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fwalking-camping-brecon-beacons-black-mountains-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20wilderness%20adventures%3A%20a%20walk%20on%20high%20in%20the%20Black%20Mountains%2C%20south%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fwalking-camping-brecon-beacons-black-mountains-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427306346447%2F3fd989e5-4434-4021-9e13-8e18b5fe371d-1351x2040.jpeg>
 The forest at Grwyne Fawr. Photograph: Neil S Price/Phoebe Smith 
Day 2
3. Leave the summit by the obvious path south-west towards the col and fence 
line. Continue, taking the gate through the fence. Be sure not to pick up the 
path that sweeps you out to Y Grib; instead take the left-hand path at the 
fork, bearing south-east.

4. This next part is probably the worst for bogs and peat hags, so perhaps 
grab a snack before you knuckle down to it. Then follow the path, tracking 
roughly south-east to the summit of Waun Fach. The path undulates, with many 
diversions around standing water, but once at Waun Fach the end is in sight. 
Continue along this boggy plateau, first descending then ascending, until you 
reach the summit of Pen y Gadair Fawr.

5. The views from here make the effort well worth it. Linger a while to enjoy 
your reward then, when you’re ready, turn your back on the summit and look 
north-east. You should see a rough path leading off in the same direction. It’s 
not on the map, but is fairly well defined and cuts downhill alongside (but not 
in) the forestry land, making the descent quick, if fairly steep. Follow this 
all the way down. You’ll pass the remains of old homesteads just before 
reaching the stream, where handy boulders enable you to cross easily into the 
woods.

6. From here turn right onto the path and follow it along under cover of the 
trees, keeping the stream to your left. Soon you’ll come to a bridge. Turn left 
to cross it and then make your way up to the minor road. Turn right onto it and 
shortly you’ll reach the car park that was your starting point.

Further information

Black Mountains breconbeacons.org/black-mountains 
<http://www.breconbeacons.org/black-mountains>, visitcrickhowell.co.uk 
<http://www.visitcrickhowell.co.uk/>, visitabergavenny.co.uk 
<http://www.visitabergavenny.co.uk/> and visitmidwales.co.uk 
<http://www.visitmidwales.co.uk/>

Taken from Wilderness Weekends: Wild Adventures in Britain’s Rugged Corners, 
published by Bradt <http://www.bradtguides.com/wilderness-weekends-pb.html> for 
£14.99. The publisher is offering Guardian readers a 35% discount on the book; 
visitbradtguides.com <http://www.bradtguides.com/wilderness-weekends-pb.html> 
and enter the code GUARDIAN at the checkout. Offer valid until 31 May 2015
 