
Along the stretch of coastline between the delightfully named town of Westward 
Ho! and the ancient coastal hamlet ofClovelly <http://www.clovelly.co.uk/> is 
one of the most beautifully secluded beaches in the UK: Peppercombe. It’s 
flanked by rising cliffs on one side and the rhythmic lapping of the waves on 
the other, with a wave-polished expanse of shingle at your feet; there could be 
few better places to spend the night.

And I’m not the only one to think so. There is a long history of people coming 
here to build their makeshift beach bothies along the shoreline, making use of 
whatever materials the waves deposit among the giant pebbles.

When I arrived to build my own bothy, I found the wreckage of many other 
formerly grand structures, now merely driftwood on the sand. Then I came across 
a half-finished shack, so perfect that the builders had even gathered fresh 
leaves for a pillow. I set to work filling in the gaps with a selection of 
bamboo stems that I’d found and some large rocks to secure it against the 
westerly breeze. Then I met the creators: two small boys who told me that every 
year they come with their family to this same spot and mastermind a structure 
in which they would like to sleep. They had never been allowed to spend the 
night in their creation but – they told me with glee – I would be welcome to 
stay, have my dinner in it and sleep over if I liked.

The hours passed and I lit a fire in the small pit the boys had made. The 
beach bothy was only a short distance from the mini-waterfall where the stream 
at Horns Cross makes its way down the valley to join the sea, so I had a 
natural shower on tap. There was not another soul for miles, and I spent the 
most peaceful night after being lulled to sleep by the waves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fbuild-driftwood-den-clovelly-north-devon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426863340288%2F4c7ba061-838e-461d-ab32-db7f1d50f099-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20wilderness%20adventures%3A%20build%20a%20driftwood%20den%20in%20north%20Devon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fbuild-driftwood-den-clovelly-north-devon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20wilderness%20adventures%3A%20build%20a%20driftwood%20den%20in%20north%20Devon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fbuild-driftwood-den-clovelly-north-devon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426863340288%2F4c7ba061-838e-461d-ab32-db7f1d50f099-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Fishing boats moored in the harbour at Clovelly. Photograph: Adam Burton/Getty 
Images/Robert Harding Worl 
After leaving the beach, you can enjoy an excellent walk along the 
easy-to-follow South West Coast Path (SWCP). Heading up through the oakwood 
land between Peppercombe and Buck’s Mills, you feel like you’re somewhere with 
a real story to tell. Some impressive old trees cling to the steep cliff edges, 
having managed to escape the axe that felled their companions elsewhere. Rare 
species of lichen festoon their ancient limbs, while marsh orchids are among 
the wild flowers that grow on the forest floor beneath. Look out for peregrine 
falcons and ravens riding the cliffupdraughts, and in spring listen for the 
tinkling songs of redstarts. This whole area is protected as a Site of Specific 
Scientific Interest.

Even the less wild parts of this walk feel suitably remote. Buck’s Mills, 
through which you will pass en route to Clovelly, features old lime kilns – now 
crumbling into the sea – along with a handful of houses and thetiny former 
stone artist’s cabin of Judith Ackland and Mary Stella Edwards. (The two women 
lived and worked there until 1971; the building is now in the care of the 
National Trust.) After passing through more woodland, you’ll finally arrive at 
the quirky village of Clovelly, lining a steep scar of a valley. The 
picturesque cobbled streets do not allow access by vehicle, so supplies come on 
a sledge or the back of a donkey. It’s the perfect place to arrive via the most 
traditional method: your boots.

Top tip

Beach bothies can be cold and damp – or non-existent – so make sure you take a 
bivvy bag in case you need a plan B. For water, look for where the river 
descends to the beach (to the right of the entrance) or carry in enough 
supplies for the night.

Pre-trip

Other than a pub meal, you’ll find no food to buy in Horns Cross. Your best 
bet for supplies is Bideford, which has supermarkets and shops, plus a range of 
accommodation options.

Public transport

A handy bus route runs between Hartland and Barnstaple: Stagecoach line 319 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:0v3vhUnp7t8J:www.stagecoachbus.com/PdfUploads/Timetable_47862_319.pdf+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=uk>
 (approx four times a day, less frequent on Sunday). This stops at both 
Clovelly and Horns Cross, making a linear walk fairly straightforward. National 
Rail connects Barnstable to the rest of the UK.

The plan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fbuild-driftwood-den-clovelly-north-devon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426700070782%2F340414d1-5b9f-42a4-add1-b955ae7fddff-1020x496.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20wilderness%20adventures%3A%20build%20a%20driftwood%20den%20in%20north%20Devon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fbuild-driftwood-den-clovelly-north-devon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20wilderness%20adventures%3A%20build%20a%20driftwood%20den%20in%20north%20Devon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fbuild-driftwood-den-clovelly-north-devon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426700070782%2F340414d1-5b9f-42a4-add1-b955ae7fddff-1020x496.jpeg>
 The route 
Day 1
1. From the lay-by, head west along the road towards the village centre. At 
the pub, turn right down the road. It soon forks. The path on the right becomes 
a gravel track blocked by a gate. Go through this and follow the track downhill 
until you come to the SWCP. Ignore this for now and continue straight on, 
following signs for the beach. You’ll pass a building on your left and go 
through a gate, then some trees, before finally emerging onto the beach.

2. Peppercombe is the perfect place for a beach sleep. Make sure you stay 
above the waterline, on the flattened rocks near the cliffs – checking above 
that nothing is loose or hanging precariously. It’s worth bringing a ground 
sheet or some tarp, as the rocks can be rough, but the sunsets more than make 
up for it.

Day 2
3. From the beach, retrace your steps back up through the trees, gate and onto 
the crossroads where the SWCP intersects the track up to Horns Cross. This time 
turn right to head west onto the National Trail. This starts off uphill and 
then weaves around the ancient woodland, offering tantalising glimpses of the 
sea. After a couple of kilometres, the path begins to descend into the village 
of Bucks Mills.

4. Take a minute to wander down to the sea front and check out the old lime 
kiln, a remnant of the industry that put this place on the map. Then head back 
uphill and rejoin the SWCP. Continue as it weaves in and around the woodland 
for several more kilometres until you arrive in the quaint village of Clovelly, 
with its cobbled streets and donkeys.

5. Take some time to explore. Then either retrace your steps or, better yet, 
walk up to the visitor centre to catch the bus back to your start.

Further information
clovelly.co.uk <http://www.clovelly.co.uk/>, southwestcoastpath.com 
<http://www.southwestcoastpath.com/walksdb/143/>, hartlandpeninsula.co.uk 
<http://www.hartlandpeninsula.co.uk/>

Taken from Wilderness Weekends: Wild Adventures in Britain’s Rugged Corners, 
published by Bradt <http://www.bradtguides.com/wilderness-weekends-pb.html> for 
£14.99. The publisher is offering Guardian readers a 35% discount on the book; 
visitbradtguides.com <http://www.bradtguides.com/wilderness-weekends-pb.html> 
and enter the code GUARDIAN at the checkout. Offer valid until 31 May 2015
 