
Denea Joseph has struggled to get out of bed each morning since Donald Trump 
won the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
. The 22-year-old college senior had hoped to get a job in communications or 
political consulting after graduation, but now she doesn’t know whether she’ll 
be able to legally work in the US – or even stay in the country.

Joseph, an undocumented immigrant who moved from Belize to California at age 
seven, has temporary deportation relief through Barack Obama’sDeferred Action 
for Childhood Arrivals (Daca) policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/25/latino-voters-clinton-sanders-campaigns-dreamers>
 – but that protection couldquickly disappear under a Trump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/donald-trump-immigration-policy-deportations-build-wall>
.

“The uncertainty is very daunting,” she said. “I don’t know what I’m going to 
do.”

Janet Napolitano, president of the University of California (UC), announced 
<http://www.sacbee.com/news/local/education/article113780763.html> this week 
that she would be meeting with undocumented students like Joseph, and said the 
institution remainedcommitted 
<https://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/press-room/university-california-statement-election>
 to supporting these students.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fundocumented-students-university-protection-trump-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f58138207f324882dadad322263783bd3b74c63%2F0_5_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Undocumented%20students%20hope%20for%20university's%20protection%20under%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fundocumented-students-university-protection-trump-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Undocumented%20students%20hope%20for%20university%27s%20protection%20under%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fundocumented-students-university-protection-trump-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f58138207f324882dadad322263783bd3b74c63%2F0_5_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Denea Joseph. Photograph: Jenna Aya./UCLA 
In the wake of her comments, students and professors across UC, one of the 
largest public college systems in the country, are now pushing administrators 
to take aggressive steps to protect thousands of undocumented students from 
potentially devastating policies, which could strip them of basic rights and 
lead tomass deportations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/donald-trump-vows-to-deport-millions-during-first-hour-in-office-in-hardline-speech>
.

Some have urged UC to be a leader in what they hope will be an organized 
movement of American universities fighting back against Trump by forming 
“sanctuary campuses” that refuse to cooperate with federal immigration 
authorities.

Immigrants fear Trump deportations: ‘This election changed my optimism'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/donald-trump-immigration-policy-deportations-build-wall>
“University systems have a certain degree of autonomy to lead the way,” said 
Cinthia Flores, manager of the Dream Resource Center at the UC Los Angeles 
(UCLA) Labor Center. She added that they could “demonstrate ally-ship to 
undocumented students and their families”.

Whether UC will take a strong stance, however, remains unclear, particularly 
since Napolitanopreviously served 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/11/deportation-immigrants-obama-reelection>
 as USsecretary for homeland security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/12/janet-napolitano-homeland-security-resigns>
 under Obama, whose administrationoversaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/17/border-patrol-children-deportation-rules>
 more deportations than any other in US history.

While immigration advocates have long been disappointed by Obama’s 
deportations, the threat of Trump has them significantly more alarmed.

As with many policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-policy-immigration-agenda-healthcare>
, the specifics of the president-elect’s immigration plans remain undetermined, 
though on the campaign trail he relied onxenophobic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/07/donald-trump-presidency-america-endure-latinos-experience>
 andracially charged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
 speeches, pledging to triple the number of Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) agents andlaunch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/aug/31/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-mexico-us-election-livedonald-trump-hillary-clinton-mexico-us-election-live?page=with%3Ablock-57c78c4ce4b0df5f040dc154>
 a “special deportation task force”.

Trump is also expected to end Daca 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-trump-immigration-20161109-story.html>, 
which provides protections for 741,500 people.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fundocumented-students-university-protection-trump-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7788cb46d7d110a05890589f1c231c9dca6a3f70%2F0_66_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Undocumented%20students%20hope%20for%20university's%20protection%20under%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fundocumented-students-university-protection-trump-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Undocumented%20students%20hope%20for%20university%27s%20protection%20under%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fundocumented-students-university-protection-trump-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7788cb46d7d110a05890589f1c231c9dca6a3f70%2F0_66_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Janet Napolitano Testifies At Senate Confirmation Hearing
 Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images 
Advocates said there were a number of tangible ways colleges could protect 
undocumented students, arguing that California’s public university system was 
in a good position to chart the course.

California already has multiple progressive policies designed to support 
undocumented immigrants, including measures that help them accesshealthcare 
<http://www.dailycal.org/2016/06/15/california-law-help-undocumented-immigrants-purchase-health-insurance/>
,driver’s licenses 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-0208-immigrant-drivers-licenses-20160208-story.html>
 andstudent loans 
<http://www.ocregister.com/articles/california-646538-state-immigrants.html>. 
Across the state, UC’s 10 campuses haveresources 
<http://undoc.universityofcalifornia.edu/> tailored to undocumented people.

The idea of sanctuary campuses is rooted in the existing concept of “sanctuary 
cities”, local governments that don’t cooperate with all federal immigration 
enforcement. Trump hasrepeatedly denounced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/17/donald-trump-immigration-hillary-clinton-remembrance-project>
 such policies and threatened tocut federal funding 
<http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/politics/seattle-will-remain-sanctuary-city-for-immigrants-despite-trump-presidency-mayor-says/>
 from those municipalities.

Madeleine Villanueva, an undocumented UC Berkeley student who moved from the 
Philippines at age nine, said a sanctuary policy would help put some students 
at ease.

“No one should be scared to go to class because someone can deport them,” said 
the 23-year-old political economy major. “I haven’t been this scared to be in 
this country for awhile.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fundocumented-students-university-protection-trump-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cede0dbb179769a70dad30a61ec6ab0917e2e7f%2F385_105_940_1175%2F940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Undocumented%20students%20hope%20for%20university's%20protection%20under%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fundocumented-students-university-protection-trump-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Undocumented%20students%20hope%20for%20university%27s%20protection%20under%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fundocumented-students-university-protection-trump-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cede0dbb179769a70dad30a61ec6ab0917e2e7f%2F385_105_940_1175%2F940.jpg>
 Madeleine Villanueva Photograph: Madeleine Villanueva 
María Blanco, executive director of UC’s Undocumented Student Legal Services 
Center 
<https://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/press-room/legal-services-program-undocumented-students>
, said the university could consider a sanctuary system that blocks campus 
police departments from collaborating with ICE agents. The administration could 
also commit to shielding students’ records from law enforcement.

“The university could in a unified way say … ‘We will protect all our student 
information,’” said Blanco. “For the students to know that and for the 
university to actually do that, that is a big protection.”

Institutions like UC “are in fact a form of state government”, noted Hiroshi 
Motomura, a UCLA law professor and immigration expert, arguing that the 
university had the power to enact specific policies.

It is unclear, however, if Trump could attempt to revoke federal funding – for 
scholarships and research, for example – if a university were to declare itself 
a sanctuary campus.

Regardless, colleges have an ethical obligation to assist undocumented 
students against threats of deportation, Motomura said. “It follows through on 
the educational mission. We want to see young people get an education, so we’re 
troubled by anything that prevents that from happening.”

Daca also allows eligible undocumented immigrants to legally work, and if 
Trump ends the program, Flores said, the university will have to find a way to 
ensure that students can continue to be employed on campus.

“Undocumented students are some of the most financially challenged students on 
our campus,” added Lisa Garcia Bedolla, UC Berkeley professor of education and 
political science.

What will President Donald Trump do? Predicting his policy agenda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-policy-immigration-agenda-healthcare>
In addition to standing up to Trump’s federal government, advocates said, UC 
needs to provide extensive legal services to threatened students as well as 
mental health counseling they may now require.

“After the election, it’s like we all woke up in a nightmare,” said Gladis, an 
undocumented 26-year-old UC graduate student who requested to be identified 
only by her first name, given the uncertain future of Daca. “The first thing 
that came to me is: how am I even going to continue in my program?” she said. 
“It’s just been overwhelming.”

Despite the threats, Joseph, a major in African American studies and public 
affairs at UCLA, said she was determined not to let Trump’s victory silence her.

“At a time like this where undocumented people are definitely under attack,” 
she said, “it’s crucial that there are people still out there to speak up.”

Villanueva, who is part of a student group called Rising Immigrant Scholars 
through Education, said undocumented immigrants would not stop protesting 
Trump. “We’re here. We’re willing to fight back.”
 