
Facebook is one of the most downloaded apps on iOS but it has long been cited 
as a cause of fast-draining iPhone batteries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/19/facebook-iphone-users-battery-drain>
. Last year it was accused ofusing background tricks to stay active 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/iphone/comments/3kvfta/how_is_facebook_doing_so_much_background_activity/>
 even when it wasn’t being used. Facebook admitted bugs existed,and fixed them 
<https://www.facebook.com/arig/posts/10105815276466163>, but questions of the 
app’s impact on battery life remained.

Similar concerns about Facebook’s Android app led to the discovery that 
deleting the app saves up to 20% of a phone’s battery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/01/uninstalling-facebook-app-saves-up-to-20-of-android-battery-life>
. After that revelation, I set about seeing if the same was true for iPhone 
users. I discovered that uninstalling Facebook’s iOS app and switching to 
Safari can save up to 15% of iPhone battery life.









 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Funinstalling-facebook-app-saves-iphone-battery-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f44a0f6d6bffb67bac12eb8addd866c713623fd%2F0_0_1702_1022%2F1702.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uninstalling%20Facebook%20app%20saves%20up%20to%2015%25%20of%20iPhone%20battery%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Funinstalling-facebook-app-saves-iphone-battery-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uninstalling%20Facebook%20app%20saves%20up%20to%2015%25%20of%20iPhone%20battery%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Funinstalling-facebook-app-saves-iphone-battery-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f44a0f6d6bffb67bac12eb8addd866c713623fd%2F0_0_1702_1022%2F1702.jpg>
 An alternative to uninstalling Facebook is using the hump from Apple’sSmart 
Battery case 
<http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/08/apple-iphone-battery-life-fix>
. Photograph: Apple 
Using an iPhone 6S Plus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/02/iphone-6s-plus-review-barely-better>
 for a week without the main Facebook app installed, I recorded the battery 
life at 10.30pm each day for a week comparing it to a daily average taken from 
a week with the app. I charged the phone overnight, taking it off the charger 
at 7.30am, and used it normally. I accessed Facebook for the same amount of 
time, and for the same purposes, using the social network’s excellent mobile 
site within Safari, as I had done using the app. I also left the Facebook 
Messenger app installed.

On average I had 15% more battery left by 10.30pm each day. I had also saved 
space, because at the point I had deleted the Facebook app it had consumed 
around 500MB in total combiningthe 111MB of the app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/facebook/id284882215?mt=8> itself and its 
cache on the iPhone.

To make sure that this wasn’t an isolated incident, I also recruited several 
other Facebook-using iPhone owners to conduct a similar test. They all found 
similar results, with increased battery life when using Facebook in Safari 
having uninstalled the mainFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> iOS app.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Funinstalling-facebook-app-saves-iphone-battery-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F553958f0a7300d637a176ee2f66e7edec5ff8dbd%2F0_1463_1241_745%2F1241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uninstalling%20Facebook%20app%20saves%20up%20to%2015%25%20of%20iPhone%20battery%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Funinstalling-facebook-app-saves-iphone-battery-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uninstalling%20Facebook%20app%20saves%20up%20to%2015%25%20of%20iPhone%20battery%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Funinstalling-facebook-app-saves-iphone-battery-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F553958f0a7300d637a176ee2f66e7edec5ff8dbd%2F0_1463_1241_745%2F1241.jpg>
 Spot the difference: one is the Facebook app, the other the Facebook mobile 
site. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Using Facebook in Safari was almost as good as the app. You can even place a 
shortcut to Facebook in Safari on the homescreen that looks almost identical to 
the app’s icon (the white is a little less bright but you need eagle eyes to 
see). The only restriction was the Share-to function, which does not exist for 
websites, meaning that to share photos I had to manually hit the “post photos” 
button on the mobile site.

Features of the app, such as Instant Articles, are also not available. Tapping 
a link on the Facebook mobile site opens a new Safari tab.

The results will vary for the smaller iPhone 6S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-6s>, as it has a smaller battery 
and shorter battery life overall, but judging by the 6S Plus experience, 
removing the Facebook app in preference of using the social network in Safari 
will extend the battery life of any iPhone.

A Facebook spokesperson said the company was investigating the matter. 

 * iPhone 6S Plus review: barely better than the iPhone 6 Plus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/02/iphone-6s-plus-review-barely-better>

 * Apple reveals iPhone battery life fix ... try not to laugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/08/apple-iphone-battery-life-fix> 