
The United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> has 
condemned an attempted coup in Libya that has seen a rival administration 
capture key government buildings, as both rebels and officials scrambled to win 
the support of Tripoli’s powerful militias.

The UN envoy Martin Kobler said: “I condemn the attempt to seize the 
headquarters of the high council of state. Such actions … will generate further 
disorder and insecurity and must end for the sake of the Libyan people.”

His comments came hours after armed units backed by trucks mounted with 
anti-aircraft guns seized buildings of the UN-backed government of national 
accord around Tripoli’s Rixos hotel complex, with local forces fleeing without 
a battle.

Libya is another tragic example of Cameron’s folly. History will not judge him 
kindly | Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/libya-cameron-folly-foreign-affairs-committee-eu>
Fayez al-Sarraj, the GNA’s prime minister, and his seven-strong presidency 
council have spent the past week ensconced in a hotel in neighbouring Tunisia 
debating a new cabinet, after deciding the Libyan capital was unsafe.

The plotters have proclaimed the return of a former administration, the 
national salvation government, in what has so far been a bloodless takeover. 
Coup leader Khalifa al-Ghwell, a former prime minister, declared the GNA was 
now void after repeated failures. “The presidential council was given chances 
one after another to form the government, but it fails ... and has become an 
illegal executive authority,” he said.

Speaking from Tunisia, Sarraj vowed to restore order, calling on loyal militia 
units to “arrest the plotters immediately”. He said: “Arrest all those who 
plotted for the coup and those who are [looking at] forming parallel 
governments. This action by the GNC and the armed militias that backed its coup 
attempt helps add to the chaos in the country and leaves the door wide open for 
any group to assault the state institutions and buildings.”

Six months after arriving in Tripoli, the GNA has failed to establish a 
security force of its own, and with no police or army units in the capital, the 
city’s potent militias have emerged as kingmakers in the power struggle between 
rival governments. The struggle is itself part of a wider war, between militias 
in parts of the capital and westernLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> against those loyal to the elected 
parliament based in the eastern town of Tobruk.

Parliament has so far refused to work with the GNA, and its hand was 
strengthened in September after its army commander, Khalifa Haftar, captured 
the country’s key oil ports giving it control of most of the oil industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Flibya-united-nations-condemns-attempted-coup-gna%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e19a1d479fea431f95e8b3bfad842df66b83847%2F0_269_5560_3336%2F5560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=United%20Nations%20condemns%20attempted%20coup%20in%20Libya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Flibya-united-nations-condemns-attempted-coup-gna%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=United%20Nations%20condemns%20attempted%20coup%20in%20Libya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Flibya-united-nations-condemns-attempted-coup-gna%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e19a1d479fea431f95e8b3bfad842df66b83847%2F0_269_5560_3336%2F5560.jpg>
 Fayez al-Sarraj, the GNA’s prime minister. Photograph: Aurelien 
Morissard/IP3/Getty Images 
MPs are due to meet in Tobruk on Monday to debate events in Tripoli, but MP 
Salah Suhbi said they were likely to adopt a wait-and-see attitude towards the 
capital’s power struggle. “To be honest it is chaotic, we now have two 
governments [in Tripoli] – it is out of our hands,” he said. “The situation in 
Tripoli is getting out of control: it is a city with 150 militias in it.”

Diplomats had been pinning their hopes on the GNA being able to persuade the 
country’s splintered armed factions to unify behind it and end a two-year civil 
war, tackle Islamic State and end a rising tide of migration to Europe. 
Instead, the fledgling government has presided over a capital where militia 
violence and assassinations are rife, and citizens struggle with daily power 
cuts – one was in place when the coup broke out – cash shortages and rampant 
inflation.

Kidnappings, either for money or part of ongoing tit-for-tat militia wars, are 
endemic, prompting Britain’s Libya ambassador, Peter Millett, stationed for 
security reasons in neighbouring Tunisia, to call on the government to do more.
Peter Millett (@PeterMillett1) 
More kidnappings & killings in #Tripoli 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Tripoli?src=hash> & across #Libya 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Libya?src=hash>. Legitimate authorities improve 
security & tackle impunityhttps://t.co/5xLpikuRnB <https://t.co/5xLpikuRnB>
 <https://twitter.com/PeterMillett1/status/785912785272209408> October 11, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/PeterMillett1/status/785912785272209408> 


Diplomatic sources have ruled out the deployment of foreign troops to back the 
government, although Britain and Italy earlier this year considered deploying 
5,000 soldiers to train a new GNA army. But that new army has yet to be formed, 
with the government struggling to win popular support.

Instead, Tripoli’s militias hold the key to power. Sarraj will hope two key 
militias who have so far backed the GNA remain loyal: Rada, a quasi-police 
force in Tripoli; and those from Misrata, whose brigades are already heavily 
engaged in a war of attrition – backed by US airstrikes – against Isis in Sirte.

A European Union External Action 
<http://eeas.europa.eu/headquarters/headquarters-homepage_en> spokesman said on 
Saturday: “The use of force to seize power in Libya can only lead to further 
disorder and a spiral of violence where the Libyan people would be the main 
victims.”

Some Tripoli citizens, with phone services disrupted by power cuts and 
computers powered by car batteries, tweeted their surprise that the coup had 
yet to trigger wider violence.
H.Rafferty1 (@HRafferty1) 
Woke up to a capital with 2 opposing resident govs. Everything is surprisingly 
ordinary...right down 2 the power cut.#Tripoli 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Tripoli?src=hash> #Libya 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Libya?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/HRafferty1/status/787225741092159488> October 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/HRafferty1/status/787225741092159488> 
Another, named Deena, expressed bewilderment at the latest twist in Libya’s 
chaotic power struggles, tweeting: “Game of Thrones#Libya 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Libya?src=hash> Edition.”
 