
Ginkgo biloba is a beautiful tree. Its elegant fan-shaped leaves, which turn a 
vivid yellow in Autumn, are often borrowed by the world of art and design. In 
South-East Asia, ginkgo has a long association with Buddhist temples and the 
trees themselves are regarded with reverence. While small wild populations have 
been identified in mountain groves in South West China, ginkgo has a global 
distribution, due to its popularity as a cultivated tree. Its tolerance of 
pollution makes it particularly popular with city planners. Male trees are 
preferable for this purpose, however (ginkgo is dioecious, with separate male 
and female trees), because the edible fleshy seeds are notoriously smelly. 
Ginkgo is also used in traditional medicine, andGinkgo biloba extract is a 
widely available dietary supplement.

Ginkgo biloba is the archetypal “living fossil” of the plant world, even if 
this label sometimes causes more confusion than it solves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/06/why-its-time-to-make-living-fossils-extinct>
. Fossils tell us that the gross morphology of its leaves has remained stable 
for more than 200 million years, although a variety of associated reproductive 
structures have been recognised. Thefossil record also tells us that ginkgoes 
were widespread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2015/dec/14/climate-change-plants-key-to-ancient-modern-fossil>
, and found in fossil assemblages not too different ecologically from the 
forests they still live in today. What ancient fossils cannot tell us is very 
much about how ginkgoes are related to the other major plant groups.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Funlocking-genetic-code-of-an-ancient-survivor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30fadefe0361cabe2e64e1d4d8e8b7851caf1933%2F0_218_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unlocking%20the%20genetic%20code%20of%20an%20ancient%20survivor%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Funlocking-genetic-code-of-an-ancient-survivor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unlocking%20the%20genetic%20code%20of%20an%20ancient%20survivor%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Funlocking-genetic-code-of-an-ancient-survivor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30fadefe0361cabe2e64e1d4d8e8b7851caf1933%2F0_218_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
Ginkgo biloba leaves Photograph: Herve Lenain/Alamy 
Despite producing fleshy seeds, ginkgo is not a flowering plant. It is a 
gymnosperm: it produces pollen, which fertilises ovules which are not fully 
enclosed within an ovary. It is also notable for itsmotile sperm 
<http://kwanten.home.xs4all.nl/ovule.htm>. There are three other living groups 
of gymnosperms – conifers,cycads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/sep/28/lets-put-endangered-plants-in-the-spotlight>
 and gnetophytes – and past molecular studies have tended to place ginkgo most 
closely with the cycads. Thepublication of a draft genome for Ginkgo biloba 
<http://gigascience.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13742-016-0154-1> by a 
team of scientists at BGI, Zheijiang University and the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences will help to answer questions about the big picture of plant evolution.

 The genome of Ginkgo biloba is huge. At more than 10 gigabases (the number of 
nucleotide base pairs, or DNA letters), it is 80 times larger than the genome of
Arabidopsis thaliana, the flowering plant which is the standard model organism 
of plant biology. It is also bigger than the notoriously large maize genome, 
although only half the size of the enormous genome of the Norway Spruce,Picea 
abies. 

The overall size of the genome reflects a very high proportion (more than 75%) 
of repetitive sequences, resulting from both gradual accumulation over deep 
time, and from two whole genome duplication (WGD) events. The authors suggest 
that the more ancient of these two WGD events is the same one that has already 
beenrecognised in all seed plants 
<http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/1/10/e1501084>, but not seen in ferns. 
Since this is WGD is estimated in this paper at between 515 and 735 million 
years ago, before plants moved onto land, there are (as is so often the case) 
interesting discrepancies between the fossil and molecular stories. The second 
WGD is estimated to have taken place between 74 and 147 million year ago, after 
ginkgoes and conifers had already diverged.

Initial analysis of the 42000 predicted genes in the Ginkgo biloba genome 
showed notable expansion in gene families which are associated with plant 
defence strategies, preventing attacks from bacteria, fungi and insects. Genes 
for chemical responses for repelling herbivores, combined with genes for 
emitting volatile organic compounds which attract predators of browsing 
insects, are part of a sophisticated armoury which ginkgo has developed over 
millions of years. It is difficult to say the degree to which much these 
enriched defence genes are responsible for the longevity of the ginkgo group 
over evolutionary time, but they may be part of the bigger picture, which this 
new draft genome will help to reveal.

• This article was amended on 24 November 2016. An earlier version referred to 
BGI as the Beijing Genomics Institute, its former name.
 