
There are only days to go before the US presidential election on 8 November. 
What are the latest polls saying?

For an election that is generating more passion on both sides than any in 
recent memory, pollsters and pundits are offering scant comfort to those 
seeking clarity about Tuesday’s result. Most outlets continue to predict 
victory for Hillary Clinton, but various models differ greatly in the certainty 
they award that outcome, and various polling averages disagree on the margin. 
Nate Silver’sFiveThirtyEight 
<http://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2016-election-forecast/?ex_cid=rrpromo> 
model gives Clinton a 65% chance of winning to Donald Trump’s 35%, while theNew 
York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/upshot/presidential-polls-forecast.html?action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=c-column-middle-span-region&region=c-column-middle-span-region&WT.nav=c-column-middle-span-region>
 sticks its neck out with an 86% chance of a Clinton presidency to 14% for 
Trump. RealClearPolitics’polling average 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/general_election_trump_vs_clinton-5491.html>
 has Clinton ahead by 1.7 percentage points, while HuffPost Pollster’saverage 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/2016-general-election-trump-vs-clinton>
 gives her a 5.5 percentage point lead.

How have these indicators changed since James Comey announced the FBI was 
looking into Clinton’s emails again?

Amid this dense electoral fog, what is clear is that Comey’s bombshell 
<http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2016/11/02/Trump_leads_Clinton_in_new_Ohio_poll.html>
 last Friday that the FBI is in a sense reviving its probe into Clinton’s use 
of a private email server when she was US secretary of state has had a profound 
impact on the race. It allowed Trump, until then mired in his owncontroversy 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html>
 over his attitudes towards women, to swing the spotlight back onto his rival’s 
perceived untrustworthiness. Probably as a result, the Republican nominee’s 
plummeting poll ratings have rallied, bringing them within the margin of error 
both on anational 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/04/us/politics/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-poll.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=first-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
 measure and in key states such asFlorida 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/02/politics/presidential-polls-2016-election-hillary-clinton-donald-trump/>
, and even propelling him into the lead in the bellwether state ofOhio 
<http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2016/11/02/Trump_leads_Clinton_in_new_Ohio_poll.html>
.

What’s happening now about the FBI investigation? Is there a timeframe?

FBI agents are racing through 650,000 emails 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/laptop-may-include-thousands-of-emails-linked-to-hillary-clintons-private-server-1477854957>
 reported to have been found on a laptop shared between Huma Abedin, vice-chair 
of Clinton’s campaign, and her estranged husband Anthony Weiner (he of the
sexting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/16/anthony-weiner-resigns-twitter-scandal>
scandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/22/anthony-weiner-under-investigation-nypd>
). It is not known how many of those emails came to or from Abedin, nor how 
many might have related to Clinton or might already have been examined by the 
Bureau. If there are any new Clinton emails, it will take time to work out 
whether they contain classified material. So the search is unlikely to be 
completed by Tuesday, leaving this Sword of Damocles dangling over the 
Democratic presidential candidate as Americans go to the polls.

How is early voting looking?

More than 34 million <http://www.electproject.org/early_2016> Americans have 
already voted, surpassing the32 million 
<http://www.electproject.org/2012_early_vote> who cast their ballots early four 
years ago. Will this benefit Clinton or Trump? There’s no easy answer to that 
question, given variations both by state and electoral group. But there are 
clues. The good news for Clinton is thatLatino turnout 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/clintons-coalition-hispanic-support-is-up-black-turnout-is-down/>
 among early voters has increased dramatically over 2012, suggesting that the 
“sleeping giant” of the Hispanic vote might actually have been awoken this year 
by Trump’s anti-immigrant rhetoric. The bad news is that theAfrican American 
turnout 
<http://www.politico.com/states/florida/story/2016/10/clinton-campaign-struggles-in-getting-african-americans-to-early-voting-polls-106931>
, such a vital element in the coalition built by Barack Obama in his two 
successful presidential runs, is relatively sluggish this time as is turnout for
young voters 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/10/31/us/elections/earlyvoters.html?_r=0>
. The fall in black turnout could be especially perilous for Clinton in swing 
states such as North Carolina, which has been identified by both candidates as 
a key target.

Can early voters change their minds, as Trump has urged, and have they been? 

Trump is trying to use the furor over the FBI’s renewed interest in Clinton’s 
emails to persuade those early voters feeling buyer’s remorse to switch their 
preference. “Now that you see that Hillary was a big mistake, change your 
vote,” hesaid on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/793763567837253633>, making the 
same appeal at a campaign stop this week in Wisconsin, one of six states that 
do actually allow early voters to change their minds (three times, in
Wisconsin’s case 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/31/politics/changing-early-vote-cast/>). The others 
are Connecticut, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, New York and Pennsylvania.
Some early voters 
<http://wbay.com/2016/10/24/some-wisconsin-early-voters-make-ballot-changes/> 
have made use of this facility, though probably not in numbers large enough to 
make a difference.

What’s the latest from Florida, and why is the Sunshine State so crucial?

Florida accounts for 29 of the 270 electoral college votes needed to win, 
which puts it on a par with New York and means it has fewer than only 
California and Texas. Combine that with the state’s history of squeakily close 
presidential elections – Obama won here in 2012 by just 74,000 out of more than 
8m votes – and you have the mother of all swing states.All 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/03/politics/donald-trump-path-to-270-scenarios/> 
modeling 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/02/4-electoral-maps-where-donald-trump-wins/?tid=sm_tw_pp&wprss=rss_the-fix>
 suggests Trump must win Florida or kiss goodbye to the White House, although 
for Clinton it may not be quite so crucial. True to form, the race in Florida 
is looking tooclose 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/fl/florida_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-5963.html>
 tocall <http://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2016-election-forecast/florida/>. 
Clinton is counting on a large turnout of Democratic-leaningPuerto Ricans <> in 
central Florida, while Trump is bashing the theme of the FBI’s investigation 
into Clinton’s emails in the hope of riling Floridians into backing him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&media=>
How does the US electoral college work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/how-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
How are voters reacting to Trump’s holding back of his tax returns?

Trump is the first presidential nominee of either main party since Watergate 
in 1972 to withhold his or her tax returns. His only return to have been made 
public, courtesy of aNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/02/us/politics/donald-trump-taxes.html?_r=0> 
leak, suggests he may have avoided paying federal income tax for two decades. 
His reluctance is deeply unpopular, with polls showing that voters
overwhelmingly think 
<https://poll.qu.edu/national/release-detail?ReleaseID=2375> he should publish 
the records, as dotwo-thirds 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/08/poll-should-trump-release-tax-returns-227408>
 of Republican voters andalmost half 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/03/politics/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-presidential-polls/>
 of Trump’s own supporters. But whether that translates into actual votes 
remains a moot point.

What about Trump’s other difficulty, with female voters?

It seems that Trump’s crude comments captured on a hot mic 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html>
 about making uninvited sexual advances to women might not have dissuaded many 
staunchconservative women voters 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/for-many-gop-women-party-loyalty-trumps-personal-affront/>
 from supporters him. But it has hurt him amongwhite women voters 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/10/13/donald-trumps-facing-an-apocalyptic-election-scenario-thanks-to-women-voters/>
generally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/hillary-clinton-how-women-voters-could-win-election>
 who will play an important role in determining the outcome of the election.Ten 
recent polls 
<http://presidentialgenderwatch.org/polls/womens-vote-watch/presidential-polling-data/>
 show Clinton with an historically high 17-point advantage among women voters.

What last-minute plans are there for this weekend?

With everything to play for, both candidates will be clocking up serious air 
miles. Trump will be focusing on North Carolina on Saturday, seeking to repeat 
Mitt Romney’s victory there in 2012. Clinton will be with Katy Perry in 
Philadelphia on Saturday, where she will also attend a blockbuster eve-of-vote 
rally on Monday night alongside Bill and Chelsea Clinton and Barack and Michele 
Obama. Voters in key swing states will also be bombarded byTV 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SBnEt8jWdPM&feature=youtu.be> and radio 
advertising <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k-n102EAYPA&feature=youtu.be>, 
with Clinton hoping to exploit her vastly superior resources – she has$62m 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/10/27/donald-trumps-fundraising-falls-off-in-october-putting-him-a-severe-cash-disadvantage-in-final-stretch/?tid=a_inl>
 in her war-chest to Trump’s $16m.

After the vote, do Trump and Clinton head off to a beach somewhere to catch up 
on their sleep?

Sadly for them, no. For the lucky winner, the hard work will have only just 
begun. They must prepare for life in the White House, starting with the 
inauguration on 20 January. Clinton has entrusted the job of handling her 
transition into the world’s most powerful job to Obama’s former interior 
secretaryKen Salazar 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/16/us/politics/hillary-clinton-transition-team.html>
, whileTrump’s team 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/trump-transition-team-pulls-out-the-stops-230666>
 is led by New Jersey governor Chris Christie. And the sorry loser? Should that 
be Clinton, don’t expect this workaholic to be idle for long. Having licked her 
wounds, there would be work to be done rebuilding the philanthropic Clinton 
Foundation, which hastaken 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/27/us/politics/bill-hillary-clinton-foundation-wikileaks.html>
knocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/12/clinton-cash-film-hillary-foundation-finances>
 during the campaign, as well as money to be made on thespeaker circuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-wall-street-goldman-sachs-speeches>
. A defeated Trump could be expected to be even busier, cranking up what many 
expect will be a far-right Trump TV network, which he’s already beenroad testing
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/24/trump-tv-facebook-live-us-election-media-tomi-lahren>
 on Facebook.
 