
Innovation is, to put it mildly, not one of the first attributes that come to 
mind when you think of “Hud <https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD>” – the US 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, soon to be overseen byDonald 
Trump’s former Republican rival Ben Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/ben-carson-housing-secretary-nomination-trump-administration>
. Yet this wasn’t always the case.

Imagine urban and suburban communities that banned cars, collected trash in 
pneumatic tubes, offered prototype community video chat capabilities, built 
elaborate pedestrian and cycle networks, and carefully retained existing 
foliage. You may not be thinking ofthe Jetsons 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/features/back-to-the-future-why-the-jetsons-is-the-most-influential-tv-show-of-the-20th-century-8225272.html>
, but products of the groundbreaking Hud New Towns initiatives in the late 
1960s and early 70s.

What’s more, these aims were achieved while paying real and successful 
attention to creating both mixed-income and mixed-race communities.

So where should Carson go to be inspired by these pioneering projects? The 
catch is (with a few exceptions) federal support for them had sputtered by the 
mid-70s and vanished entirely in subsequent years, leaving at best, mere 
fragments of their once grand ideals.

The genuine problems with some of these projects – now perceived as failures, 
if recalled at all – eclipsed their admirable qualities in historical memory. 
These are qualities that might have offered Carson models for a country that is 
currently experiencing acute housing shortages in many of its metropolitan 
areas.


In the 70s, 15 projects were approved for “Title VII” support 
<https://smartech.gatech.edu/bitstream/handle/1853/21015/percy_john_h_197308_ms_223531.pdf>
, most on greenfield sites near existing metropolitan areas. Two were in 
cities: Roosevelt Island (previously known as Welfare Island) in New York and 
Riverside Plaza in Minneapolis. Another,Soul City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/12/story-cities-soul-city-floyd-mckissick-north-carolina-black-run-suburbia>
, was distant both from any nearby cities and prevailing practices of building 
them, as an effort to build a genuinely multi-racial community, spearheaded by 
an African American developer and African American architects.

There were many inventive elements on the drawing board, and some became a 
reality. If most developments were substantially suburban in character, 
planning mainly for single family homes, they often integrated higher density 
elements or multi-family homes, as well as significant efforts at pedestrian 
friendliness.
 Donald Trump nominated Ben Carson as his secretary for housing and urban 
development. Photograph: Rainier Ehrhardt/Reuters 
The Woodlands 
<http://offcite.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2010/03/TheWoodlandsRetrospectAndProspect_Steiner_Cite65.pdf>
, near Houston, attracted praise for a trait that seems intuitive: retaining 
nature. Initial planning in semi-arid Texas was guided by an intention not to 
disturb the site’s water table, which would have affected the vegetation. The 
preservation of generous amounts of greenery around existing streams and 
drainage patterns was the first planning goal, not an afterthought.

Jonathan, Minnesota, a suburban new town, included an extensive trail system 
throughout the community and even more futuristic touches.According to Andy 
Sturdevant in the Minneapolis Post 
<https://www.minnpost.com/stroll/2012/05/ex-town-jonathan-still-has-distinct-touches-its-futuristic-beginnings>
: “Each house was to be wired with interconnected cables as part of a General 
Electric Community Information Systems (CIS) project that would turn each 
television into a telephone that allowed you to communicate visually with your 
neighbours.”

Each home’s address was also its ID number for the system: “Someone dials up 
110612 on their television, your TV makes a futuristic ringing sound, and you 
can have a video conversation,” Sturdevant wrote.

The two urban projects, Roosevelt Island and Riverside – both of which were 
fairly substantially realised – were thoughtful reactions against the known 
shortcomings of the design and composition of prior decades of low-income 
housing. Both forsook the anti-urban characteristics of prior decades of towers 
in the park and stressed the importance of planning for a mix of incomes.

Roosevelt Island 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/roosevelt-island-nears-completion-1446081649> 
(substantially the work of New York’s fascinatingUrban Development Corporation 
<http://www.udchousing.org/>) centred its marquee-architect designed main 
street around a coherent, colonnaded main street lined with shops. It 
introduced other innovations, banning private cars (for a while) and collecting 
trash via a pneumatic tube system.
 Floyd McKissick visualises the future Soul City to be built on these empty 
fields in Warren County. Photograph: Harold Valentine/AP 
Riverside Plaza 
<http://www.tcdailyplanet.net/riverside-plaza-unique-piece-urban-history-hidden-plain-sight/>
, designed by the notable modernist Ralph Rapson, included Minneapolis’s first 
high-rise residential towers – but, more importantly, offered buildings at a 
variety of scales designed to house a variety of incomes, along with retail and 
community amenities. It was also a surprising television star, thesite of Mary 
Tyler Moore’s residence 
<http://www.iamnotastalker.com/2010/05/10/the-mary-tyler-moore-show-apartment-building/>
 in later seasons of the eponymous show.

How did this brave new wave of innovation come about? Two housing bills in the 
twilight of theGreat Society <http://www.ushistory.org/us/56e.asp> sought to 
chart a brighter residential future in offering loan guarantees and other 
incentives to developers to build mixed-income and mixed-race modern towns. The 
latter bill, passed in 1970, formed a corporation chartered to distribute $500m 
in bond guarantees to new town projects.

Inspirations were quite openly European 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/mar/17/ebbsfleet-garden-city-george-osborne>
, yet the programme’s structure was considerably different. Congress eschewed 
the direct construction of new towns, asNicholas Dagen Bloom 
<http://www.nyit.edu/bio/nbloom>, associate professor of social science at New 
York Institute of Technology, wrote in an 2001 essay entitled The Federal 
Icarus:

“Title VII stated instead that the government would ‘rely to the maximum 
extent on private enterprise’ in the creation of new towns. At heart, 
congressmen sought to harness the power of private enterprise for public 
policy, believing they could save the government money by recruiting developers 
who would, through their plans, attract home-buyers and their money. Title VII 
thus relied on the individual choices of thousands of homeowners who would, in 
theory, buy homes in these towns and in turn subsidize the high development 
costs of these communities.”

It was a forward-thinking solution, mandating the “substantial provision for 
housing within the means of persons of low and moderate income”. It also 
encouraged the use of design innovations in land use and construction, the 
provision of community services, and more. The carrot was federal loan 
guarantees and promises of eligibility for other financial support.
 Construction work at Roosevelt Island in 1975. Photograph: New York Post 
Archives/The New York Post via Getty Images 
The developers were varied, ranging from Robert E Simon (creator of the 
well-known new town of Reston, Virginia) to Edmund Marcus (son of the Neiman 
Marcus department store founder) to Floyd McKissick (civil rights leader and 
head of the Congress for Racial Equality, who lead the Soul City project).

What could go wrong? Quite a lot, actually. Most Title VII projects didn’t 
advance very far. Some, such as Soul City, were too far away from existing 
population centres to attract much growth. Others were admirably set up but 
failed to attract buyers, probably due to their aversion to any or all of the 
characteristics of modern, mixed-race or mixed-income planning. Some developers 
didn’t manage their projects well; others suffered when pledged federal grants 
failed to materialise.

In time, the Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jimmy-carter> and 
Reagan <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ronald-reagan> administrations 
terminated federal relationships with most of these projects. Some never really 
developed, while others ended up as conventional suburbs. Riverside Plaza fell 
from grace after its owners abandoned its original careful balance of income, 
and converted the complex entirely to subsidised housing.

And yet some things went very right. Roosevelt Island, which had been 
carefully designed and engineered for multiple incomes, remained a lasting 
success, with an unusually low crime rate even through the city’s most 
dangerous years, and a recent spurt of growth includinga new Cornell Tech 
campus on the island’s south end 
<https://www.wired.com/2015/07/cornell-wants-people-collide-new-nyc-tech-campus/>
. The Woodlands, too, flourished as both a high-end suburb and a corporate 
centre, although its lower-income elements essentially vanished.

Suburban new towns may seem quaint to foolhardy given 40 additional years of 
sprawl, yet there are traces of these ideas in the recent rise ofNew Urbanism 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Urbanism> and efforts to provide options 
beyond the car. Perhaps more importantly, the Title VII new towns were a 
large-scale effort to achieve income integration as a central goal of housing 
policy. Subsequent decades only rendered clearer the lesson that concentrated 
amounts of poverty tend to produce comparatively high concentrations of crime 
and little opportunity.

Related: A divided empire: what the urban-rural split means for the future of 
America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/09/donald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future>

Today it’s not simply the poor, but a broader number of lower-income Americans 
who are increasingly squeezed by rising rental costs. AHarvard Joint Center for 
Housing Studies report 
<http://www.jchs.harvard.edu/research/state_nations_housing> early last year 
found a remarkable growth of 9 million renters to 43 million from 2005 to 2015. 
These are increased numbers chasing a dwindling supply, leading to the 
unenviable situation of more than 28% of renters paying more than half of their 
gross income in rent. As with any shortage, lower-income Americans are most 
affected.

What’s the most important quality missing today? While barriers to 
construction continue to choke off the meaningful expansion of housing supply, 
government support for low-income housing typically remains minimal. There is 
also an element of self-fulfilling prophecy to much of their work: low-quality 
construction only sporadically maintained will inevitably age badly and produce 
undesirable results. The new towns movement wasn’t a panacea by any measure, 
but it demonstrated the notably superior results that slightly greater effort 
could produce.

The Trump administration has broadcast its enthusiasm for infrastructure 
spending – and there’s no structure more important to the public than a home.
Ben Carson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson> and the Department 
of Housing and Urban Development could do far worse than look to the spirit of 
experiment of the new towns movement. Today it’s not new towns but old ones 
under increased pressures of growth – but we need experiment and effort to make 
them generally accessible again.

Anthony Paletta writes about architecture and urbanism for The Wall Street 
Journal, Metropolis, Architectural Record and The Architects Newspaper.Follow 
Guardian Cities onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and explore 
our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 