
Federal authorities warned local law enforcement authorities across the US on 
Friday thatIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> sympathizers 
were continuing to call for attacks on churches and other holiday gathering 
sites.

As they did so, President-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> used Twitter to broadcast his 
potentially inflammatory thoughts on the truck attack on a Berlin Christmas 
market on Monday.

Berlin attacker manhunt ends in shootout but questions remain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/berlin-anis-amri-shootout-european-arrest-warrant>
Isis militants claimed responsibility for the attack, in which 12 people died 
and 56 were injured, but did not offer proof. The suspect in the attack, a 
Tunisian national,was shot dead in Italy on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/berlin-anis-amri-shootout-european-arrest-warrant>
.

Trump wrote <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/812408189492797442>: 
“The terrorist who killed so many people in Germany said just before crime, ‘by 
God’s will we will slaughter you pigs, I swear, we will slaughter you.’

“This is a purely religious threat, which turned into reality. Such hatred! 
When will the US, and all countries, fight back?”

The federal US warning was issued after a publicly available list of US 
churches was posted on a militant social media site.

“As part of the continuous dialogue with our law enforcement partners, the FBI 
routinely shares information about potential threats to better enable law 
enforcement to protect the communities they serve,”FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> spokesman Andrew Ames said.

Ames added that citizens were advised to maintain awareness of their 
surroundings and report suspicious activity.

“The FBI is aware of the recent link published online that urges attacks 
against US churches. As with similar threats, the FBI is tracking this matter 
while we investigate its credibility,” he said.

“We continue to work closely with our federal, state and local law enforcement 
partners should there be any potential threat to public safety.”

Separately on Friday, police in Australia detained five men suspected of 
planning a series of Christmas Day attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/five-in-custody-alleged-melbourne-christmas-terrorism-threat>
 using explosives, knives and a gun in the heart of Melbourne.
 