
V&A curators who puzzled for decades over what might be inside a vintage 
Christmas cracker used an x-ray to discover it contained a small chocolate – 
but since it was made in the 1920s none of the staff were tempted to sample it.

The cracker, which has gone on display as part of the Staging Christmas 
exhibition 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/shop/whatson/index/view/id/4090/event/Staging-Christmas/dt/2016-12-11/free/1>
 in the museum’s theatre and performance gallery, was already more than half a 
century old when it came to the museum in 1987 with a small collection from the 
estate of the actor Myrette Morven.

Born in Dublin, she was a chorus girl in many hit musicals in the 1920s – 
including Rose-Marie, billed as “A Romance of the Canadian Rockies”, which 
opened at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane in March 1927 and ran for 581 
performances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fv-and-a-x-rays-christmas-cracker-from-1920s-and-finds-chocolate-inside%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb398419e6d1cf1cc3e4b9d18a5a1632c8d6c94cb%2F300_438_1590_954%2F1590.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=V%26A%20x-rays%20Christmas%20cracker%20from%201920s%20and%20finds%20chocolate%20inside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fv-and-a-x-rays-christmas-cracker-from-1920s-and-finds-chocolate-inside%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=V%26A%20x-rays%20Christmas%20cracker%20from%201920s%20and%20finds%20chocolate%20inside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fv-and-a-x-rays-christmas-cracker-from-1920s-and-finds-chocolate-inside%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb398419e6d1cf1cc3e4b9d18a5a1632c8d6c94cb%2F300_438_1590_954%2F1590.jpg>
 An x-ray of the cracker, showing its contents. Photograph: Victoria and Albert 
Museum, London 
Morven was 19 when she featured in one of the highlights of the musical, a 
totem pole dance in the first act.

One critic wrote: “A wonderful piece of concerted work – half ballet and half 
military drill, with amazing and dazzling effects that leave one breathless. 
When all these girls – literally dozens of them – fall down like a crop of 
brilliant tulips falling before a reaper, the effect is extraordinary and there 
is nothing left to do but cheer.”

He noted that the cheers went on for so long that the principal comedian had 
to come out to tell the audience that the girls were scrambling into their 
costumes for the next scene and could not take another curtain call.

Souvenirs from the show included dolls and wooden figurines, as well as Tom 
Smith crackers decorated like a totem pole. Morven – who never became a major 
star but had a successful career on stage and screen – presumably bought or was 
given a box of the crackers, and cherished one unopened one for the rest of her 
life. Its secrets are only now revealed, 30 years after her death.


 * Staging Christmas is at the V&A until 6 January 2017.  