
There are many more beautiful objects than two frayed and faded pieces of 
embroidery, in the firstexhibition in a lifetime 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/opus-anglicanum-masterpieces-of-english-medieval-embroidery>
 at the V&A of a medieval art form in which England once led the world.

All that glitters: V&A to show rare relics of England's finest embroidery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/26/v-and-a-relics-england-finest-embroidery-opus-anglicanum>
The silk has rotted leaving only the linen backing and the tarnished gold and 
silver thread, but the two shabby pieces, reunited after 150 years, vividly 
demonstrate what ultimately happened to rare surviving examples of the luxury 
textiles.


 The panel showing Jesus Christ surrounded by his apostles was chopped up by a 
German priest so famous for his ruthless approach to the medieval treasures 
that he was nicknamed Franz “Scissors” Bock. He sold half to the V&A, which 
later turned down the offer of his entire collection for £500, and half to a 
museum in Vienna, and they have remained apart until now.


The curator Clare Browne has a certain sympathy for Bock – “he was a serious 
collector, and he saved many pieces which would otherwise certainly have been 
destroyed” – but even she is startled that he ran his scissors straight through 
the figure of Christ, sparing only the face, which ended up in the V&A’s half.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a9591dc90450474a433bc966552a459a25cbff%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=V%26A%20exhibition%20reunites%20masterpieces%20of%20English%20medieval%20embroidery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=V%26A%20exhibition%20reunites%20masterpieces%20of%20English%20medieval%20embroidery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a9591dc90450474a433bc966552a459a25cbff%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 The Butler-Bowden Cope is made from embroidered silk velvet with silver and 
silver-gilt thread and features coloured silks, pearls, beads and metal. 
Photograph: Laura Dale/PA 
Other treasures that have returned to the country and probably the city where 
they were made include loans from the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, 
cathedrals in Italy and Spain, Iceland, and the Vatican. Although the V&A has 
what is considered the greatest collection in the world, it has also borrowed 
from English churches and museums, including the padded doublet once worn by the
Black Prince <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward,_the_Black_Prince>, which 
has hung over his tomb in Canterbury cathedral for 700 years.

Many of the pieces were once owned by princes of church and state: Pope 
Benedict XI commissioned some after he was astonished by the magnificence of 
English clergy on a delegation to 14th-century Rome. Some merchants visiting
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> from Iceland were equally 
dazzled, and commissioned embroideries of Icelandic saints in gold on crimson 
velvet, which they gave to their local church in northern Iceland. Perfectly 
preserved, with the 85% pure gold thread still glittering as new, the pieces 
had never left Iceland since.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5b63c1c13ffd598a224c43b08f5b61142fbe836%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=V%26A%20exhibition%20reunites%20masterpieces%20of%20English%20medieval%20embroidery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=V%26A%20exhibition%20reunites%20masterpieces%20of%20English%20medieval%20embroidery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5b63c1c13ffd598a224c43b08f5b61142fbe836%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Alice apparel, stole and maniple designed for a priest celebrating the 
Eucharist. Photograph: Laura Dale/PA 
Many were worked on luxury imported silk and velvets, including a unique 
13th-century example using a blue kanzi fabric, a mixture of silk and cotton 
woven in Iran. However, in the most costly pieces the embroiderers then covered 
every inch of the fabric in intricate scenes from the lives of saints and 
martyrs, flowers, trees, animals and birds stitched in such detail that the 
species can be identified, worked in gold, silver and coloured silks, often 
embellished with tiny gemstones and pearls.

The ecclesiastical pieces continued in use, though many were destroyed in the 
Reformation and others cut up so the least damaged panels could be reused, but 
few secular pieces survived: a spectacular crimson cloth embroidered with the 
lions of England, believed made for the horse of Edward III for a great 
procession, is a rare exception. “If that’s what the horse wore, we can only 
imagine what the king looked like,” Browne said.

 The earliest garments came from the tombs of bishops, including Hubert 
Walter, the 12th-century archbishop of Canterbury, who lost his beautiful 
stockings and shoes when his grave was reopened in the 19th century.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F419f2e6f3c22012d6493bc613b6dc2670d1865b1%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=V%26A%20exhibition%20reunites%20masterpieces%20of%20English%20medieval%20embroidery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=V%26A%20exhibition%20reunites%20masterpieces%20of%20English%20medieval%20embroidery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F419f2e6f3c22012d6493bc613b6dc2670d1865b1%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Detail from the Fishmonger’s Pall (1512-38), embroidered for and still owned 
by the Worshipful Company of Fishmongers. Photograph: Laura Dale/PA 
Co-curator Glyn Davies said some modest objects on display were as rare as any 
of the embroideries – the tools used to make them, excavated on a site in 
London, including scissors, a needle case, a thimble, and an iron needle so 
fine the eye is almost invisible.

The last major exhibition of Opus Anglicanum, or “English work”, was more than 
50 years ago. “The term is too often used – but this truly is a once in a 
lifetime experience,” Davies said.

 * Opus Anglicanum: Masterpieces of English Medieval Embroidery at the V&A 
London runs from 1 October to 5 February 2017.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd3d14866e55449da69c2d1fe6ec3a2db7be21b%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=V%26A%20exhibition%20reunites%20masterpieces%20of%20English%20medieval%20embroidery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=V%26A%20exhibition%20reunites%20masterpieces%20of%20English%20medieval%20embroidery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fv-and-a-museum-exhibition-reunites-masterpieces-english-medieval-embroidery-opus-anglicanum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd3d14866e55449da69c2d1fe6ec3a2db7be21b%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Intricate embroidery adorns a large ecclesiastical piece. Photograph: Laura 
Dale/PA  