
The V&A has confirmed its German director is to leave his role this autumn 
after five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/04/martin-roth-v-and-a-director-expected-to-resign-brexit-europe>
, a decision hastened by his disillusionment over the British vote to leave the 
EU.


The London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> museum said Roth will 
devote more time “to various international cultural consultancies” as well as 
his wife Harriet and their children in Berlin and Vancouver.

The Guardian understands that Roth had always intended to stand down in the 
next year but two factors seem to have played a decision in the timing. One was 
the Brexit vote, which he was profoundly against. The other was the V&A winning 
the2016 museum of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/06/unforgettable-va-wins-museum-of-the-year-award>
, which meant he could leave on a high.

V&A director reportedly set to resign over Brexit vote disillusionment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/04/martin-roth-v-and-a-director-expected-to-resign-brexit-europe>
In interviews with the German broadcaster DW 
<http://www.dw.com/en/martin-roth-on-brexit-me-first-mentality-spreading-through-europe-is-brutal/a-19352465>
, Roth said the vote to leave the EU felt like a “personal defeat” and he had 
been particularly upset to hear aggressive “war rhetoric” during the referendum 
campaign.

Roth, 61, said on Monday: “It’s been an enormous privilege and tremendously 
exciting to lead this great museum, with its outstanding staff and collections. 
I’m proud to have steered it to new successes and a period of growth and 
expansion, including new partnerships around the UK and internationally.

“Our recent accolade as Art Fund museum of the year feels like the perfect 
moment to draw to a close my mission in London and hand over to a new director 
to take the V&A forward to an exciting future.”

Roth had been passionate in his views on Brexit and the tone of the debate. In 
one interview he said 
<http://www.dw.com/en/martin-roth-on-brexit-me-first-mentality-spreading-through-europe-is-brutal/a-19352465>
: “What happened to tolerance, solidarity and charity? And I’m not a dreamer. 
I’m just talking about basic values – manners that are part of our upbringing 
and connect us. Where are they now?

“That doesn’t just go for England. The same thing is happening in France with 
[Marine] Le Pen, and inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> with 
the AfD party. A ‘me-first’ mentality has suddenly started to spread – and it 
is brutal.

“I can understand that people ask: how should we deal with Brussels? But it 
seems crazy to me that this question should lead to smashing everything else. 
It is destroying the future of our children. That’s sad. A majority of older 
people have voted for the Brexit, while the younger generation wants to remain 
in the EU. That means the elderly have stolen the youth’s future.”

One source at the V&A said Brexit was not the overriding reason for leaving 
but it helped decide the timing. “Martin has so many contacts and interests 
around the world he wanted to find more time for those and genuinely spend more 
time at home with the kids and Harriet,” the source said.

The museum recorded a record 3.9 million visitors last year and plans to 
expand operations to Scotland, east London and China. That was another reason, 
sources said, for it being a good time for Roth to move on.

Roth commands an enormous amount of respect in the museum world. Stephen 
Deuchar,the director of the Art Fund – and chair of the judging panel that 
named the V&A museum of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/06/unforgettable-va-wins-museum-of-the-year-award>
 – said Roth would be a great loss to the UK arts scene.

He said: “The V&A’s international programme and profile has developed markedly 
under Martin Roth’s leadership and I very much hope his departure is not, as 
has been speculated, a consequence of the profoundly dispiriting referendum 
decision. The potential cultural consequences of Brexit, alongside the 
economic, are deeply worrying.”

John Kampfner, chief executive of the Creative Industries Federation, said he 
was sad to see Roth leave the V&A “where he has been among a number of great 
Europeans to have contributed to the strength of Britain’s arts and creative 
industries in recent years.

“It would be a terrible worry if senior figures from across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> were to be deterred from 
working in this country by the EU referendum result.”

While the departure after five years of a 61-year-old who still feels he has 
lots of things to do is not a great shock, there will be some surprise that 
Roth has not waitedfor the opening, scheduled for early 2017, of the V&A’s £49m 
underground extension and new entrance on Exhibition Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/21/va-museum-project-boosted-by-russian-billionaires-donation>
.

The board of trustees is to begin a search for Roth’s succsessor. Its chairman 
Nicholas Coleridge, said: “Martin’s tenure as director has been marked by a 
highly successful period of creativity, expansion and reorganisation of the 
V&A. He has made a significant contribution to the success of this museum, and 
the trustees are immensely grateful for all that he has achieved here.

“We are starting the process of looking for someone to take on the role and 
are fortunate to have an exceptional team in place to lead its activities and 
help build its future with the new director.”

Roth was appointed in 2011, becoming the first foreign director of the V&A 
since it was founded in 1852. He previously worked at the Dresden State Art 
Collections. He always saw himself as a European, once telling an interviewer: 
“If you are German and you are born in 1955, you are not proud to be German.”
 