
The director of the V&A <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/v-and-a>, 
Martin Roth, is expected to resign this week and return to his native Germany 
in a decision fuelled by his disillusionment at theBrexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
.

Roth was appointed in 2011, becoming the first foreign director of the V&A 
since it was founded in 1852. Sunday newspaper reports in both the UK andGermany
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> said he would tell V&A staff of 
his decision to leave on Monday.

He is likely to publicly outline his reasons for leaving at some point this 
week, with Brexit apparently having played a part. In interviews with theGerman 
broadcaster DW 
<http://www.dw.com/en/martin-roth-on-brexit-me-first-mentality-spreading-through-europe-is-brutal/a-19352465>
, he said the vote to leave Europe felt like a personal defeat and he was 
particularly upset to hear aggressive “war rhetoric” used during the debate.

'Unforgettable' V&A wins museum of the year award
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/06/unforgettable-va-wins-museum-of-the-year-award>
For Roth, born in Stuttgart in 1955, the issues were personal. “For me, Europe 
is simply synonymous with peace,” he said. “I didn’t want to be a German. I did 
not want to grow up in a country that had killed a huge part of its population. 
So for me,Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> always gave 
hope for a peaceful future, based on sharing, solidarity and tolerance. 
Dropping out always means creating cultural barriers and that worries me.”

Roth replaced Sir Mark Jones as director of the V&A and immediately pledged to 
make it more international. He has always seen himself as a European, once 
telling an interviewer: “If you are German and you are born in 1955, you are 
not proud to be German.” Always impeccably dressed, he said in an interview 
with Country Life that one noticeable regret about living in the UK was the 
sartorial standards. “The sad thing for me is that nobody seems to wear a tie 
in London any longer – only the security guards.”

Before the vote he described the referendum debate as toxic. He said: “Just 
the thought that we could be ruining everything our parents’ generation 
achieved – a policy of peace, reconciliation and common thought – is quite a 
horrible perspective.”

Roth, who oversaw the vast Dresden State Art Collections 
<http://www.skd.museum/en/> before moving to London, is enormously respected in 
the British museum world. His tenure has included some of the most successful 
exhibitions – in terms of visitor numbers – ever put on at the V&A, including 
theAlexander McQueen retrospective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/03/alexander-mcqueen-show-savage-beauty-most-popular-victoria-and-albert-history>
 and the global touring success ofDavid Bowie Is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-is-exhibition-300-items-13m-visitors-but-no-bakelite-saxophone>
. Nearly half a million visitors from 87 countries went to the McQueen show, 
Savage Beauty, making it the museum’s most visited exhibition.

This summer the V&A won the UK’s largest arts prize when it was named 2016 
museum of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/06/unforgettable-va-wins-museum-of-the-year-award>
. Judges praised a year of major shows and the successful opening of the new
1600-1815 galleries <http://www.vam.ac.uk/collections/europe>. Stephen Deuchar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stephen-deuchar>, director of the Art Fund 
<https://www.artfund.org/> and chair of judges, said: “It was already one of 
the best-loved museums in the country: this year it has indisputably become one 
of the best museums in the world.”

Roth has also led major expansion projects, with the V&A Museum of Design 
Dundee <http://www.vandadundee.org/> due to open in 2018 and V&A East, 
described as a museum for the digital age, expected to open in theformer 
Olympic park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/05/olympicopolis-east-london-arts-hub-stratford-boris-johnson>
 in east London by 2022. The institution’s£49m underground extension plans 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/a/futureplan-exhibition-road-building-project/>
, which will create a new grand entrance on Exhibition Road and temporary 
exhibition space, are also on course to be completed by early next year.

Roth seemed in an ebullient mood last week as he announced that the V&A’s next 
big pop-culture show would be aboutPink Floyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/06/pink-floyd-v-and-a-exhibition>. 
On Wednesday he will welcome journalists to the museum’s show on the late 1960s:
You Say You Want a Revolution? Records and Rebels 1966-70 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/you-say-you-want-a-revolution-records-and-rebels-1966-70>
.

As soon as he announces his decision to leave, the V&A board will begin 
searching for a replacement, with his deputy, Tim Reeve, expected to be among 
the candidates.

During the EU referendum debate it was particularly difficult to find anyone 
in the arts world in favour of Brexit, both for practical as well as emotional 
reasons.One poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/british-cultural-heavyweights-sign-250-letter-backing-eu-benedict-cumberbatch-paloma-faith->
 for theCreative Industries Federation 
<http://www.creativeindustriesfederation.com/> put the figure in favour of 
remaining in the EU at 96%.
 