
There are thousands of meticulously filed gags, props for his generally 
disastrous illusions, a tiara that he wore as a panto ugly sister – but a newly 
acquiredTommy Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/apr/22/tommy-cooper-the-best-quotes>
 archive has a significant gap.

“I know, I know!” said the V&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/v-and-a> curator Simon Sladen, “We 
don’t have a fez! That icon. If anyone has one they would like to donate, we 
would be more than delighted to accept.”

The museum has acquired Cooper’s personal archive of jokes, personal 
correspondence, posters, photographs, programmes and props. But there is no 
example of his trademark fez, most of them having been sold over the years at 
memorabilia auctions.

The archive amounts to 116 boxes. Particularly interesting is how meticulous 
Cooper,known for his shambolic routines 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oTY6TxXsK-o>, was when it came to comedy. He 
kept rigorously organised A-Z files of jokes and long lists of precisely where 
props should be placed during his routines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fv-and-a-museum-acquires-tommy-cooper-archive-jokes-props-no-fez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb9f4d72095abe0d7042aeccd87c70ee419425d5%2F0_320_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=V%26A%20acquires%20Tommy%20Cooper%20archive%20of%20jokes%20and%20props%20%E2%80%93%20but%20no%20fez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fv-and-a-museum-acquires-tommy-cooper-archive-jokes-props-no-fez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=V%26A%20acquires%20Tommy%20Cooper%20archive%20of%20jokes%20and%20props%20%E2%80%93%20but%20no%20fez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fv-and-a-museum-acquires-tommy-cooper-archive-jokes-props-no-fez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb9f4d72095abe0d7042aeccd87c70ee419425d5%2F0_320_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Tommy Cooper’s gag file. Photograph: PA 
Sladen said: “We enjoy watching him not knowing what is happening next, things 
going wrong, knocking things over. The only way you can do that effectively and 
with so much skill is with meticulous planning, and that is what is so 
interesting about the archive.”

Cooper scrupulously catalogued thousands of his gags, so that if he wanted a 
joke about dancing, deafness, dentist, dieting, divorce or do-it-yourself, they 
were at his fingertips. The Bs include beatniks, birds, books, bowling, boxing 
and bullfighting.

The archive also contains numerous handwritten running orders and lists of 
audience lines such as “Don’t laugh, I feel better than I look” and “I’m so 
nervous tonight I’m afraid I’ll say something funny”. Many of his gags and 
ideas are written on the back of posters and cardboard from shirt packaging.

There are several stage props, including one for his “head-twister” illusion, 
and a tiara that Cooper wore as an ugly sister in a 1949-50 panto that toured 
Morecambe, Stockton and Oldham.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fv-and-a-museum-acquires-tommy-cooper-archive-jokes-props-no-fez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d3895a8b71c78ab52bc567c5d9167992820e1ba%2F0_282_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=V%26A%20acquires%20Tommy%20Cooper%20archive%20of%20jokes%20and%20props%20%E2%80%93%20but%20no%20fez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fv-and-a-museum-acquires-tommy-cooper-archive-jokes-props-no-fez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=V%26A%20acquires%20Tommy%20Cooper%20archive%20of%20jokes%20and%20props%20%E2%80%93%20but%20no%20fez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fv-and-a-museum-acquires-tommy-cooper-archive-jokes-props-no-fez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d3895a8b71c78ab52bc567c5d9167992820e1ba%2F0_282_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A prop for Cooper’s head-twister illusion. Photograph: PA 
The archive has been acquired for an undisclosed sum from Cooper’s biographer, 
John Fisher. Given that Cooper died in 1984 – he had a heart attack during a 
performance at the London Palladium broadcast live on ITV – the acquisition has 
clearly not happened just like that.

“The formality of how the museum world works means there were a lot of stages 
to go through,” said Sladen. “The final decision to acquire it was made on [the 
anniversary of] the day he passed away – we didn’t realise it at the time. It’s 
one of those odd moments when you think: gosh, this was definitely meant to be.”

The news has been welcomed by Cooper’s friend Ken Dodd, who said in a 
statement: “Tommy was truly a great and wondrous comedian. He possessed and was 
possessed by the comic spirit. He loved laughter and he loved to laugh. I’m 
sure he would have been very proud to see so many people enjoy his sense of 
humour.”

Cooper’s daughter Vicky said the acquisition was wonderful. “My dad would be 
very proud knowing he was now represented in the national collection of theatre 
and performance, sitting alongside the likes of Ronnie Barker’s archive and 
costumes worn by Morecambe and Wise and Stan Laurel,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fv-and-a-museum-acquires-tommy-cooper-archive-jokes-props-no-fez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae82c0a00de0b441b86fcfcaf92b007f08e5d38c%2F148_889_3195_1917%2F3195.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=V%26A%20acquires%20Tommy%20Cooper%20archive%20of%20jokes%20and%20props%20%E2%80%93%20but%20no%20fez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fv-and-a-museum-acquires-tommy-cooper-archive-jokes-props-no-fez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=V%26A%20acquires%20Tommy%20Cooper%20archive%20of%20jokes%20and%20props%20%E2%80%93%20but%20no%20fez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fv-and-a-museum-acquires-tommy-cooper-archive-jokes-props-no-fez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae82c0a00de0b441b86fcfcaf92b007f08e5d38c%2F148_889_3195_1917%2F3195.jpg>
 A props table plan. Photograph: The Tommy Cooper Esta/PA 
A selection of material will go on display at the V&A’s theatre and 
performance galleries in the autumn, and the whole archive will be available 
for research once cataloguing has been completed.

“Going through the archive has been absolutely wonderful and the problem is 
you’ve got to make sure you don’t get sidetracked with laughing too much,” said 
Sladen.

“It is a real privilege, very exciting, and I hope we will get people coming 
who are maybe starting out in comedy or people who want to tap into his mind, 
how he worked. He has done so much archiving for us that should anyone need a 
gag about a bicycle or a roof or a dog, we can find that very easily.”

 