
When I first became a full-time writer, I mostly had writing days. People 
seldom wanted to listen to me read, consult my opinion or watch me perform. But 
the combination of success and the proliferation of literary festivals and 
media platforms has profoundly altered the even tenor of my mostly isolated 
days.

That’s probably a benefit; the observation and the company of others is, after 
all, what provides a writer with raw material. Left to our own devices, we’ve 
got a tendency to adopt the habits of a hermit crab.

Now I try to carve out a chunk of the year when the other calls on my time are 
kept to a minimum. Three or four months when I can more or less stay at home 
and write. January, February, March and, when I can get away with it, into 
April. When the weather is at its most miserable and I mind being indoors 
least. But my life is complicated, so even then I spend the equivalent of one 
of most people’s working days on trains each week.

And that’s fine too. My one great self-indulgence is first-class train travel, 
which isn’t so outrageous when you can book ahead and (still to my 
astonishment) brandish a senior railcard. I like to write on trains. The Wi-Fi 
is usually dismal, the phone signal intermittent at best and people generally 
respect the earphones and the open laptop. I’m often surprised by how much I’ve 
managed to get done on a train journey.

Ideally, though, I write at home. I have two desks – a conventional one and a 
standing desk, which I try to use for 10 minutes every hour, just to keep me 
moving. And I always have music playing while I’m working. Often it’s piano or 
ambient music, but if it’s got vocals, it has to be incomprehensible likeSigur 
Rós <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sigur-ros> or Ólafur Arnalds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/27/olafur-arnalds-playlist-samaris-snorri-helgason>
.

I’m not an early starter. I usually make it to the keyboard by half past nine 
but I don’t really get going till about 11. That first part of the day is taken 
up with emails, admin, the occasional bit of journalism such as this, checking 
out my Twitter feed and looking at the news online. Around the second cup of 
coffee, I take a look at what I last wrote, tweaking and revising, stripping 
the prose back till I’m more at ease with it.

I tend to write in 20‑minute bursts. That seems to be the length of my 
concentration span

Once I start, I tend to write in 20‑minute bursts. That seems to be the length 
of my concentration span. Then I do something different for a little while, 
something that lets my subconscious whirr away at the next bit of creativity. 
So, I make a cup of coffee; I game on the computer or the console; I go out to 
buy milk or stamps or tomatoes; I make a phone call. And then it’s back to the 
work in hand.

When I start a book, I have an idea of the story arc and I’ve spent most of my 
prep time thinking about the characters: how they’re going to conduct 
themselves, how they got to be the person they are today, how I feel about 
them. I spend the first month feeling my way into the book, getting a sense of 
its world and learning its nooks and crannies. Then it picks up pace and I 
can’t escape it. Seven days a week, its presence dominates my head. It’s a very 
intense period and I’m not very good at switching off.

Cooking is one of the few things that really shifts me into a different mental 
state, so my partner gets elbowed away from the stove most evenings so I can 
prepare dinner and step outside the book for a while. I usually binge-watch box 
sets too.The West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/22/west-wing-netflix-friends-binge-watching-nostalgia>
 got me through several books – one episode with lunch, one with dinner, one at 
bedtime …

I don’t work a set number of hours or aim for a set word count. Usually, I 
stop around seven, but if the words are flowing and I feel there’s more to 
come, I’ll go back to my desk and keep going, sometimes past midnight.

And then blessed sleep, where my subconscious works out the next bit …

• Out of Bounds <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/out-of-bounds-428596.html> 
is published by Little, Brown.
 