
“Post-truth” is on everyone’s lips when it comes to politics in the age of 
Trump and Brexit –it’s the word of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries>
, according to the Oxford English Dictionary. Are we also entering the age of 
post-truth art?

Newly discovered 'Van Gogh' drawings labelled imitations by museum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/15/newly-discovered-van-gogh-drawings-labelled-imitations-museum>
Fakes are getting better and better. They are so good they may be entering the 
bloodstream of art. Sotheby’s recently had to recall a portrait supposedly by 
Frans Hals that had sold for £8.5m; the same forgery ringis suspected 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-37574411> of creating fake 
paintings falsely attributed to Orazio Gentileschi and Cranach. It feels like 
the tip of an iceberg. As Dulwich Picture Gallerywittily demonstrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/28/dulwich-gallery-reveals-fake-painting-among-collection-of-old-masters>
 by deliberately placing one of its own paintings alongside a fake, the 
forger’s art is reaching new levels. Now the plague of fakes may be infecting 
one of the greatest oeuvres in art: the passionate and poignant work of Vincent 
van Gogh.

The Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam is so unhappy about a new Van Gogh 
“discovery” that it has issued a trenchant official statement outlining exactly 
how unconvinced it is by 65 previously unseen drawings that are to be published 
in a new book, Vincent van Gogh: The Lost Arles Sketchbook. The museum says its 
experts have looked seriously at high-quality photographs of the drawings and 
some of the originals and have concluded that they “could not be attributed to 
Vincent van Gogh”. For one thing,the museum insists 
<https://www.vangoghmuseum.nl/en/news-and-press/press-releases/found-sketchbook-with-drawings-is-not-by-van-gogh-according-to-van-gogh-museum>
, the drawings, supposedly made between 1888 and 1890, “do not in any way 
reflect Van Gogh’s development as a draughtsman in that time”. For another, 
says this sombre and serious institution whose scholarship on Van Gogh is 
second to none: “the drawing style of the maker of the drawings is, in the 
opinion of our experts, monotonous, clumsy and spiritless.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fvan-gogh-arles-lost-drawings-post-truth-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54bc3ed4a31a4083ce5d7ff00271dba0e22fff7a%2F0_0_4096_2732%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Van%20Gogh's%20lost%20drawings%3A%20unconvincing%2C%20but%20does%20anyone%20care%20in%20a%20post-truth%20art%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fvan-gogh-arles-lost-drawings-post-truth-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Van%20Gogh%27s%20lost%20drawings%3A%20unconvincing%2C%20but%20does%20anyone%20care%20in%20a%20post-truth%20art%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fvan-gogh-arles-lost-drawings-post-truth-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54bc3ed4a31a4083ce5d7ff00271dba0e22fff7a%2F0_0_4096_2732%2F4096.jpg>
 Canadian art historian and Van Gogh specialist Bogomila Welsh-Ovcharov at a 
press conference to present her book Vincent van Gogh: The Lost Arles 
Sketchbook. Photograph: Yoan Valat/EPA 
Wait, there’s more. Van Gogh used black ink that has faded to brown; these 
drawings have been done in brown ink, claims the museum. It’s surely a 
devastating clue that the drawings are not by Van Gogh but by someone trying to 
replicate his art. There are mistakes in the appearance of buildings thatVan 
Gogh <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/van-gogh> never made – as he was 
drawing them from direct observation – and as for the story being told of where 
these drawings came from, their historical provenance, the museum finds it 
“highly improbable”.

Ouch. Presumably the makers of this supposed Van Gogh discovery will now 
retract. But not so fast. Vincent van Gogh: The Lost Arles Sketchbook is a 
sumptuous art book from the respectable New York publisher Abrams. It has an 
enthusiastic foreword by the Van Gogh scholar and curatorRonald Pickvance 
<http://www.universitystory.gla.ac.uk/biography/?id=WH2292&type=P>. The text is 
byBogomila Welsh-Ovcharov 
<http://www.greatpast.utoronto.ca/GreatMinds/ShowBannerUTM.asp?ID=95>, another 
noted Van Gogh expert at the University of Toronto, who tells in the book of 
her thrill and surprise when these drawings were shown to her on a trip to 
Provence and she recognised them as Van Gogh’s work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fvan-gogh-arles-lost-drawings-post-truth-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5289cc5cd0baf3ce2a3786f7b5f0038cd0a5b4e%2F200_147_2134_2336%2F2134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Van%20Gogh's%20lost%20drawings%3A%20unconvincing%2C%20but%20does%20anyone%20care%20in%20a%20post-truth%20art%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fvan-gogh-arles-lost-drawings-post-truth-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Van%20Gogh%27s%20lost%20drawings%3A%20unconvincing%2C%20but%20does%20anyone%20care%20in%20a%20post-truth%20art%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fvan-gogh-arles-lost-drawings-post-truth-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5289cc5cd0baf3ce2a3786f7b5f0038cd0a5b4e%2F200_147_2134_2336%2F2134.jpg>
 Self-Portrait with Straw Hat, July or August 1888, Arles. Photograph: Édition 
du Seuil 
If the Van Gogh Museum is right, some serious people have been fooled. But is 
the museum correct? Looking through reproductions of the drawings, I strongly 
agree that they are, as it says, “spiritless”. They use techniques that look 
“Van Gogh-y” and show the types of scenes he is famous for painting, but 
there’s something missing.

Consider when these drawings are meant to have been done: at the most creative 
and turbulent time in Van Gogh’s life when he fled the temptations of 
avant-garde Paris to discover the light of the south in Arles, painting 
ecstatic sunflowers, marvellous orchards, passionate portraits, expressive cafe 
scenes, then becoming ill and being confined in an asylum. Purportedly, he sent 
this lost album of drawings to the owners of the cafe neighbouring his Yellow 
House when he was in the asylum. But they are totally unemotional, 
unexpressive, disengaged exercises with none of the energy and vision that 
transfigured his art in these years.

Still, you can imagine being at least ready to give these flaccid sketches the 
benefit of the doubt, until you look at Van Gogh’s supposed “self-portrait” 
that the publisher, amazingly, has put on the book’s cover. This drawing does 
not look like Van Gogh, let alone the way Van Gogh portrayed Van Gogh. In fact, 
it lacks any kind of human touch. Suddenly, the nonsense is exposed. This is a 
very bad, soulless, characterless attempt at a human face. It cannot possibly 
be the work of Van Gogh or any real artist.

Van Gogh 'cut off his ear after learning brother was to marry'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/31/van-gogh-cut-off-his-ear-learning-brother-theo-to-marry-new-study>
Clearly, if the museum is correct, these drawings cannot have been made 
innocently. They deliberately pastiche Van Gogh. Someone did them on purpose to 
look like his art – and the expert who identified them as Van Gogh’s has 
written a whole book full of detailed commentaries, in good faith, that give 
them credence.

I agree with the museum, but some will be convinced by the book’s detailed 
scholarship. It is a beautifully produced and serious-looking publication. But 
why has the museum’s damning judgment, first issued in 2008, gone unheeded?

These drawings have entered the culture now. They will be reported as 
“controversial”, but the Van Gogh Museum does not have power to seize and 
destroy fakes. It can only make its case. And supporters of The Lost Arles 
Sketchbook will make their case, too. Welcome to the post-truth art world.
 