
At 1.36pm on the third day in Visakhapatnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/india-england-second-test-day-three-report>
, with a round 200-run first-innings lead safely tucked away in his back pocket,
Virat Kohli <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli> opted against 
enforcing the follow-on and with it delayed England’s next trial by spin on the 
subcontinent temporarily.

Kohli’s opposite number, Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook>, knows all about the 
chuntering from the golf-mad commentariat that can result from such a call –Old 
Trafford against Pakistan last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/25/england-pakistan-second-test-day-four-match-report>
 springs to mind – and yet on this occasion, with just under half the Test 
remaining and a pitch to wear further, few could groan at the India captain’s 
decision.

By forging ahead with the bat – India’s lead had swelled to 298 by stumps – 
Kohli made the eminently sensible choice, ruling out any remote chance of 
England performing a recreation ofVVS Laxman’s incredible turnaround Test 
against Australia in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/18/vvs-laxman-retires-india-international-cricket>
, forcing more miles into the legs of Cook’s bowlers and leaving the batsman 
time to ponder the ball’s ever-varying bounce off the strip of baked earth in 
front of them.

Virat Kohli rams home India advantage and gives England a mountain to climb
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/india-england-second-test-day-three-report>
For all the fight displayed by Cook’s side on the third day, first through 
some northern grit byBen Stokes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ben-stokes> 
and Jonny Bairstow with the bat, then later inStuart Broad’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stuart-broad> injury-defying opening burst 
with the new ball,their collapse on the second evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/england-paul-farbrace-india-joe-root-second-test-day-two>
 has meant this inaugural Test in the locally known City of Destiny has for 
some time felt locked on a set path towards a 1-0 lead for the home side.

The main question now is when Kohli eventually pulls up the ladder and thus, 
with rain as likely as an English green-top appearing this series, how many 
overs the tourists must try to resist.

South Africa produced the longest fourth innings ever witnessed in India in 
December last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/07/india-beat-south-africa-fourth-test-report>
 with an epic blockathon that lasted 143.1 overs and yet still lost the match. 
England’s task could be similar when it comes round to strapping on the pads 
again.

Ravi Ashwin will be licking his lips at this prospect, having returned figures 
of five for 67 from 29.5 overs in the first innings. While England have long 
known about his talents with the bat given an average of 91 against them, this 
was the first time that his cocktail-shaking wind-up and delicate twiddling 
fingers have got the better of their batsmen and a far cry from the 17 wickets 
at 49 apiece from six previous encounters leading into this tour. The 
30-year-old is the world’s No1 bowler for a reason, however, with 12 
five-wicket hauls in 15 Tests coming into the series, and while he was kept 
quiet in Rajkot, England knew full well he would come to the party at some 
stage. Gone is the bowler of four years ago who appeared a box of tricks with 
no steady stock ball and in his place now is a wily craftsman who prides 
himself on relentless accuracy.

India v England, second Test: day three –as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/19/india-v-england-second-test-day-three-live>
Key among his surgical strikes in this second Test, after Joe Root’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/joe-root> apparent brain-fade on day two, 
was that of Stokes for 70 following a beautiful ball that skidded on and some 
jiggery-pokery with the review system that merely concluded that the 
left-hander was out lbw, not caught at silly point. Stokes had, up until this 
dismissal, been producing the latest slab of evidence that his game is now up 
to the challenge on Asian surfaces.

Compiling 110 over 44.1 overs with Bairstow – and taking their alliance in 
2016 to 772 runs, the most in the world – Stokes showed what a kick he is now 
getting out of self-denial, grinding out 157 balls and only occasionally 
emerging from his bunker to marmalise some grot off the back foot or sweep with 
the deftness of touch displayed by the female groundstaff that dust down the 
pitch here with their besoms during every stoppage in play.

The frustration at his eventual demise, prodding forward, was evident on the 
25-year-old’s face as he thundered towards the pavilion at the wonderfully 
named Vizzy End and smashed his bat on the turf.

It was the polar opposite to that of Ashwin, who had finally seen the back of 
a player who represented both England’s last hope and the greatest long-term 
threat to his status as the world’s No1 all-rounder.
 