
Ken King is a veteran of the US navy. He worked for 25 years as a policeman in 
southernVirginia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/virginia>. After retiring 
at the rank of lieutenant, he took command of a military unit guarding the 
prison camp at Guantánamo Bay.

King does not, therefore, conform to the Donald Trump caricature of those who 
protest against killings by police officers. And yet King knows what he knows. 
He will tell you about a preventable error by police that had deadly 
consequences on two occasions. It may, in fact, be the most serious single 
institutional failing in US policing to come to light sinceFerguson, Missouri, 
erupted into civil unrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/14/ferguson-police-arrest-reporters-as-unrest-continues-over-michael-brown-shooting>
 in 2014.

The Guardian first reported in June last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/01/stephen-rankin-military-trained-officer-william-chapman>
 that King, who then went unidentified, had warned senior commanders at 
Portsmouth police department about the dangers posed by one of the officers 
under his command. The officer was Stephen Rankin.

Officer Rankin was receiving too many complaints about his use of force, King 
told them, such as using his Taser to shock a 60-year-old grandmother during a 
dispute about her car being towed, and wrestling a 15-year-old girl to the 
ground in a routine confrontation.

“There are some people who come into law enforcement who are not suited for 
the job,” says King, who is softly spoken but intense. “Stephen Rankin was one 
of those people.”

Rankin had the capacity to “cause a riot at a church social,” as King puts it. 
“He could go to any event and it would just escalate out of control in some 
way.”

Previously reluctant to speak publicly, King agreed to be interviewed for a 
powerful documentary, which builds on the Guardian’s reporting, andairs on BBC2 
on Wednesday 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/proginfo/2016/44/unarmed-black-male>.

King says he asked internal affairs investigators working for Portsmouth 
police chief Ed Hargis to look into the repeated complaints about Rankin’s 
excessive force, but the officer was allowed to continue policing the public. 
Later, after finding that Rankin was also falsely claiming overtime pay, King 
says he wrote to Hargis recommending the officer be fired from his job. He 
wasn’t.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b71a0dbd6dcce6f766f00f5830119a4d1d0dd33%2F0_32_628_785%2F628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fight%20to%20punish%20US%20police%20killings%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20missed%20an%20opportunity%20to%20stop%20him'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fight%20to%20punish%20US%20police%20killings%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20missed%20an%20opportunity%20to%20stop%20him%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b71a0dbd6dcce6f766f00f5830119a4d1d0dd33%2F0_32_628_785%2F628.jpg>
 William Chapman was shot by Rankin in a Walmart car park. Photograph: BBC 
Then, one evening in 2011, Rankin shot dead an unarmed young man while 
responding to a 911 call. One morning last year, he did it again.

“We missed an opportunity to get rid of this officer a long time ago,” says 
King. “And no one’s better off because we didn’t do that.”

Portsmouth is an old harbour and plantation town, part of the Tidewater 
region, about halfway down the Atlantic coast. More than half of its 96,000 
residents are black. Its colonial heritage and contemporary culture mix 
curiously. US naval vessels are still repaired and upgraded at its vast 
250-year-old shipyard, which was once a useful outpost for the British crown. 
It is also the birthplace of Missy Elliott, the rapper and producer. Rankin, 
like many men in the area, landed in Portsmouth with the US navy. As a 
22-year-old raised in California, he had met Cori Johnson, a 17-year-old rebel 
from an evangelical Christian family. He proposed after six weeks. They married 
and had a daughter. She followed him across the US on his naval postings and 
waited while he was deployed as a military policeman to Kuwait, to aid the US 
war effort in Iraq.

Discharged in Portsmouth in 2007 after five years, Rankin decided to become a 
policeman. He was rejected by several departments for having used 
methamphetamine in his youth. “I did it ONE TIME when I was 16,” he complained 
later, on an online forum. But Rankin was eventually accepted at Portsmouth, a 
department with a strong military streak thanks to the local base.

Johnson told the documentary makers that as complaints from the public about 
his violence piled up, Rankin said they merely proved he was doing his job 
properly. He also became obsessed with a particular premise for a police 
officer opening fire on a suspect. He would return to this hypothetical 
constantly in conversations with colleagues, she said.

“Don’t you think you’d be justified in shooting somebody if they put their 
hand on their waistband?” he would ask.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cc7743b599abb2ebc819404e5f8539e476e270a%2F75_32_1731_1039%2F1731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fight%20to%20punish%20US%20police%20killings%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20missed%20an%20opportunity%20to%20stop%20him'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fight%20to%20punish%20US%20police%20killings%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20missed%20an%20opportunity%20to%20stop%20him%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cc7743b599abb2ebc819404e5f8539e476e270a%2F75_32_1731_1039%2F1731.jpg>
 Chapman’s mother Sallie holding a vigil outside Walmart. Photograph: BBC 
Rankin’s marriage began to deteriorate, and ended in divorce. King’s efforts 
to have Rankin removed from the streets were in vain. But on the evening of 23 
April 2011, Rankin answered a 911 call reporting someone banging on the front 
door of an apartment building in Portsmouth’s historic Olde Towne area.

Kirill Denyakin, a cook from Kazakhstan who was living in the town, had been 
drinking too much while out with friends. Denyakin had ended up outside the 
apartment building in question, where he had been staying, and began rapping 
incessantly on the glass door. Footage from a dashboard camera in Rankin’s car 
shows the officer arriving in response to the 911 call and leaping over a grass 
verge. Seconds after he disappears from view, 11 gunshots are heard.

Photographs taken at the scene showed that Denyakin ended up with his jeans 
around his ankles. Friends suggested he had been urinating. Certainly he had no 
weapon. But Rankin claimed he had been forced to fire his gun repeatedly 
because the 26-year-old turned, charged toward the officer aggressively – and 
reached into his waistband.

“When I read his statement in the newspaper, that he had said ‘hand on the 
waistband’, a chill went up my spine,” said Johnson. “I realised this was not a 
standard line-of-duty shooting. I realised this was what he’d been waiting for.”

King adds: “I think you could have put 100 other officers in that same 
situation and you would not have had that same outcome.”

In those pre-Ferguson days, Rankin avoided criminal charges and the national 
spotlight. Denyakin’s family sued in the civil courts for $22m (£18m). After 
they rejected an offer of a small settlement, however, the jury at trialsided 
with Rankin 
<http://hamptonroads.com/2012/03/jury-portsmouth-officer-not-liable-shooting-death>
, accepting his claim that he was forced to fire because he feared for his 
life, and awarding the family no damages. Denyakin’s mother, Yelena, went home 
distraught and empty-handed. Denyakin’s family had also come under attack in 
the comments section of the Virginian-Pilot, their local newspaper. “22 mil 
wont buy your boy back,” wrote one observer, under the username 
yourealythinkthat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3da782c63ef37aed6da0309d2bc4e871f95604e8%2F30_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fight%20to%20punish%20US%20police%20killings%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20missed%20an%20opportunity%20to%20stop%20him'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fight%20to%20punish%20US%20police%20killings%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20missed%20an%20opportunity%20to%20stop%20him%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3da782c63ef37aed6da0309d2bc4e871f95604e8%2F30_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Kirill Denyakin was shot within seconds of Rankin arriving at an apartment 
where an inebriated Denyakin was banging on the door. Photograph: Guardian Video
Most Americans, the commenter said, could not hope to earn such a sum in their 
entire career, “let alone a habitual drunk working as a hotel cook”. Speaking 
under oath six months and 246 comments later, Rankin admitted that he was 
actually yourealythinkthat.

The killing caused a diplomatic incident. Officials from Kazakhstan, a key 
central Asian ally for the US in post-9/11 conflicts, made their anger known to 
the State Department. Concerns were relayed to the authorities in Portsmouth, 
who also faced a furore over Facebook postings from the previous two years that 
showed Rankin, a firearms obsessive, referring to his gun container as 
“Rankin’s box of vengeance”.

Rankin was put on administrative duties, leaving him stuck behind a desk for 
the following two years and nine months, until things blew over. But then he 
was let out again.

“Not only was he told it was OK, but in his world, he was empowered by it,” 
Johnson says in the documentary. “It made him a hero. It made him a badass. Why 
give that up? Why stop?”

When a security worker at the town’s Walmart store called 911 early on 22 
April last year to report a suspected shoplifting, the US was in a state of 
acute anxiety. It was only eight months since Michael Brown, an unarmed black 
18-year-old, had been shot dead in Ferguson, and the aftershocks were still 
felt.

Virginia officer said 'This is my second one' after killing William Chapman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/william-chapman-stephen-rankin-trial-virginia>
Protests spread to major cities. A long-dormant debate about race and policing 
was forced back to the top of the domestic political agenda. And the discord 
was about to enter a second phase. In Baltimore, Maryland, 22-year-old Freddie 
Gray had just died of a broken neck after being driven around shackled in the 
back of a police van without a seatbelt. Demonstrations turned into clashes 
with police, rioting and arson.

It meant the country was already preoccupied by the in-custody death of a 
young African American man when Rankin took that early-morning 911 call and 
confronted 18-year-old William Chapman in the Walmart’s vast car park.

Rankin was not in a good mood. “I hate this job,” Rankin, who was 34, had told 
a colleague in a mobile message about an hour earlier. “Seen too much bad and 
not enough good.” The colleague brushed aside his complaints, but Rankin 
insisted. “The city sucks, but so does the rest of the world. People are just 
bad,” he said. He made an allusion to the condemned biblical cities of Sodom 
and Gomorrah.

Then, as Rankin tried to detain Chapman, the 18-year-old defied him. “Take 
your hand out your pocket,” Rankin said, as they began to struggle at Rankin’s 
squad car. “Take your hand out your pocket.” Rankin drew his Taser, which had 
an in-built camera that recorded their exchange. “You’re not gonna Tase me, cos 
you’re not gonna arrest me for nothing,” Chapman told him, before knocking the 
Taser to the ground. The pair split apart and stood face to face, separated by 
the car.

What happened next is sharply disputed. A Walmart security worker, a young 
black man named Gregory Provo, said Chapman took a “jab step” – an upper-body 
jerk meant to make an opponent flinch. “He never charged, he just made a 
gesture,” said Provo. Rankin and some white builders working nearby claimed 
that Chapman advanced towards the officer. No one, however, disputes that 
Chapman was unarmed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe13756c96af5ff7b3be7c734291cf06ea010488d%2F961_764_4373_2624%2F4373.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fight%20to%20punish%20US%20police%20killings%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20missed%20an%20opportunity%20to%20stop%20him'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fight%20to%20punish%20US%20police%20killings%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20missed%20an%20opportunity%20to%20stop%20him%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe13756c96af5ff7b3be7c734291cf06ea010488d%2F961_764_4373_2624%2F4373.jpg>
 Stephen Rankin. His ex-wife says Rankin would talk about a hypothetical 
premise in which it would be justified to shoot a suspect. Photograph: BBC 
Rankin fired his Glock pistol twice in quick succession. Chapman was struck in 
the face and chest. The 18-year-old died almost instantly, becoming one of 306 
African-Americans killed by police last year, as recorded byan award-winning 
Guardian project, called The Counted. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>

According to King, the retired lieutenant, it needn’t have happened.

“He was given chance after chance,” King says of Rankin. “Sometimes tragic 
things happen that can’t be prevented, and there was no chance to try to avoid 
it. But in this case, it could have been avoided.”

After his second killing, Rankin faced a drastically different situation. The 
number of officers charged with crimes for deadly shootings in 2015 across the 
country was three times higher than in recent years. Meanwhile, in Portsmouth, 
the white, male Republican prosecutor who oversaw Rankin’s avoidance of charges 
for killing Denyakin was gone. In his place wasStephanie Morales 
<http://www.portsmouthcwa.com/commonwealths-attorney>, a recently elected black 
Democrat, just 31 years old.

In August last year, Morales announced that she would pursue criminal charges 
against Rankin for killing Chapman. The following month, a grand juryreturned 
an indictment 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/09/03/us/virginia-police-shooting-murder-charge> 
of first-degree murder – still a highly unusual charge for a police shooting. 
Rankin was also terminated from his job.

The documentary follows Rankin and the Chapmans through the murder trial, 
which spanned two sweltering weeks in summer. As a steady stream of 
controversial shootings by police continued to flow across the US, extensive 
security measures were installed at Portsmouth courthouse, where officers 
stationed on the roof scanned the area for potential danger.

Rankin was protected by a coterie of armed deputies dressed like soldiers. “We 
had some pretty credible threats on our lives,” said his second wife, Dawn.

Funded by her friends and neighbours, Yelena Denyakin flew back to Virginia to 
see Rankin in the dock. Jointly determined to see him punished this time, 
Denyakin and Sallie Chapman, William’s mother,forged an unlikely partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/william-chapman-kirill-denyakina-murder-trial-stephen-rankin-virginia>
 “Rankin didn’t just kill my son,” said Denyakin. “He destroyed our whole 
family.”

“If I get justice, then we get justice together,” said Chapman.

Unshaven and dishevelled, the former officer gave his first and only public 
interview for the film, breaking an unspoken omertà among officers that 
typically follows deadly encounters. “Having to shoot someone,” said Rankin, is 
“not as easy as it looks in the movies.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd575e0b94659e29fe2cea9f0b2605e651443d1d%2F8_8_1046_627%2F1046.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fight%20to%20punish%20US%20police%20killings%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20missed%20an%20opportunity%20to%20stop%20him'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fight%20to%20punish%20US%20police%20killings%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20missed%20an%20opportunity%20to%20stop%20him%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvirginia-police-shootings-we-missed-an-opportunity-to-stop-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd575e0b94659e29fe2cea9f0b2605e651443d1d%2F8_8_1046_627%2F1046.jpg>
 The victim’s mothers Yelena Denyakin and Sallie Chapman before Rankin’s trial. 
Photograph: BBC 
While offering sympathy to the Chapmans, Rankin remains convinced of his 
propriety, and aggrieved at his treatment, which he contrasts with the “three 
weeks and a medal” – paid leave and a commendation for bravery – that he claims 
ordinarily would be expected. “I did exactly what I was trained to do,” said 
Rankin. “I did my job, and I really feel like I’m being punished for doing 
exactly what I was supposed to do.”

Pre-trial wrangling resulted in rulings that jurors would not hear about 
Rankin’s first deadly shooting. Nor, though, would they learn of childhood 
offences committed by Chapman, who was sent to a juvenile prison after bringing 
to school a cigarette lighter styled like a pistol.

Inside the courtroom, America’s troubling racial divide played out in 
miniature. Morales was joined in prosecuting Rankin by her black deputy; 
Rankin’s attorneys were white. While one half of the public gallery filled each 
morning with Rankin’s white supporters, Chapman’s family filled the other side 
with black friends and activists. Even eyewitnesses and jurors divided along 
racial lines.

The days were thick with tension. “He and his wife are sitting there 
peacefully,” Yelena Denyakin said during one sunny lunch break. “Soon their 
peace should come to an end.”

Morales, styled as naive by local media for daring to charge an officer with 
murder, was fighting for her political future. She faced off aggressively 
against attorney James Broccoletti, a grizzled veteran defending Rankin after 
getting a man cleared of murder despite his fingerprints being found on bags 
the body was wrapped in.

Rankin, facing a potential life sentence if convicted, was clinging to his 
freedom, to his chances of working again as a police officer – and to his right 
to ever again own a gun.

“I believe it’s not just me that’s on trial,” said Rankin. “I believe it’s all 
American police officers.”

• Unarmed Black Male will be broadcast on BBC2 at 9pm on Wednesday 2 November
 