
US intelligence officials believe that Vladimir Putin was personally involved 
in hacking during the American election campaign as part of a vendetta against
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, NBC News 
has claimed.


The Russian president personally instructed how material hacked from US 
Democrats was leaked and otherwise used, the US television network said, 
quoting two senior officials with access to this information.

The officials said they have a “high level of confidence” in this new 
assessment, NBC reported.

Russian involvement in US vote raises fears for European elections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/russian-involvement-in-us-vote-raises-fears-for-european-elections>
Last weekend the Washington Post reported a CIA evaluation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 that Russia had hacked the emails of US persons and institutions as a way to 
sway the election in favor of Republican Donald Trump, who defeated Clinton on 
8 November.

Putin has reportedly never forgiven Clinton – then secretary of state – for 
publicly questioning the integrity of parliamentary elections in 2011 in 
Russia, andaccused her of encouraging street protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/08/vladimir-putin-hillary-clinton-russia>
.

The intelligence officials told NBC that Putin’s goals in the alleged hacking 
began as revenge against Clinton.

But they transformed into a broader effort to show that the world of US 
politics was corrupt and, in the words of one official, to “split off key 
American allies by creating the image that (other countries) couldn’t depend on 
the US to be a credible global leader anymore”.

In preparation for possible retaliation, US intelligence agencies have 
intensified their investigations into Putin’s personal wealth, NBC said, citing 
US officials.

Trump, who has spoken warmly of Putin, has dismissed as “ridiculous” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
 the allegation that Russia was behind the hacking of the Democratic National 
Committee and people close to Clinton.

Leading US lawmakers have called for a formal congressional investigation into 
the hacking.
 