
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> has used his 
annual press conference to launch a stinging attack on the outgoing Obama 
administration and the Democratic party and to claim he had always known Donald 
Trump would win the US election.

“Nobody believed he’d win. Except us, of course. We always believed,” said 
Putin, to applause from some of the 1,400 journalists gathered.

He dismissed all accusations of Russian interference in the vote, insisting 
that US claims of meddling by Moscow were due to theDemocrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> being sore losers.

“The Democratic party and the US administration are trying to chalk their own 
failures up to outside factors,” the president said. “They lost everywhere, and 
are looking for outside factors to blame. It is not very dignified.”

Putin press conference: don't blame me for Democrats' election loss – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/23/vladimir-putins-annual-press-conference-live-updates>
Before the vote, the US administration accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 Russia of hacking the Democrats’ servers, and this month it was reported that 
the CIA believed Russia hadintervened with the specific goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 of helping Trump. Trump has dismissed the claims as implausible.

Putin said he agreed with Trump’s suggestion, made during the campaign, that 
the hacks could have been carried out by an individual sitting on their bed. 
“The president-elect was absolutely right to note that nobody knows who these 
hackers are. Maybe they were in a different country, and not inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. Maybe it was just someone sitting 
on their sofa or bed. It’s very easy now to show one origin country, when 
you’re actually in a different place.”


Putin declined to comment on Barack Obama’s claim that he had personally asked 
Putin to put a stop to hacking efforts. “I never talk about what is said in 
personal conversations with other leaders,” he said.” More important than who 
did the hacking were the revelations contained in them about the Democratic 
party, he said, but “instead of apologising to their voters they started 
shouting about who organised the attacks”.


Asked about recent comments by Obama that “Ronald Reagan would roll over in 
his grave” over poll findings that 37% of Republican voters admitted to being 
fans of Putin, the president said it was a sign that the two countries were 
close.


“That means a large part of the American people have the same views as us 
about how the world should be organised,” he said, adding that many Americans 
“agree with our understanding of traditional values”.


In a potential sign that rhetoric about the US – portrayed in recent years as 
the biggest threat to Russia – could be softening as Trump enters the White 
House, Putin implied that the country was no longer a danger. Asked about his 
comments this week that Russia’s army was stronger than “any aggressor”, he 
conceded that the US had the strongest army in the world. “But I said we were 
stronger than any – pay attention – aggressor,” he said. By implication, the US 
was no longer seen as an aggressor.

Putin’s marathon press conferences have become an annual tradition during his 
16 years in charge of Russia (12 as president and four as prime minister), and 
typically involve a mix of carefully scripted questions and wildcards from 
journalists, ranging across topics from geopolitics to regional issues. 
Journalists bring signs, photographs and flags to wave in the hope of catching 
the president’s attention. On this occasion one had brought a poster portraying 
Putin in a Superman costume.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fvladimir-putin-defeated-democrats-blame-game-not-very-dignified-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c72f56d82b288ec74f2da4930b68f21a59e3335%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vladimir%20Putin%3A%20defeated%20Democrats'%20blame%20game%20'not%20very%20dignified'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fvladimir-putin-defeated-democrats-blame-game-not-very-dignified-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vladimir%20Putin%3A%20defeated%20Democrats%27%20blame%20game%20%27not%20very%20dignified%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fvladimir-putin-defeated-democrats-blame-game-not-very-dignified-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c72f56d82b288ec74f2da4930b68f21a59e3335%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Journalists hold up signs during Putin’s press conference. Photograph: Planet 
Pix/Rex/Shutterstock 
The session lasted almost four hours. Putin touched on other issues, railing 
against the west for causing the Ukraine crisis and affirming that themurder of 
Russia’s ambassador to Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/russian-ambassador-to-turkey-wounded-in-ankara-shooting-attack>
 this week would not affect relations between the two countries.

As well as international affairs, he opined at length on grain production, 
chess and regional road construction.


Although Putin does take questions on sensitive topics during the sessions, 
the lack of follow-up questions makes it easy for him to evade giving real 
answers. When asked whethersuspects linked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/08/boris-nemtsov-five-suspects-appear-in-court-over-opposition-leaders-killing>
 to Chechnya’s pro-Kremlin president, Ramzan Kadyrov, should be called as 
witnesses in the trial over thekilling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/29/how-nemtsovs-could-force-putin-into-a-big-decision>
 of the opposition politician Boris Nemtsov, Putin simply did not answer.

Putin refused to say whether he would stand for president for another six-year 
term in 2018. He is widely expected to stand and win, which if he saw out the 
term would mean he had run Russia for 24 years. “I will look at what’s 
happening in the country and the world … and the decision will be taken about 
taking part or not in the future elections,” he said.

The world according to Putin

On the evacuation of Aleppo: “It’s the biggest current international 
humanitarian mission. It couldn’t have been achieved without the active work of 
the presidents of Turkey and Iran, and our active participation. And of course, 
as well, the goodwill and work which was carried out by the Syrian president 
Assad.”

On Russia, Turkey and the fighter jet downed last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/turkey-shoots-down-jet-near-border-with-syria>
: “I was sceptical about the theory that our jet was shot down without orders 
from the Turkish leadership and it was ordered by people who actually wanted to 
ruin Russian-Turkish relations. But now, after the attack on our ambassador, I 
am starting to change my opinion.”

On allegations of a state-sponsored doping programme in sport: “Russia never 
had any state system of doping or state support for doping. It’s simply 
impossible, and we will do everything to make sure it doesn’t happen in future.”

On Oleg Sentsov, a Ukrainian film director jailed on terrorism charges in a 
case seen as political: “What should we do if a film director is proven by a 
court to have been planning acts of terror? Let him go just because he’s a film 
director?”

On love: [Responding to a voice from the hall asking: “Can I ask you a 
question about love?”] “Love quickly turns to hatred.”
 