
In this extraordinary glut of news stories, there is a risk that the recent 
report by theHouse of Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> 
economic affairs committee on housing supply, published on 15 July, will go 
unnoticed.


The report lays out a comprehensive and devastating critique of our failure to 
deliver the housing we need and puts forward the radical changes in policy 
required to change this.


It first takes the government to task for setting the target too low, arguing 
that 300,000 new houses need to be built every year to meet the needs of the 
country’s growing population, address the backlog and moderate house prices. 
This is 50% more than the government’s target of 1m over the life of this 
parliament – a figure subsequently disavowed as even being a target by the 
former housing minister Brandon Lewis.

Our last chance to restrain the housing bill is with the Lords | Bob Kerslake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/26/housing-planning-bill-house-of-lords>
The report goes on to argue that private housebuilders, as currently 
incentivised, are unable to deliver this target and calls for local authorities 
and housing associations to be freed up to build substantially more homes for 
rent and sale.


It ought to be required reading for the incoming housing minister, Gavin 
Barwell. In the hierarchy of Lords’ select committees, economic affairs comes 
near the top. It is chaired by a Labour peer, Lord Hollick, but is all-party 
and includes the former chancellor Norman Lamont and former cabinet secretary 
Andrew Turnbull.

Also included in its recommendations are an ability to levy council tax on 
development that is not completed quickly, bringing forward the use of public 
land and giving local authorities the power to increase planning fees. 
Hallelujah! At last, some common sense in the housing debate.

To my mind these are the right actions and indeed similar to the proposals put 
forward by the London housing commission I chaired. During the passage of the 
housing and planning bill through the Lords,I voiced concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/26/housing-planning-bill-house-of-lords>
 that the bill advanced the interests of home ownership at the expense of 
social rented housing. Apart from being grossly unfair, this approach put far 
too much reliance on building for sale by private housebuilders and left the 
government vulnerable to economic shocks.

That shock has come with Brexit. Even if the share values of housebuilders 
recover to previous levels, the appetite for new development is unlikely to. In 
these uncertain times, even the 1m new homes figure must be in serious doubt.

What is needed is nothing less than a wholesale review of the government’s 
housing policy and a new approach set out in the autumn statement. In preparing 
their new plans, ministers and officials could do a lot worse than follow the 
recommendations of this excellent report.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you every 
Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>.

 