
Long-distance footpaths can be seductive things. You gaze at them on a map – 
the greater and lesser squiggles on the Ordnance Survey’s snakes-and-ladders 
grid. If the air and your step feel full of spring, the temptation is to set 
off for the start of one of these routes and mentally project yourself along 
the awaiting stretches. Five days, maybe six or seven if you dawdle, and in 
what feels like no time you’ll be at the other end, in the pub, brimming with 
beer and achievement.

Sometimes, however, the will founders, even in seasoned walkers. On the third 
day, you find yourself in fine rain, with no view, sore feet, the waymarking 
all to hell, in a boggy field, with bulls staring back. And there’s no signal 
on your mobile, so no taxi to bail you out to the nearest station, wherever 
that is.

One solution is to “collect” the walks: do them in bite-size portions, a 
single day here, a weekend there. That way you can put together even the 
longest of the British footpaths, such as the 630-mileSouth West Coast Path 
<http://www.southwestcoastpath.com/>, from Minehead in Somerset to Studland in 
Dorset. That will take you a while, but then, what’s the hurry?

I am in the middle of “collecting” the magnificent Grand Union canal 
<https://canalrivertrust.org.uk/canals-and-rivers/grand-union-canal>, which 
runs from west London to Gas Street Basin in the heart of Birmingham. It offers 
147 miles of towpath walking – the extra length is partly explained by the way 
some of the stretches go with the flow of the land, contouring round its 
features rather than engineering a straight line by aqueduct and tunnel.

I started at Paddington station, which is next to the canal’s terminal basin. 
Yes, the railways of the mid-19th century often stalked the existing canals, 
and the courses of these erstwhile rivals crisscross dramatically all the way 
up to the Black Country.
 The Grand Union canal at Brentford, west London. Photograph: Alamy 
I got off the underground at Paddington and started walking – and talking to 
the people on the boats along the way (literally along the way, since they’re 
going at walking speed). It’s impossible to hurry, because the world slows into 
a placid, reflective corridor, green-fringed through the dense townscape. And 
there are pubs dotted along the entire route.

A week later, I took a suburban ride to Brentford. My next leg of the walk 
involved taking the Piccadilly line to Alperton; then, the Chiltern line out of 
Marylebone for Rickmansworth; to Euston, for the Rugby line to Berkhamsted, 
Tring, Leighton Buzzard, Milton Keynes … you get the picture. It’s a kind of 
elasticated commute, but instead of a walkers’ B&B I went home each night.

So now I’m at Wolverton, 73.3 miles from Paddington and almost the same 
distance from Gas Street. I’ve done this in nine sections and it has taken 
almost as many months. I’ve trumped the barges for slowness. Every few minutes 
there’s a chunk of displaced air coming at my face as the Birmingham-bound 
trains roar past, reminding me that they can do the journey in 90 minutes. Good 
for them.
 The Rising Sun, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. Photograph: Alamy 
Yes, when I was much younger I did the 177 miles of the Offa’s Dyke path 
<http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/offas-dyke-path>, down the Welsh border, in one 
10-day trip. And while I’m trying to brag, I once walked a series of 30-mile 
days as part of Ian Botham’s transalpine charity marathon in Hannibal’s 
footsteps, complete with three elephants. (That was too tough to be called fun, 
let alone leisure. One of the animals had to pull out with an offside-elbow 
strain, but that’s another story.)

Many of Britain’s long-distance paths, such as the Ridgeway 
<http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/ridgeway>, have a historical rationale, and 
none more obviously so than the Grand Union Canal. This great strip of water 
was the future once: at the end of the 18th century, Britain was just pulling 
clear from a depression caused by the US war of independence. Industry was 
picking up, and hungry for raw materials. A horse that could haul maybe a 
couple of tons on a good road could pull more than 20 times that along the 
canal. To walk this towpath, even with all that activity over long ago, is to 
see a little of how we got to where we are now. And by spring, I should be in 
Birmingham.

More ‘collectible’ walks


There are several hundred long-distance footpaths in Britain, ranging from 
17-mile hikes such as theAltrincham Circular 
<http://www.ldwa.org.uk/ldp/members/show_path.php?path_name=Altrincham+Circular>
 in Cheshire, through the medium-size (at 65 miles) Black Fen Waterway trail in 
East Anglia, and theWest Highland Way <http://www.west-highland-way.co.uk/> in 
Scotland at 95 miles, up to classics such asthe Pennine Way 
<http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/pennine-way> at 247 miles. The Walking 
Englishman website <http://www.walkingenglishman.com/> has a directory. Here 
are a few options.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwalking-guides-uk-long-distance-footpaths-grand-union-canal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415209359587%2F8fc6bc67-0ed4-4e7d-8aed-f029cd958acb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walking%20guides%3A%20the%20UK%E2%80%99s%20long-distance%20footpaths%20in%20easy%20stages&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwalking-guides-uk-long-distance-footpaths-grand-union-canal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walking%20guides%3A%20the%20UK%E2%80%99s%20long-distance%20footpaths%20in%20easy%20stages&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwalking-guides-uk-long-distance-footpaths-grand-union-canal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415209359587%2F8fc6bc67-0ed4-4e7d-8aed-f029cd958acb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hadrian’s Wall at Birdoswald. Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images 
Hadrian’s Wall
This 84-mile walk, from Wallsend on Tyne to Bowness-on-Solway, follows the 
remains of the second-century fortification. It is served by the 
Newcastle-Carlisle rail link, which crisscrosses the wall along its way. 
Stopping points can be: Newcastle, Blaydon, Wylam, Prudhoe, Stocksfield, Riding 
Mill, Corbridge, Hexham, Haydon Bridge, Bardon Mill, Haltwhistle, Brampton, 
Wetheral and Carlisle. It’s also accessible on the685 bus route along the A69 
<http://www.visithadrianswall.co.uk/explore/getting-here>. (See Hadrian’s Wall 
Path <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/hadrian-s-wall-path-5.html> by Anthony 
Burton, Aurum Press, £12.99.)
• visithadrianswall.co.uk <http://www.visithadrianswall.co.uk/>

South Downs Way
Almost all 106 miles of this chalkland bridleway – from Eastbourne in East 
Sussex to Winchester in Hampshire – is accessible by train. Try Eastbourne, 
Polegate, Glynde, Lewes, Southease, Amberley, Petersfield and Winchester. 
(Further details in the National Trail Guide series’South Downs Way 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/south-downs-way-2.html>.)
• nationaltrail.co.uk <http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/south-downs-way>

Offa’s Dyke
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwalking-guides-uk-long-distance-footpaths-grand-union-canal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415209546591%2F0e55016d-0de1-448f-ae79-bec62ce645e5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walking%20guides%3A%20the%20UK%E2%80%99s%20long-distance%20footpaths%20in%20easy%20stages&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwalking-guides-uk-long-distance-footpaths-grand-union-canal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walking%20guides%3A%20the%20UK%E2%80%99s%20long-distance%20footpaths%20in%20easy%20stages&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwalking-guides-uk-long-distance-footpaths-grand-union-canal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415209546591%2F0e55016d-0de1-448f-ae79-bec62ce645e5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Walkers on the Offa’s Dyke path, with a view of the market town of Ruthin. 
Photograph: Alamy 
A slightly more ambitious proposition, and a good candidate for weekend 
expeditions, this is 177 miles down the England/Wales border, allegedly 
constructed by the eighth-century king of Mercia. Stopping points: Sedbury, 
Monmouth, Pandy, Hay, Kington, Knighton, Brompton Crossroads, Buttington 
Bridge, Llanymynech, Chirk Mill, Llandegla, Bodfari, Prestatyn.
• offasdyke.demon.co.uk <http://www.offasdyke.demon.co.uk/>)


Angles Way
Beneath enormous Norfolk and Suffolk skies, this 93-mile stretch is regarded 
as the best waterside walk going. It’s eminently accessible by train – from the 
starting point of Great Yarmouth, across the Broads from Norfolk; then Oulton 
Broads and Beccles, both on the line to Lowestoft from Ipswich; Bungay and 
Harlesden by number 80 bus from Diss, then Diss itself, on the London-Norwich 
mainline; and Thetford, on the Ely-Norwich train. There’s an interactive map at
norfolk.gov.uk 
<http://www.norfolk.gov.uk/Leisure_and_culture/Norfolk_Trails/Long_distance_trails/Angles_Way/index.htm>
.
• ldwa.org.uk 
<http://www.ldwa.org.uk/ldp/members/show_path.php?path_name=Angles+Way>
 