
Reading Gaol, made infamous worldwide by the grim ballad written by its most 
famous prisoner,Oscar Wilde <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde>, 
closed its doors to prisoners in 2013. Now, for the first time in almost two 
centuries, it will reopen to outsiders.

They will be welcomed with installations by artists, readings by poets and 
writers – including De Profundis, the bitterly moving letter Wilde wrote from 
the jail, one page at a time on the single piece of paper he was allowed each 
day – and offered tours into the darkest and most feared part of the compound, 
the underground punishment cells where the prisoners were held for days in 
complete darkness and silence. It has all been organised by the arts producers
Artangel <https://www.artangel.org.uk/project/inside/> and the National Trust.

“The recommendation was that prisoners should be locked up in the dark cells 
for no more than three days, but Oscar Wilde was actually kept there for two 
weeks, as punishment for talking to another prisoner in the chapel,” said Emily 
O’Neil, who has written the guide for the National Trust.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Freading-prison-reopen-art-and-tours-national-trust-jail-oscar-wilde%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa986a0208efa5477eb98c8bf1d18827773b43152%2F0_459_2028_1216%2F2028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walk%20on%20the%20Wilde%20side%3A%20Reading%20prison%20to%20reopen%20for%20art%20and%20tours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Freading-prison-reopen-art-and-tours-national-trust-jail-oscar-wilde%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walk%20on%20the%20Wilde%20side%3A%20Reading%20prison%20to%20reopen%20for%20art%20and%20tours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Freading-prison-reopen-art-and-tours-national-trust-jail-oscar-wilde%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa986a0208efa5477eb98c8bf1d18827773b43152%2F0_459_2028_1216%2F2028.jpg>
 Oscar Wilde. Photograph: Matthew Bailey/National Portrait/PA 
“It was incredibly harsh punishment: the window was blocked so it was totally 
dark, the double doors meant they saw nothing, and bread and water was just 
handed in through a slot in the door.


“Wilde wrote: ‘Each narrow cell in which we dwell is foul and dark latrine/And 
the fetid breath of living Death chokes up each grated screen.’ Even now I 
think you get a vivid feeling from the cells of what that must have been like,” 
she said.


Since the last prisoner left in 2013, one man has remained serving out his own 
solitary confinement. Sandy Frew, the caretaker, is delighted that the jail’s 
doors are about reopen, after spending months entirely alone, apart from the 
odd rat or pigeon, among acres of echoing stone floors and metal staircases, 
and hundreds of empty cells.

“Some people have said it’s haunted, but I’ve never seen anything, ” he said 
dismissively. “There have been faces picked up in the night by the security 
cameras, and I’ve had things flash by me. I’ve heard voices, quite often heard 
things, felt things touch me – but I’ve never seen anything.”

The prison was built with sanitation in each cell: by the time Wilde occupied 
cell C33 it had been stripped out on a governor’s order, and the prisoners 
forced into the daily routine of slopping out, to make the regime more punitive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Freading-prison-reopen-art-and-tours-national-trust-jail-oscar-wilde%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd06e95bd04828ab9392b5bcb3e15220e32f0014f%2F0_0_2957_4436%2F2957.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walk%20on%20the%20Wilde%20side%3A%20Reading%20prison%20to%20reopen%20for%20art%20and%20tours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Freading-prison-reopen-art-and-tours-national-trust-jail-oscar-wilde%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walk%20on%20the%20Wilde%20side%3A%20Reading%20prison%20to%20reopen%20for%20art%20and%20tours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Freading-prison-reopen-art-and-tours-national-trust-jail-oscar-wilde%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd06e95bd04828ab9392b5bcb3e15220e32f0014f%2F0_0_2957_4436%2F2957.jpg>
 One of Reading’s narrow cells. Photograph: Morley von Sternberg 
In the 20th century the underground cells, chilly even on a warm summer’s day, 
were used to hold prisoners considered vulnerable, including sex offenders, 
whose confinement was as cut off from the rest of the life of the prison as the 
Victorians.

While many of the Artangel installations reflect on wider issues of justice, 
freedom and separation from families and loved ones – including one by 
Jean-Michel Pancin which uses the original door of Wilde’s cell – the National 
Trust tours will follow the route through the prison taken by more recent 
inmates This goes from the reception through The Boss, a full-body X-ray 
machine housed in the former Victorian morgue, into the Box Room where arrivals 
had to surrender all their clothes and possessions, and then on to the cells.

The volunteers who will lead the tours include some former staff, and local 
people who contributed to an oral history of the place. The prison employed 
hundreds of people from the town and the surrounding areas.

O’Neil had one well-informed source very close to hand: her fiance’s mother, 
Julie Parker, who worked atReading <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/reading>
 – and loved her work – until it closed in 2013.


The National Trust could not get permission to lead the tours out into the 
yard where the scaffold was built and the bodies of those executed were buried 
in quick lime. But the yard can be seen from the windows of several cells, just 
as Wilde described. The space is currently being investigated by archaeologists 
looking for the great medieval abbey whose foundations lie under the prison – 
andthe possible grave of a king 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/13/archaeologists-reading-garden-king-henry-i-remains-bones>
, Henry I, an irony even Wilde could not have dreamed of.

The Artangel programme will run from this Sunday until 30 October. The 
National Trust’s tours <https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/readinggaoltours> are 
available every Friday and Saturday from 9 September until 29 October.
 