
Democrats lost to Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> because they were unable to 
capitalize sufficiently on his political weaknesses – lying, bigotry, 
bankruptcies, allegations of serial sexual assault – that would normally be 
considered disqualifying. If they are to limit the damage Trump wreaks on the 
country and beat him in four years, they need a new strategy. Fortunately for 
them, he is already handing them one by behaving as a corrupt kleptocrat.


It's Trump's America now. Time to get over our attachment to facts | Richard 
Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-facts-lies-trumpism>
Like Karl Rove’s fiendishly brilliant decision to attack 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/architect/interviews/slater.html>
 John Kerry’s heroic war service during the 2004 campaign, Democrats should go 
after their opponent’s strength. He won the crucial Rust Belt states by being 
perceived as an outsider, an agent of change and a friend of blue-collar white 
people between the coasts.


Democrats must expose Trump for what he really is: a self-dealing political 
profiteer and a tool of the business and political elite.

Trump is making that job easy by nominating generic establishment Republicans 
and Wall Street insiders to fill his White House and using his meetings with 
foreign dignitaries to pressure them for favorable treatment of his businesses. 
If Democrats are to gain anything from Trump’s abandonment of his campaign 
promises to oust the establishment and clean up the capital, they need to 
develop and repeat a negative narrative about Trump.

Since winning the presidency, Trump has asked 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/administration/307146-trump-urged-farage-to-oppose-wind-farms-report>
 British politician Nigel Farage to help stop a wind farm from going up near 
his Scottish golf course and, allegedly, asked Argentina’s president, Mauricio 
Macri, for swifter building permit approval for an office building. (Trump and 
Macri denied that Trump mentioned his project, but three days after their 
conversation, Trump’s buildinggot its permits 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/11/donald-trump-mauricio-macri-trump-tower>
.) Trump supports building the Dakota Access pipeline – andhe owns 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/trump-dakota-access-pipeline-investment_us_5841d8f9e4b09e21702e8f58>
, orowned 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/donald-trump-claims-sold-stocks-offering-proof/story?id=44033644>
, if he did indeed sell it off in June, stock in the project’s parent company.

He may have promised to “drain the swamp” in Washington, but he is filling his 
administration with typical swamp creatures. Republican National Committee 
chairman Reince Priebus was tapped for chief of staff. Trump has nominated or 
is considering such other longtime GOP power brokers as Senator Jeff Sessions 
for attorney general, and Mitt Romney or Rudy Giuliani for secretary of state. 
The latter two are veterans of the same corporate speaking circuit that Trump 
heaped abuse on Hillary Clinton for traveling.

Romney ran a private equity fund that profited from laying off workers  
<http://www.aol.com/article/2012/06/15/romneys-profit-from-bains-buyouts-up-to-20-000-per-laid-off/20258952/>
across the heartland. Giuliani also works at afirm that lobbies Congress on 
behalf of corporations 
<http://www.law.com/sites/almstaff/2016/10/06/giulianis-leave-from-firm-highlights-lobbying-tightrope-in-divisive-election/?slreturn=20161104231259>
 and he has his own bundleof conflicts of interest 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/16/us/politics/donald-trump-cabinet-rudy-giuliani.html>
, since he has been on the payroll of several foreign governments. One Beltway 
veteran who has turned down Trump’s invitation to audition for cabinet jobs is 
his informal advisor Newt Gingrich. The former House speaker has made millions
consulting for 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/04/us/politics/gingrichs-deep-ties-to-fannie-mae-and-freddie-mac.html>
 Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and working as acorporate influence peddler 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/30/us/politics/gingrich-gave-push-to-clients-not-just-ideas.html>
. Now, he is cashing in on his relationship with the president-electby jacking 
up <http://nypost.com/2016/12/02/newt-gingrich-cashes-in-on-his-trump-insight/> 
his speaking fee.


And Trump’s national security team is filling up with generals – also known as 
longtime government bureaucrats. Among them are NSA director Michael S Rogers, 
whom Trump isconsidering 
<http://www.cnn.com/interactive/2016/11/politics/new-cabinet/> for director of 
national intelligence or other high-level posts, despite his current superiors
recommending 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/pentagon-and-intelligence-community-chiefs-have-urged-obama-to-remove-the-head-of-the-nsa/2016/11/19/44de6ea6-adff-11e6-977a-1030f822fc35_story.html?utm_term=.afda713eec08>
 that he be fired for poor performance. Trump nominated retired Marine GenJames 
N Mattis 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/trump-has-chosen-retired-marine-gen-james-mattis-for-secretary-of-defense/2016/12/01/6c6b3b74-aff9-11e6-be1c-8cec35b1ad25_story.html?utm_term=.2e3360b58595>
 for secretary of defense and retiredLt Gen Michael T Flynn 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/18/us/politics/michael-flynn-national-security-adviser-donald-trump.html>
 for national security advisor. Gen David Petraeus, who pled guilty to sharing 
classified information with his mistress andwould need permission 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/petraeus-would-need-permission-to-travel-as-sec-of-state.html>
 from his probation officer to travel out of the country, is being considered 
for Secretary of State. Anyone who thought Trump would overthrow the hawkish 
national security establishment will be disappointed.

The economic team is also a band of insiders. The Washington Post reports that 
“the millionaires and billionaires of Trump’s White House ... will be the 
wealthiest administration in modern American history.” Treasury secretary 
nomineeSteven Mnuchin 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/29/us/politics/steven-terner-mnuchin-trump-treasury-secretary.html?_r=1%20and%20hedge%20fund%20manager;>
 is a former Goldman Sachs partner and hedge fund manager. For commerce 
secretary and deputy commerce secretary, respectively, Trump tapped billionaire 
investorWilbur Ross 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/11/30/503253374/trump-taps-billionaire-investor-wilbur-ross-for-commerce-secretary>
 andTodd Ricketts 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-todd-ricketts-trump-deputy-commerce-secretary-20161130-story.html>
, a former securities trader from a super-wealthy Republican donor family.

Perhaps no one better embodies Trump coopting the permanent governing class 
than his future Transportation Secretary,Elaine Chao 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/29/us/politics/elaine-chao-transportation-trump.html>
. She is a veteran of three past GOP administrations, the Heritage Foundation 
and Citicorp. She’s also married to Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell.

Mainstream Democrats have mostly failed to wrap all this into a thematic 
critique. Take Sen Cory Booker, a rising star in the party who is frequently 
discussed as a future presidential candidate. He hasspoken up only 
<https://www.booker.senate.gov/?p=press_releases> about the Trump appointees, 
such as Bannon and Sessions, who are openly racist. The same goes for Senate 
minority whip Dick Durbin, who has criticized Bannon and Sessions but not gone 
after other cabinet nominees other than to say the Senate will closely inspect 
them.

Perhaps Democrats are reluctant to complain about establishment nominations 
when the alternative is comically unqualifiedright-wing extremists like Ben 
Carson 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/11/28/ben-carson-trump-s-hud-pick-once-called-fair-housing-communism.html>
, Trump’s pick for secretary of housing and urban development. But pointing out 
Trump’s insider status may be the only way to to show the public that he isn’t 
who he claims to be. They should say, “This is just another instance of the 
corrupt crony capitalism typical of the Trump administration.”

So far it’s mostly just liberal pundits and gadflies like Bernie Sanders 
pointing out Trump’s corruption, when it should be leading national Democrats 
such as incoming Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer, or House minority leader 
Nancy Pelosi. Instead, Schumer and Pelosi arefoolishly speculating 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/schumer-and-pelosi-have-a-plan-to-make-trump-popular.html>
 that they can work together with Trump on infrastructure – ie, they’re 
normalizing the incoming administration.

This message needs the megaphone and official imprimatur of elected officials 
who go on Meet the Press. And it needs a party disciplined in hammering points 
home as the GOP did its bogus attacks on Clinton over Benghazi and her email 
server.


Remarkably enough, the first major political figure to take on Trump’s 
economic policy hypocrisy is one his earliest supporters, Sarah Palin. In an 
op-ed Friday, Palin accuratelydenounced 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/sarah-palin-crony-capitalism-carrier_us_58420349e4b017f37fe4c443>
 the Trump’s Carrier inducement as “corporate welfare” and “special interest 
crony capitalism.” Palin is an intuitively shrewd manipulator of conservative 
populism and Middle American resentment. Her adopting this meme demonstrates 
that its appeal will reach beyond the Democratic base.

That Democrats have allowed Palin to beat them to the anti-Trump punch shows 
they are doing their jobs terribly, if at all. If they want to beat Trump, they 
had better start hitting him where it will hurt.
 