
Apple’s removal of the headphone socket on its latest iPhone 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-7> has had several knock-on 
effects, but one thing most people might not realise is that if you’re using 
wired headphones with it, you can’t charge it at the same time. Unless you buy 
a £35 adapter. Or a £49 dock.


The scrapping of the long-standing, universal 3.5mm phone connector, commonly 
known as the headphones jack, has alreadyboosted sales of wireless headphones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/apple-faces-tough-sell-after-scrapping-iphone-7-headphones-jack>
, which according to Apple is the way forward. It’s also upset a lot of people, 
whose often high-priced cabled headphones now need an adapter to plug into the 
Lightning socket of the iPhone 7, should they buy one.

But arguably the biggest problem for office workers around the country will be 
that the Lightning socket is the sole power source for charging the battery of 
theiPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 7. It means for all 
those who sit at their desks, charge the phone and plug in their headphones to 
listen to music, Apple’s latest smartphone isn’t going to cut the mustard –you 
simply can’t do both.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fiphone-7-listen-music-charge-adapter-headphones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd55858424c9de0c1322c34d2db49c0ec8682ac4b%2F33_277_1079_647%2F1079.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Want%20to%20listen%20to%20an%20iPhone%207%20and%20charge%20it%20simultaneously%3F%20That'll%20be%20%C2%A335&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fiphone-7-listen-music-charge-adapter-headphones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Want%20to%20listen%20to%20an%20iPhone%207%20and%20charge%20it%20simultaneously%3F%20That%27ll%20be%20%C2%A335&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fiphone-7-listen-music-charge-adapter-headphones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd55858424c9de0c1322c34d2db49c0ec8682ac4b%2F33_277_1079_647%2F1079.jpg>
 Apple’s Lightning dock, which is great if you don’t move desks and you can 
trust your co-workers not to steal nice shiny things when you’ve popped home 
for the night. Photograph: Apple 
At least, without buying an adapter that is. Apple’s only option for cable 
aficionados is the iPhone’s £49 Lightning dock, which has a Lightning socket 
and a 3.5mm headphone socket on the back, but is a bit impractical to carry 
around.

Accessory-maker Belkin to the rescue then, with it’s new £35 Lightning Audio + 
Charge RockStar – terrible name, likely an essential buy for many just to use 
the included headphones and charge. Great, another dongle to lose.
 Belkin Lightning headphone and power dongle. Photograph: Belkin 
Of course, if you want to listen to your old 3.5mm “legacy” headphones, you’re 
going to need to use another adapter, which at least Apple ships in the box 
with the iPhone 7.

One adapter plugged into the phone, another adapter plugged into the original 
adapter and the headphones plugged into the second adapter that’s plugged into 
the adapter plugged into the iPhone 7. What could possibly go wrong?

Maybe it’s time to buy some Bluetooth headphones.

 * Five of the best Bluetooth headphones from 2015 to break free of cables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/05/five-of-the-best-bluetooth-headphones-to-break-free-of-cables>

 * Marshall Major II Bluetooth headphones: they last for ages and sound great 
too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/15/marshall-major-ii-bluetooth-headphones-battery-life-sound-wireless>

 * Bose QC35 wireless headphones: simply unrivalled noise cancelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/21/bose-qc35-wireless-bluetooth-noise-cancelling-headphones-review>
 