
Springtime can kill you, but autumn is worse. If one’s soul responds to nature 
– and, as Louis Armstrong said of jazz, if you have to ask what that means, 
you’ll never know – then its beauty is painful. Whatever TS Eliot thought (the 
poor man was wrong about so much), autumn is the most painful time of all. 
Walking in the grounds of Tolstoy’s country estate atYasnaya Polyana 
<http://ypmuseum.ru/en.html>, yellow birch leaves turning gently as they fall, 
is almost too much, particularly for an oversensitive novelist. Five of us are 
here, imported by the British Council to broaden Russian conceptions of British 
literature. We have worked – by God we have worked – but, this morning, among 
the wooded paths and ripe, rich leaf mould, nothing else seems to matter, not 
even fiction.

For cramped city-dwellers, the incomprehensible excess of space is dazzling: 
the “cascade of three ponds”, each more invitingly cool and swimmable than the 
last; the fir woods thick with fungal life; the juicy grass. Even the ponies 
have had a surfeit. There is so much silken birch bark, pinkly tender beneath 
its epidermis; so many fallen, unregarded apples and ancient, lichen-spattered 
branches: mustard, pigeon, rose. One wants to sniff and wallow; at least, I do. 
Surely this is normal? A reasonable response to being knee-deep in the dew and 
bracken: surrendering to the space, the wildness?

Of course not. My fellow writers return home with translators’ business cards 
and ecclesiastical souvenirs. My case is full of Japanese quinces, oak leaves, 
almond shells, calendula seeds and, most worrying of all, a knobbly fir branch, 
as long as my arm, stolen from the forest floor and slipped past the cold-eyed, 
epauletted customs boys at Domodedovo airport. Did the other novelists find 
themselves embarrassingly weeping at the perfect transparency of a plantation 
of firs, bare-trunked and widely spaced to allow, as Sofia andLeo Tolstoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/leonikolaevichtolstoy> had intended, the 
pale September sunlight to pour in? They did not.

***

Like his grandfather, Prince Volkonsky, who first developed the estate in Tula 
region, 120 miles south of Moscow, Leo Tolstoy was an enthusiast. His wife, 
Sofia, may also have been, in her spare moments between bearing his 13 
children, copying and editingWar and Peace seven times and documenting every 
minute of their lives in diaries and photographs. Sofia’s husband had no time 
for such fripperies. He was busy, trying to create a new breed of horse by 
crossing English thoroughbred stallions with their Kirgizian cousins; following 
developments in fruit-tree breeding; buying Japanese pigs (“I feel I cannot be 
happy in life until I get some of my own”); downing healthy bowlfuls of 
fermented mare’s milk; maddening Sofia with his “purely verbal” renunciation of 
worldly goods; spending too many roubles on attempting to grow watermelons, 
coffee and pineapples in his hothouse. Anything, one suspects, could have 
captured his attention: dog-racing, topiary, needlepoint.

Tolstoy derided his early works as an awkward mixture of fact and fiction, yet 
they offer an insight into what made him

But, although it’s easy to dismiss him as a Professor Branestawm  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2014/dec/24/the-problem-with-professor-branestawm>
crank, to laugh at the old man who lifted weights in his study and hung, 
red-faced, from a bar while instructing his staff, Tolstoy’s passionate 
engagement with the land around him was his life’s joy. Like all but the 
unluckiest children, even today, he knew the tannic bite of currant leaves, the 
rumpled gloss of worm casts, the hayish sweetness of a grass stem.Childhood, 
boyhood, youth <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/childhood-boyhood-youth.html> 
is thick with the sensual thrills of the outdoors: the damply shaded raspberry 
thicket, alive with sparrows, and the taste of accidentally ingested wood 
beetles, the cobwebs, the dense, dank soil. And, even though he famously 
derided his early works as “an awkward mixture of fact and fiction”, they offer 
a moving insight into what made him.

Monet wrote: “Je dois peut-être aux fleurs d’avoir été peintre” – I perhaps 
owe having become a painter to flowers. Writers are often asked what made them 
write; I can’t answer that for myself, let alone for Monet, but, surely, the 
intense feelings evoked by colour and form made him need to express himself, in 
paint. He also became a wonderful gardener. Edith Wharton’sfirst published 
short story <http://www.todayinliterature.com/stories.asp?Event_Date=5/26/1891>,
Mrs Manstey’s View, describes how a glimpse of shabby town garden is all that 
keeps old Mrs Mantsey alive. Later, of the grand Italianate gardens, all rustic 
rock fountains and pleaching, which she designed for The Mount, her home in 
Massachusetts, she wrote: “I’m a better landscape gardener than novelist, and 
this place, every line of which is my own work, far surpassesThe House of Mirth
.”

Salad days: how author Charlotte Mendelson transformed her patio into a garden 
larder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/17/charlotte-mendelson-edible-garden>
Wharton was wrong about the novels, and The Mount is too neat for me: where is 
the sledge requisitioned as a plant crutch? However, we would agree, I think, 
about the soothing power of gardens: loneliness and sadness are horrible, but 
they feed us, teach us to comfort ourselves with alertness, and to look – what 
the poetMary Oliver <http://maryoliver.beacon.org/> calls paying attention. 
When at school I encountered Gerard Manley Hopkins’s “worlds of wanwood 
leafmeal” in “Spring and Fall: To a Young Child 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/44400>”, or 
Laurie Lee’s morning in “April Rise 
<http://www.poetryarchive.org/poem/april-rise>” – “lemon-green the vaporous 
morning drips / wet sunlight on the powder of my eye” – I recognised that 
precision, the thrilling focus on nature, close up. Don’t other children, on 
the rare occasions when they’re not reading, fall in love with the blistered, 
sun-warmed paint on a door, the beauty of old, lichened bricks, or susurrating 
grasses? We didn’t have grateful serfs or 100 acres of orchards, but there were 
new worlds among the wild strawberries and, possibly, ichthyosaur bones in the 
sandpit.

I had no interest in gardens until my mid-30s but, I now realise, I had fallen 
in love with leaves, twigs and decay long ago, and it made me need to write. 
Tolstoy may have found apiaries so absorbing, he claimed he could barely 
remember the author ofThe Cossacks 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/cossacks-and-hadji-murat.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 but, as he told an old friend: “Whatever I do, somewhere between the dung and 
the dirt I keep starting to weave words.”

***

Count Tolstoy would probably not have recognised my tiny outdoor space as a 
garden. Largely paved, entirely overlooked, without bluebells or coppicing or 
even a simple wildflower meadow, my six square metres of polluted soil he would 
consider to be unworthy of the most pitiful peasant schoolteacher: where is the 
pig? The walnut tree? Oh Leo, I know; I’m disappointed too.

This may be why, for me, garden writing is a sensitive subject. As a writer 
and a gardener, albeit of an experimental jungle allotment, the classics of 
domestic horticulture leave me embarrassingly cold.Gertrude Jekyll 
<http://gertrudejekyll.co.uk/>, Elizabeth von Arnim 
<http://elizabethvonarnimsociety.org/about-elizabeth-von-arnim/biography/>, 
Margery Fish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/20/margery-fish-cottage-garden-somerset>
, Mirabel Osler, evenChristopher Lloyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/christopherlloyd>, the Mae West of garden 
writers, all had acres, staff, greenhice. Their vision was inspiring, their 
metaphors exciting (I particularly love Lloyd’s division of smells into “moral 
and immoral”), but their rambling rhododendron groves and stone walkways were 
alienating to a novice. Reading about their tree‑surgery crises was like owning 
a carnivorous Shetland pony while reading about Olympic dressage: all very 
lovely but not for the likes of me. Besides, my ever more rampaging obsession 
was for growing fruit and vegetables, now well over 100 different kinds and the 
more unusual the better, yet most garden writing focused either on shrubbery 
and flowers, or on an alien world of double digging potato trenches, 
superphosphate and basic pruning, apparently a simple twice-yearly process of 
shortening main central leaders, side-branch leaders to the third tier and 
laterals, then spurring back and tying in, which, to a person unable to tell 
their left from their right, was of limited value.

At the other end of the gamut of garden writing lies seed catalogues: during 
times of stress or in deepest midwinter, they are perfect for reading in the 
bath. At least, they should be. But, for the novelist-gardener, trauma lies 
ahead. I hope I am not alone in finding certain words and phrases unbearable: 
“veggies”, “a bake”, “eat happy”, “hue”. Unfortunately, seed catalogues are 
worse, full of showy choice fluoroselect picotee bicoloured collarette pastel 
novelties. Perfectly ordinary varieties of flowers, fruit and vegetables bear 
names for which there is no excuse: Naughty Marietta, Slap ’n’ Tickle, 
Tendersnax, Bright Bikini, Nonstop® Rose Petticoat. They make me want to die.

Noël Coward described Vita Sackville-West as 'Lady Chatterley above the waist 
and the gamekeeper below'

And so, needing both comradeship and advice, I have found my gardening friends 
in unlikely places: horticulturally minded food writers; Joy Larkcom’sand her 
masterpiece,Oriental Vegetables 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/264861.Oriental_Vegetables>; poor murdered 
Karel Čapek, author of my belovedThe Gardener’s Year 
<http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/the-gardeners-year-9781441195333/>; and Ursula 
Buchan <http://www.ursula-buchan.co.uk/>’s Garden People, for sartorial 
guidance. Who needs advice about vine weevils when one can gaze at photographs 
of interior designer and gardenerNancy Lancaster 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nancy_Lancaster>’s sexy yellow scarf, or the 
rakish gaucho hat ofRhoda, Lady Birley 
<http://www.myfriendshouse.co.uk/ladies-who-garden/>, as she firmly grips those 
scarlet parrot-bill loppers? Noël Coward described Vita Sackville-West as “Lady 
Chatterley above the waist and the gamekeeper below”, which is good enough for 
me.

And now, after a decade of increasingly demented growing, I have at last found 
my gardening sibling: Leo Tolstoy. At Yasnaya Polyana, inspecting the fat 
yellow squashes growing on the compost heap, sensing the curvature of the earth 
as we reached the bare brim of a wooded hill, I suddenly understood that in one 
respect, if, irritatingly, none other, I and the great beardy genius are alike. 
We are enthusiasts. Fine, so my garden isn’t an arrangement of colours and 
textures to please an artist’s, or even a normal gardener’s, eye. Who cares if 
it’s not reflected in any book I’ve read, or if few others garden purely for 
taste, smell, sensual pleasure: the warm pepper of tomato leaves, curling 
courgette tendrils, the corduroy ridges on a coriander seed. My tiny green and 
fragrant world would definitely not have been admired by Tolstoy’s guests from 
the drawing-room windows, but I think the man himself would have understood the 
passion behind it. Please ignore the broom handles and recycled windows; I’m 
sorry that there is nowhere to sit. But just taste this Crimean tomato, this 
purple bean, this golden raspberry. Look into the translucent depths of this 
whitecurrant. Pay attention. It brings such peace.

• Rhapsody in Green is published by Kyle Books <http://www.kylebooks.com/>. To 
order a copy for £12.99 (RRP £16.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rhapsody-in-green.html> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
 