
The warden of a Hawaii <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hawaii> jail has 
admitted showing inmates violent sexual films as part of a program he created 
that includes what he calls “shame therapy”.

Neal Wagatsuma, warden of Kauai community correctional center, began 
testifying in Honolulu on Wednesday in a trial for a lawsuit that accuses him 
of retaliating against a former jail social worker who alleged he subjected 
female inmates tosexual humiliation and discrimination 
<http://www.hawaiinewsnow.com/story/24659854/exclusive-former-kauai-prison-worker-talks-about-alleged-abuses>
.

Ever since the mid-1990s there have been rumors that he shows pornography to 
inmates at the mixed prison, but the videos are not porn, he said: “I would 
never do that.”

The human toll of America's public defender crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/07/public-defender-us-criminal-justice-system>
The warden showed films such as Finding Mr. Goodbar, according to court 
documents. Finding Mr. Goodbar is a 1970s American drama in which the female 
protagonist is raped and murdered at its conclusion.

Bosko Petricevic, Hawaii’s deputy attorney general, told jurors the films were 
shown to discourage male inmates from committing rape and to teach female 
inmates how to lower the risks of becoming victims.

Former jail social worker Carolyn Ritchie’s 2014 lawsuit says female inmates 
complained to her about Wagatsuma forcing them to watch rape videos and to 
divulge their sexual pasts while being filmed.

“Shame therapy is talking about things that are deep within a person,” 
Wagatsuma told the federal court. “It’s just talking about their lives, talking 
about anything that’s bothering them.”

Wagatsuma said he yells and uses profanity during so-called “shame therapy” 
sessions. Words such as “whore” and “batuna”, a Hawaii slang term for a woman 
who trades sex for crystal meth, were used in appropriate contexts, he said.

“I don’t yell at them for no reason,” said Wagatsuma, who became acting warden 
in 1992 and the permanent warden in 1995. “It’s about chastising. It’s a good 
thing ... you want to confront them when they’re wrong.”

No one was forced to talk about anything at daily meetings, Petricevic said.

Wagatsuma said he created the program without any experience or background in 
psychology but by drawing on his own life experiences. “Before I came into 
government, I had a really hard life,” he said calling himself a “social 
misfit”.

Crime, punishment and redemption: the man who decides whether to free killers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/25/frederic-reamer-on-parole-board-book-rhode-island>
Ritchie’s lawsuit also alleges the warden denied women the same work release 
opportunities as men. Kauai offers convicted felons a “structured, paramilitary 
regimen of marching, drill exercises, physical training, education, and 
community outreach”, according to theHawaiian state government’s website 
<http://dps.hawaii.gov/kccc/>.

Not all women could participate in a program that allows inmates to work in 
the community and then return to jail at the end of the day because there were 
not enough female guards to strip-search them when they returned, he said.

But he said he provided women and men equal work opportunities by ensuring 
that eligible female inmates could participate in a less-restrictive program 
that allowed them to also live in the community.

Wagatsuma’s testimony is scheduled to continue next week.
 