
Its surface is hot enough to melt lead and its skies are darkened by toxic 
clouds of sulphuric acid. Venus is often referred to asEarth’s evil twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/gallery/2007/nov/29/venus.express>, but 
conditions on the planet were not always so hellish, according to research that 
suggests it may have been the first place in the solar system to have become 
habitable.

The study, due to be presented this week at the at the American Astronomical 
Society Meeting in Pasadena <https://aas.org/meetings/dps48>, concludes that at 
a time when primitive bacteria were emerging on Earth, Venus may have had a 
balmy climate and vast oceans up to 2,000 metres (6,562 feet) deep.

Michael Way, who led the work at the Nasa Goddard Institute for Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Studies in New York City, said: “If 
you lived three billion years ago at a low latitude and low elevation the 
surface temperatures would not have been that different from that of a place in 
the tropics on Earth,” he said.

The Venusian skies would have been cloudy with almost continual rain lashing 
down in some regions, however. “So while you might get nice sunsets you would 
have mostly overcast skies during the day and precipitation,” Way added.

Crucially, if the calculations are correct the oceans may have remained until 
715m years ago - a long enough period of climate stability for microbial life 
to have plausibly sprung up.

“The oceans of ancient Venus <https://www.theguardian.com/science/venus> would 
have had more constant temperatures, and if life begins in the oceans - 
something which we are not certain of on Earth - then this would be a good 
starting place,” said Way.

Other planetary scientists agreed that, despite the differing fates of the two 
planets, early Earth and Venus may have been similar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fwas-venus-the-first-habitable-planet-in-our-solar-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4cf1d7e85f367bbe0be6c246c39dc0fa1ff957d%2F0_4_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Was%20Venus%20the%20first%20habitable%20planet%20in%20our%20solar%20system%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fwas-venus-the-first-habitable-planet-in-our-solar-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Was%20Venus%20the%20first%20habitable%20planet%20in%20our%20solar%20system%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fwas-venus-the-first-habitable-planet-in-our-solar-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4cf1d7e85f367bbe0be6c246c39dc0fa1ff957d%2F0_4_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Artist’s impression of an active volcano on Venus. The Akatsuki mission could 
answer longstanding questions, such as whether the planet has volcanic 
activity. Illustration: ESA/AOES 
Professor Takehiko Satoh, who works on the Japan Aerospace Exploration 
Agency’s Venus Climate Orbiter 
<http://www.isas.jaxa.jp/j/enterp/missions/akatsuki/compile/gallery.shtml> 
(“Akatsuki”) mission, said: “Habitable or not, I’m not in a position to answer. 
Environment-wise, probably Venus once had an ocean and probably the environment 
of Venus and the Earth might have been similar.”

With an average surface temperature of 462C (864F), Venus is the hottest 
planet in the solar system today, thanks to its proximity to the sun and its 
impenetrable carbon dioxide atmosphere, 90 times denser than Earth’s. At some 
point in the planet’s history this led to a runaway greenhouse effect.

Previous US and Soviet landers 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observations_and_explorations_of_Venus#Past_missions>
 sent to Venus have survived only a few hours on the surface before being 
destroyed.
 A image of the Venus’ night-side produced by the Akatsuki mission. 
Photograph: JAXA 
Way and colleagues simulated the Venusian climate at various time points 
between 2.9bn and 715m years ago, employing similar models to those used to 
predict future climate change on Earth. The scientists fed some basic 
assumptions into the model, including the presence of water, the intensity of 
the sunlight and how fast Venus was rotating. In this virtual version, 2.9bn 
years ago Venus had an average surface temperature of 11C (52F) and this only 
increased to an average of 15C (59F) by 715m years ago, as the sun became more 
powerful.

More precise measurements of the chemical makeup of Venus’s surface and 
atmosphere could help establish how much water the planet had in the past, and 
when this began to disappear.

Some of this information may be filled in by the Akatsuki mission, which is 
observing the Venusian weather systems in unprecedented detail. The spacecraft 
was supposed to enter orbit about the planet in 2010, but after its main engine 
blew out, it instead spent five years drifting around the sun like a miniature 
artificial planet. Last year, scientists used altitude thrusters to redirect it 
into an orbit, and the mission could yet answer longstanding questions about 
our planetary neighbour, including whether it has volcanic activity, whether 
lightning strikes in the sky and why its atmosphere is rotating 60 times faster 
than the planet itself.

However, searching for traces of ancient microbial life would need a lander, 
and would be significantly more challenging.

“It would take a great deal of technology development, and money of course, to 
build the requisite landing craft to survive the surface conditions of present 
day Venus and to be able to dig into the surface,” said Way. “But if the 
investments were made it would be possible to search for such signs of life, 
including chemical traces.”

Details of the study are also published in the journal Geophysical Research 
Letters <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2016GL069790/full>.
 