
Not far from the village of Killiecrankie in the Scottish Highlands, there is 
a densely wooded gorge through which the River Garry rushes. According to 
folklore, it is here (or somewhere very like it) thatSir Ewen Cameron of Lochiel
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ewen_Cameron_of_Lochiel> shot the last 
wild-living wolf in Great Britain in 1680.

 In May I walked across the Highlands to find out how local people feel about 
the idea of bringing the wolf back, a prospect that isgaining momentum 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-highlands-islands-26616451> and one that 
the UK government is obliged to consider underan EU Directive of 1992 
<http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/environment/nature_and_biodiversity/l28076_en.htm>
. For some this is a necessary reevaluation of a once-persecuted animal; for 
others it’s yet another scheme concocted by city folk who don’t understand the 
countryside.

 I had read about Cameron’s wolf in James Edmund Harting’s 1880 classic 
British Animals Extinct Within Historic Times (With Some Account of British 
Wild White Cattle). There, ina footnote <> to the text, he notes that “a noble 
animal in a large glass case” had come up for sale in 1818, a specimen that 
claimed to be “the last Wolf killed in Scotland by Sir E. Cameron.” Could this 
really be true, I wondered?

 I decided to start in 1818 and work backwards to 1680. According to Harting, 
the wolf had been listed as “Lot 832” in the sale catalogue of the “London 
Museum” or theLondon Museum and Institute of Natural History 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/London_Museum_and_Institute_of_Natural_History> 
as it was properly known. This had been the brainchild ofEdward Donovan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Donovan>, an amateur zoologist, author, 
artist and budding entrepreneur who had opened its doors on Catherine Street 
just off the Strand in 1807. But the project had cost him the colossal sum of 
£15,000 and within a decade he was broke. Unable to find a benefactor, Donovan 
had little option but to auction off his entire collection, including the wolf.

 Donovan was a prolific author, writing dozens of books on the natural history 
of the British Isles. One of them – the Natural History of British Quadrupeds – 
contains a chapter on the wolf and a description that waxes, at times, almost 
Shakespearian. Wolves, he tells us, “frequently commit prodigious ravages”. The 
book also includes the illustration of a lone wolf with an unhinged look and a 
hint of slaver round its chops, most likely based on the sole wolf specimen 
that he held in his collection. Where did Donovan get his wolf? With a bit of 
searching, I discover that the year before he opened his museum, he’d picked up 
the wolf and some other interesting specimens from the dispersal of another 
natural history collection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fanimal-magic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Flast-wolf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F19%2F1405788802915%2F38312718-d5e1-456d-8956-6bd3a671cc32-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Was%20this%20the%20last%20wild%20wolf%20of%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fanimal-magic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Flast-wolf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Was%20this%20the%20last%20wild%20wolf%20of%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fanimal-magic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Flast-wolf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F19%2F1405788802915%2F38312718-d5e1-456d-8956-6bd3a671cc32-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Edward Donovan's wolf, with an unhinged look and a hint of slaver round its 
chops as depicted in the Natural History of British Quadrupeds. © The Trustees 
of theNatural History Museum 
<http://piclib.nhm.ac.uk/searchresults.asp?image=100695>, London. All rights 
reserved 
 Several decades earlier, in 1775, Sir Ashton Lever 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashton_Lever> had opened the Leverian Museum 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leverian_collection>, recognised as the finest 
natural history collection of its day. But Lever, like Donovan after him, was 
more interested in collecting than accounting and by 1786 he was bankrupt, 
disposing of all 28,000 objects with a lottery. The winning ticket was bought by
James Parkinson 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Parkinson_%281730%E2%80%931813%29>, a 
stationer. But Parkinson, also beset by financial difficulties, struggled to 
make it a going concern and put it up for auction in 1806, which is when 
Donovan came into the picture. At the sale he bought more items than anyone 
else. On 30 June, along with “sea otter, young,” “crab, with a number of oyster 
shells adhering” and “a curious water rat”, he paid five pounds for “the wolf 
in fine preservation.”

 Botanist and zoologist George Shaw made a study of Lever's collection and his 
Musei Leveriani 
<https://openlibrary.org/books/OL24135903M/Musei_Leveriani_explicatio_anglica_et_latina>
 published in 1792 contains an illustration of Lever’s wolf. This bears a happy 
resemblance to Donovan’s illustration – see how that front left forepaw is 
cocked – supporting the idea that Lever’s wolf and Donovan’s wolf are one and 
the same.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fanimal-magic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Flast-wolf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F19%2F1405789015930%2F6e238c57-9655-4baa-8fd8-9a6dd1e3d527-1020x708.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Was%20this%20the%20last%20wild%20wolf%20of%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fanimal-magic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Flast-wolf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Was%20this%20the%20last%20wild%20wolf%20of%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fanimal-magic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Flast-wolf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F19%2F1405789015930%2F6e238c57-9655-4baa-8fd8-9a6dd1e3d527-1020x708.jpeg>
 Ashton Lever's more docile, pastoral rendition of the wolf, as depicted in
Musei Leveriani 
<https://openlibrary.org/books/OL24135903M/Musei_Leveriani_explicatio_anglica_et_latina>
. Internet Archive 
Yet the wolf depicted in Musei Leveriani looks closer to a collie, docile and 
pastoral. And Shaw goes on to note that the ferocity of the wolf “is greatly 
mitigated by an early education; of which the individual specimen from which 
the present figure was taken, is a remarkable instance;” it had, he wrote, 
“been rendered in a great degree tame and gentle by the assiduity of the late 
Sir Ashton Lever.”

 Shaw’s assertion that Lever tamed his wolf before stuffing it and putting it 
on show strongly suggests that it was not “the last Wolf killed in Scotland by 
Sir E. Cameron” as Donovan later claimed. Donovan’s ravaging wolf, it seems, 
was Ashton Lever’s pet.

 One can only assume that, on the verge of bankruptcy and with no qualms about 
misleading a public who had failed to stump up the cash to save his life’s 
collection, Donovan turned his specimen into “the last Wolf” in the hope of a 
few extra quid. Maybe he coaxed those jaws into a snarl. There have always been 
those that benefited in making the wolf a little more ravening than in reality.

 Who bought the wolf from Donovan remains a mystery. But although the specimen 
was not all that Donovan made it out to be, it is one that still fascinates me, 
mixed up as it is with the wolf's myth and its demise. And it is a specimen I 
fancy still survives. I picture it now, in the bowels of some Scottish estate 
perhaps, moth-eaten and with its glass eyes staring madly.

If you think you have seen this wolf, stuffed and quite possibly still in its 
original glass case, please get in touch.

Tale ends

It is unlikely we will ever know when the wolf finally went extinct in 
Britain. The story of Ewen Cameron killing a wolf in Killiecrankie seems to 
derive froma footnote in travel book for 1769 
<https://archive.org/details/atourinscotland03penngoog>, but it is by no means 
the only “last wolf” story. By the time that Lever sourced a wolf cub to tame, 
we can be certain that there were no longer any wolves in Britain so he 
probably looked further afield. He was renowned in his youth for training his 
beagles so well that they would close and open doors for him. A wolf must have 
seemed the next logical challenge.
 