
Name: The peace sign.

Appearance: Fist clenched, index and middle fingers outstretched skywards.

Security strength: Very poor.

Security? Come on, man. This is the peace sign – it’s all about freedom! 
Freedom to give all your personal data to anyone who wants it?

Yeah, dude. Share and share alike, right? No, I mean it. If someone takes a 
photo of you doing the peace sign,they can quite easily steal all your money 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2017/01/12/peace-sign-selfies-could-let-hackers-copy-fingerprints/>
.

That sounds unlikely. Oh, really? Japan’s National Institute of Technology 
<http://www.kosen-k.go.jp/english/> claims that smartphone cameras are now 
advanced enough to allow biometric theft.

How? Say you do a peace sign in a well-lit photo taken from 3ft away. Crooks 
can take that photo, zoom in on your fingertips, create an exact fingerprint 
copy in latex, unlock your phone, log in to your internet banking and swipe all 
your cash.

But … but … it’s the peace sign. Well, not really. It is often said to have 
origins in the second world war, when the Belgians – andlater Winston Churchill 
<http://time.com/3880345/v-for-victory-a-gesture-of-solidarity-and-defiance/> – 
used the sign to denote military victory.Richard Nixon even used it 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/from-churchill-to-libya-how-the-v-symbol-went-viral/2011/03/18/AFzPiYYB_story.html?utm_term=.1410854e0c0a>
 during Vietnam. The whole thing is tied up in destruction and violence. It’s 
only called “the peace sign” becausehippies tried to claim it back from Nixon 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=_5ixkCTW7I0C&pg=PA122&lpg=PA122&dq=v+sign+hippies+nixon&source=bl&ots=0A5SW2bdCN&sig=Xq67YHEUahsz41Rd4ucTc2-P1-w&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjRitXSir_RAhWMBcAKHcYnDCk4ChDoAQgZMAA#v=onepage&q=v%20sign%20hippies%20nixon&f=false>
.

I’ve been destroyed by my own liberal beliefs. I have never felt so vulnerable.
 Well, quite. Now that more and more phones allow you to authorise payments 
with your fingerprint, giving the peace sign on camera is a little like 
tattooing your pin number right across your face.

This is worrying. Imagine how Rihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna> feels. Search Wikipedia for “V 
sign” and you’ll find afive-year-old photo of her brazenly showing the world 
her fingerprints 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/V_sign#/media/File:Rihanna,_LOUD_Tour,_Minneapolis_6_crop.jpg>
. If she’s not homeless and impoverished by the end of the week, it will be a 
miracle.

And, God, poor Ringo Starr <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ringo-starr>. 
All he does is throw peace signs out. True 
<http://radio.com/2015/07/06/ringo-starr-celebrate-75th-birthday-celebration-hollywood/>
. But let’s calm down a little. Think about it: do you unlock your smartphone 
with your index or middle finger?

Neither – I use my thumbprint. Right, everyone does. So peace-signers are 
probably quite safe. It’s thumbs-uppers who should worry.

Oh, no – Paul McCartney ... Yep. McCartney has basically had it 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/whats-on/whats-on-news/sir-paul-mccartney-tells-lipa-7546034>
.

Do say: “Curse those hippies.”

Don’t say: “Quick, let’s break into Nixon’s Snapchat.”
 