 Mr Slingsby (Capt.), reporting on Interim Progress, stated that his team had 
defeated Hackthorn Young Conservatives (away) 13–0, N Baddesley Congs Tennis & 
Football Club (home) 14–0, Bennington British Rail (away) 12–0 and Aston Villa 
(at Wolverhampton) 2–1. The Chairman commented favourably on these statistics … 
JL Carr – Joseph Lloyd, but friends knew him as Jim – died in February 1994 at 
the age of 81. Theobituaries 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-j-l-carr-1397014.html> were 
long and appreciative, without ever quite getting beyond the bank of 
fortifications that the deceased had erected before his highly enigmatic 
personality and the faint air of concealment that hung over nearly every aspect 
of his life. This, after all, was a man who, when asked to supply jacket copy 
for an American edition of one of his novels, vouchsafed the single sentence 
“JL Carr lives in England”, who left bits of fake medieval statuary lying 
around rural churchyards “to give people something to think about” and whose 
funeral was enlivened by the last-minute appearance of a young, beautiful, 
black-clad woman in high heels whom the other mourners strained to identify. 
According to his biographer Byron Rogers, who lurked amid the horde of 
journalists, readers, ex-pupils and the ornaments of advisory committees on 
church architecture, such had been the rigid compartmentalisation of Carr’s 
eight decades on the planet that nearly all those present had come to bid 
farewell to different men.

The bare outline of Carr’s progress through mid-20th-century England offers 
scarcely a hint of the vat of idiosyncrasy that boiled away within him. In 
strict biographical terms, he was the son of a stationmaster-cum-Methodist lay 
reader from North Yorkshire who, heading south to pursue a career in 
schoolteaching, ended up as the headmaster of a primary school in Kettering, 
Northamptonshire. Here, he was remembered as a pioneer of what would now be 
known as “child-centred education” but to Carr seemed ordinary common sense: 
the school gates were left unlocked so that pupils could play in the grounds at 
night; a history trip to the water meadows at Wellingborough involved the 
dispatch of an Armada of message-filled bottles and a complaint from the clerk 
of the Nene River Board, while the all-inclusive sports days incorporated 
Arithmetic Races, with blackboards set up for competitors to complete sums as 
they made their way around the course. Then, as Carr moved into his 50s, there 
came a change of direction. Having spent time at a Workers’ Educational 
Association creative-writing class and published a well-received first novel (A 
Day in Summer, 1963), he gave up Highfields primary and, with the loyal support 
of his wife, Sally, capital of £1,600 and a back bedroom pressed into service 
as office space, set up as the tiniest of small publishers.

The Carrs began by issuing sixpenny-booklet selections of the classics, 
hand-drawn maps of the English counties and one or two bona fide originals, 
such as Carr’sDictionary of English Queens, Kings’ Wives, Celebrated Paramours, 
Handfast Spouses and Royal Changelings 
<http://www.oakknoll.com/pages/books/75315/j-l-carr/dictionary-of-english-queens-kings-wives-celebrated-paramours-handfast-spouses-royal>
, which, as experts pointed out, would have sold even better had the more 
technically accurate “concubines” replaced “handfast spouses”. Carr, who, as he 
put it, venerated his father’s memory, was inflexible on this point. Meanwhile, 
in the intervals between repping his wares around remote parts of the British 
Isles and shaking his head over the bundles of letters sent in by children with 
suspiciously mature handwriting keen to take advantage of their twopenny 
discount, he continued to labour at what, it is fair to say, he regarded as the 
really serious business of his life. There were another seven novels, written 
at four- or five-year intervals, with wildly differing levels of success. In 
the cash-strapped mid-1970s some remaindered copies ofThe Harpole Report (1972) 
were supposed to have paid a butcher’s bill, but bothA Month in the Country 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/month-in-the-country.html> (1980), later 
filmed with Kenneth Branagh and Colin Firth 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0093562/>, and The Battle of Pollocks Crossing 
<http://themanbookerprize.com/books/battle-pollocks-crossing> (1985) made the 
Booker shortlist. It was entirely typical of Carr that, having achieved this 
feat, he should have given up London publishing for good and resolved to bring 
out his last two booksWhat Hetty Did (1988), and Harpole and Foxberrow General 
Publishers (1992) himself.

Like nearly everything he wrote, How Steeple Sinderby Wanderers Won the FA Cup 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385681//?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, his fourth novel, first published in 1975 by Alan Ross’s London Magazine 
Editions, is a mixture of the prosaically down-to-earth and the unutterably 
fantastic. On the one hand, its grounding in the realities of amateur football, 
where the teams change into their kit in an old LNER railway carriage and the 
reek of embrocation steals along the touchline like river fog, is horribly 
authentic. Reissuing the book himself shortly before he died, Carr larkily 
included a photograph of a real-life football team, which turns out to be 
a North Yorkshire XI from the early 1930s, with the author himself perched on 
one knee at the end of the front row. On the other, its premise comes straight 
from a postwar boys’ comic such as the Victor or the Eagle – nothing less than 
a straightforward exercise in wish-fulfilment, in which a village side, trained 
up by Dr Kossuth, an émigré Hungarian academic who has applied his deductive 
intelligence to the first principles of sport, and supported by the tyrannical 
local magnate, Mr Fangfoss, sees off several first division teams in a 
triumphal cavalcade that runs all the way to Wembley Stadium.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fjl-carr-how-steeple-sinderby-wanderers-won-the-fa-cup-football-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceedacb62810557e91001b7de478ebab2e6cef51%2F621_313_2855_4169%2F2855.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20Wem-ber-ley!%20DJ%20Taylor%20on%20a%20football%20classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fjl-carr-how-steeple-sinderby-wanderers-won-the-fa-cup-football-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20Wem-ber-ley%21%20DJ%20Taylor%20on%20a%20football%20classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fjl-carr-how-steeple-sinderby-wanderers-won-the-fa-cup-football-classic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceedacb62810557e91001b7de478ebab2e6cef51%2F621_313_2855_4169%2F2855.jpg>
 JL Carr. Photograph: Denis Thorpe for the Guardian 
The vehicle for this fantasia on the state of our national game circa 1973 – 
a timeframe confirmed by the references to Alan Hardaker, Football League 
secretary until 1979 – is, by and large, pastiche. This much can be inferred 
from the breathless match commentaries of the local newshound, 17-year-old 
Alice “Ginchy” Trigger (“Her heroes were Thomas Hardy and Monty Python”), the 
epic parody of Neville Cardus-style broadsheet sports reporting courtesy of the 
Times’s “Nigel Kelmscott-Jones” (“You never would have guessed that both his 
prep and public schools played rugger, or that he loathed all games and was 
just filling in with sport until his uncle could find an excuse to winkle out 
the Paris correspondent … “) and the Sun’s reaction to the news that this 
previously unheard-of hamlet had drawn Hartlepool in the first round proper 
(“Old Grandfer Fangfoss, trainer of the villagers, squeezed a chuckle from his 
toothless jaws as he sat over a noggin beside his cottage door. ‘Oi sez our 
lads’ll win ’em, mi jolleys,’ he piped, running a horny hand over his luscious 
16-year-old bride’s bouncy boobies”).

If all this sometimes threatens to get dangerously out of hand, then there are 
always one or two uncomfortable truths lurking at the story’s edge. Carr’s 
forte as a writer, it might be said, is the faint air of wistfulness that 
always attends even his most comic scenes, the barely disguised feeling that, 
despite the best efforts of its cast, life will never turn out quite how they 
want it to, that disappointment lies just around the corner and that happiness 
needs to be grasped at in the split second before it turns into stark 
disillusion. And so Steeple Sinderby (“popn 547, height above sea‑level in the 
Dry Season, 32 feet”), as well as harbouring any amount of neighbourliness and 
good-fellowship, is also a Gehenna of drift and frustration. Joe Gidner, its 
punctilious chronicler, is an absolutely typical Carr specimen, a bruised and 
purposeless twentysomething who, having “had this trouble and left theological 
college”, answers a newspaper ad and finds himself living in the village 
schoolmaster’s house, where he combines the writing of greetings-card verses 
with looking after his host’s invalid wife. Desperate for something to give 
meaning to his life, Joe finds it in the secretaryship of the football club, 
here in its moment of triumph, only for the dream to puncture as soon as it has 
taken shape.”

A Month in the Country’s finale strikes exactly the same note, with its bleak 
assurance that past time can never be properly recaptured and all we can do is 
treasure the memories gathered along the way. At the same time,How Steeple 
Sinderby Wanderers Won the FA Cup is something more than a comedy in which, 
mysteriously, no one is ever happy and no character can rest until his, or her, 
illusions about existence have been ruthlessly dispelled. It is also, obliquely 
and with maximum stealth, a state of the nation novel, or rather a novel about 
an alternative nation that subsists, in conditions of relative neglect, on the 
first one’s border. “People don’t know about rural England between the last 
Mystery Autumn Foliage Coach Trip and the Mystery Blossom Journey into Spring,” 
Gidner reflects at one point. “Mud, fog, dripping trees, blackness, floods, 
mighty rushing winds under doors that don’t fit, damp hassocks, sticking organ 
keys, stone floors and that dreadful smell of decay. Like his friendPenelope 
Fitzgerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/may/03/guardianobituaries.books>’s The 
Bookshop <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bookshop.html> (1978), this is a 
bulletin from the English margins, where the prescriptions of Westminster and 
Fleet Street count for very little, and the media racket reduces itself to the 
faintest perceptible hum.

A Month in the Country by JL Carr | Book review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/08/jl-carr-month-in-country> 
It is not simply that Carr devotes several pages to the history of 
his imaginary fenland village, its spoof entry in Pevsner’sBuildings of England
, its “peasant poet” Thomas Dadds, on whose grave the local children strew 
flowers on the anniversary of his birth, and whose mournful verse Gidner is 
given to quoting. Much more telling, perhaps, is the way in which Steeple 
Sinderby is used as a stick with which to beat the tinsel-town values of the 
media scrum that descends once the team has seen off Leeds United in the fourth 
round. Mr Fangfoss, in particular, is seized on by the newspapers, has his 
pronouncements on such topics as the common market and the nationalised 
industries reproduced in a best-selling paperback entitledChairman Fangfoss’s 
Words (“There had never been such a man for voicing popular prejudice since 
Enoch Powell retired,” Carr helpfully glosses) and at one stage grants a live 
television interview to a BBC personality in which he loses his temper, offers 
some choice remarks about the workshy, denounces medium and messenger alike, 
and demands to be switched off forthwith. The subsequent mail delivery amounts 
to 11 sacks.

A polygamous local farmer who assumes the chairmanship of the football club 
merely because he is in charge of everything else, Mr Fangfoss exemplifies 
Carr’s attitude to the wider landscapes beyond the Sinderby window. Half of him 
clearly regards the man whose rural district council election address consists 
of the eight words, “If elected I will keep down the rates”, as a kind of 
monstrous ogre complacently ruling the roost over people who would be better 
off without him, but the other half rather sympathises with his idea that the 
modern world is essentially a swindle in which good nature is stifled and 
trampled on by catchpenny moralists and obfuscating Whitehall bureaucrats, and 
the only way of ameliorating the human lot is simply to let ordinary people get 
on with their lives. The explanation for this larger-than-life quality lies in 
the fact that he appeals to Carr’s mischievous side, which is always keen on 
seeing just how far his characters can go, sometimes seeming to rebuke them for 
their folly while quietly cheering their good sense and at all times hanging an 
atmospheric smokescreen over the book that extends even as far as its location.

It is one of the greatest football novels ever and a penetrating report card 
from a world where fiction rarely lingers

Where, when it comes down to it, is Steeple Sinderby? It is apparently 
a fenland village – the main crop is sugar beet – but the solitary professional 
fixture that Dr Kossuth attends in his attempt to comprehend the principles of 
football takes place at Leicester City’s Filbert Street ground. The names of 
the towns nearby and some of the characters are taken from locales as various 
as North Yorkshire (Slingsby, Hackthorn), the East Riding (Fangfoss) and 
Radnorshire (Cascob). The air of mystery that hangs over its exact location – 
possibly the westernmost edge of Cambridgeshire or a few miles over the south 
Lincolnshire border – extends to the team’s progress in the cup, where the 
first round is for some reason followed by the fourth, and there are apparently 
only two more games between that and the final, itself played against Glasgow 
Rangers owing to a rule change that for the first time admits Scottish clubs 
into the competition.

The reader who comes fresh to Carr’s work might reasonably assume that this is 
the result of simple negligence. Long-term fans would probably counter that, on 
the contrary, he knew exactly what he was doing and that the novel’s procedural 
inconsistencies are quite deliberate, the natural consequence of a writer who 
is, above all things, determined not to give himself away, to keep some part of 
his considerable technical weaponry in reserve. Carr was modest about his 
achievements: shortly afterA Month in the Country’s appearance on the wide 
screen he declared that all he had really tried to do was to create a few 
characters and speed them around the page in a plausible way. ButHow Steeple 
Sinderby Wanderers Won the FA Cup is an extraordinary performance, 
simultaneously one of the greatest football novels ever written and a 
penetrating report card from a world where fiction rarely lingers, at once 
a comic masterpiece and a study in national temperament that the doughtiest 
social historian would struggle to match.

• JL Carr’s How Steeple Sinderby Wanderers Won the FA Cup 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385681//?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Penguin Modern Classics.
 