
In a single week the Care Quality Commission (CQC) State of Care 
<http://www.cqc.org.uk/content/state-of-care> report warned that the adult care 
system in England is reaching “tipping point”, while a National Audit Office 
(NAO) analysis detailed“systemic rather than just local failure” in child 
protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/12/child-protection-services-judged-unsatisfactory-and-inconsistent>
. Social workers may be wondering what’s going to stop them going over the edge.

Both the NAO and CQC reports are careful to highlight good services despite 
the cuts, and that funding does not automatically equal excellence. However, 
both emphasise inconsistency and inequality in services across the country. It 
is possible to do more with less – but only to a point.

At the British Association of Social Workers <https://www.basw.co.uk/> (BASW), 
we hear every day of the impact on service users. Reports of how bad things are 
getting do not in themselves bring about change. Those of us involved in, or 
concerned about, care services perhaps need to approach this by remembering 
that we are “the system” – and we can be the change.

In this time of unsustainable pressure on public services, we need to come 
together under a common cause. BASW’s membership is growing and we are becoming 
an increasingly strong professional body and an organised and powerful voice 
for service users and social workers.

My 10-point plan for better social work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/oct/13/10-point-plan-better-social-work>
Recently, we carried out a survey 
<http://cdn.basw.co.uk/upload/basw_92637-9.pdf> on the implementation of the 
Care Act 2014 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/23/contents/enacted/data.htm> in 
adult services, and found a wide variation in how respondents believed the act 
was being applied. Some talked of empowerment, while others highlighted 
barriers, with one social worker saying: “It is the system within which [we] 
work that often inhibits making things more personalised.”

But it isn’t enough to blame “the system”, because we are all part of it. As 
registered social workers our code of ethics states we have an “obligation to 
challenge social conditions that contribute to social exclusion, stigmatisation 
or subjugation, and to work towards an inclusive society”. That alone makes us 
more than cogs in the system: we are system leaders.

At BASW we think there are three steps to take to make a difference. First, 
look after ourselves. Nothing can be achieved by a demoralised or burnt out 
individual or profession.

In response to the NAO report, our chief executive, Ruth Allen, called for an 
investment in the workforce. We need to start by investing in ourselves. Just 
as the report found a link between quality and the level of caseloads and 
vacancies, we must resist simply taking on more, because we won’t be able to do 
a good job. Often the person giving out the extra work is another social 
worker. Let’s be accountable for each other’s wellbeing, and highlight to our 
organisations and elected representatives when we simply cannot meet demand.

What I wish I'd known at the start of my social work career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/sep/22/what-i-wish-id-known-at-the-start-of-my-social-work-career>
Second, do the best we can with what we have. There is no point asking for 
more resources if citizens and elected representatives can say we haven’t got 
the most out what we have.

We need to share what we are doing well. BASW branches, the principal social 
worker networks, local communities of practice, team chats and mentoring 
opportunities are all part of this. We also need to use expertise and 
experience to work in ways we know are likely to be helpful.

Finally, we need to join up with people who use social work. Society does not 
seem to be responding to the warnings about people having increasingly 
difficult lives. However, maybe our fellow citizens will respond if they get to 
know people experiencing difficulties – it is much harder to leave someone in a 
tight spot if you know them.

Social workers meet people who face challenges every day, and we can help 
ensure their voices and stories are heard. We can work with them to agree how 
we will campaign together. BASW is involved in an event to improve support for 
refugees and asylum seekers on 19 November; we are co-producing resources with 
disabled adults that will set out how we should work together; plus we are 
campaigning with a wide group of children’s charities to ensure rights are 
protected in the children and social work bill.

Above all, we social workers need to recognise that any argument for good 
working conditions and resources starts and finishes with what we need to serve 
people well. Many social workers feel tired and despondent. But we do have a 
lot of power to advocate for, work towards and overcome barriers to poor 
quality. We need to get together and use it.

 * Gerry Nosowska is a social worker and vice-chair of the BASW adults 
practice policy and education group

The Social Life Blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written 
by people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write for 
the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> 
with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 