
It was a cold night in early January. The family of the man whose body I had 
recovered from a river stood in front of me, crying and clinging to one other. 
Their relative had disappeared one winter’s night.

As volunteers for Lowland Rescue <http://www.lowlandrescue.org/>, my team and 
I had spent almost 800 hours searching for him on foot, in rafts and by boat, 
in waterways, farms and woodland. We had taken days off work and spent evenings 
and weekends planning and trampling the countryside, supporting our local 
police service. Eventually we found him, 14 miles downstream from where he was 
last seen alive. He had become caught on a tree and fallen in the river.


I will never forget the day we found him. All 10 of us on the search team were 
desperate to find him and some have suffered from post-traumatic stress as a 
result of the experience. We had met his family and friends and all felt a deep 
desire to bring him home. A week after his body was found, his family and 
friends asked to meet us. Their grief was raw but they were incredibly 
appreciative of all our efforts. We had kept them informed throughout the 
period and told them all the facts. Our job isn’t to fill people with hope, but 
to always be honest, just like any professional working for the emergency 
services.

One thank you – and my career helping homeless people was worthwhile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/may/12/one-thank-you-helping-homeless-worthwhile>
There are 2,000 volunteers like us in England, serving as unpaid members of 35 
Lowland Rescue teams, on call to respond to the highest-risk and most 
resource-intensive searches and provide specialist support to the police. We 
are the least well-known part of the UK’s official search and rescue 
infrastructure – alongside the likes ofRNLI <https://rnli.org/> and Mountain 
Rescue <https://www.mountain.rescue.org.uk/> – because the vast majority of 
what we do is for the most vulnerable members of society.

We respond to missing people with dementia, mental health issues, suicidal 
thoughts and those who are believed to be in difficult terrain such as 
woodland, rivers and farmland. That means that we simply can’t publicise most 
of our call-outs in the same way as some of the other charities.


Recent call-outs include an elderly gentleman who wandered off from his care 
home next to a major river; a lady whose husband had just died and who wanted 
to lay down in a woodland to die herself; a missing farmer. We get no 
government funding. My car boot is full of torches, rescue gear and maps, all 
of which I have funded myself. We pay for our own fuel, personal kit and 
clothing and give hundreds – if not thousands – of hours every year to maintain 
professional training standards.


If it wasn’t for the rare opportunity to meet a family to whom we’ve made a 
difference or the genuine thanks from the emergency services who are under such 
pressure to produce results, I’m not sure we’d do this at all.

But I’m five years in now and have worked on more than 100 missing person 
searches. For all of us, every call-out is another chance to make a difference 
to a family in need and the occasional thanks we get is enough to keep us going 
for now.


The day I made a difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/series/the-day-i-made-a-difference>
 is the GuardianVoluntary Sector Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network>’s series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. f you have a story to share about a 
landmark moment in your life, email voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com with 
a short summary of your experience.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 