
A tent on a sidewalk is the only place thousands of San Franciscans have to 
call home. But if a few of the city’s tech billionaires and millionaires have 
their way, even that shelter could be taken away.

Sequoia Capital chairman Michael Moritz, tech angel investor Ron Conway, and 
hedge-fund investor William Oberndorf have donated $49,999 apiece to a divisive 
ballot measure intended to clear San Francisco’s streets of homeless 
encampments, according to campaign filings.

Zachary Bogue, a tech investor best known as husband to the Yahoo CEO, Marissa 
Mayer, also pitched in $2,500.

Those sums may be chump change to the likes of Moritz (net worth $3.1bn 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/michael-moritz/>), but they account for the 
majority of the approximately $270,000 campaign chest.

Proposition Q purports to address the most visible symptom of the city’s 
ongoing homelessness crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/san-francisco-state-of-emergency-homelessness-crisis>
, tent cities that crowd the sidewalks in certain neighborhoods. To the city’s 
housed residents, the encampments serve as a visceral reminder of the city’s 
gaping inequality – or as anuisance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/17/san-francisco-tech-open-letter-i-dont-want-to-see-homeless-riff-raff>
 that they wish would go away.

The proposed law would amend the city’s police code to ban tent encampments on 
city sidewalks. The city would be required to offer residents of an encampment 
24 hours’ notice and a shelter bed or a bus ticket out of town, before being 
authorized to confiscate their tents and other belongings. The city would be 
required to store those belongings for up to 90 days.

“I strongly believe that it is not compassionate to allow human beings to live 
on our city streets,” wrote the measure’s author, supervisor Mark Farrell, in an
op-ed 
<http://www.marinatimes.com/2016/10/my-ballot-priorities-for-the-november-election/>
. “Let’s help get the homeless into housing, not tents.”

Opponents of the measure point out that the proposed law does not include any 
funding for additional housing or shelters, and the city’s existing shelters 
have long waiting lists for beds.

'This is killing me': 100-year-old woman fights eviction in San Francisco
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/03/san-francisco-100-year-old-iris-canada-eviction>
“With Proposition Q, we’re just taking away someone’s tent and making them 
sleep on the cold concrete,” said Jennifer Friedenbach, executive director of 
the Coalition onHomelessness <https://www.theguardian.com/society/homelessness>
. “They’re not going to disappear.”

Moreover, city workers already perform regular sweeps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/01/sf-homeless-camp-razed-long-term-solution>
 of homeless encampments, often working with groups of residents living in 
specific areas over the course of a few days or weeks to place people in 
shelters.

Nathan Ballard, a spokesman for the campaign, said that the measure will 
provide the city with “one more tool which incentivizes homeless people to get 
out of the tents”.

“The incentive is the 24 hours’ notice,” he said. 

The San Francisco Chronicle 
<http://www.sfchronicle.com/opinion/editorials/article/Editorial-9213838.php>, 
which spearheaded a media campaign designed to urge city hall to seriously 
address homelessness, agreed that the measure would be ineffective and included 
it on their list of propositions that “don’t belong on SF’s ballot”.


Friedenbach argues that the campaign has nothing to do with homeless people, 
but is instead a tool being used by politicians looking to draw political 
distinctions in a one-party town.

“San Francisco is a liberal city, so the typical stuff they would use – 
anti-queer, anti-immigrant, racism, all the traditional wedges – don’t work,” 
she said. “Much like Trump is playing into the frustrations of Americans who 
are frustrated because their incomes aren’t keeping up with the cost of living, 
this is playing into the frustrations San Franciscans have with homelessness.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fsan-francisco-homeless-proposition-q-tech-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc2614950bd2a5dc48cc17f05e609bf673512bbe%2F0_151_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wealthy%20San%20Francisco%20tech%20investors%20bankroll%20bid%20to%20ban%20homeless%20camps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fsan-francisco-homeless-proposition-q-tech-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wealthy%20San%20Francisco%20tech%20investors%20bankroll%20bid%20to%20ban%20homeless%20camps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fsan-francisco-homeless-proposition-q-tech-investors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc2614950bd2a5dc48cc17f05e609bf673512bbe%2F0_151_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 A San Francisco city worker asks a homeless man to leave the area to make room 
for cleaning in February 2016. Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
Indeed, homelessness has been a reliably divisive issue in local elections for 
decades.

In 2003, the San Francisco Hotel Council ran a billboard campaign 
<http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/matier-ross/article/S-F-billboards-slap-handouts-for-feeding-2653324.php>
 in support of an anti-panhandling law, that said that people who gave money to 
beggars had “supported a drug habit” or “helped spread STDs”. The Hotel Council 
is also backing Measure Q.


In 2010, Ron Conway was one of the primary donors to the campaign to pass a 
law that bans sitting or lying on the sidewalk during the day.

This type of anti-homeless, quality-of-life law is not effective in reducing 
homelessness. In May, areport 
<http://s79f01z693v3ecoes3yyjsg1.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Budget-and-Legislative-Analyst-Report.Quality-of-Life-Infactions-and-Homelessness.052616-1.pdf>
 by the city’s budget analyst found that enforcement of the city’s 36 
quality-of-life laws cost more than $20m, while the number of unsheltered 
homeless continued to rise.

It does give politicians something to campaign about, though. 

Moritz referred questions about his support for the measure to the campaign. 
Conway declined to comment when reached by phone. Oberndorf and Bogue did not 
immediately respond to queries.

 