
Last week marked the start of the Edinburgh Festival Fringe with the 
International Book Festival <https://www.edbookfest.co.uk/> hailing from the 
same city kicking off tomorrow. Peggy van Overdijk sent in this photo of some 
familiar-looking faces admiring antiques on the Royal Mile:

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53d7cf19e4b08005b3cfd46e/1094275> 
What a boar!  
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53d7cf19e4b08005b3cfd46e/1094275>

The cast of Faulty Towers The Dining Experience went antiques shopping off the 
Royal Mile. They ran into a boar and an ♯unbored moose’s head instead! But 
no-body knows why…

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Peggy van Overdijk <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Peggy van 
Overdijk> 

5 August 2014, 21:40 

Our partnership with the 99% campaign <http://99percentblog.org/> to showcase 
positive stories of young people in the places they love continues, and the 
focus is still on young Londoners who are inspirational or have interesting 
stories to share. sparxy shared this encouraging story about FGM campaigner 
Christina Ramsay, who has worked tirelessly with agencies in Croydon to set up 
a FGM charter:

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53cf7ceee4b09d274f9861ab/1092463> 
Christina Ramsay 23 - FGM campaigner (Croydon College) 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53cf7ceee4b09d274f9861ab/1092463>

Christina has worked with agencies in Croydon to set up a FGM Charter.

Female Genital Mutilation is carried out as a cultural or religious practice, 
but is internationally recognised as a violation of the human rights of girls 
and women.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) estimates that there are around 24,000 
young girls at risk of FGM in the UK, and over 80,000 women in the UK are 
living with the consequences of FGM.

Christina says: “We have a lot of Human Rights in this country, but many are 
just ‘gathering dust on a shelf, and are not enforced. FGM is illegal in the UK 
and unqualified back-street practitioners are profiting from performing FGM. 
Generally, girls under the age of 15 are subjected to the practice and the 
summer months is widely understood to be the ‘cutting season.’

Christina believes that Croydon is well placed to provide the country’s first 
‘safe haven’ for those at risk.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By sparxy <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/sparxy> 

4 August 2014, 15:51 

The National Eisteddfod is being held in Llanelli this week, and we’ve been 
asking you to share your photos and stories from theimportant Welsh cultural 
event <http://www.eisteddfod.org.uk/cymraeg/>. ID2534846 told us how important 
the festival is for strengthening Welsh identity:
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53df9b59e4b0f95786e4500f/1095031> 
Sharing a commonality and strengthening my sense of identity 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53df9b59e4b0f95786e4500f/1095031>

This week, I took my 10 month old daughter to her first Eisteddfod of many. 
It's the one place where so much of what makes you Welsh comes together. You 
catch up with childhood friends and make new ones. You get the opportunity to 
discuss and reflect on the present and future ofWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> and the language. You find out what's 
new in the Welsh music and literary industries. You can take part in political 
events or just watch the crowds mill about while you sample food from one of 
the many wonderful food stalls. And even if you're not Welsh and can't speak 
Welsh, you get to witness and take part in a tradition which I know will be 
around when my daughter has children of her own.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By ID2534846 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/ID2534846> 

6 August 2014, 10:59 

As the crisis in Iraq continues we’re asking for your photos and experiences - 
whether you’re caught up in the crisis yourself or helping out as an aid 
worker. Eujin Byun shared this moving picture of a family outside the Khazair 
camp after fleeing their home due to fighting:

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/539ed548e4b0d256530d9d37/1096640> 
A Glimpse Of Happiness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/539ed548e4b0d256530d9d37/1096640>

A newly arrived family outside of Khazair camp. Parents always want to 
give/show the best thing to their kids. This Iraqi parents had to flee their 
home because of fighting but still want to offer some glimpse of happiness to 
their children.

UNHCR/Eujin Byun

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Eujin Byun <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/guardianUser11762754> 

7 August 2014, 13:52 

For the last few weeks we have been running two assignments on the Israel and 
Palestine conflict – one for people living in Palestine 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53b3f0f1e4b0bcfdaf4042ff> and the 
other forthose in Israel 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53b3e204e4b0bcfdaf4042e3>. We 
received many stories and testimonies that shared a desire for reconciliation 
and peace, you can see themhere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/guardianwitness-blog/2014/aug/01/israel-and-palestine-if-i-was-to-look-to-anyone-for-hope-it-would-be-the-people-on-both-sides>
 Thank you to everyone who shared their stories and photos with us.

Last week was National Parks Week and the Public Leaders Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network> asked you to share your 
photos and experiences of local parks, and how they’re fairing against the 
ongoing government cuts. lauxgled shared their intriguing insight into Hodkins 
Park in Gateshead, which seems to have suffered from a lack of council care in 
recent years:

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53d78718e4b0dea6a4a764c3/1095734> 
Football in Hodkins Park, Gateshead 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53d78718e4b0dea6a4a764c3/1095734>

Our local park is just over the road. It used to be locked at dusk by the 
council and well looked after. Now it stays open all night and the kids play 
equipment has been vandalised. It is sad as I love taking the kids here. The 
grass is still good for football though!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By lauxgled <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/lauxgled> 

6 August 2014, 21:54 

We all have plenty of good holiday memories immortalised in photographs and 
Culture <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/culture> have been encouraging you to 
share your photos that capture your favourite summer memories. leparadis sent 
in this fantastic family shot from North Wales:
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53dbb3f2e4b0c1da8a3a9021/1092573> 
Me and My Dad in North Wales 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53dbb3f2e4b0c1da8a3a9021/1092573>

When I was young we could never afford to go on a proper holiday for a week. 
We would have 'days out'. Me and my brother would be bundled into the back of 
my dad's Austin Cambridge. Dad would drive us to North Wales for a day by the 
seaside. That would be our summer holiday. Autumn holidays were better as they 
would be a day trip to Blackpool to ride a tram and see the lights. Oh happy 
days!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By leparadis <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/leparadis> 

4 August 2014, 17:39 

We asked you for your best August wildlife pictures, and in its first week 
there have already been some great submissions. One in particular from Jenny 
Downing captured this fly blowing bubbles on a table cloth:
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53d7816de4b0dea6a4a764b6/1096360> 
Forever blowing bubbles 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53d7816de4b0dea6a4a764b6/1096360>

Spotted this fly on the tablecloth at lunchtime. It appeared to be blowing 
bubbles then sucking them back in again. I have since tried to find out why 
they do this - the most convincing theory seems to be that they are 
regurgitating stomach contents and using air to aid digestion ...

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Jenny Downing <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Jenny Downing> 

7 August 2014, 9:09 

The British summer weather is just about holding up, which means there have 
been more seaside snaps for you to share with us. Darren Hopton took this photo 
from the Brighton eye to give us an aerial perspective of the seaside town’s 
beach:
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53bbf70de4b099c2ea41d89f/1093036> 
Eye on Brighton beach 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53bbf70de4b099c2ea41d89f/1093036>

A view of the beach from the Brighton Eye.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Darren Hopton <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Darren Hopton> 

5 August 2014, 0:29 

Staying with the summer theme, it has been ideal cycling weather for many, and 
theEnvironment <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/environment> desk encouraged you 
to share your bestsummer cycling photos and stories. Jeremy Wallis shared this 
fantastic action shot of his daughter cycling part of the route of Stage One 
during this year’s Yorkshire leg of theTour de France 
<http://www.letour.com/le-tour/2014/us/>:
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53e0c37ce4b09bc4dcfc278b/1095385> 
Le Grand Depart en Yorkshire, 2014 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53e0c37ce4b09bc4dcfc278b/1095385>

My daughter rides part of the route of Stage One before the race passes 
through Ilkley. The crowds cheered her on, the occasional official race vehicle 
would pass with their horns sounding, and the stewards policing the road 
furniture and traffic islands would wave their yellow pennants as she passed.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By JemWallis <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/JemWallis> 

6 August 2014, 16:34 

To celebrate the return of The Great British Bake Off 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b013pqnm>, the Observer Food Monthly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/foodmonthly> are asking to see your 
outrageous cake decorations. Kate Hardie sent in this amazing cake she made for 
her daughter’s 1st birthday:
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53e356e4e4b0c8aa99e2b152/1096819> 
Teddy Bears Picnic 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53e356e4e4b0c8aa99e2b152/1096819>

I made this cake for my daughters 1st birthday when I had more time on my 
hands and pre-3 kids. I loved experimenting with the sugar craft.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Kate Hardie <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/guardianUser12881108> 

7 August 2014, 16:52 

GuardianWitness is now on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianwitness>, 
as we wanted to share your contributions with a wider audience. Have a look at 
our page and get involved.


New assignments this week


Signs of spring in the southern hemisphere 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53e2f94fe4b0489f499be698>


This is my team: share photos and experiences of your football club 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53e0fc17e4b0dcb8d71f75e9>

Summer cycling: share your photos and experiences 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53e0c37ce4b09bc4dcfc278b>
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53dcb629e4b0092d799600ab>

Art Everywhere – share your photos of the world’s largest art show 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53e0c5f3e4b09bc4dcfc278f>

Thank you to everyone who’s sent something in this week. You can see all the 
contributions – or add your own - onGuardianWitness. 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/>
 