
We are delighted to announce the distinguished members of our Public Leaders 
Network 2016 editorial advisory board.

Nine leaders have been selected to provide expert insight over the next year. 
They will work with our editorial team to ensure we tackle the most important 
issues facing public services.


Once again, members of the network nominated a wide cross-section of public 
leaders. The nine members of this year’s board come from all parts of public 
services, from central and local government to health and social care, from the 
voluntary sector to housing and support services.


Here are the members of this year’s board:
 Christian Brodie 
Christian Brodie, chair, Student Loans Company

Christian (Chris) Brodie has been the non-executive chair of the Student Loans 
Company <http://www.slc.co.uk/> since 2014. A qualified solicitor, he is also 
the chair of the governing body of the University of Sussex and retired in July 
2013 from the role of vice chair of UBS Investment Bank.

Brodie’s roles give him a perspective on the delivery of public services and 
major government transformation programmes, including major change at the 
Student Loans Company. He also serves on a number of other public bodies: he is 
co-chair of the BIS Partnership Organisations Chairs’ Forum and co-chairs the 
Regulatory Partnership Group for Higher Education.
 Anne Byrne 
Anne Byrne, head of regeneration (Woodberry Down), London borough of Hackney

A highly experienced public sector professional, Anne Byrne has worked in the 
housing and regeneration field for more than 25 years.

She has held a number of senior roles in local government, which has provided 
her with a breadth of understanding and perspective on the challenges and 
opportunities of working within the public sector.Hackney council 
<http://www.hackney.gov.uk/>’s estate regeneration programme is one of the 
largest in the country and the Woodberry Down scheme on which Anne leads is a 
major project that will deliver more than 5,500 new homes.

She worked on the Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE) 
and has recently been appointed by the Design Council as a building environment 
expert.
 Stewart Carruth 
Stewart Carruth, chief executive, Stirling council

Stewart Carruth has been chief executive at Stirling council 
<http://my.stirling.gov.uk/home> since July 2014 and is the former strategic 
director of the Scottish Cities Alliance, the body representing Scotland’s 
seven cities set up to boost economic activity and create new jobs. He was 
previously director of corporate governance at Aberdeen city council, and he 
has worked as director of corporate services at Learning and Teaching Scotland.

Carruth has also held senior management posts at PwC where he worked with a 
large number of clients from across the public sector, and he spent three years 
in Turkey working on a range of public sector projects. He has a master’s 
degree in economics and accountancy, an MBA, and a postgraduate diploma in 
housing. Carruth has a breadth of experience in the public sector and is 
fiercely ambitious for local government at a time of enormous change, upheaval 
and pessimism around the sector in Scotland.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6676b6b6bcfc9e89221e55fd1df7554cdb755d25%2F437_73_664_817%2F664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20our%202016%20Guardian%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20our%202016%20Guardian%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6676b6b6bcfc9e89221e55fd1df7554cdb755d25%2F437_73_664_817%2F664.jpg>
 Sherry Malik 
Sherry Malik, director of children’s services, development and delivery, NSPCC

Sherry Malik has been in her present role at the NSPCC 
<https://www.nspcc.org.uk/> since August 2014, where she leads an ambitious 
programme that aims to bring more evidence of what works to prevent child abuse 
into the wider children’s sector. She has spent almost three decades working in 
the public, voluntary and private sectors. Previous roles include director of 
strategy for Cafcass; deputy chief executive for the General Social Care 
Council; and director of children’s and adult social care at Hounslow.


Originally as a teacher, Malik went on to become a social worker and is a huge 
champion of the profession, with strong ideas about how the public sector can 
develop in tough times, with a particular emphasis on strong, evidence-based 
outcomes frameworks.
 Christine Moore 
Christine Moore, chief executive, Manchester Credit Union

Christine Moore is the chief executive of Manchester Credit Union 
<http://www.manchestercreditunion.co.uk/index.asp>, a not-for-profit financial 
co-operative that serves people who live or work in Manchester, Tameside, 
Trafford, Rochdale, Bury and the High Peak.

Manchester Credit Union is the largest credit union in the north west at a 
time when credit unions are increasingly picking up some of the financial 
impact of welfare reform. Moore is a leader in the field of credit unions and 
other sectors across Greater Manchester, with valuable insight into related 
issues, such as poverty, financial exclusion, high cost lending and wellbeing 
issues related to excessive debt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe69e3797ba331a090acec5ed5922c10b0b37d210%2F0_0_3806_5385%2F3806.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20our%202016%20Guardian%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20our%202016%20Guardian%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe69e3797ba331a090acec5ed5922c10b0b37d210%2F0_0_3806_5385%2F3806.jpg>
 Joe Rafferty 
Joe Rafferty, chief executive, Mersey Care NHS Trust

Joe Rafferty has been chief executive of the Mersey Care NHS mental health 
trust <http://www.merseycare.nhs.uk/>since September 2012. Prior to joining 
Mersey Care, he was a director of commissioning support at the NHS 
Commissioning Board, where he had national responsibility for the design and 
delivery of a significant reforms.

Rafferty has worked in the health service for more than 25 years, having 
joined the NHS general management training scheme in 1999. From 2007 to 2010, 
he was chief executive ofNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Central 
Lancashire, with an annual commissioning budget of £750m.

At Mersey Care, Rafferty has set up a number of initiatives that have gained 
national recognition, including the trust’s No Force First strategy, which aims 
to eliminate the need for seclusion and physical or pharmacological restraint 
on people who are mentally ill, a commitment to a zero suicide strategy for 
people in the trust’s care and a partnership with Stanford University to build 
on the use of incident data. He is part of an NHS trade mission to China.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa820e38ebdc283bcee92606d22d7ab266cf3934b%2F120_95_916_865%2F916.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20our%202016%20Guardian%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20our%202016%20Guardian%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa820e38ebdc283bcee92606d22d7ab266cf3934b%2F120_95_916_865%2F916.jpg>
 Helen Reynolds 
Helen Reynolds, director, Social for the People

Helen Reynolds was one of the first people to understand the potential of 
digital communication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/local-government-network/2013/aug/23/social-media-monmouthshire>
 to promote engagement in the public sector. She began using social media in 
local government in 2007, with aMySpace page 
<http://www.southwalesargus.co.uk/news/1328820.shire_h@ll_connects_with_21st_century/>
 dedicated to getting people to help a council restore a town hall.

Since 2011, Reynolds has run a social media consultancy to help government, 
public sector and charity organisations communicate online. Before that, she 
worked for nine years in comms at Monmouthshire council, using her knowledge to 
revolutionise the way the council communicated and engaged with its residents. 
Other previous roles include developing a social media strategy for the Social 
Care Partnership in south eastWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>. Her 
work has been recognised through several awards, including coming 16th on the 
2014 list of 100 UK digital leaders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3ea5582b7ca86beb58908c0e1d17a4a05c768f%2F0_85_667_753%2F667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20our%202016%20Guardian%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20our%202016%20Guardian%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2F2016-guardian-public-leaders-editorial-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3ea5582b7ca86beb58908c0e1d17a4a05c768f%2F0_85_667_753%2F667.jpg>
 Zoe Sweet 
Zoe Sweet, director, leadership & organisation development, Academi Wales

Zoe Sweet has been director of organisation development for public services in 
Wales since 2009, initially working for Public Service Management Wales, which 
in 2013 becameAcademi Wales <http://www.academiwales.org.uk/home.aspx>, the 
strategic centre for leadership excellence across the Welsh public service, 
including the NHS.

Before that, she spent four years as Swansea’s change manager for 
e-government. She also has experience in the private sector. Sweet is described 
by colleagues as an inspiring, resourceful leader, able to find creative 
solutions to longstanding problems.
 Carolyn Wilkins 
Carolyn Wilkins, chief executive, Oldham council

Carolyn Wilkins has been chief executive of Oldham council 
<http://www.oldham.gov.uk/> since May 2014, having been interim chief executive 
since the end of the previous year. As well as managing a large council she is 
the lead for the development of services to tackle complex dependency across 
Greater Manchester.

Wilkins joined Oldham from Rossendale district council in 2009, after holding 
the position of chief executive for two and a half years. She played a leading 
role within the Association of Greater Manchester Authorities, contributing to 
the government’s troubled families programme and public sector reform.

She is also a governor at Oldham College and has previously served as a 
non-executive director at the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.

 