
The atmosphere in the pub is tense, uncomfortable. All eyes are on the 
tourists: two American students, nervously edging toward the door. "Stay on the 
road. Keep clear of the moors," warns a stone-faced darts player. "Beware the 
moon, lads," adds an imposing, bald bloke sitting in front of a chessboard.

The film is An American Werewolf in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/86245/american-werewolf-in-london>, the 
pub the evocatively named Slaughtered Lamb, the image of yokels versus 
outsiders enduring. This spot is in Yorkshire, but the image of moors 
everywhere is broadly the same: forbidding and foggy and not somewhere you'd 
want to get lost.

Dartmoor's sense of isolation and dread is such that it's been riffed on by 
both Arthur Conan Doyle and Agatha Christie and was deemed the ideal location 
for a prison, built more than 200 years ago, to guard Napoleonic prisoners of 
war. Walking through the streets of nearby Tavistock last week, French voices 
echoed again, considerably happier and less imperialistic. The week before, it 
was Americans, wandering around like extras from central casting, tourists 
living the cliche in baseball caps and mistaking the fags'n'Coke bus kiosk for 
somewhere to "stock up on groceries".

West Devon is a wonderful place to visit. You just have to make sure to 
remember that if you live here.

Of Peppa Pig and bodyboards

I'm writing this while nursing three children and a mild hangover, to the 
soundtrack of one son's worryingly violent videogame, the other's Minecraft 
obsession and my daughter babbling at Peppa Pig on the laptop, in thrall to 
this bizarre toddler-goddess, like some kind of wide-eyed member of a 
porcine-worshipping death cult. It has only just occurred to me to open the 
curtains and look outside.

It is beautifully sunny. Dartmoor, which you can see if you stick your head 
out the front window, is stunning. There are wetsuits on our washing line from 
when the boys were taken on the hour-long drive to Dawlish for bodyboarding 
yesterday, while I was chimp-bashing the keyboard in my office, ostensibly 
trying to pay the mortgage by writing a screenplay and definitely not reading 
and rereadingGuardian Football <https://www.theguardian.com/football> (let's be 
quite clear about that).

I really must get out more

Currently, I'm co-scribbling a comedy set on Dartmoor, which hopes to follow 
in the tradition of idiot-men-coming-of-age established inWithnail and I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/14/favourite-film-withnail-and-i>
 andSideways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_Film_of_the_week/0,4267,1400070,00.html>
. It's about marriage, failure and forgiveness, but also about this place: the 
mighty Tors… the desolate beauty… the ales. When we holidayed in Tavistock, 
we'd spend hours in the market, buying craft-made knick-knacks, eating fudge 
(oh, the fudge) and browsing the excellent bookstall. But in the six years 
we've lived here, I've been there all of twice. We chased the broadsheet dream 
of decamping to the country, but it turns out you still have to pay your bills 
here. And if you don't take a moment, everything remains a blur.

In the last few months, I've been to Australia to meet an Oscar-winner; Berlin 
to meet Rupert Friend, who is playing Agent 47 in the forthcomingHitman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/10/paul-walker-agent-47-rupert-friend-hitman-movie>
 film; and Detroit to meet Ben Affleck on the set ofBatman v Superman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/13/new-batmobile-glimpse-batman-v-superman-zack-snyder>
; yet from plane to taxi to homogeneous hotels, each place was interchangeable, 
as there wasn't the time to explore. (Yes, I know, poor me.)

Listening to the non-Napoleonic French enthusiastically consider which Devon 
delight to visit next, it occurred to me to start appreciating this place, this 
moment – the here, the now.

As you drive over a cattle grid, up on to Dartmoor, there's a slogan: "Take 
Moor Care". I'm always torn between admiring its effectiveness and wanting to 
douse it in paraffin and burn it down for being so twee. But it's a good point.

This afternoon, I'm going to buy some fudge. And take my children for a walk. 
We won't stick to the roads.

Nev Pierce is editor-at-large of Empire magazine and a screenwriter, who is in 
his words "successful enough to be paid, not yet successful enough to be made".
 