
Tree-based camping, East Sussex and Wales

The latest way for campers to enjoy the great outdoors is suspended several 
metres above ground – from the comfort of a tree tent. The Secret Campsite 
(01273 401100,thesecretcampsite.co.uk 
<http://http://www.thesecretcampsite.co.uk/>), near Lewes in East Sussex, has 
added a hanging tent for two "with views over the South Downs" to its 
collection of camping "shelters", which include a modern day shepherd's hut 
called an Arkette and a bell tent.

Meanwhile, in a wood in Wales, the Red Kite tree tent (01865 764087, available 
to book throughsheepskinlife.com <http://www.sheepskinlife.com>) hangs from the 
trees in the grounds of Red Kite Barn, a self-catering property near Builth 
Wells in Powys. Featuring a double bed and wood-burning stove, it offers all 
perks of other posh camping structures, but a few metres above the ground.

Tree tents may be sold as "back to nature" options, but the idea of such 
creature comforts as a wood burner will no doubt appall camping 
traditionalists. They may well baulk at the price too. As with most "glamping" 
options, tree tents aren't cheap. The Secret Campsite's tree tent costs £95 per 
night, with a two-night minimum at weekends (though a standard tent pitch costs 
from £10pp). The Red Kite tent is similarly priced: £299 for a three-night stay 
for two. But for those who like the romance of camping, but not the discomfort 
of sleeping on lumpy ground, it's perfect.

Sea kayaking and wild camping, Scotland
 Kayaking in west Scotland. Photograph: Andy McCandlish 
How do you solve a problem like the UK's unpredictable spring weather? 
Wilderness Scotland (01479 420 020wildernessscotland.com 
<http://www.wildernessscotland.com/>) has come up with a good plan for their 
new sea-kayaking trip along the west coast. Wait and see what the conditions 
are like, and then decide how brave you are feeling. If the sun's out over the 
Hebrides, up the number of nights of wild camping from one to three. Or if it 
feels like less of a good idea when you're hit by April showers, then a comfy 
bed can be booked instead. A five-night trip leaving on 25 May costs £650pp, 
including accommodation (hostel and wild camping), most meals, all transport to 
and from Inverness, full guiding and equipment. Across the sea, newly-launched 
sister company Wilderness Ireland (wildernessireland.com 
<http://wildernessireland.com>) is offering a range of activity holidays. Its 
Northern Ireland cycling trip takes in Rathlin Island and the Giants Causeway, 
with overnight stays in an 18th-century manor house (from £337pp, based on four 
sharing, including two nights' B&B, afternoon tea, packed lunches, bike hire 
and guides).

Cycling for all, the Lake District
 Cycling in the Lake District 
Sky Rides' free group cycling trips have become popular in various UK cities, 
from London to Newcastle, but this spring will be the first time they come to a 
national park. May's Lake District ride will be led by British Cycling guides 
and split into different abilities on arrival, so experienced riders who might 
be considering joining a club won't be held back by kids using stabilisers. 
These are great days out for families and groups of friends, or those wanting 
to meet new people who share a love of two-wheeled travel. Participants will 
soon be able to register atgoskyride.com <http://www.goskyride.com>. For more 
on cycling in the area (including details on bike hire), see
golakestravel.co.uk/bybike <http://www.golakes.co.uk/travel/by-bike.aspx>.

Wine tasting, Essex
 West Street Vineyard's new English Wine Barn in Essex 
There are nearly 400 vineyards in the England and Wales, and the West Street 
Vineyard in the village of Coggeshall in north Essex claims to be the first 
wine "experience" dedicated to celebrating a range of them. Modelled on the 
vineyard experiences of New Zealand and South Africa, and housed in a newly 
constructed barn overlooking 1.4 hectares of vines, West Street will offer 
tastings of over 30 English wines in its wine bar, including their own 
sparkling, white and rose. They also offer courses covering English (an 
introduction to East Anglian wines), European and New World varieties, plus 
there's cafe selling locally produced cheese and meats.
• weststreetvineyard.co.uk 
<http://www.weststreetvineyard.co.uk/essex-wine-school/>. Opens 23 April. 
Visitors can buy a smart card for £5, £10 or £20, which gives them a choice of 
tastings from an automated wine wall

Non-stop arts, Norfolk
 It's All Up in the Air, a sculpture by Rhona Byrne at the Norfolk and Norwich 
festival 
Norfolk is preparing to become a giant stage as it hosts its annual arts 
festival. Renowned for cutting-edge events and brilliant use of alternative 
venues, the Norfolk and Norwich festival promises another stonking line up of 
music, visual arts and theatre, among them contemporary circus Risque Zéro at 
the Great Yarmouth Hippodrome (the UK's only surviving complete circus building 
in the UK); a Kindness of Strangers theatre piece performed to an audience of 
four in a moving ambulance; and the world premiere of an epic show by New 
York-based Nature Theater of Oklahoma, based on the verbatim transcript of a 
16-hour phone conversation. With 75 shows over 17 days, there's a massive 
choice of entertainment.
• nnfestival.org.uk <http://www.nnfestival.org.uk/>, 10-26 May 

Scenic strolls, nationwide
 St Stephen’s church, North Yorkshire 
The Churches Conservation Trust, the charity dedicated to conserving historic 
churches, has put together a series of walks taking in some of the most 
picturesque churches in the country. They include a five-mile, cliff-top path 
walk from Whitby to Ravenscar in North Yorkshire, via Whitby's dramatic 
Benedictine abbey; St Andrew's hilltop to Prudhoe castle in Northumberland; and 
from All Saints on the Thames to Oxford (six miles), ending at theEagle and 
Child pub <http://www.nicholsonspubs.co.uk/theeagleandchildoxford/>, which has 
attracted many literary heavyweights over its long history, including Tolkien 
and C.S. Lewis.
• Whitby to Ravenscar, North Yorkshire: click here for route map 
<http://www.visitchurches.org.uk/findwalk/RouteDetails/?walkId=376077&searchMileDistance=0&searchKeyWord=>
St Andrew's hilltop to Prudhoe castle: click here for route map 
<http://www.visitchurches.org.uk/findwalk/RouteDetails/?walkId=376092>
All Saints to Oxford: click here for route map 
<http://www.visitchurches.org.uk/findwalk/RouteDetails/?walkId=376092&searchMileDistance=0&searchKeyWord=>

Fish and a dip (if you're brave), Cornwall
 St Edmund's House, Padstow 
The pretty Cornish harbour of Padstow can be hellishly busy in summer, but in 
spring visitors can admire its charming narrow streets, lined with colourful 
homes and cute cafes, in peace. There's no escaping the influence of Rick 
Stein, but those who don't mind that could take advantage of a spring deal in 
one of his holiday properties. Costing £425 for two and available on breaks 
between Sunday and Thursday until 23 May (excluding Sunday 5 May), the stay 
includes two dinners and two nights' B&B accommodation in one of six properties 
(including cottages, the Petroc Hotel and B&B rooms in the cafes). The meals 
are at St Petroc's Bistro and Rick Stein's Cafe, known for its very fresh fish 
dishes.
• 01841 532 700, rickstein.com <http://www.rickstein.com> 

Sunny strolls by day, stargazing by night, Cambridge
 Varsity Hotel, Cambridge: the rooftop terrace at sunset 
For those who like looking at the constellations but who can barely identify 
that sort of frying pan-shaped one, the stylish Varsity Hotel is putting on an 
astronomy night, run by the Cambridge Astronomical Association, on 25 April. 
The hotel, which has a fantastic rooftop garden, backs on to the river Cam, so 
guests could spend the day strolling in the sunshine (fingers crossed) before 
the event. Specialist telescopes and high-powered laser pointers will be put 
into action by the experts for a guided tour of the cosmos; last month's class 
managed to see the rings of Jupiter. A warming drink on the roof, a two-course 
meal and glass of fizz are included in the tickets, which cost £45pp.
• 01223 306 030, thevarsityhotel.co.uk <http://www.thevarsityhotel.co.uk>, 
rooms from £155 per night

Walk with a purpose, Northumberland/Scottish Borders

The 2012 bestseller The Unlikely Pilgrimage of Harold Fry, which tells the 
tale of a man who goes out to post a letter to a sick friend but ends up 
walking 600 miles across Britain, is partly to blame for an increased interest 
this year in pilgrimages, according to self-guided walking specialist Macs 
Adventure. It says bookings for long walks are up by over 100% on certain 
trips. For a spring challenge in the UK, it recommends St Cuthbert's Way, a 
63-mile trek through the Scottish Borders and Northumberland, finishing at Holy 
Island. Its package for independent walkers starts in Melrose and takes four to 
seven days, costing from £370pp including accommodation, breakfast, luggage 
transfer, maps and route guides.
•  0141 530 1950, macsadventure.com <http://www.macsadventure.com/>

Enjoy spring blooms, Wiltshire
 Bluebells and other blooms at Bowood House and Gardens 
Britain's woods are normally carpeted with bluebells by now but the freezing 
weather in March and early April mean the traditional bloomsmay not appear 
until mid May or later this year. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2013/apr/15/british-bluebells-fail-to-bloom?CMP=twt_fd>
 When they do make an appearance, enjoy them at Stourhead in Wiltshire (
nationaltrust.org.uk/stourhead <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/stourhead>) 
where you can stroll landscaped gardens and bluebell woods (garden entry is 
priced at £7.70 for adults; £4.20 for children).

The harsh spring has not affected the Bowood House and Gardens' (bowood.org 
<http://www.bowood.org/>) famous rhododendron displays. If anything, it's 
helped. Owner Lord Lansdowne is predicting one of the best flowering years 
after the particularly wet spring. Bowood's Rhododendron Woodland Walks, a 
separate garden featuring 60 acres of azaleas, magnolias and rhododendrons, 
opens on 26 April for six weeks (walks are between Calne and Chippenham, 
accessed via a separate entrance) and will take in the new four-acre Jubilee 
Garden.

If you're planning more than a day trip to enjoy Wiltshire's impressive 
gardens, you could base yourself at Poulton Lodge Marlborough (poultonlodge.com 
<http://www.poultonlodge.com>), a Finnish-style log cabin set on a working 
farm. Walk straight from the cabin into a bluebell wood and onto the Ridgeway 
(sleeps five, £700 - £950 self-catering), or enjoy other nearby gardens 
including Lydiard House and Park (lydiardpark.org.uk 
<http://www.lydiardpark.org.uk/>) and Wilton House (wiltonhouse.co.uk 
<http://www.wiltonhouse.co.uk/>).
 