
The civil service fast stream is highly prestigious and competitive; in 2014 
less than 5% of applicants were offered a place. If you haven’t sent your 
application off, there’s still time. But with around 20,000 people applying 
each year, it’s inevitable that many bright and talented graduates won’t get on 
the scheme.

However, it’s not the only route into the sector. The fast stream accounted 
for less than 5% of all recruitment into the civil service between 2010 and 
2014, and in 2014 there were 2,342 fast streamers in total, which only amounts 
to just over 0.5% of the civil service.

How to join the civil service fast stream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>
Rachel Malic is a PR and communications officer at the Education and Training 
Foundation <http://www.et-foundation.co.uk/> charity. She knows only too well 
what the application process is like for the fast stream, and what it feels 
like not to make the cut.

But she has had an exciting and fulfilling career in the public sector: “By 
the age of 30 I’d worked for a Business, Innovation and Skills executive 
agency, prepared responses for Prime Minister’s Question Time, given financial 
advice to students, and chaperoned ministers on stage at events at the O2,” she 
said.

Despite failing to get a place on the fast stream, and despite the civil 
service pay freeze, Malic forged her way up the career ladder at a similar rate 
to graduate fast trackers. She reached middle management by taking on project 
work and secondments. And also by 30, she had paid off her student loan and was 
on a salary of around £40,000.

“If I could go back 10 years, I’d tell myself recruitment programmes are not 
the be all and end all. You can also apply for administration jobs to get a 
foot in the door. I’d say to anyone graduating now – who wants diversity and 
satisfaction from their working life – to consider taking control of their 
career rather than put it in the hands of a scheme,” Malic explains.

If you do find yourself without a place on the fast stream, applying directly 
to civil service jobs is a great alternative. And the same golden rules apply 
as for any sector: proofread your CV and cover letter, tailor both to each job 
and show your enthusiasm for the role.

But what are recruiters looking for? “Applicants are assessed using the civil 
service framework. Graduates need to demonstrate these competencies in their 
applications and interviews,” says Mercy Njoku, who works in HR at the Ministry 
of Justice.

“Not all graduates are aware of this, but these are competencies most people 
will have. They just need to learn how to present them,” she explains.

Like most recruitment processes, it can take many months to get from the 
application send-off to a job offer. James Long is now a career coach at the 
City of Liverpool College, but he started his career in the public sector seven 
years ago.

He found patience was the key to his success. “When I got in, it was part of a 
huge recruitment drive for the Department for Work and Pensions. I applied in 
January, and didn’t start the job until July. Many young people lose faith 
during this process, or find something else,” he says.

Due to the recession, cuts in local governments and the civil service, and so 
many people getting degrees, advertised vacancies are often inundated with 
applications. Many of these people will already have experience of public 
sector work, or may have been made redundant, giving them the edge. This makes 
it difficult for graduates to stand out.

Long urges graduates to be proactive and willing to relocate: “The large 
government departments are in most of the UK’s largest cities and you can’t be 
too fussy if that is your career choice. It may sound obvious but make sure 
you’re also signed up to relevant job alerts.”

When it comes to applying to opportunities, there are a few things to bear in 
mind. “Civil service is notorious for meritocracy so make sure there is no 
irrelevant information in your applications. Prepare examples of your 
competencies and problem solving skills ready for interviews – keep these to 
the point and relevant,” says Long.

What is it like to work in the civil service fast stream?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/04/civil-service-fast-stream-like-to-work-advice>
It is possible to start at a thinktank but it’s by no means an easy option. 
“It’s difficult to get a graduate-level job at a thinktank because jobs aren’t 
particularly numerous. It’s not easy to get a foot in the door, especially at 
European thinktanks,” says Fabian Zuleeg, chief executive of theEuropean Policy 
Centre <http://www.epc.eu/>.

For graduates, the usual route is through doing paid internships or temporary 
roles. This sort of experience is vital for your CV, and shows recruiters 
you’re engaged with things like policymaking and how the European Union works.

When looking at applicants, Zuleeg says: “The most important thing is that 
people show they’re enthusiastic about this kind of job. It’s very hard, you 
work long hours and it’s not particularly well paid. You really have to have a 
passion for it.”

But, he explains, you do get to directly influence policy and have the freedom 
to write, get published and talk to the media – opportunities you don’t get 
from joining the civil service through fast stream.

Zuleeg urges graduates not to be discouraged if they don’t get onto the fast 
stream as it is not the only route into the public sector. Another alternative 
is to spend some time gaining relevant experience and skills to make yourself 
well suited to the types of jobs you’re going for. Volunteering or short paid 
contracts in the sector are a great way to boost your skills and gain specific 
experience.

More on this topic

 * How to join the civil service fast stream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>
 * What’s it like to work in the fast stream? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/04/civil-service-fast-stream-like-to-work-advice>
 * What to do if you don’t get in to the civil service fast stream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/03/civil-service-fast-stream-other-routes>

 * How to get a job in the public sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/public-sector-jobs-top-employers-career>
 * Why work in the public sector? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/feb/27/why-join-public-sector>
Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> here for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 