
The Republican national convention has concluded. Here’s what happened on the 
fourth and final day:

 * Donald Trump accepted the presidential nomination in an approximately 
75-minute speech in which he promised to “restore law and order to our 
country”. A speech transcriptis here 
<https://assets.donaldjtrump.com/DJT_Acceptance_Speech.pdf>. 
 * Trump described “a moment of crisis for our nation” born of a series of 
threats, from “illegal immigration” to violent crime to violence directed at 
law enforcement to transnational terrorism. 
 * The details of Trump’s dire picture of a darkly violent America did not 
stand up to scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jul/21/republican-national-convention-day-four-trump?page=with:block-57919ef5e4b00b50d2e0fd2a#block-57919ef5e4b00b50d2e0fd2a>
, but the sense he communicated of a nation under siege seemed to resonate 
deeply with the packed crowd at Cleveland’s Quicken Loans arena, which 
repeatedly leapt to its feet, chanted and cheered. 
 * “I have a message for all of you,” Trump said. “The crime and violence that 
today afflicts our nation will soon come to an end. Beginning on January 20th 
2017, safety will be restored.” 
 * Trump was preceded at the lectern by his daughter Ivanka, who promised the 
country that her father would work tirelessly to make America great again. The 
highest spike in Google traffic of the night, in terms of percentage, was for 
the question: “How old is Ivanka Trump?” 
 * Ivanka Trump noted she was a millennial and said her father would fight for 
equal pay for women and paid family leave. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fivanka-trump-donald-women-republican-national-convention-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ivanka%20Trump%20tells%20RNC%3A%20my%20father%2C%20Donald%20Trump%2C%20supports%20women%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fivanka-trump-donald-women-republican-national-convention-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ivanka%20Trump%20tells%20RNC%3A%20my%20father%2C%20Donald%20Trump%2C%20supports%20women%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fivanka-trump-donald-women-republican-national-convention-speech-video&media=>
Ivanka Trump tells RNC: my father, Donald Trump, supports women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/22/ivanka-trump-donald-women-republican-national-convention-speech-video>
 * Donald Trump invited Bernie Sanders to join his “movement” and predicted 
that “millions of Democrats” would end up voting for him. 
 * Litigious tech billionaire Peter Thiel, in his speech, told the crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/21/peter-thiel-republican-national-convention-proud-to-be-gay>
: “I’m proud to be gay,” and was applauded. A call to protect “the LGBTQ 
community” by Trump was also applauded, and he thanked the crowd for applauding.
 * At the end, thousands of balloons and confetti dropped from the ceiling as 
the candidates and their families took the stage. 
 * Cleveland officials reported no RNC-related arrests on the day – but that 
may have been before Code Pink’s Medea Benjamin was pulled from the arena for 
protesting Trump’s speech. 
 * Read our full news coverage here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/21/donald-trump-republican-national-convention-speech>
. David Duke (@DrDavidDuke) 
Great Trump Speech, America First! Stop Wars! Defeat the Corrupt elites! 
Protect our Borders!, Fair Trade! Couldn't have said it better!
 <https://twitter.com/DrDavidDuke/status/756334475223638016> July 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/DrDavidDuke/status/756334475223638016> Donald J. Trump 
(@realDonaldTrump) 
FORMAL ACCEPTANCE OF THE NOMINATION! #TrumpPence16 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/TrumpPence16?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/E6ZtVjSQZa 
<https://t.co/E6ZtVjSQZa>
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/756338260230623232> July 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/756338260230623232>  