
You’ve overdone it, again; gorged yourself on titular girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/08/the-girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-review-novel>
 andtitanium men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/05/fiction-runs-away-with-uk-library-loans-lee-child>
, left that set of Penguin classics to stand untouched on the shelf. The 
excuses are: there’s no time, you’re tired, you need to ”switch off” in the 
evening. It’s time to get serious in 2017! Cancel that gym membership, remove 
all trace of kale from the blender and make some new year reading resolutions 
instead.

I did exactly this at the start of 2016, when I was asked about my favourite 
authors. I smugly reeled off a list of names, displaying my immaculate taste 
and erudition.

“Where are the women?” asked my inquisitor. I was confused. “On your list,” 
she said. “Where are the women?”

I laughed and nodded, but left in a fit of panic. I read women, didn’t I? What 
kind ofGay Talese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/02/gay-talese-twitter-female-writers>
-type man monster would I be if I didn’t? So I examined my bookshelves for 
sexism and the result was desultory – barely a woman in sight. I was only in 
love with men, uxoriously devoted toWilliam Gass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/03/why-you-should-read-william-h-gass-eyes-novellas-and-stories>
 andStanley Elkin 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/3712/stanley-elkin-the-art-of-fiction-no-61-stanley-elkin>
, to the point where the likes ofAngela Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/angelacarter> and Mary Gaitskill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/17/ary-gaitskill-interview-literature-is-not-a-realm-for-politeness-the-mare--tim-adams>
 didn’t get a look in. Was it purely taste? Was the type of fiction I adored 
intrinsically male? It was time to make amends: 2016 was my year of reading 
women.

I had just read an essay <http://www.williamgaddis.org/marcus.pdf> by the 
author Ben Marcus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/21/ben-marcus-contain-secret-misery-perversion>
, who, while defending the pleasures of avant garde fiction from the 
middle-of-the-road scorn of Jonathan Franzen, referenced many female writers I 
didn’t know. As a result, I got hold of Kate Braverman’sLithium for Medea 
<https://www.sevenstories.com/books/3257-lithium-for-medea>, a forgotten 
classic that is raw and honest, and her icy prose was as tough and beautiful as 
anything I’d read. After that, I became obsessed by the complex, fabulist tales 
of Mary Caponegro; a student of John Hawkes and Robert Coover,she talks about 
<https://www.cairn.info/revue-francaise-d-etudes-americaines-2002-4-page-16.htm>
 the male domination of avant fiction and her “wish to feminise the legacy of 
her mentors”. Caponegro is an important masthead for bold, adventurous fiction, 
flying her flags within flags higher and more meta than most.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fnew-years-reading-resolution-women-writers-classics-bame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62985921777c93e54c2126f86960210e1b235554%2F0_0_2668_1740%2F2668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20your%20new%20year's%20reading%20resolution%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fnew-years-reading-resolution-women-writers-classics-bame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20your%20new%20year%27s%20reading%20resolution%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fnew-years-reading-resolution-women-writers-classics-bame%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62985921777c93e54c2126f86960210e1b235554%2F0_0_2668_1740%2F2668.jpg>
 Cool brilliance … Jenny Diski. Photograph: Photoshot/Getty Images 
I was on my way. Jenny Diski <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jenny-diski>’s 
cool brilliance was revelatory,Kathryn Davis 
<http://www.bookslut.com/features/2003_11_000969.php>’s irrealism a joy. 
Through the brilliant publishing projectDorothy 
<http://dorothyproject.com/books-gallery/>, I discovered Joanna Ruocco, whose 
remote, repeating style unsettled and thrilled in equal measure. By spring, I 
was joyfully tumbling down the rabbit hole and greedily grabbing all I could. I 
was staggered byJane Bowles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/may/06/short-story-jane-bowles>
 andJoy Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/30/the-visiting-privilege-joy-williams-review>
, awed byLynne Tillman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/feb/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview21>
 andLorrie Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/books/lorrie-moore>, blown 
sideways byZZ Packer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/oct/06/featuresreviews.guardianreview32>
. WhenFlannery O’Connor <https://www.theguardian.com/books/flannery-o-connor> 
got lost in the post, I took solace inDeborah Eisenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/apr/13/brief-survey-short-story-deborah-eisenberg>
 instead. I could go on. I did go on.

The cliche that women writers ignore grand themes in favour of lighter motifs 
is woefully fallacious. Williams’sThe Quick and the Dead 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/10/22/reviews/001022.22schuest.html> and Lydia 
Millet’sLA cycle of novels <http://www.lydiamillet.net/how-the-dead-dream/> are 
ambitious works of moral philosophy, books that scorch the soul and leave you 
weak-limbed and thirsty. Likewise, I found no preoccupation with domesticity, 
another common charge. The characters I read were lost and isolated, detached 
from family, surviving – or not – in a wider socio-political world. I had found 
women writers I loved; life-changers. I am truly a hetero-reader at last, both 
shamed and enlightened.

So take it from me, reading resolutions work. They’re worth doing. And now 
it’s your turn. Make this year a year to read more women or finish more 
giant-sized classics, or perhaps read the entire Booker winners list.

What are your suggestions for reading resolutions? I’ve got mine. Just don’t 
ask me who my favouriteBAME 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/19/bame-prize-slams-uk-publishers-sunny-singh-jhalak-diversity-britain>
 authors are yet, I might start to cry. Ask Ben Marcus instead.
 