
I bought a budget Acer netbook knowing I’d be forced to keep an eye on the 
applications I installed, and be more organised with external storage. I’m 
holding up my end of the bargain, butWindows 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows-10> most certainly isn’t. 
Despite a relatively hassle-free installation, there has been an endless stream 
of prompts to free up space so it can update.

I have next to nothing installed except absolute essentials such as Chrome, 
OpenOffice and iTunes. My iTunes library is on an external USB, and isn’t to 
blame. Despite this, I have less than 3GB left.

There seems to be the option of using external drive space to complete the 
Windows <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> 10 upgrade, but what 
about updates once you’re saddled with it?Stuart

I don’t know if this is a response to my little rant last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/dec/29/which-is-the-best-cheap-windows-laptop-for-my-mum>
, but either way, it’s a good question. For those who missed it, I said: “I 
think 32GB Flash memory drives are too small for traditional laptop uses. 
Microsoft has reduced the size of Windows 10 ... but it’s going to get bigger 
with use. There will be numerous upgrades, growing log files, swap files, and 
large caches of temporary internet files. Looking three years or six upgrades 
ahead, I can’t see a 32GB drive coping without some massive clean-ups.”

PC manufacturers are fitting 32GB eMMC Flash storage chips to cut costs. High 
quality 64GB chips are around twice the price, and the extra, say, $12 to $15 
is significant if you’re selling a system for £149.99 or $199.99. In the long 
term, users would be better off paying a higher price for 64GB of storage, but 
this is not widely understood.

Either way, you probably need a couple of accessories: an SD card, and an 
external USB hard drive (EHD).

Windows 10 can use extra space on the EHD to install updates even when your C: 
drive has run out of space. If so, this will be mentioned on the pop-up that 
says “Windows needs more space”. You can also use the EHD to back up your PC. I 
strongly recommend doing that before you try any of the tips below.

Using an SD card

Most netbooks and Windows tablets have a slot for an SD or microSD card. This 
is a quick way to add 32GB or 64GB or sometimes even more storage. You can 
create an icon for the card and keep it on the desktop for quick access.

If you have large collections of photos, music, movies etc then you can store 
them on SD cards. Further, you can now install programs on SD cards, too. To do 
this, run the Settings app (the cogwheel), select System, then Storage, and 
look for “Save locations”. Whenever it says “This PC (C:)”, you can change it 
to save to your SD card.

You can also move existing programs to your SD card. To do this, go to “Apps & 
features” in the Settings app, and sort them by size. Click on a large program, 
and Windows 10 will give you two options: Move and Uninstall. Click Move. The 
pop-up will say: “This app is currently installed on: This PC (C:) Select a 
drive to move this app to”. Again, use the drop-down menu to select your SD 
card.

Note: don’t move frequently used essentials such as drivers and anti-virus 
programs. It’s probably not worth moving anything smaller than 50MB.

Removing apps

Go back to “Apps & features” in the System section of the Settings app, and 
sort programs by size. There may be some that you want to uninstall, such as 
Candy Crush Soda Saga, and any trial version of Microsoft Office. You can also 
uninstall some parts of Windows 10, but most apps are not actually installed 
until you use them. You only have placeholders.

On my system, Windows 10’s Get Started app took up 44K. After I used it to 
watch several help videos, its size swelled to 42.5MB. Many Windows 10 apps 
only take up a couple of megabytes, and I have 15 apps that only take up 16K 
each (Maps, Sport, Voice Recorder, Weather etc). It’s not worth uninstalling 
these placeholders. The space saving is trivial and the next major Windows 10 
update will just put them back. Life’s too short.

Note that Windows 10 will not uninstall some core apps – such as Mail, Photos, 
and Groove Music – butCCleaner Free <https://www.piriform.com/ccleaner/download>
 will. Just select Tools, then Uninstall. However, as mentioned above, you 
won’t save much space, and at some point, Windows 10 will put them back. Just 
don’t uninstall the Windows Store app.

Saving storage space

The quickest way to clear space in Windows is to run Microsoft’s built-in Disk 
Clean-up utility, or an alternative such as CCleaner Free, as explainedtwo 
weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/dec/22/which-programs-should-i-install-when-setting-up-windows-10>
. Only do this after you have made sure you know all your log-on IDs and 
passwords, and you have saved your browser session, so that you don’t lose all 
your open tabs. By default, CCleaner will remove the history files and cookies 
used to store this information.

Microsoft’s Disk Clean-up utility can safely delete hidden system files. Click 
the button that says “Clean up system files” for the option to delete various 
files including “Previous Windows Installation(s)”.

Next, go back to the Storage page and click on your C: drive. Windows 10 will 
scan your 32GB and tell you how much space you have free. After a while, it 
will also tell you what’s taking up space. The entries will include System & 
reserved, Apps & games, Documents, Pictures, Music etc. There will also be 
entries for Mail, OneDrive, Temporary files and Other.

Click each entry for more information and the chance to manage it. Click 
“System & reserved” to see how much space Windows 10 is using for system files, 
virtual memory (ie thepagefile.sys file 
<http://lifehacker.com/5426041/understanding-the-windows-pagefile-and-why-you-shouldnt-disable-it>
 used as a scratchpad), hibernation (the hiberfil.sys file stores your PC’s 
state while it’s asleep, and is used byFast Startup 
<http://www.howtogeek.com/243901/the-pros-and-cons-of-windows-10s-fast-startup-mode/>
) and system restore (system files you would need to restore your PC to an 
earlier state).

These work files may well take up more space than Windows 10. There’s not much 
you can do about them without some expertise, the old Control Panel and a few 
DOS-type commands. However, you can limit how much virtual memory Windows can 
use – though it will work badly if it doesn’t have enough – and the space 
available for system restore files. You can also move the hibernation file to 
your SD card.

Hard drive management

Finally, and most dangerously, you can check your hard drive partitions. 
Windows 10 creates its own small recovery partition, WinRE, which doesn’t have 
a drive letter. It’s what lets you re-set your PC. I would never delete it. 
However, if you upgraded to Windows 10, your PC may still have an OEM recovery 
partition for an earlier version of Windows. You can delete this and – most 
importantly – reclaim the space by using a free program such asEaseUS Partition 
Master <http://www.partition-tool.com/> or AOMEI Partition Assistant 
<http://www.disk-partition.com/free-partition-manager.html>.

You can also, of course, accidentally brick your PC. It’s important to create 
“recovery media” and a back-up before messing with this stuff.

Install Windows from USB

Microsoft is releasing two major versions of Windows 10 each year. The next 
one, theCreators Update 
<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/upcoming-features>, is being tested 
now. These updates are installed as new operating systems, in just the same way 
as the upgrade from Windows 7 or 8.1 to 10. This means you need space for the 
large download, the working operating system, and a back-up copy of the old 
version. This is stored in a hidden folder called “Windows.old” in case you 
need to roll back to it.

However, you can also download the latest version on a different PC and use 
Microsoft’sMedia Creation Tool 
<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/software-download/windows10> to create 
installation media on a 4GB or larger USB thumb drive or DVD. You must select 
the option to “Create installation media for another PC” and choose the correct 
version for your laptop (64-bit Windows 10 Home, or whatever). You may also 
need to set your laptop to boot from USB. You don’t need a product key as your 
Windows 10 activation is stored online against the Microsoft Account you use to 
log on.

You can use this approach to “Start fresh with a clean installation of Windows 
10 <https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/software-download/windows10startfresh>” as 
per Microsoft’s instructions. However, it removes all the programs that are not 
part of Windows 10, including your manufacturer’s apps, support apps, drivers, 
customised power and sleep settings, and so on. While you can opt to keep 
personal files, you may lose digital licenses and related content you have paid 
for. You must back them up.

It’s not as simple as letting Windows 10 auto-update, but at least you’ll end 
up with the latest version of Windows 10 and the maximum amount of free storage 
space.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 