
In his first televised interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-deportation-immigration-criminals>
 as president-elect, Donald Trump gave a glimpse into his plans for large-scale 
deportations. He suggested his administration would initially target 2-3 
million undocumented immigrants for removal, people who he branded criminals, 
“gang members, drugs dealers”. But even a cursory analysis of Trump’s target 
number of deportations shows that he will have to deport far more than 
undocumented immigrants convicted of serious crimes.

The incoming Trump administration will try to implement the harshest 
immigration regime in presidential history, with his closest advisersmaking 
clear 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/kris-kobach-trump-immigration-231430> 
they will seek to expedite these deportations. And those deported are likely to 
include a far greater number of those who have lived in the US for years – 
perhaps, experts warn, even those who are in the US on temporary visas or green 
cards.

The US already deports vast numbers of undocumented immigrants. During the 
first six years of his tenure, Barack Obama deported two and a half million 
people, under the guise of ridding the US of “criminals, gang bangers, [and] 
people who are hurting the community”. Obama’s rhetoric was somewhat misleading 
– aNew York Times investigation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/07/us/more-deportations-follow-minor-crimes-data-shows.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fginger-thompson&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=2&pgtype=collection>
 found that two-thirds of those deported by the administration by 2013 had only 
minor criminal convictions or none at all. This underlies the impossibility of 
Trump’s pledge: there simply are not enough people who match his description as 
serious criminals to deport, and many speculate the targets he wants to reach 
will mean not only dramatically broadening the scope of deportations to meet 
targets, but also seriously curtail any oversight within the system.

“It’s important to point out that Obama was actively trying to deport a record 
number of people, and even he hit two and a half million over two terms,” said 
Grace Meng, a senior immigration researcher at Human Rights Watch’s US program. 
“So the idea of 2 to 3 million, whether it’s immediately, or even within a 
couple of years, would require a system that really defies our imagination of 
what a fair system might be.”

In the absence of official data, the Migration Policy Institute estimates 
<http://www.migrationpolicy.org/news/unauthorized-immigrants-criminal-convictions-who-might-be-priority-removal>
 about 820,000 of the roughly 11 million undocumented migrants living in 
America are likely to have a criminal conviction, with only 300,000 projected 
to hold a felony conviction. Since November 2014, the Obama administration has 
actively targeted this cohort of individuals. They have drastically reduced the 
number of interior deportations – those involving apprehensions that occur away 
from the border and usually involve individuals who have lived in the US for 
years – by activating a “Priority Enforcement Program <https://www.ice.gov/pep>
”. This program sees Immigration and Customs Enforcement [Ice] agents 
prioritise undocumented arrestees picked up by state or local law enforcement 
who are found to have serious felonies, gang affiliations or terror suspicions.

But even under this new policy, Ice data obtained under the Freedom of 
Information Act <http://www.myweb.uiowa.edu/rrocha/2016ICFO11263.pdf> by 
researchers at the University of Iowa, and reported here for the first time, 
highlights that a tiny fraction – 6.73% of total deportations in 2014 – 
involved individuals convicted of a violent crime, while 43.5% were deported 
with no recorded criminal history at all.

To get to 2 to 3 million will mean a dramatic rewriting of who or what is a 
criminal
Professor Karthick Ramakrishnan, UC Riverside 
“To get to 2 to 3 million [deportations] will mean a dramatic rewriting of who 
or what is a criminal, and rewriting that definition in a way that involves 
acts most Americans would not consider to be a crime,” said Professor Karthick 
Ramakrishnan, an immigration researcher at the University of California, 
Riverside and author of Framing Immigrants. “It would also mean considering not 
just undocumented immigrants, but people here who are on temporary visas or 
green cards that have committed minor crimes like shoplifting or DUI.”

Trump’s advisers have now acknowledged their net will need to widen and have 
started explaining 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-immigration-criminals-20161114-story.html>
 that the administration will seek to deport not just convicted criminals but 
also those accused of a crime or gang affiliation as well as those charged with 
minor immigration violations, such as illegal re-entry.

Some have argued 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/11/11/13586156/trump-deport-immigrants>
 that Trump’s new immigration regime could simply use the tools left over from 
the so-called deportation machines created by both the Bush and Obama 
administrations. But the sheer scale of Trump’s project and the perceived 
desire to act quickly will probably require legislative action through Congress 
to enhance and expand the effectiveness of these devices.

In August, Trump pledged 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/donald-j.-trump-address-on-immigration>
 to restore the Secure Communities program, the precursor to the Priority 
Enforcement Program, which was utilised by both the Bush and Obama 
administration until 2014. The program allowed federal authorities to conduct 
broader, less targeted sweeps of undocumented arrestees held by local 
authorities, and allowed Ice agents to request that local jails detain suspects 
past their release date in order to allow more time to transfer them to federal 
detention facilities.

In the same speech, Trump also pledged to expand 287(g) agreements between Ice 
and local law enforcement, which allow local police officers to carry out 
certain functions of immigration law enforcement directly. Ice reportedly 
credited these partnerships with identifying more than 400,000 “potentially 
removable aliens” between 2006 and 2015,according to Politifact 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/sep/06/donald-trump/trump-says-secure-communities-287g-immigration-pro/>
. But local law enforcement officials, most notably the Maricopa County 
sheriff’s office in Arizona, were routinely criticized for discriminatory 
policing, and as a result the Obama administration substantiallyrolled back 
their use in 2012 <https://www.ice.gov/factsheets/287g-reform>. 

Trump’s promise to expand or reinstate both these programs is a strong 
indication the new administration will significantly intensify interior 
deportations. But these removals havemarkedly declined 
<https://www.ice.gov/removal-statistics> since Obama entered office, from 
237,941 in 2009 to 69,478 last year, as the outgoing administration – 
particularly in its second term – focused on deportations at the border, many 
of which occur through an expedited removal process that requires no hearing in 
court.

This sharpening of the interior deportation machine will leave a number of 
institutions in the crosshairs for reform, said conservative analysts close to 
Trump’s transition team. First, theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> will probably focus 
on “streamlining” civil immigration proceedings in court, said Dan Stein, 
president of the Federation for American Immigration Reform (Fair).

“The different kinds of changes that would be made in the court system will 
include dramatically adding to the number of immigration judges, curtailing 
review opportunities, hopefully making some changes to the board of immigration 
appeals, and really suggesting to Congress that they limit the definition of 
asylum,” said Stein, whose organisation is listed as an anti-immigrant 
extremist groupby the Southern Poverty Law Center 
<https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/group/federation-american-immigration-reform>
.

There is already a backlog of over half a million cases before the immigration 
courts <http://trac.syr.edu/whatsnew/email.161110.html>, making this task 
nothing short of monumental, and leaving advocates concerned that due process 
could simply fly out of the window.

Stein also predicted the Trump administration will seek to expand the Ice 
detention network, due to the rising rate of interior apprehensions. The network
already detains more than 30,000 people and relies heavily on privatised, 
substandard facilities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/us-immigration-detention-facilities-private>
, raising concerns that the standard of care will plummet even further.

But to proceed with even just these two reforms, the Trump administration will 
probably need significant funding passed through Congress. For some advocates 
there is hope that this may at least curtail Trump’s ability to act with the 
pace he seems wedded to.

“Anything that needs to be done by Congress is going to take time and I think 
there are Republican and Democratic members in Congress who see immigrant 
rights as being crucial to the wellbeing of this country, and I hope they will 
resist these efforts,” said Meng, of Human Rights Watch. “It’s already a very 
expensive system.”
 