
The research community hasn’t had much to smile about in recent months. Faced 
with thegrinding uncertainties of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2016/jul/14/six-leading-scientists-give-perspectives-on-uk-science-after-brexit>
, concerns overuniversity finances 
<http://wonkhe.com/blogs/getting-worse-hefces-bleak-prognosis-for-university-finances/>
, and aroot-and-branch reorganisation of the funding system 
<http://wonkhe.com/blogs/analysis-concerns-ukri-blueprint/>, 2016 has been 
morphing into the sector’s ownannus horribilis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/01/could-2016-be-our-own-annus-horribilis>
.

So when news broke over the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-to-promise-2bn-a-year-for-scientific-research>
 about a big boost for R&D funding, the first reaction of many was to raise a 
sceptical eyebrow. Experience says it’s wise to treat big, headline numbers 
with caution until there’s an opportunity to scour HM Treasury’s fine print.

Last time there was a significant boost in UK research spending was 2004, when 
Gordon Brown as chancellor unveiled his10-year framework for science and 
innovation <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/nov/09/economy.uk1> - and 
even that was not all it seemed. Not long after, the financial crisis hit, and 
a decade of austerity began, in which budgets havebasically flatlined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2015/dec/03/spending-review-uk-science-chancellor-please-stand-up 
https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2015/dec/03/spending-review-uk-science-chancellor-please-stand-up>
.

When news broke of an extra £2 billion a year, it seemed likely that at least 
some of this new funding would be reheated from past announcements, or 
funnelled into business R&D tax credits and loans, which have adebatable impact 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/publications/impact-and-effectiveness-fiscal-incentives-rd>
 on the “real” research and innovation economy. ThePM’s speech to the CBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-to-promise-2bn-a-year-for-scientific-research>
 offered little in the way of further detail, and the journalNature reflected 
the mood of many in its headline “Cautious welcome for UK government’s vague 
£2-billion research pledge 
<http://www.nature.com/news/cautious-welcome-for-uk-government-s-vague-2-billion-research-pledge-1.21022>
.”

But with the full autumn statement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/571556/autumn_statement_2016_print.pdf>
 in front of us, it’s clear that this really is new money. By 2020, government 
spending on R&D will grow to an additional £2bn over and above existing 
spending, an increase of about a fifth. The investment ramps up year-on-year to 
reach this level, and means a total boost of £4.7 billion by 2020-21. AsHM 
Treasury points out 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/571556/autumn_statement_2016_print.pdf>
, this is the largest increase in R&D investment in any Parliament since 1979.

The autumn statement document 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/571556/autumn_statement_2016_print.pdf>
 explains the two streams through which the new funding will flow: a new 
Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund (ISCF) for collaborative research between 
industry and academia, targeted at priority technologies; and a broader boost 
to UK capacity in research and innovation. Intriguingly, the document stresses 
grant funding - even by Innovate UK – when until recently government had been 
pushing Innovate UKto replace grants with soft loans 
<http://www.mscrnd.com/government-considers-plan-to-replace-innovate-uk-grants-with-loans/>
.

The challenge-led approach of the ISCF is something that bodies like Nesta 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/> and many others have called for 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/why-and-how-government-should-invest-innovation-autumn-statement>
. It represents the culmination of a revival of interest in activist technology 
policy in the UK, which has been building since the financial crisis. Earlier 
steps in this direction were tentative and criticised for being sub-scale.

Historically, public spending on applied technological R&D began to fall in 
relative terms in the 1960s. In the 1980s, Margaret Thatcher believed strongly 
that it was important for the taxpayer to continue to support so-called “basic” 
research but that it was the role of industry, not government, to fund 
“applied” R&D. The problem was, outside a few key sectors, the bulk of UK 
industry took its cue from government, running down its own investment in R&D 
relative to international comparators.The UK’s technology base withered 
<http://speri.dept.shef.ac.uk/2016/04/14/new-speri-paper-innovation-research-and-the-uks-productivity-crisis/>
 and no amount of effort to wring out innovations from basic research through 
commercialization and technology transfer could hope to compensate.

So it’s noteworthy that a Conservative government has looked afresh at 
international competitors, such as the US and Germany, and decisively rejected 
the Thatcherite distaste for large-scale technological R&D spending. Though of 
course, the driving force behind this shift is a defensive need to anticipate 
and prepare for the impacts of Brexit.

This week’s windfall is also a real credit to Greg Clark, the business 
secretary and Jo Johnson, minister for universities and science, and to the 
less visible but crucial influence ofSir John Kingman 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/john-kingman-to-lead-creation-of-new-6-billion-research-and-innovation-body>
, who recently moved from the top job at HM Treasury to become the inaugural 
chair ofUK Research and Innovation 
<http://wonkhe.com/blogs/analysis-ukri-if-you-want-to-how-to-read-the-new-research-funding-landscape/>
, the new mega-funding agency that is being created through theHigher Education 
and Research Bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2016-17/highereducationandresearch.html>. 
As one policymaker told us off the record yesterday: “This is classic John 
Kingman. Be as bold as you can and then double it.” It was Kingman who was the 
principal architect ofGordon Brown’s 10-year framework 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/nol/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/science_innovation_120704.pdf> in 
2004, and having steered HM Treasury through the bank bailout and quantitative 
easing in the decade since, he is perhaps the only Whitehall figure who could 
have delivered such an ambitious plan.

Beyond the headlines, there are plenty of details still to be worked out. How 
much of the new money will go to the research councils, and how much to the 
ISCF (through Innovate UK)? How will new challenges and technological 
priorities be defined, and with what mix of government, academic, disciplinary 
and user input?

The autumn statement promises an “evidence-based” approach – but by 
definition, there is no reliable evidence about technologies that don’t yet 
exist, so priority-setting for R&D is always a political process. However, it 
is one that the UK could do better, perhaps by adopting tools likeArloesiadur 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/arloesiadur-innovation-analytics-experiment>, the 
dashboard that the Welsh government has developed to understand its innovation 
strengths.

More importantly, will this extra investment be enough to offset the damaging 
uncertainties being created for the research community by Brexit? Some, such as 
Richard Jones,argued yesterday 
<https://twitter.com/RichardALJones/status/801539074217639936> that the scale 
of new investment suggests the government has resigned itself to ending UK 
involvement in European R&D programmes after 2020. But officials at BEIS are 
adamant that this is not the case, and UK participation – in whatever form – 
remains a key item in the Article 50 negotiations to come.

Another uncertainty is whether any of this new money will come through the 
quality-related (QR) side of the UK’s funding system (allocated via theResearch 
Excellence Framework <http://www.ref.ac.uk/>). The higher education and 
research bill emphasises the importance of balance across the two pillars of the
dual support system <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/rsrch/funding/>. As Graeme Reid 
<https://twitter.com/graemetr>, professor of research policy at UCL, told us 
yesterday: “With so much new investment, the government’s commitment to a 
balanced funding system is being tested. This is a chance for ministers to 
demonstrate that they are serious about preserving that balance.”

How the new ISCF is implemented will of course be key to its impact. We are 
told that the new fund will be modelled onDARPA <http://www.darpa.mil/>, but it 
needs to drawthe right lessons 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/art-and-craft-running-innovation-agency> from the 
US defence research agency. DARPA funds groundbreaking, challenge-based 
research, and one reason it works is because it can fund the best research 
whether it takes place in universities or businesses. Formulaic approaches to 
funding, associated with research grants, sit uncomfortably with this 
risk-taking approach. So it is hard to see how UKRI will play a DARPA-like role 
given the cultures and practices it will inherit from its constituent funding 
bodies.

In any case perhaps DARPA is not what the UK really needs right now. We may 
need to walk before we can run, and a steady focus on rebuilding our technology 
base may be more appropriate than leaping into riskier waters.

On other fronts, the review of the Small Business Research Initiative (SBRI) 
<https://sbri.innovateuk.org/>, announced on Monday, could help deliver the 
holy grail of innovation policy: using the government’s massive procurement 
budget to drive new technologies. To get this right, Whitehall will need fix 
the internal wiring of departments, joining up procurement and strategy 
functions. The review should kick-start an open debate about how best to 
achieve this, drawing on evaluations of the SBRI and comparable international 
initiatives. TheAdvanced Systems Agencies model 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/if-not-darpa-then-what-advanced-systems-agency> 
is one model worth exploring.

The review of “patient capital” and the government’s commitment of £400 
million to co-invest in growth capital funds could also benefit high tech 
businesses. This co-investment model has agood track record 
<https://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/reshaping_the_uk_economy.pdf> in 
encouraging venture capital investment, both in the UK and elsewhere (for 
examples, through Israel’s Yozma programme).

Overall, this week’s announcements represent an unexpected and transformative 
statement of intent. There will always be voices calling for more, but the 
prospects for UKRI to deliver a step-change in the UK’s research and innovation 
performance now look genuinely exciting. And lingering opposition to UKRI,which 
was expected to intensify 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/blog/amendments-uk-he-bill-will-do-little-convince-its-fiercest-critics>
 when the higher education and research bill heads to the House of Lords on 6 
December, is now dead in the water. To prove the value of the new body, Jo 
Johnson simply needs to smile and utter the words “£4.7 billion”.

James Wilsdon <https://twitter.com/jameswilsdon> is professor of research 
policy at the University of Sheffield 
<https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/faculty/social-sciences> and chair of the Campaign 
for Social Science <https://campaignforsocialscience.org.uk/>. Kieron Flanagan 
<http://www.manchester.ac.uk/research/mbs/kieron.flanagan/> is a senior 
lecturer in science and technology policy at the University of Manchester’s
Manchester Institute of Innovation Research 
<https://research.mbs.ac.uk/innovation/>. Stian Westlake 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/users/stian-westlake> is executive director of policy 
and research atNesta <http://www.nesta.org.uk/>, the UK foundation for 
innovation.

This post was amended at 14:00 on 24 November 2016 with minor changes to 
correct typos and clarify the point about Gordon Brown’s 10-year framework.

 