
The first day and night of the 2016 Republican national convention is 
complete. Here’s what we learned:

 * The program reached its dramatic climax with a splashy entrance 
<https://twitter.com/FoxNews/status/755237027960848384> by Donald Trump, who 
emerged in a cloud of blue smoke to We Are the Champions by Queen. He said 
“we’re gonna win so big” and introduced his wife, Melania, the next speaker. 
 * There was a moment of major uncertainty on the arena floor in mid-afternoon 
when the presiding officer ignored and spoke over an attempt by delegates 
opposed to Trumpto derail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/18/never-trump-republican-convention-roll-call-vote-rule-39>
 a rules adoption process. The movement failed. 
 * The failure of the Anybody but Trump movement complete, it appeared that no 
hurdle remained to Trump’s official nomination on Tuesday. 
 * Monday evening’s program was devoted to national security issues, which 
meant a movie about Benghazi and emotional testimonies by parents who had lost 
children to intoxicated drivers who turned out to be undocumented migrants. 
 * At times the hearty opposition of the arena crowd to illegal immigration 
seemed to tip over into an antipathy toward immigrants more broadly, and from 
there to foreigners or anything falling outside the tightly defined boundaries 
of “USA! USA!” a repeated chant. 
 * “The world outside our borders is a dark place, a scary place,” retired 
Navy seal Michael Luttrell said to applause. “America is the light.”

 * Former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani brought the crowd to its feet with some 
charged lines about race and policing. “When [police] come to save your life, 
they don’t ask if you’re black or white, they just come to save you!” he said. 
 * The program seemed to stretch later than expected, with Melania Trump 
speaking more than an hour before the end, and senator Joni Ernst delivering 
her headliner speech to an almost empty room. 
 * The crowd seemed charmed by Melania, clapping enthusiastically at her 
heavily accented descriptions of how much her husband loves America. But it was 
revealed that she hadborrowed lines verbatim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/melania-trump-republican-convention-plagiarism-michelle-obama>
 from the speech Michelle Obama gave to the 2008 convention. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fcompare-melania-trumps-speech-with-michelle-obamas-2008-address-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Compare%20Melania%20Trump's%20speech%20with%20Michelle%20Obama's%202008%20address%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fcompare-melania-trumps-speech-with-michelle-obamas-2008-address-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Compare%20Melania%20Trump%27s%20speech%20with%20Michelle%20Obama%27s%202008%20address%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fcompare-melania-trumps-speech-with-michelle-obamas-2008-address-video&media=>
Compare Melania Trump’s speech with Michelle Obama’s 2008 address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/19/compare-melania-trumps-speech-with-michelle-obamas-2008-address-video>
 * The day began with the Trump campaign disparaging non-attendees. Trump 
campaign chairman Paul Manafort said the Bushes were “part of the past” and 
said Ohio governor John Kasich was “embarrassing his state” by not 
participating in the convention. 
 * Cleveland police reported that two protests of 450-500 people concluded 
“peacefully” and there was just one arrest Monday for misdemeanor obstruction 
and resisting arrest.

That’s it for tonight. See you back here bright and early tomorrow. Thanks for 
all the comments.
 