
They filed into the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> chamber to learn what 
Brexit means for the economy, and filed out to be shamed the next morning by 
newspaper picture editors armed with yellow pens. In one photograph, half of 
the 42 Labour MPs sitting behind John McDonnell can be seen immersed in their 
mobile phones while the shadow chancellor responds to the autumn statement.

“Isn’t that awful?” asked Judith Woods in the Daily Telegraph, comparing the 
“rude” MPs to millennials unable to resist the lure of their devices during pub 
quizzes. “Isn’t this addiction steering dangerously close to out-and-out 
junkiedom?” she added, gamely offering to “restore Britain’s manners to their 
factory settings”.

McDonnell was sanguine about the perceived digital snub. “It doesn’t look 
good, but that’s what happens,” he told ITV’s Good Morning Britain. But should 
it happen? Beyond the obvious danger that phones can pose, not least on the 
road, should we take a stand against tapping in the workplace?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwhat-were-labour-mps-doing-on-their-mobile-phones-in-parliament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8235e4c7693440e49fee0d8680d790cba28533de%2F544_343_1295_1617%2F1295.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20were%20all%20those%20MPs%20doing%20on%20their%20phones%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwhat-were-labour-mps-doing-on-their-mobile-phones-in-parliament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20were%20all%20those%20MPs%20doing%20on%20their%20phones%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwhat-were-labour-mps-doing-on-their-mobile-phones-in-parliament%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8235e4c7693440e49fee0d8680d790cba28533de%2F544_343_1295_1617%2F1295.jpg>
 ‘When I look at that picture, I see a lot of MPs trying to live-stream what’s 
going on to make it more accessible’ … Sarah Champion MP. Photograph: Victor De 
Jesus 
Labour MP Sarah Champion, one of those pictured, makes a stirring defence of 
connected politicians. “When I look at that picture, I see a lot of MPs trying 
to live-stream what’s going on to make it more accessible,” she says. “They’re 
not playing Candy Crush – or at least this one certainly isn’t.”

Seven minutes after McDonnell stood up to respond to Philip Hammond, Champion 
tweeted <https://twitter.com/SarahChampionMP/status/801419272429965312> about 
the chancellor’s failure to address the gender pay gap. She then retweeted 
shadow health secretary Jonathan Ashworth, another of the MPs in the picture, 
who wassharing his dismay 
<https://twitter.com/JonAshworth/status/801442838684848128> about the absence 
of the NHS in the autumn statement.

“Tweeting is a direct way for me to get my messages out to people,” adds 
Champion, who has more than 20,000 followers, many of whom she represents. “I 
could put out a press statement hours afterwards, but it may not be picked up. 
This way I can commentate live, and if I’ve got a juicy story on Twitter, 
within minutes I have journalists calling me for more information.”

Outside parliament, rules, unspoken or otherwise, vary. Debrett’s, the arbiter 
of etiquette for centuries, is strict on the matter. “In a work context, 
mobiles can be seen as disruptive, self-involved and anti the corporate 
culture,” itsNetiquette Pocket Book 
<http://www.debretts.com/product/debretts-netiquette/> says, adding: “The 
cardinal rule is always to switch your phone off before you go into a meeting.”

Three-quarters of the respondents to a 2013 survey of business people by the 
University of Southern California said that it was inappropriate to read phones 
during meetings. But Monideepa Tarafdar, a professor of management at Lancaster 
University, says bosses are adapting to modern demands for always-on 
communication. “There are times in meetings when not everyone is talking, and 
if something work-related can be quickly finished off with a little email, 
people can do that,” she says. “I think people are sensible about when 
interruptions might affect productivity.”

Champion says she wouldn’t use her phone for anything other than calls were 
she not an MP, but insists social media offers a vital, two-way channel. “I 
also get alerted to campaigns and casework,” she adds. “And MPs are expensive. 
Do you want us just listening for hours, or to be able to work and talk to 
people and reflect debate? That’s a much better use of my time.”

Norway's PM caught playing Pokémon Go in parliament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/05/norway-prime-minister-caught-playing-pokemon-go-parliament-erna-solberg>
House of Commons authorities have permitted the use of phones in the chamber 
since 2007, but emails on Blackberries were the only distraction then. In May, 
the Speaker John Bercow burned Jeremy Hunt for “fiddling ostentatiously” with 
his phone during a debate, calling him “rank discourteous” for “impairing 
parliamentary decorum”. David Cameron banned phones from cabinet meetings in 
2010, and last year had to remind Michael Gove of this when the minister’s 
ringtone gave him away. Theresa May has expanded the ban to include Apple 
Watches, reportedly over concerns that they might be hacked by spies. In 2014, 
Conservative MP Nigel Mills apologised after beingcaught playing Candy Crush 
Saga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/08/tory-mp-nigel-mills-apologises-candy-crush>
 during a meeting of the work and pensions committee.

But Labour MPs – or anyone else – feeling unfairly rebuked can seek solidarity 
with the Norwegian prime minister Erna Solberg, no less, who wascaught playing 
Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/05/norway-prime-minister-caught-playing-pokemon-go-parliament-erna-solberg>
 during a parliamentary debate last month. It wasn’t the first incidence of 
Pokémon distraction in the house: Trine Skei Grande, the Liberal party leader 
who had previously been rumbled,responded on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Trinesg/status/783549174902059008?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
(naturally). “We ladies can do two things at the same time you know,” she 
wrote, including a winky-face emoji for good measure.

Smartphone etiquette – the professionals’ views

Pauline Brimblecombe, 62, GP and prison doctor in Cambridgeshire: Some 
practices have “no mobile phone” signs, but nobody pays any attention of 
course. I’ve had patients answer non-urgent calls in consultations, which is 
rather irritating, and I’ve also known patients to complain about doctors using 
phones. It’s part of life now. But not in prison, where phones are banned. I 
leave mine in the car. In a way, it’s quite nice – an unlikely oasis where I 
can go and have an uninterrupted day.

Sarah Champion, 47, Labour MP for Rotherham: If I’m awake, my phone is on, but 
it never comes into the bedroom, and I see it as a piece of kit for me to do my 
job. It’s fundamental for me to able to communicate directly with people. I’m 
on Twitter, which I do myself, and I’ve got Facebook, though that tends to be 
more press release-type stuff. I haven’t got Snapchat – I’m old, remember. And 
I don’t have my parliamentary inbox on my phone, because that would take up 
every minute of my day. On a busy day I can get 200 emails per hour.

Michael Donkor, 30, English teacher in south London: New students get a talk 
about the importance of not touching phones in lessons. They go a bit crazy at 
first because they come to a new school expecting all these new freedoms, but 
they soon get used to it. We’re not supposed to use them either, but 
occasionally I’ve felt a buzz in my pocket and resisted the urge to check for 
that email from the mortgage broker. Phones tend to stay put away, even in the 
staff room. After two hours in the company of young people, you really just 
want an actual conversation with an adult.
 