
Donald Trump has been on Twitter again 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/820786730257285120> this morning, 
this time in reaction to an admonishment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/john-brennan-trump-nazi-germany-russia>
 made on Sunday by outgoing CIA director John Brennan criticising the 
president-elect for comparing the US intelligence community with Nazi Germany 
and urging him to rein in “talking and tweeting” that could impact on national 
security. Trump responded by slamming the credibility of US intelligence on key 
national security issues and attacking Brennan personally. “Was this the leaker 
of Fake News?”Trump tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/820789938887294977>.

This spat is the latest in a series of hostile exchanges that reflect 
ever-worsening discord between the US president-elect and the American 
intelligence institutions. The implications are potentially severe, not only 
for the day-to-day operations of the US intelligence agencies but also for the 
very prospect of rational government, which relies on a functioning 
relationship between those whose job it is to understand the world and those 
who make decisions.

It’s safe to say that the US intelligence community’s handling of the Trump 
dossier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-dossier-explainer-details>
 didnothing to improve its relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/us-intelligence-trump-dossier-leak>
 with the incoming commander-in-chief. The two-page summary of unverified 
reports suggesting “kompromat” on Trump, which landed on the desks of the 
president and president-elect, handed Trump and his team the opportunity to 
accuse them of being complicit inthe spread of “fake news” and “phoney stuff” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/us-intelligence-trump-dossier-leak>
.

While these accusations are unfounded and over the top – the Trump dossier has 
nothing to do with the separate problem of fake news – the situation does 
highlight the critical need for intelligence professionals to adhere to the
tradecraft standards 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligence_analysis#Analytic_tradecraft> that 
command the trust that decision-makers must place in them. The tradecraft that 
matters most these days for intelligence organisations (contrary to fake news 
peddlers) relates to the analysis and assessment of information, rather than 
its collection. In an age of information abundance, collecting information is 
arguably less challenging than the task of extracting value from it for 
decision-making purposes. Indeed, information becomes intelligence only after 
it has been analysed and assessed, and decision-makers require intelligent 
judgments.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Trump attacks media and intelligence community in press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
While the professionalisation of intelligence in government circles has led to 
the development of cutting-edge analytical and assessment techniques, the 
corporate intelligence world tends to be less sophisticated, where the line 
between “intelligence” and “information” is more blurred. The privately 
produced source reports about Trump do not constitute intelligence product;they 
simply present information 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/11/kremlin-ridicules-claims-collected-material-donald-trump>
 that might or might not be true. It remains surprising, therefore, that a 
two-page summary of this reporting, which fell well short of normal tradecraft 
standards, was included in high-level government briefings.

The fallout of the Trump dossier handling will present unprecedented 
challenges to US intelligence organisations, activities and knowledge. As 
former CIA acting director Mike Morell warned on CBS’sFace the Nation on 8 
January 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/former-cia-head-says-donald-trumps-intel-disparagement-will-have-significant-effects/>
, staff morale will undoubtedly suffer if President Trump turns out to be 
permanently uninterested in what they do. It is unlikely that he will seek to 
actively invest in the intelligence community or empower its leadership; there 
is already loose talk suggesting the administration aims toweaken the influence 
of the office of the director of national intelligence 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/lawmakers-officials-frown-on-donald-trumps-dismissal-of-u-s-intelligence-1483554450>
, who is supposed to serve as the principal adviser to the president on such 
matters, following the perceived mishandling of Russian hacking claims.

Even if Trump doesn’t restructure US intelligence organisations in any 
meaningful way, it remains highly doubtful that he will ever become a keen 
consumer of intelligence material. As per Morell’s warning, the existence of a 
commander-in-chief that doesn’t appear to value intelligence product or process 
could jeopardise the US’s ability to recruit sources, especially those 
motivated by a strong sense of patriotism and the desire to make a difference. 
A disengaged president would surely do little to incentivise agents to take 
risks to provide information if there is little prospect of that information 
ever influencing the thinking of high-level decision-makers serving in aTrump 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>.

Perhaps most concerning, however, are questions surrounding the status and 
handling of intelligence as a type of knowledge, especially as it pertains to 
national security, foreign affairs and defence. “I know more about Islamic 
State than the generals do” is a statement typical of Trump, but the emergence 
of a thick “post-truth” atmosphere seeping through American (and British) 
political and media institutions risks stifling expert opinion where it is 
needed most.

Related: John Brennan: Trump's 'Nazi Germany' tweet to US agencies was 
'outrageous' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/john-brennan-trump-nazi-germany-russia>

In 1949, the great American academic and serviceman Sherman Kent introduced 
the concept of “strategic intelligence”. The core idea was that intelligence 
played a critical role in supporting rational government, by helping 
policymakers gain a “big picture” understanding of the world around them and 
make informed strategic decisions. It became the backbone of the western 
intelligence model, which serves as the blueprint for the US and other 
democratic countries worldwide.

Its fundamental purpose is to “provide truth to power”, promote evidence-based 
thinking, and present perspectives that might challenge the preconceptions of 
those in charge. It stands in stark contrast to politicised models, often found 
in totalitarian states, that feature organisations that struggle to resist the 
pressure to simply say what their political masters want to hear. History shows 
us that the relationship between intelligence and policy has rarely been 
straightforward, but it will struggle to provide any examples of previous US 
presidents-elect publicly denigrating the very institutions that US 
policymakers rely on for objective insight and evidence-based perspectives that 
might serve to challenge the ideological convictions of politicians.

The western intelligence model has survived in the US for almost 70 years. It 
may now be facing its sternest test yet.
 