
The third day of the Republican national convention is over and done. Here’s a 
summary of what happened:

 * Ted Cruz did not endorse Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/20/ted-cruz-speech-republican-national-convention-trump-endorsement>
 in a speech to the convention, and he was lustily booed by a crowd that had 
cheered much of his speech to that point. 
 * “Please, don’t stay home in November,” Cruz said. “Stand, and speak, and 
vote your conscience, vote for candidates up and down the ticket who you trust 
to defend our freedom and to be faithful to the constitution.” Then he stood 
and waved to thousands booing.

 * Newt Gingrich came out after Cruz and said the crowd has misunderstood, 
that what Cruz said was in effect an endorsement of Trump because Trump was the 
only candidate faithful to the constitution, see? 
 * A sense of deteriorating order in the arena was expanded by the flickering 
malfunctions of the Jumbotrons as Eric Trump attempted to follow Cruz. 
 * Vice-presidential nominee Mike Pence won an enthusiastic, if not quite 
rapturous, reception fora smooth speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/20/mike-pence-speech-rnc-ted-cruz-donald-trump>
 that framed the election efficiently thus: “It’s change versus status quo.”

 * After Pence’s speech, the last of the evening and on the late side of 
things,Donald Trump came onstage to very strong cheering. And mis-kissed his 
running mate: Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fdonald-trump-attempts-awkward-kiss-mike-pence-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20attempts%20awkward%20kiss%20with%20Mike%20Pence%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fdonald-trump-attempts-awkward-kiss-mike-pence-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20attempts%20awkward%20kiss%20with%20Mike%20Pence%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fdonald-trump-attempts-awkward-kiss-mike-pence-video&media=>
Donald Trump attempts awkward kiss with Mike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/21/donald-trump-attempts-awkward-kiss-mike-pence-video>
 * The big finale begins tomorrow just after 7pm ET, with Donald Trump, 
preceded by daughter Ivanka. 
 * Early in the night, conservative radio host Laura Ingraham threatened to 
steal the show with attacks on Hillary Clinton and the media and a call on Cruz 
(not by name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jul/20/republican-national-convention-day-three-live?page=with:block-5790208fe4b09ac5ee0eece2#block-5790208fe4b09ac5ee0eece2>
) to endorse Trump. 
 * Marco Rubio addressed the crowd by video before the Jumbotrons went out and 
said it was time to unify the party and get behind the nominee. His pixels were 
cheered. 
 * A Trump staffer released a statement inviting blame for the inclusion in 
Melania Trump’s speech Monday of Michelle Obama’s words. Trump said “we all 
make mistakes” and declined to accept her resignation. 
 * The secret service was investigating a Trump aide who said Hillary Clinton 
should be shot for treason. The Trump campaign said the aide did not speak for 
Trump. 
 * Cleveland officials said a flag burning that turned into a melee resulted 
in the arrest of 18 people, bringing total RNC-related arrests to 23. 
 * A woman at the centre of sexual assault allegations against Donald Trump has
 spoken for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/20/donald-trump-sexual-assault-allegations-jill-harth-interview>
 in detail about her personal experience with the billionaire tycoon who this 
week became the Republican nominee for president.  