
Glasgow

If your image of Glasgow is filled with anachronisms of rusting shipyards and 
deep-fried confectionery, 2014 would be a good time to rediscover Scotland's 
largest city as it welcomes the world during what is, perhaps, the biggest year 
in its history.

That Glasgow is emerging as one of Europe's fastest-growing city-break 
destinations is impressive considering it did not even have a tourist office 
until the 1980s. In 1990 Glasgow its European City of Culture title kickstarted 
the regeneration process. In 1999, it utilised the UK City of Architecture and 
Design award to similar effect. Glasgow is indeed a city transformed, with the 
focus around the reborn riverside.

Finnieston, between the city centre and the West End, has seen the most 
palpable metamorphosis, with Lord Foster'sArmadillo 
<http://www.secc.co.uk/organise/concerts-and-events/concert-hall-overview/clyde-auditorium.aspx>
 and Zaha Hadid's brilliantRiverside Museum 
<http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/museums/riverside/Pages/default.aspx> (European 
Museum of the Year in 2013) joined late in 2013 by the sleekSSE Hydro 
<http://www.thehydro.com/default.aspx> concert and sports venue. The Hydro will 
be one of the stars of Glasgow's biggest-ever event, this summer's2014 
Commonwealth Games <http://www.glasgow2014.com/>.

The city's vibrant cultural scene will be further boosted by Homecoming 
Scotland 2014 <http://www.visitscotland.com/see-do/homecoming-scotland-2014/>, 
which will sees dozens of cultural, historic and gastronomic events taking 
place. Then there are theMTV Music Awards 
<http://www.mtv.co.uk/news/ema/394981-glasgow-named-as-host-city-for-2014-mtv-ema>
 being held in thisUnesco City of Music <http://www.glasgowcityofmusic.com/> 
for the first time, partly in recognition of the successful recent staging of a 
trio ofMOBO Awards <http://www.mobo.com/tickets>.

Somerset
 The Gainsborough in Bath is the first hotel to tap the town’s thermal waters 
Once-sleepy Somerset is no longer a West Country backwater. First came the 
celebrities. Then independent shops, restaurants and elegant places to stay 
such asAt The Chapel <http://atthechapel.co.uk> helped put 
pretty-but-otherwise-unremarkable spots such asBruton on the map for 
metropolitan weekenders. Now, the whole world looks set to take notice of the 
tiny village, as global art powerhouseHauser & Wirth 
<http://www.hauserwirthsomerset.com/> sets up shop on nearby Durslade Farm. The 
project is driven by visionariesIwan and Manuela Wirth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/dec/16/hauser-wirth-art-gallery-somerset>
, who live nearby, and will include a number of contemporary art spaces 
alongside a guesthouse and gardens designed by landscaperPiet Oudolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/07/piet-oudolf-garden-designer>
. Across the county in Bath, theGainsborough 
<http://www.thegainsboroughbathspa.co.uk/> (doubles from £289) has become the 
first hotel to tap the town's thermal waters (the famous Bath Spa does not have 
accommodation). It will open this spring with 99 rooms and an enormous 
spa/bathing area inside a listed Georgian building.

Yorkshire
 The Tour de France starts in Yorkshire in 2014 
Hosting the Grand Départ of the 2014 Tour de France certainly puts a place on 
the map, but there's a lot more to Yorkshire than two days of carbon bikes and 
lycra. In fact, the Tour route misses a lot of what's best in the region: the 
North York Moors, the North Sea coast, and the Wolds in East Yorkshire.Whitby 
has been an attraction since Victorian days (Lewis Carroll was a regular at 
what is now the delightfully quirkyLa Rosa Hotel <http://larosa.co.uk/hotel/>, 
butScarborough and Filey further south are great, too. Even Bridlington, 
powered by resident David Hockney, is on the up, perhaps also helped by the 
arrival of award-winningWold Top Brewery <http://www.woldtopbrewery.co.uk/>.

Beer, of course, is excellent throughout Yorkshire, and there's a new brewery, 
Stod Fold <http://www.stodfoldbrewing.com/>, in Halifax, to add to an 
impressive list. Good food is found in the simple cafes:Little Organic Bakery 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Little-Organic-Bakery/254891304556402> on 
Wellington Road in Bridlington is a new gem; and for great fish and chips, try 
theHarbour View Cafe 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Harbour-View-Cafe/118553381549201?sk=page_map>
 on Scarborough's West Pier.

There are Michelin stars, too – more than in any other county. One newcomer, 
The Star in the City  <http://www.starinnthecity.co.uk/>in York, is run by 
Andrew Pern, who builtThe Star at Harome <http://www.thestaratharome.co.uk/> 
into a top restaurant with rooms. WithHull set to be City of Culture 2017, 
Leeds' modern events arena, and Sheffield boasting more artists than London, 
Yorkshire is definitely buzzing.

Carmarthenshire
 The Dylan Thomas boat house in Laugharne. Photograph: Roy Shakespeare/Loop 
Images/Corbis 
The man himself would no doubt have approved. In the seaside town of Laugharne 
this year, on the centenary of Dylan Thomas's birth, visitors who can prove it 
is their birthday can claim a free pint inBrown's Hotel, the very pub where 
Thomas liked to sit "mouldering" and giving his liver a punishing work-out. (
dylanthomasbirthdaywalk.co.uk <http://www.dylanthomasbirthdaywalk.co.uk>). 
There will be festivals and events to mark the centenary all year, including a
Dylan Thomas Poetry Biography and Film Weekend in Laugharne, from 2-5 May, with 
poets including Simon Armitage and John Cooper Clarke performing in venues 
around town. (For a list of all centenary events seedylanthomas100.org 
<http://dylanthomas100.org>). Brown's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/aug/10/guesthouse-review-browns-laugharne-carmarthenshire>
 (doubles from £95) has been refurbished in a 1950s style Thomas would be 
familiar with, but it is now a boutique hotel with lovely organic linens and 
iPod docks in its 14 rooms.

Dorset
 Higher Bockhampton in Dorchester, where Thomas Hardy was born in 1840. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Celebrity chef Mark Hix has got the green light for the second Food Rocks 
<http://www.lymeregis.org/events/food-rocks-3709/> (6-7 September), the gourmet 
festival in Lyme Regis that last year drew the likes of Angela Harnett and 
Mitch Tonks. The chefs have invited back the 2,267 guitarists who last year set 
a UK record for the biggest band in history (guitarsonthebeach.co.uk 
<http://www.guitarsonthebeach.co.uk/>).

Thomas Hardy fans can call into the visitor centre in Higher Bockhampton 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/hardys-birthplace/>, set to open in summer 
after an investment of nearly £1m, while walkers can enjoy the new 20kmDorset 
Legacy Trail 
<http://www.visit-dorset.com/about-the-area/countryside/weymouth-and-portland-legacy-trail>
, along the Jurassic Coast from Littlemoor in Weymouth to Portland Bill. Come 
nightfall, the county's most sought-after beds will be at thePig on the Beach 
<http://www.thepighotel.com/on-the-beach/explore.aspx>, opening this spring in 
Studland, the newest in the acclaimed mini-chain of country house hotels.

The islands of Essex
 Osea Island 
Island hopping in Essex? The thought may never have crossed your mind but 
there are great little spots out in the Blackwater estuary.Osea 
<http://www.oseaisland.co.uk/>, the private island a few miles from Maldon 
where the rich and famous party, is hosting several special events this year: 
kids' camps, boutique festivals, pop-up restaurants. Although a restaurant for 
daytrippers has been rumoured, only overnight guests are currently allowed to 
cross Osea's exclusive causeway (cottages for two from £295 for two nights).

Less pricey and open to all is Mersea Island, famous for its seafood. Don't 
miss the delicious platters atThe Company Shed 
<http://www.the-company-shed.co.uk/> a simple seafront shack. Leeward House 
<http://leewardwestmersea.co.uk>, a B&B close to the beach, has doubles from 
£70, or splash out – almost literally – onThe Raft 
<http://www.canopyandstars.co.uk/britain/england/essex/chigborough-farm/the-raft-at-chigborough>
, a floating cabin sleeping four near Maldon from £195 a night.
 