
Before long, Santiago could be a city full of electric vehicles charged by 
“smart” power grids, many of them driving on highways equipped with 
traffic-reducing automated variable toll pricing. Perhaps a new arrival to the 
Chilean capital would go for the chance to found a technology company, 
incentivised by programmes like the state-backed, foreigner-friendly Start-Up 
Chile, in“Chilecon Valley” <http://www.economist.com/node/21564589>. And 
perhaps they’ll stay for the capital’s reputation boasting the most advanced 
public transit system in Latin America.

Or they might opt for Africa instead of South America, to take advantage of 
the assistance offered by organisations likeSmartXchange 
<http://www.smartxchange.co.za/index.html> in Durban. Not only does South 
Africa’s third largest city now have an increasingly tech-savvy middle class 
population, it has schools like the Durban University of Technology, whoseUrban 
Futures Centre <http://www.dut.ac.za/faculty/engineering/urban_futures/> is 
even developing technological solutions to the common challenges of drug use, 
security and policing strategy. If these succeed, Durban, like Santiago, may 
count itself among the highest-tech cities sooner than the rest of the world 
could imagine.


An urbanite cannot live by startup incubation alone – only implementing the 
latest technology within a sound built and social environment can make a city 
truly hi-tech. Indeed, I kept hearing the same answer from current and former 
San Franciscans asked to name the best such cities in the world right now: “Not 
San Francisco.” Yetlast year Tech Insider’s ranked 
<http://www.techinsider.io/the-most-high-tech-cities-in-the-world-2016-6> the 
“undeniable epicentre of all things tech, from its gigantic start-up culture to 
its venture capital scene to its population of designers and programmers,” at 
the top spot. If San Francisco doesn’t rank among the most hi-tech cities in 
the world, which city could?


The epicentre of tech lies less in San Francisco proper than in Silicon Valley 
to the south (Tech Insider’s list conflates the two). It’s the birthplace of 
the personal computer, now home to Apple, Google, Facebook, Intel and Stanford 
University, and the cradle of thousands upon thousands of startups. Only in 
recent years have large numbers of technology companies and their workers based 
themselves in urban San Francisco instead of the suburbanSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley>, and the resulting 
conflicts between the long-term bohemian population and these wealthy new 
arrivals have exposed its real, underdeveloped technological state.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fc6509a6c42da6af1731dffd8ef71af4a3f7763%2F0_0_4000_2670%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20is%20the%20world's%20most%20hi-tech%20city%3F%20(And%20it's%20not%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%A6)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20is%20the%20world%27s%20most%20hi-tech%20city%3F%20%28And%20it%27s%20not%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%A6%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fc6509a6c42da6af1731dffd8ef71af4a3f7763%2F0_0_4000_2670%2F4000.jpg>
 San Francisco is home to Twitter’s headquarters, but is Silicon Valley still 
the world’s tech hub? Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
“Planners in 1996 had no way of predicting the tech boom,” admitted 
<https://twitter.com/SFBART/status/710284636476284928?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
Taylor Huckaby, a representative of San Francisco’s Bay Area Rapid Transit 
(Bart) agency in March in response to residents’ complaints about the 
unreliability of the city’s transport infrastructure. They’d grown especially 
fed up with its commuter rail network, designed and built at enormous expense 
in the 1960s and 70s, much of which, Huckabytweeted 
<https://twitter.com/SFBART/status/710274963987570689?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
through Bart’s official feed, “has reached the end of its useful life”.


I kept hearing the same answer from San Franciscans asked to name the best 
such cities in the world: 'Not San Francisco'

No matter how much app developing innovation San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> attracts – Twitter is 
headquartered there – the experience it provides San Franciscans remains, for 
the foreseeable future, decidedly low-tech. Other cities have tried to become 
startup hubs, offering an environment equally attractive to currently small but 
potentially huge tech companies.


The very nature of a mature city like San Francisco, with its old buildings 
and layers of regulation, throws serious obstacles to 21st-century 
modernisation, but some city builders have addressed that problem by starting 
afresh and raising a state-of-the-art metropolis from the ground up.

Masdar City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/apr/26/masdar-city-desert-future> 
– a walled, Norman Foster-designed development in Abu Dhabi – began 
construction in 2008 at the behest of renewable energy company Masdar. The 
original $22bn (£18bn) plan envisioned a community of 50,000, its energy and 
other resource use to be all centrally monitored and adjusted. But the global 
financial crisis deferred this urban dream, greatly slowing construction, 
curtailing ambitious plans for a personal rapid transit system, and rendering 
the stated goal of full carbon neutrality seemingly impossible. Only 5% of the 
planned smart city in the desert stands today.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1f16f1e48357251d823fb9e0194b31aa65802c0%2F0_185_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20is%20the%20world's%20most%20hi-tech%20city%3F%20(And%20it's%20not%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%A6)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20is%20the%20world%27s%20most%20hi-tech%20city%3F%20%28And%20it%27s%20not%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%A6%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1f16f1e48357251d823fb9e0194b31aa65802c0%2F0_185_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Since Start-up Chile began, $40m have been invested in 1,309 startups. 
Photograph: Ivan Alvarado/Reuters 
A more successful example has appeared eight miles from South Korea’s largest 
international airport: Songdo International Business District, built over 12 
years on 600 hectares of reclaimed waterfront land at a cost of $40bn. It is 
boththe world’s first smart city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/22/songdo-south-korea-world-first-smart-city-in-pictures>
 and largest private development in history. Computers embedded in the streets 
and structures form a citywide information network used for monitoring and 
maintenance. A pneumatic waste disposal system, obviating the need for garbage 
cans and trucks, directs all refuse to an automatic central processing facility 
underground.


With all its built-in computational power, Songdo aims to go beyond the 
concept of the high technology smart city to become a technologically 
“ubiquitous city”. Data sensors continually collect information on the city’s 
flows of water, energy, and traffic for ongoing optimisation. A partnership 
between Songdo’s builders and Cisco Systems – the Silicon Valley maker of 
networking equipment – has so far led to the installation of a “telepresence” 
system, which enables instant audiovisual communication between residents. It 
also promises the citizenry of Songdo future domestic niceties such as 
appliances controllable by smartphones and systems to track the whereabouts of 
their children.


On a private tour, representatives from developer and majority stakeholder 
Gale International described Songdo to me as not just a technological project 
but an “urbanistic” one. It synthesises, they said, the best elements of such 
classically great metropolises as Paris (wide boulevards), New York (Songdo’s 
own Central Park occupies nearly 10% of its land area), and Venice (visitors 
can boat down canals dug for the purpose). But not even they could deny that 
Songdo, with its often empty public spaces and – apart from a few deliberately 
traditional-looking restaurants – eerie historical uniformity, has yet to 
replicate the urban essence of those places.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefcdaf4ab3b7451990de7d7f9d754dbf2bda5e16%2F0_84_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20is%20the%20world's%20most%20hi-tech%20city%3F%20(And%20it's%20not%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%A6)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20is%20the%20world%27s%20most%20hi-tech%20city%3F%20%28And%20it%27s%20not%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%A6%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefcdaf4ab3b7451990de7d7f9d754dbf2bda5e16%2F0_84_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Santiago’s zero polluting car. Photograph: Ivan Alvarado/Reuters 
Yet urban essence abounds on the other side of the Sea of Japan. As host of 
the 2020 Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/sep/01/tokyo-2020-olympic-games-crisis-management-earthquakes>
, Tokyo intends to use the occasion to build a model city of the future in the 
form of a completely hydrogen-powered Olympic Village. It will exist, of 
course, within a city the rest of the world has long seen as a tech spectacle 
perpetually on the cutting edge.


But as any longtime resident knows, life in Tokyo, with, for instance, the 
in-person appointments at bureaucratic branch offices, can feel frustratingly 
low-tech as often as thrillingly hi-tech.

High technology has permeated life far more deeply elsewhere in Asia, most 
notably in the city state of Singapore. Its lack of resources, small size and 
high population density have demanded innovative solutions to age-old 
logistical and environmental urban problems, and its wealth and top-down 
government control have made those solutions feasible.

Life in Tokyo can feel frustratingly low-tech as often as thrillingly hi-tech

Singapore, which integrates technology and urban planning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/21/story-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew>
 to a unique degree, pioneered the hi-tech solution to the complications of 
urban life. Its traffic congestion charging system – the first in the world 
when implemented in 1975 – now uses a network of cameras, sensors, and GPS 
devises that foresee and head off jams by adjusting the location and amount of 
the charge, bringing the government $50m in revenue per year. Street crossers 
also play a role in this web of technology: senior and disabled citizens, for 
instance, receive radio frequency identification cards that will keep the 
crossing lights on for them – along with the free high-speed internet every 
Singaporean gets.

Though no one can deny Singapore’s technological acumen, its squeaky-clean 
image and paternalistic style of governance could be off-putting for some. But 
across the South China Sea over in Hong Kong, the faster-living region 
possesses equally fast internet. It has long been a part of life in Hong Kong, 
as has theOctopus <http://www.octopus.com.hk/home/en/index.html>, the 
contactless smart-card system used to pay transport fares when introduced in 
1997 – but is now the payment system of choice for almost everything. The 
city’s increasingly ubiquitous fingerprint scanners allow its citizens easier 
and more secure passage to and fro.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff135f447006e8efee2c86c09f69f6d133c6fe9fb%2F0_279_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20is%20the%20world's%20most%20hi-tech%20city%3F%20(And%20it's%20not%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%A6)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20is%20the%20world%27s%20most%20hi-tech%20city%3F%20%28And%20it%27s%20not%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%A6%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhere-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff135f447006e8efee2c86c09f69f6d133c6fe9fb%2F0_279_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 The Future World exhibit was held in Singapore, which has been pioneering 
hi-tech solutions to the complications in urban life. Photograph: Wallace 
Woon/EPA 
But even some of the less overtly futuristic cities in Europe also stand a 
chance of emerging as the most hi-tech cities of this century. Barcelona, which 
has perfected most of the traditional niceties of urban life, and continues to 
dramatically improve its streets, has more recently outfitted itself with 
energy-saving lights on the streets, touchscreen information stations, traffic 
and pollution sensors, and charging points for phones and vehicles alike. In 
collaboration with Barcelona-based universities, Spanish automaker Seat has got 
to work converting existing parking facilities into hi-tech, service intensive, 
transit oriented “microcities”.


But perhaps the most technologically promising European capital is on the 
other end of the continent: Tallinn, Estonia, the birthplace of Skype. The 
countryplowed all the resources it could into information technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/21/e-stonia-country-using-technology-to-rebrand-itself-as-the-anti-russia>
 after gaining its independence in 1991, and it shows: signs point to the 
nearest hotspot where one can tap into the high-speed data services available, 
well before they made it to the US and the UK. Over a decade ago, Tallinn 
became the first city to hold elections online, through the same system 
citizens use to pay their taxes and view all government data pertaining to 
them. Access to these features of Estonian technological life greatly widened 
when the country introduced a convenient system ofe-Residency 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/article/estonia-e-resident> in 2014.


For my part, I moved from California to Seoul. Home to such tech intensive 
conglomerates as Samsung and LG, the capital of South Korea has the most 
plausible claim to the title of the world’s most hi-tech city, despite the 
haphazardness of the unprecedented rapid development following its near-total 
destruction in the Korean War. “What a Londoner notices first is the ways in 
which the city is more advanced than his own,”historian Perry Anderson wrote 20 
years ago <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v18/n20/perry-anderson/diary>, marvelling at 
this more-first-world-than-the-first-world metropolis that seemingly 
materialised from nowhere. “One is constantly struck by the intelligence 
brought to the inconspicuous details of living, as if the routines of urban 
existence were being freshly invented for the first time.”


The Tallinn experiment: what happens when a city makes public transport free?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/11/tallinn-experiment-estonia-public-transport-free-cities>
South Korea’s comprehensive internet infrastructure already sets speed records 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/blog/south-koreas-internet-is-about-to-be-50-times-faster-than-yours>
, and the government plans to widely implement 5G, the next generation of 
wireless connections, by the year 2020. And Seoulites can connect wherever they 
please – not only at the city’s more than 10,000 free Wi-Fi hot spots, but even 
underground, while riding one of the finest metro systems in the world. 
Real-time displays keep riders apprised of the location of the next train, and 
the same goes for buses. Commuters can also stop at one of the station’s 
“virtual stores” where, simply by snapping a picture of their desired product 
with their smartphone, they can arrange for its delivery to their home the very 
same day.


Yet even in Seoul, the integration of the hi-tech into urban life occasionally 
gets stifled: a 1999 law meant to standardise internet payment systems has 
forced South Koreans to use increasingly outdated web browsers, and economic 
protectionism (often under the banner of national security) tends to render 
international e-commerce sites useless, as well as mapping and ride-share 
applications. However, the country has announced intentions of clearing up some 
of these issues by the time of the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang.

The fruits of humanity’s now seemingly constant technological revolutions and 
the living patterns of our urban population currently integrate nowhere better 
than they do in Seoul. Yet the title of the world’s most hi-tech city could go 
anywhere in the next decade: to a city about to emerge triumphantly from the 
developing world, to a historic capital that has turned to the future, to a 
slick development that has settled into its urban identity … or to some place 
as yet barely imagined.


Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 