
My daughter has asked for a Windows laptop for Christmas, for schoolwork and 
games. I used to follow the same procedure when setting up a PC for the first 
time: I’d install AVG anti-virus, Zone Alarm, CCleaner, Spybot Search and 
Destroy etc. I’m a Mac user and haven’t set up aWindows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> machine for many years so I’d 
appreciate any advice … except “get her a Mac/Linux” from below the line!Stuart

Windows 10 already includes almost everything the average PC user needs, with 
three different types of software. First, there are traditional Windows 
programs such as WordPad. Second, there are new-style apps such as Mail and 
Sticky Notes. Third, there are in-browser programs that work with your log-on 
email address, which is your Microsoft Account.

Traditional programs are usually the most powerful but also the most 
dangerous. They should only be downloaded from the original source (the 
software company) or a trusted alternative, such asMajor Geeks 
<http://www.majorgeeks.com/mg/topdownloads/index.html> or Ninite 
<https://ninite.com/>. 

New-style apps are downloaded and maintained from a trusted source, the 
Windows Store, and they run in sandboxes that prevent them from doing bad 
things. There are apps for Facebook, Messenger, Instagram, Netflix, Shazam, 
Deezer, Pinterest, Twitter, TuneIn Radio etc (but not Snapchat), plus loads of 
games.

Online apps are useful if you have a good internet connection. Windows 10 
includes online versions of OneNote, Word, Excel and PowerPoint from Microsoft 
Office. The online programs often have their own apps as well, including apps 
for Android and Apple smartphones and tablets.

In general, it’s only worth installing things that are better than the bundled 
programs, but it depends on personal preferences and circumstances. For 
example, I used to recommend Evernote and Dropbox, and now I don’t. Today, 
OneNote is better than Evernote, and OneNote is widely used in schools. Dropbox 
is better than OneDrive, but OneDrive offers more free storage (5GB vs 2GB) and 
is good enough. Of course, many people already have data in Evernote and 
Dropbox, but for the rest of us, they’re optional.

Windows 10 security

Security has been a major concern because some earlier versions of Windows – 
especially XP – were very insecure. That has changed. Windows 10’s security has 
improved so much that theUS Defense Department 
<https://www.defense.gov/News/Article/Article/688721/dod-wide-windows-10-rapid-deployment-to-boost-cybersecurity>
 is moving to it as quickly as possible.

Windows 10 is safe enough to use without any extra security software, if you 
keep the latest default settings. These include SmartScreen filter, which 
checks web addresses for known malware, and a cloud-based service, which was 
turned on by default in the Anniversary Update edition. If Defender sees a 
suspicious file that it does not recognise, it refers it to the cloud service, 
which uses heuristics, automated file analysis and machine learning to decide 
whether or not to block it. This is important with things like ransomware 
attacks.

People who block Windows 10’s background security and telemetry communications 
– perhaps in a misguided attempt to protect their privacy – risk compromising 
their security. If so, they should install an alternative anti-virus program 
that makes exactly the same checks, and uses its own cloud services for exactly 
the same purposes.

The combination of Defender, SmartScreen and cloud-based heuristics should be 
OK for users who don’t have dangerous surfing habits, especially if they use 
secure browsers, such as Microsoft Edge or Google Chrome. My wife is in this 
category. I’m paranoid so I supplement Defender withMalwareBytes Anti-Malware 
<https://www.malwarebytes.com/> and occasional scans with Adware Cleaner 
<http://www.majorgeeks.com/files/details/adwcleaner.html>, Hitman Pro 
<https://www.hitmanpro.com/en-us/hmp.aspx> and GMER <http://www.gmer.net/>. 
(They’ve not found anything yet.)

There are, of course, better anti-virus products than Defender, both free and 
paid-for. I usually installAvast <https://www.avast.com/windows-10-antivirus> 
on other people’s PCs after removing a virus, but Avira, Bitdefender and 
Kaspersky are good alternatives. (Avast now owns AVG.) Kaspersky and 
Bitdefender seem to be the best paid-for AV suites.

I also install Flexera’s free Personal Software Inspector 
<https://www.flexerasoftware.com/enterprise/products/software-vulnerability-management/personal-software-inspector/>
. This monitors your PC’s software and tells you which programs are insecure 
and need updating. In some cases, it will even update them for you.

PSI is important because most vulnerabilities are now in third-party programs 
such as Adobe Reader, Flash, Oracle Java and so on, not in Windows. A PC may 
have dozens of programs from dozens of suppliers, and even if you knew which 
ones needed security patches, it would be tedious to update them. PSI solves 
that problem nicely.

Browser choice

Windows 10 includes two browsers: the new Edge and the old Internet Explorer 
11. Edge is a good browser: it’s secure, fast and light. However, it still has 
some weird omissions (can’t save pages!) andvery few extensions 
<https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/extensions/> (about 20). 
IE11 is best avoided, unless a website only works in IE. So, you probably need 
another browser....

The main alternatives are Google Chrome 
<https://www.google.co.uk/chrome/browser/desktop/> and Firefox 
<https://www.mozilla.org/en-GB/firefox/new/>. Chrome is more secure but it 
guzzles memory, resources and battery power, so I generally use Firefox with the
Ghostery <https://www.ghostery.com/try-us/download-browser-extension/> and 
uBlock Origin <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-GB/firefox/addon/ublock-origin/> 
extensions. Instead of Chrome, I useVivaldi <https://vivaldi.com/?lang=en>, 
which is slow to load, a bit geeky – sorry, aimed at “power users” – and still 
being developed. Vivaldi is, like Chrome, based on the open sourceChromium 
browser <https://www.chromium.org/getting-involved/download-chromium>, and it 
runs most Chrome extensions.

There are lots of Chromium-based browsers 
<https://www.raymond.cc/blog/chromium-browser-alternatives-with-extra-features/>
, including Opera.

Useful utilities

There are a few free programs that I install on most PCs because they’re 
generally useful. These are: Unchecky, Search Everything, Paint.net, 
PIXresizer, FreeFileSync, and the K-Lite codec pack. Windows 10’s much improved 
Task Manager (WinKey-X, T) means there’s less need forProcess Explorer 
<https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/processexplorer.aspx>. To 
those, I might add CCleaner, Revo Uninstaller or SlimCleaner, but I usually 
don’t.

Unchecky <https://unchecky.com/> is a simple program that unchecks tick-boxes. 
When you download a free Windows program, the supplier will often try to foist 
some unwanted software on you, such as Google Chrome. It’s how they make money. 
Unchecky unchecks all the boxes in case you miss them.

Search Everything <https://www.voidtools.com/> is a fast way to find and open 
files if you can’t quite remember their names or where you put them. It doesn’t 
search inside files, so it doesn’t spend a lot of time and resources on 
indexing.

Paint.net <http://www.getpaint.net/index.html> is a replacement for Microsoft 
Paint, and it’s good for editing photos and images. It can, of course, resize 
images too, but Bluefive’sPIXresizer 
<http://bluefive.pair.com/free_computer_software.htm> is super-efficient at 
reducing file sizes. It also does batch conversions so you can process whole 
folders of photos before uploading them to Facebook, or whatever.

FreeFileSync <http://www.freefilesync.org/> is a fast way to synchronise two 
sets of files: one on your PC and the other on an external hard drive or other 
target. It doesn’t replace full backups, but it’s a really useful way to keep 
uncompressed, instantly accessible copies of important photos and documents.

The K-Lite codec pack <https://www.codecguide.com/download_kl.htm> is a bundle 
of decoders that will play most of the video and audio files you can find on 
the net. The standard version includes a lightweight media player – Media 
Player Classic Home Cinema (MPC-HC) – that looks like an old Microsoft product 
but isn’t. The main alternative isVLC 
<http://www.videolan.org/vlc/download-windows.en_GB.html>, which also runs on 
MacOS and Linux.

CCleaner <https://www.piriform.com/ccleaner/download>, Revo Uninstaller 
<http://www.revouninstaller.com/revo_uninstaller_free_download.html> and 
SlimCleaner <https://www.slimwareutilities.com/slimcleaner.php> all include 
clean-up routines and utilities to uninstall programs and manage hard drives. 
Such programs were popular with Windows XP users, but they’re not as useful 
with Windows 10, unless you need to recover some disk space in a hurry. If so, 
they’ll delete old logs, cookies, temporary internet files and so on. Just make 
sure you have backups, that you know all your log-on IDs and passwords, and 
that you’ve saved your browser tabs with, for example,Session Manager 
<https://addons.mozilla.org/en-GB/firefox/addon/session-manager/>.

Of the three, I’d pick Revo Uninstaller, but they all need to be used with 
care.

There’s a long and honourable tradition of messing about with Windows, and 
some versions have needed it. But the days of Windows 95 and XP have long gone. 
Windows 10 generally works perfectly well if left to do its thing, and the less 
tinkering, the better. If it goes badly wrong, you can simplyre-set it 
<https://support.microsoft.com/en-gb/help/12415/windows-10-recovery-options>.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 