
They’re calling it “White House North”, the Manhattan skyscraper that sits 
more than 200 miles up the road from Washington DC. “The north wing” might also 
apply to Trump Tower, where the president-elect – and blue-collar champion – is 
turning his $100m (£79m) gilded penthouse into an executive satellite. Here’s 
what you need to know about it.

Immigration situation

The 202-metre tower opened in 1983 and took four years to build, with the help 
of200 undocumented Polish construction workers 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/oct/20/hillary-clinton/hillary-clinton-correctly-claims-trump-tower-was-p/>
 (Trump denied knowledge of their employment in a 1990 court case).

Floors in the plan

Trump’s penthouse lift goes up to floor 68, but the building only has 58 
storeys 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/02/nyregion/donald-trump-tower-heights.html>. 
Trump justifies the maths on the basis of the large atrium on the ground floor, 
but he has a habit of exaggerating the size of his constructions. The nearby 
Trump World Tower has 90 advertised floors, and 70 real ones.

Love thy rich neighbour

Trump lives in the top three floors and ran his election campaign from his 
Trump Organisation headquarters on the 26th floor. Celebrities with apartments 
in the building includeBruce Willis 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016/11/18/how-donald-trump-will-retrofit-midtown-manhattan-as-a-presidential-getaway/?utm_term=.3c333974b47e>
 andCristiano Ronaldo 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/sportsnews/article-3208671/Cristiano-Ronaldo-s-new-11-8million-luxury-New-York-loft-apartment-Inside-Real-Madrid-stars-new-pad-Trump-Tower.html>
. Andrew Lloyd Webbersold his two-floor apartment in 2010 for $16.5m 
<http://ny.curbed.com/2010/9/28/10502306/andrew-lloyd-webber-finally-bows-out-of-trump-tower>
.

Security headache

Trump’s determination to keep his family in New York, where his youngest son, 
Barron, goes to school, has created a security headache for the city and the 
secret service.A cordon around the Fifth Avenue tower will include high-speed 
crash barriers and permanent lane closures 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/fashion/fifth-avenue-holiday-shopping-donald-trump-tower-protesters.html>
, while 50 traffic agents have been assigned to the address. The Federal 
Aviation Administration has declared the sky above the tower “national defense 
airspace” and the secret service is reportedly in talks to rent a whole floor 
as its operations base (landlord: Donald Trump).

Immigration situation #2

The tower is three miles north of 76 Forsyth Street, where, in 1885, the 
president-elect’s grandfather Friedrich Trumplived after arriving from Germany 
as a 16-year-old barber 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/an-immigrant-named-trump>.
 