
The FBI is investigating the attack on Yahoo that compromised at least 1bn 
user accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/yahoo-hack-security-of-one-billion-accounts-breached>
, the White House said on Thursday.

Speaking to reporters at the daily White House press briefing on Thursday, 
spokesman Josh Earnest said he could not comment on the scope of material that 
may have been compromised in the hack, the largest data breach in history, which
Yahoo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo> believes was 
state-sponsored. “What I can say is that the FBI is investigating this matter,” 
Earnest said.

Security experts: 'No one should have faith in Yahoo at this point'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/15/security-experts-yahoo-hack>
“There was a previously reported breach that the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> had previously indicated that they 
were investigating and they’re investigating this situation as well, so I’ll 
let them speak to what they have found over the course of that investigation 
thus far.”


Before the FBI made an announcement about who was responsible for the breach, 
Earnest added, it would want to be certain that going public would not 
undermine the investigation.


The attack on Yahoo’s systems took place in 2013 but was only revealed on 
Wednesday; Yahoo discovered it after investigating another breach of 500m 
accounts in 2014,which the company revealed in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/22/yahoo-hack-data-state-sponsored>
. On Wednesday evening,Bloomberg reported 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-12-15/stolen-yahoo-data-includes-government-employee-information>
 that the victims of the billion-user hack include FBI, CIA, NSA and White 
House workers.

Virginia senator Mark Warner joined technical analysts in expressing 
disappointment in the company. “This most-recent revelation warrants a separate 
follow-up and I plan to press the company on why its cyber defenses have been 
so weak as to have compromised over a billion users,” Warner wrote in a 
statement.

Some experts have questioned Yahoo’s claim that the attack was 
“state-sponsored”; Michael Mimoso of security firm Kaspersky Labsuggested 
<https://threatpost.com/yahoo-challenged-on-claims-breach-was-state-sponsored-attack/120975/>
 “a criminal operation was behind the attack and sold the data to an eastern 
European government”, resulting in the confusion.

Security researcher Brian Krebs said Yahoo’s security was especially bad 
“because of pseudo-security features (like secret questions) that tend to end 
up weakening the security of accounts”, andrecommended users stay away 
<https://krebsonsecurity.com/2016/12/yahoo-one-billion-more-accounts-hacked/> 
from the company.

Six US senators demanded Yahoo explain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/27/yahoo-leak-500-million-accounts-senate>
 exactly when it had detected the theft of user data in a letter to the company 
after the September revelations; the company did not comply in its response. In 
its November quarterly results report, though, Yahoo hinted that there was 
worse to come: “On November 7, 2016, law enforcement authorities began sharing 
certain data that they indicated was provided by a hacker who claimed the 
information was Yahoo user account data,” company spokespeople told investors.

Yahoo now believes the hackers stole proprietary code from the company and 
used it to build falsified “session cookies” – bits of code that tell Yahoo’s 
servers that a computer has already logged in, so that users don’t have to keep 
entering passwords every time they open a new window. With the “forged 
cookies”, as Yahoo chief information security officer put it on the company 
blog, the hackers could peer into emails without a password.


US telecoms giant Verizon has signed a deal to acquire Yahoo for $4.85bn. 
Citing “people familiar with the matter”,Bloomberg reported 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-12-15/verizon-said-to-explore-lower-price-or-even-exit-from-yahoo-deal>
 in the wake of the historic data breach that Verizon now wants either a steep 
discount or to abandon the deal altogether. Shares of Yahoo fell 6.5% on the 
news.

Yahoo’s woes continued as Germany’s cybersecurity authority, the Federal 
Office for Information Security (BSI), advised German consumers to consider 
switching to safer alternatives for email, and criticized Yahoo for failing to 
adopt modern encryption techniques to protect users’ personal data.

“Considering the repeated cases of data theft, users should look more closely 
at which services they want to use in the future and security should play a 
part in that decision,” the BSI’s president, Arne Schoenbohm, said in a 
statement.


The company’s legal situation may worsen: In response to Yahoo’s revelations 
in September, 23 consumer class action lawsuits have been filed against the 
firm in US federal and state courts. The lawsuit tally is from a filing with 
the US securities and exchange commission in November, over a month before 
Yahoo’s 500m-user breach became only the second-biggest-ever hack.

 