
With just one day to go until the 2016 presidential election, Hillary 
Clinton’s support is at 46.8% while Donald Trump’s is at 44.3%.

When analysts refer to the Democrat’s 2.5 percentage point lead, they are 
talking about the difference between those two figures in polling averages.

It’s an important number but it’s also probably an inaccurate one. That’s 
because polling averages do not capture fully a few factors that will affect 
the final outcome.

Early votes

More than 41 million <http://www.electproject.org/early_2016> Americans have 
already cast their votes. Some, but not all, polls include such early voters. 
More than a third of respondents in a survey released by Bloomberg on Monday 
morning said they had already voted. The poll showed Clinton leading by three 
points.

There are some other positive signs for Clinton. Turnout among Hispanic voters 
is up 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/10/31/us/elections/earlyvoters.html> 
in every state where early voting data is available – andpolling data 
<http://www.latinodecisions.com/files/1514/7839/2130/Wk8_Full_Tracker.pdf> 
suggests that as the weeks have passed, those in this group of Americans have 
increasingly said they do plan on voting. Since three-quarters of Hispanic 
Americans say they will vote for Clinton, that is bad news for Republicans.

What is the voter turnout in your state? An election quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/oct/11/voter-turnout-presidential-election-states-2012-2016>
What’s more complicated, though, is figuring out how increases in early 
turnout among Hispanic voters might offset declines in early turnout among 
African Americans and voters aged 18 to 29. And it’s also possible that voter 
behavior differs by political affiliation. It might simply be that those who 
support Trump are more inclined to show up on election day, rather than voting 
ahead of time.

In Nevada, where polls suggested Trump was leading by 1.5 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/nv/nevada_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson-6004.html>
 points, early votes look positive for a Clinton win.More than half 
<http://nvsos.gov/sos/home/showdocument?id=4567> of active votes have been 
cast, 42% of them among registered Democrats and 36% among registered 
Republicans.

To win Nevada, Trump would have to win over a majority of independents, which 
would mean bucking trends from 2008 and 2012. Which is possible. But maybe 
Trump has already written it off – with only six electoral college votes 
available, it might not be crucial in getting either candidate to the 270 they 
need to win.

National opinion doesn’t translate neatly to national results

Historically 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_United_States_presidential_elections_by_popular_vote_margin>
, the popular vote (the results as a percentage of all ballots cast) doesn’t 
neatly translate to the electoral vote (the results as a share of 538 electoral 
college votes).Four times 
<http://www.factcheck.org/2008/03/presidents-winning-without-popular-vote/>, 
most recently in 2000 between George Bush and Al Gore, the winning candidate 
has won the electoral vote but not the popular vote.

That affects the way we read the polls. Having 47% support in national polls 
does not mean Clinton is also set to win 47% of the electoral college votes. 
The size of her support varies considerably from state to state. InMaryland 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/md/maryland_trump_vs_clinton-5859.html>
, she is polling at 63%. InIdaho 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/id/idaho_trump_vs_clinton-5903.html>
, she has around 23%.

So, any definition of a battleground state needs to take into account two 
things: how close the two candidates are in the polls and how many electoral 
college votes are available in that state. If you set your criteria as being 1) 
that the candidates are separated by six points or less in state polls and 2) 
that the state is worth 10 electoral college votes or more, the battleground 
states are as follows: Florida, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan, Georgia, North 
Carolina, Virginia, Arizona, Wisconsin and Minnesota.

Based on early voting and the fact that nearly one in five 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/datablog/2016/jan/25/us-hispanic-latino-voters-us-election-2016>
 eligible voters there is Hispanic, Florida looks likely to vote for Clinton. 
That’s important, given that the state is worth 29 electoral college votes – 
but it might not be enough. Even if Clinton can add Florida to the list of 
states she can count on, that will only take her to 216 of the 270 electoral 
college votes she needs.
Florida <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=FL> 
Margin of error

The margin of error 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/09/08/understanding-the-margin-of-error-in-election-polls/>
 is crucial. Typically, when a poll is published, buried in the methodology 
section is a line that says something like “margin of error ± 3.5 percentage 
points”, which means for example that Clinton’s actual level of support could 
be as high as 50.3% or as low as 43.3%.

Since the two candidates are so close in the polls, that margin of error could 
be the difference between winning the popular vote or losing it.

If the margin of error systematically favors the frontrunner or the underdog, 
we could just take that into account. Unfortunately, it doesn’t. TakeGallup 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/9442/election-polls-accuracy-record-presidential-elections.aspx>
, for example, one of the country’s largest polling firms. In 2012, it 
overestimated Barack Obama’s vote share by two points. In 2008, it 
underestimated it by two points.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&media=>
How does the US electoral college work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/how-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Looking beyond the average

The polling average simply takes all the credible polls conducted at a similar 
time and averages out their results. It rarely takes into consideration the 
past accuracy of polling companies, let alone how many people were included in 
the poll and whether pollsters spoke to enough minority groups. Polls are very 
different.

NBC News 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/330243723/NBC-News-SurveyMonkey-Toplines-and-Methodology-1031-11-6>
 suggests Clinton is ahead by seven points while the Los Angeles Times poll (
long an outlier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/datablog/2016/sep/28/donald-trump-poll-la-times-usc-clinton>
) shows Trump leading nationally by five points. Encouragingly for Clinton, 
survey companies regarded as more reliable are pointing to alarger lead 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/election-update-dont-ignore-the-polls-clinton-leads-but-its-a-close-race/>
 for her.

It’s unusual to have so much disagreement so close to election day. But this 
isn’t a typical election: it is one that has been characterised by uncertainty 
and surprise.

What we can say with absolute certainty based on the polling data is that a 
lot of Americans are going to wake up disappointed on Wednesday.


What’s the mood where you are? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/us-election-voting-polls-mood> 
Share your pictures and views with us
 