
This extraordinary work of postmodern fakery from the “golden age of detective 
fiction” was last reprinted 30 years ago, and in the intervening decades has 
acquired a legendary status. Introducing the book to those who haven’t read it 
yet, without revealing too many of its various secrets, is not an easy task.

It would be a terrible breach of protocol, after all, to give away the ending 
of a mystery story; and yet it would be hard to decide, in any case, what the 
“ending” ofThe Face on the Cutting-Room Floor actually is – one of the book’s 
many peculiar qualities being that the enigmas surrounding it do not come to a 
halt on the final page.

In this novel, reality and fiction bleed into one another in the most 
disorientating way. Of course it’s – on one of its levels – a murder story, so 
I will not do anything so crass as to reveal the identity of the murderer; but 
the identity of the author – which lay hidden for more than 30 years after 
publication – is in some ways the central mystery, and the more intriguing one. 
There seems to have been no particularly feverish rush of speculation when the 
name “Cameron McCabe”appeared on the British crime-writing scene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/dec/01/featuresreviews.guardianreview21>
, for the first and last time, in 1937, even though several reviewers remarked 
on the unusual nature of his book.

Reading group: Dashiell Hammett, dean of hard-boiled detective fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/dec/16/reading-group-dashiell-hammett-maltese-falcon>
It was enthusiastically reviewed by Ross McLaren and Herbert Read, who called 
it a “detective story with a difference”. Mention was made of the fact that the 
story did not proceed or indeed resolve according to the normal rules of 
detective fiction; that the author’s name was also the name of the principal 
character, and that the concluding fifth of the book was in fact an epilogue, 
purportedly written by a journalist friend of the narrator’s, commenting on its 
literary qualities and setting it within the context of recent trends in crime 
writing.

But just as much attention was focused on the story, which centres on an act 
of murder at an unnamed London film studio. An actor called Estella Lamare, 
already effectively killed off by a vindictive producer who has decided to 
excise her role completely from his latest picture, is found dead in the 
cutting room: her death has been captured on film by an automatic camera but 
the reel has gone missing. The subsequent investigation ranges from the streets 
around King’s Cross to the nightclubs of Soho, from tranquil, verdant 
Bloomsbury to the docks of the East End.

If “Cameron McCabe” was praised for the originality of his first entry into 
the crime genre, and for his novel’s strong sense of place, reviewers might 
have been surprised, and even more impressed, had they learned upon whom they 
were bestowing their acclaim. For the author ofThe Face on the Cutting-Room 
Floor was only 22 years old when it was published and just four years earlier 
he had barely been able to speak a word of English.

His name was Ernst Wilhelm Julius Bornemann – subsequently anglicized to 
Ernest Borneman – and he had arrived in London as a communist refugee from Nazi 
Germany in 1933. In Berlin he had already made the acquaintance of Bertolt 
Brecht and worked for Wilhelm Reich’s Socialist Association for Sexual 
Counselling and Research. Somewhere along the way, either in Germany or London 
or both, he also worked as a film editor and acquired a reputation as a 
virtuoso of the cutting room. Borneman was widely read in European literature 
and, once settled in London, wasted no time bringing himself up to speed with 
developments in English-language writing, discovering a particular affinity 
with Hemingway and Joyce, not to mention American crime writers such as Carroll 
John Daly andDashiell Hammett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/11/audiobooks-maltese-falcon>. This 
presumably explains the distinctive, sometimes highly eccentric style ofThe 
Face on the Cutting-Room Floor, which despite being set in an English film 
studio of the 1930s (which evokes images, perhaps, of genteel musical comedies 
performed in perfect RP accents), combines laconic, hardboiled dialogue with 
extended stream-of-consciousness passages, all filtered through the skewed 
phraseology of someone whose acquisition of English was still, to some extent, 
a work in progress.

It begins briskly enough … but things start to get weird. You keep expecting 
the story to move forward and it doesn't

Borneman was a man of formidable intelligence who, like many a postmodern 
writer before and after him, loved the narrative energies of crime fiction 
while wanting to remain aloof from its conventions and simplicities. This is 
the tension that explains, I think, the formal idiosyncrasies ofThe Face on the 
Cutting-Room Floor.

It begins briskly enough, with a crisp, punchy dialogue between narrator 
McCabe and producer Bloom, followed by an important chance encounter with a 
stranger outside King’s Cross station, on “one of those last evenings in 
November with the feel of July or August and the sky orange and heavy”. We then 
get a long and evocative sequence following our hero on a night’s adventures 
through bohemian Soho, and then there is the discovery of the murder itself, 
the next morning. After that, however, things start to get weird. You keep 
expecting the story to move forward and it doesn’t, really.

Inspector Smith of Scotland Yard turns up to take over the case and we are 
drawn into a protracted battle of wills (alternately referred to as a “fight” 
and a “game”) between him and McCabe. The minutest details of the case – who 
saw what, who was where and at what time – are combed over again and again. 
Hardly any clues are offered, or deductions made. The story starts to become an 
exercise in reconciling different perceptions of the same event.

And then there is the epilogue. The idea of bringing in a (fictional) literary 
critic to offer an assessment of the manuscript doesn’t exactly suggest that 
McCabe is a disciple of Dorothy L Sayers or Raymond Chandler: instead it calls 
to mindAlasdair Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/oct/12/fiction.alasdairgray> and his 
slippery creation Sidney Workman, who often pops up at the end of Gray’s novels 
to provide a commentary and footnotes. And when McCabe’s critic starts making 
general observations about the crime genre, such as “The possibilities for 
alternative endings to any detective story are infinite,” we are reminded that 
only two years separateThe Face on the Cutting-Room Floor from that true 
masterpiece of early postmodernism,Flann O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/01/my-hero-flann-o-brien-by-john-banville>
’sAt Swim-Two-Birds, whose opening paragraph concludes: “One beginning and one 
ending for a book was a thing I did not agree with. A good book may have three 
openings entirely dissimilar and inter-related only in the prescience of the 
author, or for that matter one hundred times as many endings.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhodunnit-and-whowroteit-the-strange-case-of-the-face-on-the-cutting-room-floor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc07f9b6891c41fbd9811d3239b4a8c531bedc94%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whodunnit%20and%20whowroteit%3A%20the%20strange%20case%20of%20The%20Face%20on%20the%20Cutting-Room%20Floor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhodunnit-and-whowroteit-the-strange-case-of-the-face-on-the-cutting-room-floor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whodunnit%20and%20whowroteit%3A%20the%20strange%20case%20of%20The%20Face%20on%20the%20Cutting-Room%20Floor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhodunnit-and-whowroteit-the-strange-case-of-the-face-on-the-cutting-room-floor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc07f9b6891c41fbd9811d3239b4a8c531bedc94%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The epilogue recalls Alasdair Gray and his creation Sidney Workman. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
O’Brien’s motives for undermining fictional conventions in this way are lofty 
and inscrutable. One senses only an amused Sternean scepticism about the whole 
silly business of writing books in the first place. With Borneman, though, the 
underlying aesthetic is more (forgive the pun) earnest. Given the fact that he 
knew Brecht while living in Berlin and came under the influence of his writing, 
I don’t think it’s too fanciful to see some kind of Brechtian alienation 
technique being brought into play. Just as alater experimentalist, BS Johnson, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/oct/14/why-bs-johnson-suits-digital-age>
 would tear through the fabric of his novelAlbert Angelo (by declaring “Oh fuck 
all thislying!”) in order to make a political point about the dishonesty of 
fiction, so Borneman here is drawing attention to the inadequacy of detective 
fiction to express the chaos, loose ends and ambiguities of real life.

This does not quite, however, make The Face on the Cutting-Room Floor “the 
detective story to end all detective stories”, as Julian Symons has claimed. 
For me, that accolade would have to go toFriedrich Dürrenmatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/25/featuresreviews.guardianreview15>
’sThe Pledge, published in 1958, at which time it bore the subtitle (later 
discarded) ofRequiem auf den Kriminalroman or Requiem for the Detective Novel. 
Most of Dürrenmatt’s book works superbly as a self-contained crime novella, and 
in fact the central story is a very faithful novelisation of his film scriptEs 
geschah am hellichten Tag (It Happened in Broad Daylight); but when turning it 
into a book, he also topped and tailed it with a framing narrative in which a 
writer of crime novels meets a cynical ex-detective in a bar, and after 
listening to his (true) version of the story, with its far less neat and 
satisfying conclusion, is left in no doubt as to the fatal short-comings of his 
own genre of writing. Dürrenmatt’s forensic demonstration is elegant, 
devastating and final. By comparisonThe Face on the Cutting-Room Floor’s 
increasingly flummoxing layers of repetition and variation, and the elaborate 
metatextual apparatus at the end, feel more like a brilliant 19-year-old’s roar 
of frustration at the limitations of the genre which he has chosen for himself.

And so, having apparently exhausted the possibilities of the detective story 
with his first book, what was Borneman to do next? Initially, at least, the 
matter was taken out of his own hands. As a German national living in the 
United Kingdom, not long after the outbreak of war he was apprehended and 
shipped off to an internment camp in northern Ontario. After a year of this, 
fortunately, his plight came to the attention of Sir Alexander Paterson, the 
British commissioner for prisons, who had met Borneman briefly in London, and 
recognised him when he came to Canada to inspect the camp. Paterson arranged 
for his release and put him in touch with John Grierson, who had also come to 
Canada to help set up the NationalFilm <https://www.theguardian.com/books/film> 
Board. Before long, Borneman was working for the NFB in (where else?) the 
cutting room.

Graham MacInnes’s memoir One Man’s Documentary gives a vivid portrait of 
Borneman at work as a film editor. Watching him make sense of the vast mass of 
footage assembled for a naval documentary calledAction Stations, MacInnes saw 
that this was someone “with an eye as clinical and detached as a lizard’s”, who 
approached his work with “a fine mixture of Teutonic exactitude and a Jewish 
sense of extrovert lyricism”.

“To see his wavy blond head bent rigidly over a hand viewer; his strong but 
elegant hands ripping “outs” of film backward like gravel flung behind a 
bone-digging dog; his swift, frenzied but orderly snatching of “takes” from 
bins; his skilled manipulation, without getting them twisted or torn, of half a 
dozen shots; his mouth full of clips, his shirt-sleeved figure draped with film 
like a raised bronze statue with Aegean seaweed: this was to see a Laocoon 
writhing in the agony of creation. Borneman was a fanatic, a grammarian, a 
Central European engulfer and regurgitator of fact. But never a bore.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhodunnit-and-whowroteit-the-strange-case-of-the-face-on-the-cutting-room-floor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2eeb269ddab78a1865e3f5f1a70d36f621f68cb8%2F0_494_2449_3060%2F2449.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whodunnit%20and%20whowroteit%3A%20the%20strange%20case%20of%20The%20Face%20on%20the%20Cutting-Room%20Floor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhodunnit-and-whowroteit-the-strange-case-of-the-face-on-the-cutting-room-floor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whodunnit%20and%20whowroteit%3A%20the%20strange%20case%20of%20The%20Face%20on%20the%20Cutting-Room%20Floor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhodunnit-and-whowroteit-the-strange-case-of-the-face-on-the-cutting-room-floor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2eeb269ddab78a1865e3f5f1a70d36f621f68cb8%2F0_494_2449_3060%2F2449.jpg>
 Borneman was sent to an internment camp during the second world war. 
Photograph: Nick Yapp/Getty Images 
We are dealing with a remarkable man, then, obviously: and yet I’ve barely 
begun to scratch the surface of his remarkableness. He was also, already, a 
leading authority on jazz (there is a lot of it inThe Face on the Cutting-Room 
Floor) and his next publication was A Critic Looks at Jazz, a collection of 
journalism on the subject from his London days. He returned to Britain in 5the 
1950s and worked as a jobbing screenwriter for TV shows such asThe Adventures 
of Robin Hood. By now he had published two novels under his own name, Tremolo 
andFace the Music, a murder mystery set in the jazz world which was filmed in 
the UK in 1954. Another Borneman-scripted film from that year,Bang! You’re Dead
, is a fascinating British thriller set in the world of villagers displaced and 
made homeless by German bombing, who still live in Nissen huts on an abandoned 
US army camp. In 1959 Borneman publishedTomorrow Is Now, a cold war story 
described by the critic Jonathan Rosenbaum as “evoking at times both Ibsen and 
Shaw”, and which Borneman himself considered his best novel.

In the 1960s he returned to Germany, in an abortive attempt to set up a new 
state-funded TV channel and published his last two novels in English,The 
Compromisers and The Man Who Loved Women.

Finally Borneman settled in Upper Austria, where he lived in rural isolation 
in the village of Scharten. Isolation but not, by any means, obscurity: for now 
the final phase of his multifaceted career was under way, and he had made a 
considerable reputation for himself as an academic working in the field of 
human and particularly infant sexuality. By the timeThe Face on the 
Cutting-Room Floor was rediscovered and reissued in the early 70s, attracting 
extravagant praise from such writers as Symons and Frederic Raphael, Borneman 
was already the celebrated, sometimes notorious author ofLexikon der Liebe und 
Erotik and the monumental Das Patriarchat, which became a key text of the 
German women’s movement. He continued to write, lecture and publish well into 
his 70s.

By the end of his life, Borneman had travelled an immense distance from his 
early, brilliant foray into detective fiction. Or had he? If we are to make 
sense ofThe Face on the Cutting-Room Floor, in the end, perhaps we should see 
it, not as a postmodern intellectual prank, or a “dazzling box of tricks”, but 
as a work of wild and desperate youthful romanticism. By the time his part of 
the narration draws to a close, McCabe – Borneman’s alter ego – has reached a 
suicidal frame of mind. Hopelessly in love with a woman who thinks nothing of 
him, he reflects that there is “No way out for a man once a woman has got hold 
of him … It will get you in the end.”

In 1995, to mark his 80th birthday, Ein Luderlichtes Leben (A Wayward Life), a 
festschrift devoted to Borneman’s life and work appeared, with a cover that 
showed him standing, fully clothed, next to a naked female model. The book had 
been compiled by a colleague of Borneman’s, who was also his lover at the time. 
Before long, however, their affair was over, and in June of that year Borneman 
killed himself. It had got him in the end. It seems that the 22-year-old 
Cameron McCabe and the 80-year-old Ernst Wilhelm Julius Bornemann were not so 
different after all.

• The Face on the Cutting-Room Floor by Cameron McCabe (Ernest Borneman) is 
published this month as a Picador Classic. To order a copy for £7.37 (RRP 
£8.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/face-on-the-cutting-room-floor.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 