
Only a day after striking an agreement  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/17/northern-ireland-power-sharing-saved>
with Sinn Féin and the British and Irish governments to end a three-month 
crisis at Stormont, Northern Ireland’s first minister Peter Robinson has 
announced that heis to stand down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/19/peter-robinson-to-step-down-as-northern-ireland-first-minister>
.

Robinson has been a leading figure in the Democratic Unionist party for 
decades, and his decision raises significant questions for the future of the 
province.

Peter Robinson to step down as Northern Ireland first minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/19/peter-robinson-to-step-down-as-northern-ireland-first-minister>
If Ian Paisley <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ianpaisley> was the 
Unionist pilot of the historic settlement that brought bitter old enemies to 
share government together in 2007, then Robinson, his longtime deputy, was the 
navigator. Both were indispensable: Paisley the Big Man with the big picture 
and an uncanny feel for his grassroots, Robinson the consummate party manager, 
the one who forensically rechecked everything – line by line, word by word. It 
was this thoroughness that led to a final agreement most had thought would 
never happen.

During the two years we worked together, from 2005, Robinson was impatient 
with Paisley’s lack of attention to detail. But in the last weeks, whenSinn Féin
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> had finally signed up to 
support policing and the rule of law, and Paisley had made up his mind to say 
yes when he had always trumpeted no, Robinson became the back marker.

He was alarmed his leader had moved too far, too fast – even irritated; I had 
become too close to Paisley. He played for time and worked furiously to ensure 
his DUP colleagues could be brought on board, with the naysayers marginalised.

In government, Paisley preached harmony and reconciliation, forming a 
remarkable relationship with the deputy first minister and former IRA commander
Martin McGuinness <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness>. 
Robinson tidied up behind him, managing the grumbles of colleagues.

When he moved, with other senior figures such as Nigel Dodds 
<http://www.nigeldodds.co.uk/>, to oust and replace the Big Man they showed a 
ruthlessness never forgiven in the Paisley clan.

Many thought Robinson was a natural number two, but he proved an effective 
first minister, bedding down the awkward, unwieldy system of power-sharing 
government, resolving perpetual crises, standoffs and cliff edges. It brought 
him little affection but, I think, considerable credit.

These past eight years have hardly been inspiring. The all-party executive has 
bumped along, vetoes getting in the way of good governance, leaving voters 
disillusioned. But then could it have been otherwise? Unionist leaders such as 
Paisley and Robinson had never exchanged even a courtesy with the republican 
leaders,Gerry Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams> and 
McGuinness. There was real hatred. The divide between communities went back 
centuries. The bombings, murders and terror had left deep wounds.

Although unionist politicians endorsed the 2007 peace settlement, they never 
applauded it. Their acceptance was grudging; many were deeply anguished at 
working with former IRA militants.

In this continuing transitional phase towards the goal of normalisation around 
more conventional democratic divisions, the DNA of Northern Ireland’s politics 
will remain at once clumsily dysfunctional yet immeasurably better than the 
sectarian prejudices and horror of the past. And the 2007 settlement won’t be 
reversed.

The word on the street is that Dodds, a Belfast MP, will become DUP leader 
from Westminster andArlene Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/19/arlene-foster-uup-defector-dup-northern-ireland>
, the assembly’s finance minister, will be the new DUP first minister. To 
outsiders it may seem an odd setup, but ironically the arrangement is mirrored 
in Sinn Féin, where Adams leads his party from the Irish parliament in Dublin 
and McGuinness in Belfast.

Northern Ireland power sharing saved
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/17/northern-ireland-power-sharing-saved>
Whoever succeeds, the real question for the future of Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> is a much larger one. Will the 
DUP’s top figures be leaders or followers? Followership had been the party’s 
norm before Ian Paisley realised his moment of destiny. It has long been easy 
in the DUP to court popularity by marching supporters to the old tunes; 
leadership – as Labour’s Jeremy Corbyn is discovering – is very different. It 
requires the courage of sometimes telling followers what they don’t wish to 
hear in the best interests of progress.

Robinson, like Paisley before him, demonstrated that quality. Given the fresh 
start pledged in Wednesday’s agreement between the parties, whoever succeeds 
Robinson will also require this quality.
 