
When is a garden bridge not a garden bridge? When it’s a bridge garden 
<http://www.alliesandmorrison.com/news/could-blackfriars-bridge-be-londons-bridge-garden/>
, according to Allies and Morrison, the Southwark-based architects who have 
come up with a cheap and cheerful alternative to the eye-wateringly expensive, 
contractually dubious proposal by Thomas Heatherwick and Joanna Lumley for a
floating forest across the Thames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/24/garden-bridge-london-thomas-heatherwick-joanna-lumley>
.

Rather than spending £175m on installing two gargantuan copper-nickel plant 
pots in the middle of the river, in a public-private business model that could
burden the taxpayer for years to come 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/dec/03/thames-garden-bridge-three-half-million-pounds-public-funding>
, they have realised we could simply plant some trees on a bridge that already 
exists. But which one?

Blackfriars bridge, which lands just a few hundred metres from the Allies and 
Morrison office, stretches up to 40 metres wide between its stately stone 
piers, carrying four lanes of traffic and a generous pavement on either side. 
With a bit of rejigging, the pavements could be consolidated into one 14 
metre-wide, tree-planted park, while leaving enough room for cars, buses and a 
separated cycle lane.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fgarden-bridge-london-blackfriars-trees-allies-and-morrison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fd329d937f365b3008b701865ee29412d9c46e2%2F0_0_639_453%2F639.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20build%20the%20garden%20bridge%20when%20we%20could%20plant%20trees%20on%20Blackfriars%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fgarden-bridge-london-blackfriars-trees-allies-and-morrison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20build%20the%20garden%20bridge%20when%20we%20could%20plant%20trees%20on%20Blackfriars%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fgarden-bridge-london-blackfriars-trees-allies-and-morrison%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fd329d937f365b3008b701865ee29412d9c46e2%2F0_0_639_453%2F639.jpg>
 Blackfriars Bridge Garden … a green garnish for Joseph Cubitt’s Victorian road 
bridge.The railway bridge to the right is covered in solar panels to power 
nearby Blackriars station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jan/22/worlds-largest-solar-powered-bridge-opens-in-london>
. Illustration: Allies and Morrison 
By contrast, proposals for the garden bridge <https://www.gardenbridge.london/>
 suggestbikes would be banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/nov/19/londons-garden-bridge-the-public-park-where-groups-and-cyclists-arent-welcome>
. The controversial crossing, whose campaigners have already spent almost £40m 
of its £60m public funding before construction has even started, would also be 
shut at night and closed several days a year for corporate events – part of a 
shakybusiness plan that also expects bridge users to donate £2 per crossing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/londons-garden-bridge-visitors-donate-card-readers-thames-crossing-sadiq-khan->
.

Large groups will be encouraged to register their visits in advance, phone 
signals will be tracked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/06/garden-bridge-mobile-phone-signals-tracking-london>
 in a bid to deter protesters, while a list of draconian rules will prohibit 
playing musical instruments, flying kites and taking part in a “gathering of 
any kind”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fgarden-bridge-london-blackfriars-trees-allies-and-morrison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa08a2662e28fdb440ade36711752de067770571c%2F0_0_806_418%2F806.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20build%20the%20garden%20bridge%20when%20we%20could%20plant%20trees%20on%20Blackfriars%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fgarden-bridge-london-blackfriars-trees-allies-and-morrison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20build%20the%20garden%20bridge%20when%20we%20could%20plant%20trees%20on%20Blackfriars%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fgarden-bridge-london-blackfriars-trees-allies-and-morrison%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa08a2662e28fdb440ade36711752de067770571c%2F0_0_806_418%2F806.jpg>
 Cross-section of the Blackfriars bridge garden, showing a 14m-wide garden with 
traffic and a cycle lane. Illustration: Allies and Morrison 
Freed from the burden of a huge debt and the demands of corporate sponsors, 
the Blackfriars bridge garden could be a truly public space. Constructed by 
engineer Joseph Cubitt in 1869, the structure has a built-in generosity 
emblematic of the days of Victorian civic pride. It already incorporates 
charming stone seating nooks above its five bastions, which would be 
incorporated into the park: “riverside alcoves for a sandwich at lunchtime, a 
break from a jog or a place for families to gather,” as the architects put it, 
“a garden for morning commuters as well as the quiet moments of urban life”.

Garden Bridge: alternative ideas for 'A Folly for London' announced
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/sep/25/garden-bridge-alternative-ideas-for-a-folly-for-london-announced>
The proposal is the latest, and perhaps the most feasible, in a series of 
alternatives to the costly vanity project, which was championed by Boris 
Johnson and remains supported by London’s new mayor Sadiq Khan, whose odd 
defence is that cancelling the scheme wouldcost twice as much as completing it 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-36378092>.

It follows the satirical Folly for London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/sep/25/garden-bridge-alternative-ideas-for-a-folly-for-london-announced>
 competition, whose winner proposed constructing an eternal bonfire on the 
Thames. Fuelled by trees felled from London’s parks, usefully freeing up land 
for private development, it would be “an eternal flame dedicated to 
21st-century planning departments and developers”.

Other entries 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2015/09/23/a-folly-for-london-eternal-bonfire-river-thames-satirical-competition-heatherwick-garden-bridge/>
 to the contest included a “Scrotopolis” of bulging pink scrota and the Jesus 
bridge, an invisible crossing that would allow commuters to walk on water – a 
dream as probable as the idea that Heatherwick’s scheme could ever get this far.
 