
Are we supposed to have sympathy for the Hollywood screenwriter Max Landis 
after he wasaccused of defending Scarlett Johansson’s casting in the upcoming 
live-action remake of Ghost in the Shell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/18/max-landis-denies-defence-of-scarlett-johansson-ghost-in-the-shell>
? Well, perhaps a little bit. Landis, with his impromptu YouTube “vlog”, was 
merely trying to explain the twisted thinking that goes on when studios make 
the decision to “whitewash” famous roles, the clink-clank of Hollywood 
machinery that over the past year has given us Johansson as Major Kusanagi, 
Scotsman Gerard Butler as the Egyptian deity Set (in Alex Proyas’ Gods of 
Egypt) and Rooney Mara as Native American princess Tiger Lily (in Joe Wright’s 
Pan).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D747cvo8Lkjw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D747cvo8Lkjw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D747cvo8Lkjw&media=>
The Chronicle screenwriter’s argument, in condensed form, is that there are no 
actors of east Asian origins capable of getting Ghost in the Shell green-lit in 
2016. Therefore, there is no point in the internet blaming Johansson; the 
studio, Paramount; or even the film industry as a whole for the casting: if we 
wanted a Hollywood live actionGhost in the Shell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghost-in-the-shell> movie, this is the only 
one we were ever likely to get.

Max Landis: there are ‘no A-list female Asian celebrities’ who could have 
taken Scarlett Johansson’s Ghost in a Shell role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/18/max-landis-denies-defence-of-scarlett-johansson-ghost-in-the-shell>
But what if we don’t actually want a Hollywood live action Ghost in the Shell 
movie in the first place? What if the idea of a live action Ghost in the Shell 
movie starring Johansson and overseen by theBritish commercials guy 
<http://www.rupertsanders.com/commercials.html?ref=0> who directed Snow White 
and the Huntsman, Rupert Sanders, leaves us pretty cold? The Avengers star is a 
class act,has the requisite sci-tech chops 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1798709/>, and fully deserves her leading lady 
status. But what if we shudder at the horror of it all every time we look at 
that set photograph of Johansson with a dyed black, cod-Manga cyber-bob and 
recall that somebody, somewhere, convinced themselves this was a good idea? 
These are a lot of variables, but there are many more lurking about.

Aside from the damage to its corporate soul, what if for every extra dollar 
casting Johansson pulls in at the box office, the studio loses two or three 
from all the negative publicity surrounding her casting? This is, after all, 
pretty much what happened to the JM Barrie prequel Pan,which is estimated to 
have lost Warner Bros $150m 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/warner-bros-pan-could-lead-831412> last 
year, and Gods of Egypt,which proved 2016’s first major box office turkey in 
February 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/box-office-gods-of-egypt-flops-1201717313/>. 
Other examples of the disastrous financial effects of whitewashing include 
Cameron Crowe’s ill-fated Aloha,which failed to recoup its budget 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2015/06/01/four-reasons-aloha-flopped-box-office> 
after casting Emma Stone as an ethnically mixed Hawaiian, and The Lone Ranger,
which reportedly saw Disney write off $190m in 2013 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-disney-results-idUSBRE97512H20130807> after 
the studio decided Johnny Depp would make a great Tonto. On this evidence, the 
whole pro-whitewashing Hollywood template begins to look like pretty dumb as a 
financial model.

‘Whitewashing’ row over Scarlett Johansson's Ghost in the Shell role reignites
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/15/scarlett-johanssons-role-in-ghost-in-the-shell-ignites-twitter-storm>
Let’s imagine for a minute that Paramount (or Dreamworks, which preceded it) 
had taken a different approach to Ghost in the Shell. The studio might, by way 
of example, have chosen to shoot its remake as an all-CGI animated affair. 
After all, the excellentBig Hero 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/07/big-hero-6-review>, which posited 
a suitably Eurasian universe and cast an unknown (Ryan Potter) as a young 
robotics genius, didn’t do so badly. The futuristic tale won the Oscar for best 
animation last year, and scored a soaring $657m worldwide.

What if the studios had found a director capable of eliciting a positive fan 
response even without a star name in the hot seat? Duncan Jones, Alex Garland 
and Neill Blomkamp are all examples of up-and-coming film-makers with a nose 
for scintillating sci-fi that could have helped build hype with a strong 
marketing campaign. For that matter, a certain Joss Whedon has a history of 
delivering movies with strong female protagonists. (Rupert Sanders may be best 
known for sleeping with his. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/us-news-blog/2012/jul/26/kristen-stewart-robert-pattinson-apology>
)

Landis also seems to be ignoring the fact that Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
just broke the all-time US box office record with two relatively unknown 
British actors, one black, in the lead roles. Granted, the space opera reboot 
also had Harrison Ford returning to the role of Han Solo, but the 
septuagenerian action hero hasn’t exactly been a top box office draw over the 
past decade.

Then there’s the Deadpool factor. Ryan Reynolds is such a non-entity in the 
eyes of Hollywood 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/scottmendelson/2016/02/15/deadpool-does-not-make-ryan-reynolds-a-movie-star/#4943f435617c>
 that the makers of the highest-grossing R-rated comic book movie of all time
had to leak test footage of the actor in costume 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Sq0_MGriXc> to get the movie green-lit. Once 
all that internet buzz had been generated, 20th Century Fox could have cast the 
hybrid clone of Tom Cruise, Robert Downey Jr and Jennifer Lawrence as the 
foul-mouthed mutant without seeing much of a box office bump.

Likewise, Landis’s view of Hollywood would posit Will Smith as the reason 
Suicide Squad got greenlit. Yet David Ayer’s supervillain smackdownis among the 
most-hyped comic book movies of the 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/harley-quinn-suicide-squad-margot-robbie-dc-comics>
 because people have watched the outlandish trailers and can’t wait to see what 
appears to be a gloriously uproarious turn from Margot Robbie as the vicious 
little scream queen Harley Quinn. Is Robbie on Landis’ five-strong list of 
female stars who can get a movie made in 2016?

So yes, we should probably have some sympathy for the screenwriter when he’s 
simply trying to explain the nonsensical decision-making process followed by 
studio bigwigs when making these utterly ridiculous decisions. But the idea 
that Johansson, Paramount, Dreamworks and the American film industry as a whole 
should be immune to criticism simply because studios can’t abide by common 
sense when casting a sensitive remake is idiotic. If Hollywood can’t learn from 
its mistakesbefore plastering them all over the internet 
<https://twitter.com/ParamountPics/status/720655439973625856>, it can hardly 
blame the Twitterverse for pelting it with rotten fruit for getting things so 
very, very wrong.
 