
Long one of Iran’s few Sunni Arab partners, Sudan announced that it will sever 
ties with Tehran after theexecution of a Saudi Shia cleric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/02/saudi-execution-of-shia-cleric-sparks-outrage-in-middle-east>
 inflamed tensions in the region.

But with Khartoum hungry for Saudi investment, the move has been characterised 
by Sudanese analysts as motivated by the promise of financial reward.

Sunni allies join Saudi Arabia in severing diplomatic ties with Iran
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/04/sunni-allies-join-saudi-arabia-in-ceasing-diplomatic-ties-with-iran>
Though the government says it was in response to retaliatory attacks on Saudi 
diplomatic missions inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, Al-Tayeb 
Zein al-Abidine, professor of political science at Khartoum University, said it 
had been made for “pragmatic reasons” at a time when the country’s economy is 
in tatters.

“The government realised it was very isolated, even within the Arab world, and 
decided to change sides,” Abidine said.

Sudan’s move towards Riyadh is a “relationship of convenience”, said Magdi El 
Gizouli, an independent analyst. “I don’t think there’s a strong ideological 
commitment,” he said.

Sudan made a firmer commitment to Riyadh and its Gulf allies in March when it 
joined the coalition in Yemenagainst Shia Huthi rebels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/26/saudi-arabia-begins-airstrikes-against-houthi-in-yemen>
, despite already fighting insurgencies in its own country – in the western 
Darfur region, and South Kordofan and Blue Nile states.

In August, Sudan said it had received a $1bn deposit in its central bank from 
Saudi Arabia 
<http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2015/11/sudan-saudi-arabia-war-yemen-houthi-economy.html#>
, with media reports at the time saying it was aimed at shoring up Sudan’s 
foreign reserves.

Foreign ministry spokesman Ali al-Sadiq denied Sudan’s “very good relations” 
with Riyadh were driven by financial and economic motives.

“The flow of investments has [been] coming all the time,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsudan-siding-with-saudi-arabia-long-term-ally-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8549bf59d0b707672cae86cc1cd22b8c21af407%2F0_98_3333_2000%2F3333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20has%20Sudan%20ditched%20Iran%20in%20favour%20of%20Saudi%20Arabia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsudan-siding-with-saudi-arabia-long-term-ally-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20has%20Sudan%20ditched%20Iran%20in%20favour%20of%20Saudi%20Arabia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsudan-siding-with-saudi-arabia-long-term-ally-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8549bf59d0b707672cae86cc1cd22b8c21af407%2F0_98_3333_2000%2F3333.jpg>
 A protest in Tehran after the execution of a Shia cleric by Saudi Arabia. 
Photograph: Ahmad Halabisaz/Xinhua Press/Corbis 
Sanctions

President Bashir’s 26-year rule has seen Sudan slapped with sanctions over 
rights abuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/datablog/2015/jul/21/which-countries-still-affected-us-sanctions>
 and its support for Islamic extremists, including Osama bin Laden.

Bashir himself is wanted on war crimes charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/mar/04/omar-bashir-sudan-president-arrest>
 related to the insurgency in the western region of Darfur.

Ties with the rest of the Gulf region disintegrated over Khartoum’s support of 
the 1990 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, leavingSudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> to turn to Iran, also isolated and 
hit by sanctions.


Reports said Tehran supplied Sudan with ammunition and small arms 
<http://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/how-irans-revived-weapons-exports-could-boost-its-proxies>
, helping to develop its arms industry.

Saudi Arabia v Iran: Riyadh defiant and angry after turbulent week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/08/saudi-arabia-v-iran-riyadh-defiant-and-angry-after-turbulent-week>
But the partnership soured in September 2014, when Sudanese officials ordered 
the closure of an Iranian cultural centre 
<http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article52254> in Khartoum, accusing its 
employees of preaching Shia Islam in majority Sunni Sudan.

Observers in the capital saw underlying motives. “They closed the centres to 
give a positive signal toSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>,” a diplomatic source in 
Khartoum said.

The closure came with the economy faltering after nearly 20 years of 
sanctions, a situation exacerbated by the secession of South Sudan in 2011, 
which took with it three quarters of the country’s oil reserves.

The Khartoum government’s subsequent lifting of national fuel subsidies 
triggeredstreet protests in September 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/27/sudanese-protesters-attacked-march-fuel-subsidies>
, in one of the most serious challenges to Bashir’s rule since he seized power 
in 1989.

“The main driver of foreign relations is the situation of the ‘bank of 
Sudan’,” said Gizouli, referring to the state of the country’s economy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsudan-siding-with-saudi-arabia-long-term-ally-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0f2c976d6b6bc5988fcf9d1d38afbf605bcc29%2F0_317_4836_2907%2F4836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20has%20Sudan%20ditched%20Iran%20in%20favour%20of%20Saudi%20Arabia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsudan-siding-with-saudi-arabia-long-term-ally-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20has%20Sudan%20ditched%20Iran%20in%20favour%20of%20Saudi%20Arabia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsudan-siding-with-saudi-arabia-long-term-ally-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0f2c976d6b6bc5988fcf9d1d38afbf605bcc29%2F0_317_4836_2907%2F4836.jpg>
 Men shop for fruit in Sudan’s capital, Khartoum. Photograph: Mosa'ab Elshamy/AP
Investment

Since Sudan’s rapprochement with Riyadh and its Gulf allies, officials have 
been promising there will be more Saudi investment in the country.


The investment minister told parliament last week that Saudi investments in 
Sudan were worth $11bn.

The diplomatic change is also likely to prove popular with the families of the 
hundreds of thousands of Sudanese workers living in the Gulf.

The Saudi execution of a Shia cleric has deepened Islam's sectarian rift. 
Where does that leave the west?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/10/iran-saudi-arabia-middle-east-war-nimr-al-nimr-execution>
“They give support to many families in Sudan, so mending relations with the 
Gulf was a very popular step,” Abidine said.

In March 2014, Saudi banks stopped dealing with Sudan, hitting the workers 
sending remittances back.

Following Sudan’s decision to join the war in Yemen, officials said the 
measures could be eased.

Khartoum may also hope Riyadh will lobby Washington over its sanctions regime, 
the removal of which would also lift the economy.

“All countries lead a foreign policy in line with their interests,” the 
diplomatic source in Khartoum said. “Sudan’s interest now is economic.”
 