
What does a porn star wear when she hits the campaign trail? A smile.

And a black net brassiere with intricate straps. A very short, peach satin 
romper open to the waist. A whole lot of deeply tanned skin. And a fist full of 
“No on Proposition 60” pamphlets.

Not familiar with Proposition 60? Neither were most of the students Tasha 
Reign (hernom de scène) encountered on a sunny Monday at the University of 
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, San Diego (UCSD).

The measure, one of 17 on the California ballot in November, would require 
adult entertainers to wear condoms while filming sex scenes. To the 27-year-old 
feminist with a fan base she calls her Reigndeers, Proposition 60 is an assault 
on her human rights, her artistic freedom and the very constitution itself.

Not to mention that it is often anatomically impractical.

“I do acts where I literally could not use condoms, whether that be anal, 
whether that be double penetration, whether that be multiple guys,” Reign said. 
“I cannot even imagine having a group sex scene like that.”

I hate the idea that some man is going to tell me what I can and can’t do
Tasha Reign 
The logistical hurdles are endless. How do you ensure that the same condom 
doesn’t find itself inside more than one woman? Do you stop filming while an 
actor swaps latex? What if the condom breaks during a particularly rigorous 
outing? This isn’t, she notes, regular sex, 20 or so comfy minutes and it’s 
over.

“It’s extremely difficult for somebody to be able to maintain an erection for 
45 minutes, and to be able to pop with a condom, especially,” she said. “The 
bigger issue for me is that it opens up the gateway to mandate my body. I hate 
the idea that some man is going to tell me what I can and can’t do.”

Reign is a practitioner of gonzo porn – none of the cuddly couples stuff for 
her. Her Twitter feed is filled with political activism and waxed genitalia. As 
she campaigns in front of UCSD’s Geisel Library, she attracts attention, if not 
always votes.

Ten minutes before every hour, as one class ends and another is set to begin, 
the tree-lined walkway fills with students. Young women weighed down with heavy 
backpacks slide their eyes Reign’s way before hurrying off. A young man on a 
skate board does a double take fast enough to cause whiplash.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fporn-tasha-reign-california-condom-law-proposition-60%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc8db8132eb33c3732fe43b128d99492cc06f039%2F0_253_3789_2273%2F3789.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20a%20porn%20star%20is%20fighting%20California's%20condom%20law%3A%20'It's%20a%20women's%20rights%20issue'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fporn-tasha-reign-california-condom-law-proposition-60%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20a%20porn%20star%20is%20fighting%20California%27s%20condom%20law%3A%20%27It%27s%20a%20women%27s%20rights%20issue%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fporn-tasha-reign-california-condom-law-proposition-60%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc8db8132eb33c3732fe43b128d99492cc06f039%2F0_253_3789_2273%2F3789.jpg>
 Tasha Reign talks to UC San Diego students about Proposition 60, which would 
require adult entertainers to wear condoms during sex scenes. Photograph: 
Ariana Drehsler for the Guardian 
She walks up to student after student, leading with a smile, campaign 
literature in her outstretched hand. More often than not on this day, her 
targets scurry by. The young men at the fraternity table across the path rebuff 
her.

“It’s like a lot of rejection,” Reign says with a pout. “When they say no, I’m 
not used to it, actually.”

But she is not deterred. “Are you going to vote on Prop 60?” she begins, over 
and over. “Let me tell you about it. I’m an adult film star.”

The day after her UCSD foray, she arrives at California State University, Long 
Beach. In her first hour, she gives her pitch 18 times – 19 if you count the 
guy who said he wasn’t voting but hung around to talk to her anyway – and posed 
for a selfie with a young man in full Dodgers regalia.

I want to be able to say: I’m a sex worker. I have a choice in the way that I 
protect my genitals
Tasha Reign 
“This would take away the choice we have to use condoms or not,” Reign tells 
them. The measure, she says, “incentivizes people to sue adult film stars, 
giving them access to their personal names, their personal home address, taking 
your tax dollars and putting it toward regulating an industry that does a 
really good job at self-regulating itself.”

“It’s a women’s rights issue,” she says. And “it’s also a freedom of speech 
issue.” And “it’s something the performers, the majority of us, don’t want 
passed.” And “we just want you guys to vote no.” And “tell your friends.”

Michael Weinstein, president of the Aids Healthcare Foundation, is the 
measure’s major backer. Neither he nor his organization responded to repeated 
requests for comment.

The Vote Yes on Prop 60 website says “condoms in porn is about protecting 
California employees at work.” Although Reign and other adult film actors 
undergo regular screening for HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases, such 
testing is voluntary.

The state’s Republican, Democratic and Libertarian parties have officially 
come out against the measure, along with Aids Project LA, Equality California, 
the Transgender Law Center and the San Francisco Aids Foundation.

Porn in the classroom? Here’s why it makes sense | Jenni Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/educate-teenagers-porn-attitudes-sex-parents-schools>
Most major newspapers in the state recommend a no vote. The Los Angeles Times’ 
editorial against the measure points out that “any resident who spots a 
violation in a pornographic film shot in the state could sue and collect cash 
from the producers and purveyors if they prevail in court.”

Reign is a registered Democrat who supports Hillary Clinton for president. She 
had planned to vote for Bernie Sanders in the primary, but her mother persuaded 
her otherwise. She lives in the hills above Los Angeles with her Chihuahua 
mixes, Cinderella and Bambi, and her pot-bellied piglets, Harley and Quinn.

She graduated from UCLA with a degree in women’s studies. And she did not get 
into adult entertainment, she said, so she could be pushed around by a man like 
Weinstein “who has never been a sex worker” and doesn’t respect the choices she 
and her fellow performers make.

She doesn’t believe that such a person “should come in and tell me, on my own 
adult film set that I’m producing in my own home that I need to use a condom”.

“I want to be able to say: I’m a sex worker. I have a choice in the way that I 
protect my genitals. This is a huge issue for me.”
 