
Bristol is a city with one foot in the countryside. Acres of hilly allotments 
slope into wildlife corridors and riverside cycle paths. It’s big on slow food, 
urban farmers’ markets, city farms and free-range thinking (think street art, 
independent shops, an independent mayor, and a local currency – theBristol Pound
 <http://bristolpound.org/what> is now widely accepted). The BBC’s Natural 
History Unit is based here; so is transport charity Sustrans and the ethical 
Triodos Bank. And now, thanks to all this grassroots greenery, Bristol is the 
first UK city to be named aEuropean Green Capital 
<https://www.bristol2015.co.uk/> since the awards began in 2010. The year-long 
eco-fest begins on 24 January.

Things to do

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fbristol-green-capital-2015-eco-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421944540979%2Fe0a19b51-05e6-407f-8581-411c1af18e01-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Bristol%E2%80%99s%20eco%20aura%20won%20it%20European%20Green%20Capital%202015%20status&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fbristol-green-capital-2015-eco-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Bristol%E2%80%99s%20eco%20aura%20won%20it%20European%20Green%20Capital%202015%20status&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fbristol-green-capital-2015-eco-sustainable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421944540979%2Fe0a19b51-05e6-407f-8581-411c1af18e01-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Bristol offers a variety of terrain for cyclists, urban and rural. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Hire a bike from Cycle the City <http://cyclethecity.org/> and pedal around 
Bristol’s hilly but bike-friendly streets. It’s a hub of national cycle routes: 
a good off-road route follows the disused railway line – part of Sustrans’ 
route 41 – which runs through the Avon Gorge. Though marred by the three-lane 
Portway road, the rocky gorge is a haven for rare plants, as well as peregrine 
falcons and feral goats.

It is crossed by Brunel’s iconic suspension bridge 
<http://www.cliftonbridge.org.uk/visit>, slung between the Georgian terraces of 
Clifton and the Forestry Commission’sLeigh Woods 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/website/recreation.nsf/luwebdocsbykey/englandbathandnortheastsomersetnoforestbristolwoodlandsleighwoods>
. From April, the woods will be the backdrop for an installation, called
Withdrawn <http://www.lukejerram.com/projects/withdrawn>, by artist Luke Jerram 
<http://www.lukejerram.com/>. Part of the National Trust’s New Art Bristol 
project, Withdrawn will feature a series of ghostly fishing boats marooned in 
the forest, and aims to raise questions about climate change and its impact on 
our marine environment.

Top 10 music venues in Bristol
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/28/top-10-music-gig-venues-bristol>
Other events include the Blue Whale Project 
<http://www.apeuk.org/blue-whale-project-2> (a 30-metre walk-in whale to be 
installed in Millennium Square for six months from mid-April), andBig Green Week
 <http://biggreenweek.com/> in June, with entertainment from film and food to 
fashion. During August’sBalloon Fiesta, <http://bristolballoonfiesta.co.uk/> 
local manufacturer Cameron Balloons will launch a solar-powered hot-air balloon.

A series of summer open days are planned for Triodos Renewables 
<https://www.triodos.co.uk>’ wind farm in industrial Avonmouth, which is also 
home to a biomethane plant which supplies the gas for a human-waste Bio-Bus 
that runs from Bristol airport to Bath.

The At-Bristol Science Centre <http://www.at-bristol.org.uk/> on the 
Harbourside is planning behind-the-scenes tours of its low-energy building – 
one of the UK’s greenest. (Green-tech marvels include a phase-change tank for 
storing solar energy, waste baling and a rooftop photovoltaic system, guarded 
by Brian, a robotic peregrine falcon.) Front of house, the centre entertains 
with an array of interactive playthings: a planetarium, a walk-through virtual 
tornado and a DIY animation station – complete with Bristol-born Wallace and 
Gromit film set. You can’t do Bristol without a bit of Aardman Animations.

Where to eat

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fbristol-green-capital-2015-eco-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422013394222%2Fd6ec11d3-d5a4-4676-b9e0-49daf51edf86-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Bristol%E2%80%99s%20eco%20aura%20won%20it%20European%20Green%20Capital%202015%20status&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fbristol-green-capital-2015-eco-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Bristol%E2%80%99s%20eco%20aura%20won%20it%20European%20Green%20Capital%202015%20status&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fbristol-green-capital-2015-eco-sustainable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422013394222%2Fd6ec11d3-d5a4-4676-b9e0-49daf51edf86-2060x1371.jpeg>
 Thali Café PR Photograph: PR 
Among the many local restaurants that subscribe to the Slow Food movement, a 
few stand out. In a recycled warehouse on the waterfront,Bordeaux Quay 
<http://www.bordeaux-quay.co.uk/> boasts a sustainable approach to everything 
from ingredients to waste management. The food isn’t cheap (mains from £13.50), 
but it has a three-star rating from the Sustainable Restaurant Association for 
its humanely raised meat, home-baked artisan bread and wild, day-boat fish. It 
has nice views of the harbour, too.

Another three-star restaurant is The Canteen <http://canteenbristol.com/> in 
Stokes Croft <http://www.visitstokescroft.co.uk/>, Bristol’s centre of 
alternative culture. It’s part of Hamilton House, a solar-powered, converted 
office building which houses a community of artists, musicians and charities 
and theBristol Bike Project <http://www.thebristolbikeproject.org/>. Choose 
from a chalk-board menu – maybe beetroot and spinach gnocchi with garden-pea 
sauce (£8), or steamed Fowey mussels (£8.50). There is live music every night, 
10% of profits go to local causes and you get a free bowl of soup with every 
meal.

Top 10 craft beer pubs in Bristol
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/may/26/top-10-craft-beer-pubs-bristol> 
Bristol is very good at homegrown micro chains. One of them, Friska 
<http://www.friskafood.com/> – with four cafe-takeaways around the city – was 
recently namedbest ethical restaurant by Observer Food Monthly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gallery/2014/oct/20/observer-food-monthly-awards-2014-the-winners-in-pictures>
. Try one of its tasty hot boxes (Thai chicken curry or grilled halloumi with 
roast veg, £5.25).

The curse of takeaway waste is neatly taken care of by the Thali Café 
<http://www.thethalicafe.co.uk/> chain’s excellent tiffin scheme (tiffin dishes 
are really between-meal snacks, but can be eaten as mains). You buy a 
Mumbai-style stainless steel tiffin pot and make regular trips to your local 
Thali Café (there are four of them) for refills. Some 10,000 people in the city 
now have a Thali tiffin (dishes start at £8.95 and are served with rice and 
dahl). Menu highlights include Goan fish curry, Punjab kebabs and masala dosas, 
all inspired by Indian street food.

Finally, there’s the “junk food” option: Skipchen 
<https://www.facebook.com/bristolskipchen> is a pop-up, pay-as-you-feel cafe in 
Stokes Croft thatsources most of its ingredients from supermarket surplus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/08/bristol-restaurant-skipchen-ingredients-binned-supermarkets>
. For a voluntary donation, you might try kiln-roasted salmon with watercress 
and white wine sauce. The food is on the cusp of a best-before date, but 
nobody’s died.

Where to stay

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fbristol-green-capital-2015-eco-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421944710254%2F73dd1699-7864-47b8-8401-1792317cc8b2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Bristol%E2%80%99s%20eco%20aura%20won%20it%20European%20Green%20Capital%202015%20status&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fbristol-green-capital-2015-eco-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Bristol%E2%80%99s%20eco%20aura%20won%20it%20European%20Green%20Capital%202015%20status&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fbristol-green-capital-2015-eco-sustainable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421944710254%2F73dd1699-7864-47b8-8401-1792317cc8b2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Rockets on the Roof at Brooks Guesthouse 
The only B&B in the city to earn a Green Tourism gold award is The Greenhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/28/top-10-hotels-bed-breakfast-bristol>
 in Southville (doubles from £105 B&B). Fitted carpets are made from recycled 
plastic, there’s wool insulation under the floors, solar panels on the roof, a 
bike store and electric bikes for hire, but the rooms are otherwise 
conventional.

More central is Rockets on the Roof at Brooks Guesthouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/28/top-10-hotels-bed-breakfast-bristol>
 (doubles from £70), which offers glamping in four British-made Airstream 
lookalikes on an astroturfed rooftop four floors above historic Corn Street. 
Each polished-metal caravan has a double bed, eco-heating and shower, LED 
lights (including coloured mood lights) and views of spires and clock towers.

Top 10 hotels and B&amp;Bs in Bristol
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/28/top-10-hotels-bed-breakfast-bristol>
Bristol’s Airbnb listings include a “modern, inner-city eco house” in a corner 
of the delightfully untidy garden of a former farmhouse onRedland Green 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/422956>, which has three bedrooms, a 
wood-burner and a heat-exchange boiler (from £135 a night, sleeps five); and, 
in a suburban street close to the M32 flyover, a “Cosy Eco Cabin 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/4543852>” (£49 a night) is set among fruit 
trees in a large bucolic garden overlooking the Frome river and Eastville Park 
lake. From this woody cabin with outdoor compost loo, you can look out for 
swans and kingfishers.
 