
I’m standing in the recently opened South Tank performance space of Tate Modern
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern>, in front of about 50 
people and akoto. The koto is one of a group of sculptural instruments in Tarek 
Atoui’s installationThe Reverse Collection and any resemblance to the 
traditional Japanese string instrument of the same name is – at best – 
tentative. Thiskoto is comprised of a bundle of organ pipes set on a table 
frame, connected via copper tubing and taps to an underfloor pipe that is 
connected to an air compressor. Mounted at regular intervals around the bundle 
are metal strings, with a microphone installed beneath them to pick up your 
every move.

Harry Partch – how Heiner Goebbels bought Delusion of the Fury to Edinburgh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/29/harry-partch-delusion-of-the-fury-heiner-goebbels-edinburgh>
I’ve watched the artist Vincent Martial, who made the koto for Atoui, play it, 
but unlike most of the instruments I know, there are few sounds here I can 
immediately attribute to specific gestures. It’s not that the sounds are new to 
me: the methods of their making are. I can’t yet see what I’m hearing. So I’m 
in front of an audience and I’m not sure what to do. But that’s not a bad place 
to start. I’m not nervous; I’m listening.

The Reverse Collection was born in 2013, in the storage facilities of Berlin’s 
Dahlem museum 
<http://www.smb.museum/en/museums-institutions/museen-dahlem/home.html>, which 
houses the city’s ethnographic and anthropological collections. Atoui, a 
Lebanese artist who works with hearing, sound and people, was on a recce ahead 
of the eighth Berlin Biennale. And in the museum’s stash of historical 
instruments from around the world, he came up trumps. Except for a simple 
archival reference, the instruments were without any indication of their 
sociocultural provenance, or, crucially, any instructions on how to play them. 
They were just things that make sounds. So Atoui invited established musicians 
and improvisers to play with them, and recorded what happened.

There is very little experiment in much experimental music – by definition 
this project ensured there would be

Stage two saw Atoui ask instrument makers to listen to those recordings – 
layered and edited – and create new instruments on which one might be able to 
play something similar. Traditional luthiers didn’t know what to make of that 
request. But a handful of artists working in the outer reaches of music-making 
were intrigued. Léo Maurel, a musician based in north-east France, who has 
spent the better part of a decade making hurdy-gurdies, heard in Atoui’s sound 
files tonal, timbral drones he recognised. Other makers included Thierry 
Madiot, a Parisian sound artist and trombonist, whose work used horns, balloons 
and compressed air, and Martial, a flautist, and one half of improv duo 
Sonambule, whose instrumentarium is a menagerie of rerouted musical tools. It 
makes sense that thekoto is Martial’s creation, an implausible wind-string 
hybrid that seems almost built to resist mastery.

For the first month of the Tate show, a gaggle of mostly London-based 
musicians were invited to perform on these instruments daily, in groups of 
three to five. Atoui and the makers held back from telling us how to play 
anything: they mostly focused on on/off mechanisms, and what to do if something 
stopped working. These daily sessions were the preamble to a series of larger 
group ensembles playing “compositions” by Madiot, and later that month by 
celebrated British saxophonist John Butcher, and then Atoui.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-tate-moderns-reverse-collection-of-musical-instruments-is-striking-an-unfamiliar-chord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a0482a155262589788418cc993328aef3c8af96%2F0_133_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Tate%20Modern's%20new%20collection%20of%20musical%20instruments%20is%20striking%20an%20unfamiliar%20chord&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-tate-moderns-reverse-collection-of-musical-instruments-is-striking-an-unfamiliar-chord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Tate%20Modern%27s%20new%20collection%20of%20musical%20instruments%20is%20striking%20an%20unfamiliar%20chord&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-tate-moderns-reverse-collection-of-musical-instruments-is-striking-an-unfamiliar-chord%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a0482a155262589788418cc993328aef3c8af96%2F0_133_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Photograph: Oli Cowling/Tate Photography 
The 10 instruments are arranged as work stations on a factory floor. Several 
use compressed air, most combine percussive and drone-generating abilities, all 
of them are odd, at times even funny. There’s the aquaflute (a wobbly 
plastic-air-and-water contraption); two sets of horns that function – very 
differently – with balloons and compressed air; theorgue à clapets or valve 
organ (all metal tubing and woodwork, strings and tiny objects), thebabasse (a 
hurdy-gurdy of sorts), thetoui (a kind of horizontal, deconstructed bagpipes) 
and a motorised bow. Lastly, on two raised platforms are the lithophone (a 
thicket of slate pieces balanced on conical cardboard feet) and the spin (a set 
of ceramic vessels, some small and unglazed, others, tall and lustrous, with 
frozen jellyfish-like layered skirts, along with a potter’s wheel).

What these instruments have most in common is a kind of wilful abstruseness. 
As Butcher put it, “Most of us, in search of new methods and materials, have 
spent years controlling comparatively unstable things on our instruments.” 
Here, the volatility is native, and it forces you to stay awake. Which is what 
improv at its best does anyway. Bradford Bailey, another of the musicians, said 
that that kind of destabilisation is what brought him to this world to begin 
with. “There’s very little experiment in much experimental music,” he added – 
by definition this project ensured there would be.

Composers seek a new definition of greatness in a digital age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/22/composers-greatness-in-digital-age-susanna-eastburn>
During performances, the players move from one instrument to another in a 
silent, barefooted dance (shoes on those platforms are simply unthinkable) , 
and the most riveting moments come when two or three people descend on the same 
thing. It’s intimate, like watching skilled workers teaming up to repair 
something delicate. They visibly navigate that thin line between totally 
focusing on the sound they’re each making and being hyper aware of every other 
sound being made. And then there are the moments when people stop playing. 
Listening, intently, to what’s happening around you sharpens your focus. In the 
same way that an empty patch of grass will, the more you stare at it, slowly 
reveal insect life and movement, so moments of quiet cause the space you’re in 
to seemingly expand with sound, until even the lightest circling of a hand 
along the rim of a porcelain jar has an audible resonance.

Atoui’s artwork is difficult to locate. The instruments are not the work – 
precious and visually arresting though they might be, they are just instruments 
– and nor are the recordings, which are just documentary. Atoui defines his 
relationship with the instrument makers as an exchange, not a collaboration: “I 
don’t want to take up too much space in their work.” Tate curator Andrea 
Lissoni, meanwhile, sums up the work as the result of a communal conversation, 
a cooperative endeavour, with all the political weight that phrase contains. 
And that is perhaps where the beauty of the piece lies. It’s in the gesture, 
the invitations, the encounters. It is the poetry in making a silenced 
instrument sing again, and in making use – with your hands – of a museum 
collection. It is the space Atoui made for six instrument makers and 49 
musicians to play, the sound of someone listening.

• The Reverse Collection. performances take place at Tate Modern 
<http://www.tate.org.uk>, London SE1, on 16 and 23 September. tate.org.uk 
<http://tate.org.uk>.

• This article was amended on 5 September as the captions had incorrectly 
identified Tarek Atoui in both pictures. The lead picture was also changed to 
one of Atoui.
 