
At school, I was a prefect. I am a goody two-shoes, so I relished the job. I 
took it seriously, sometimes tracing the little green prefect’s badge on my 
collar with pride. Yes, it was a figurehead position, but it meant something to 
me.

I reckon Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> 
feels a version of this (to the power of 1,000). The office of the first lady 
of the US is a weird, elevated mantle to uphold, a semi-archaic symbol with 
limited power, but, gosh, she’s worn it so well.

Like so many accomplished women before her, Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama>, 52, first came to wider 
attention as a political spouse. After that, the magazine profiles started: 
raised in Chicago, studied at Princeton and then Harvard law school, mother to 
two girls. Every article noted her brainpower and then mentioned how it would 
have to take the back seat to her husband’s career. I try to think of it – 
shelving a promising career for your much-loved spouse’s ambitions – and I get 
a little sad.

Why I love… film-maker Barry Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/15/why-i-love-barry-jenkins-bim-adewunmi>
But Michelle Obama never looks sad about it. It’s worth noting her grace in 
all this: smiling for the cameras, making incendiary speeches,promoting 
children’s healthy living <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VTqaLiq2kqQ>, 
raising her daughters, and even the indignity ofCarpool Karaoke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ln3wAdRAim4>. And to be doing it under a cloud 
of disrespect,resentment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jul/15/barackobama.usa> and overt racism
 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/03/24/newspaper-obama-ape-belgian-satire-putin-barack-president-racism-racist_n_5020987.html>
 – well, what a dame.

And not that it matters, but she looks amazing (hello, three Vogue covers 
<http://www.essence.com/celebrity/michelle-obama-vogue-cover-story>). At the 
Democratic convention in July, Iwatched an arena of people lose their cool 
<https://twitter.com/bimadew/status/758129471253782528> and swoon over her. It 
was difficult not to join them.

Is she perfect? No one is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2012/jan/13/michelle-obama-reluctant-first-lady>
. But I’m not ready to say goodbye. Good luck to her successor, because, man, 
those boots will take some filling.
 