
I was once taken to a Travelodge on a second date. We didn’t get a room, you 
understand. The guy actually rang ahead and reserved a table – an actual table 
– in the restaurant of a Travelodge, less than two miles from my house. Right 
there, beside the display table of cereal boxes and selection box of teabags. 
When we went to the bar and were asked for our room number, he looked the 
person serving us straight in the eye and said “We don’t have a room. We’ve 
just come for the ambience.” I was standing beside a stationery salesman from 
Newcastle, under fluorescent blue strip lights, holding a tepid glass of rosé. 
It was pretty bloody ambient.

Like all great things, Travelodge <https://www.travelodge.co.uk/our-company> 
was knocked into existence just a few short months after my parents failed 
comprehensively to navigate contraception. Or to quote their (Travelodge’s – 
even my parents didn’t go this far) heart-stopping press release: “Guests have 
enjoyed an estimated 880m hours of sleep, 50m sausages and 10,950 sunrises and 
sunsets since Britain’s first budget hotel opened – the “Burton A38 
(northbound) Travelodge in 1985.”That makes 2015 our 30th anniversary 
<http://www.hospitalityandcateringnews.com/2015/06/travelodge-celebrates-turning-30/>
, and I for one intend to celebrate it with a wall-mounted box of shower gel 
and a mug-sized plastic kettle.

In many ways Travelodge and I are twins: both frequently found in light 
industrial areas, both a huge fan of thrift …

In many ways, Travelodge and I are twins – both frequently found in the light 
industrial areas on the outskirts of town, both a huge fan of thrift, both with 
a solid appreciation for mass-produced soft furnishings and both overlooked by 
people on the quest for something “special”. But just like launderettes, the 
Pumpkin Cafe, bike sheds and pound shops, Travelodge is that most wonderful 
thing – not special.

It is the great British social leveller. Everyone has stayed in a Travelodge 
at some point. You might be delivering your children to university, crawling 
back after your best friend’s wedding, breaking up a car journey from Cardiff 
to Glasgow, going to some corporate conference for work, picking up your 
grandmother’s ashes or having the kind of affair that is best served beside an 
A-road with two plastic strips of instant coffee. Whatever the reason, this is 
where you’ll lie. Because Travelodge is where you stay when you think you’re 
not staying anywhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftravelodge-social-leveller-budget-hotel-30-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffff8ed1be9c8df6609e0c520f889d8395b829e43%2F0_199_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20I%20love%20Travelodge%3F%20Because%20it%E2%80%99s%20the%20great%20British%20social%20leveller%20%7C%20Nell%20Frizzell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftravelodge-social-leveller-budget-hotel-30-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20I%20love%20Travelodge%3F%20Because%20it%E2%80%99s%20the%20great%20British%20social%20leveller%20%7C%20Nell%20Frizzell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftravelodge-social-leveller-budget-hotel-30-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffff8ed1be9c8df6609e0c520f889d8395b829e43%2F0_199_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘Did you know that you can book three adults into a double room on the 
Travelodge website as standard?’ Photograph: Travelodge PR 
It’s the glorious anonymity of these roadside bunkers that gets me. If I ever 
get round to writing a great novel, I will do so sitting in an airless magnolia 
room in a Travelodge on the outskirts of Huddersfield, with nothing but a 
maroon strip of wallpaper and a nylon carpet. I cannot think of anywhere more 
inspiring, more electrifying, more ripe with possibility. Did you know that you 
can book three adults into a double room on the Travelodge website as standard? 
The wonderful, British, unflappable, end-of-the-pier, 
a-nod’s-as-good-as-a-wink-to-a-blind-horse filth of it. Of course, these days 
“budget” hotels like Travelodges are popping up like mushrooms. Premier Inns, 
Ibis, Novotel, Holiday Inn. But I don’t want to be premier. And, whatever the 
calendar says, this is not a time for inns.

I spent one of the happiest nights of my life in a Travelodge on the edge of 
Halifax. Of course it’s bittersweet that one of that city’s great satanic mills 
had been turned over from manufacturing to the nebulous industry of clean 
sheets and breakfast muffins, but I had a whale of a time lying diagonally 
across my mattress in a pair of work boots, drinking hot chocolate and watching 
Come Dine With Me. I’d probably be there now if I’d only packed enough knickers.

Talking of knickers, you may be wondering what happened to the man who took me 
to that Travelodge. The man who got me drunk on cheap rosé (seriously, a glass 
of that stuff cost less than a packet of Pringles) and childhood anecdotes. The 
man who sat me on a moulded plastic chair beneath a widescreen television on a 
Wednesday night, surrounded by the smell of microwave curry and disinfectant. 
The man who offered to steal a stack of paper napkins as we rolled out into the 
midnight air. Well, dear reader, I took him home.

And you’ll never guess where he’s taking me for my birthday.
 