
On 19 March, one day before a presidential election in Congo-Brazzaville, the 
French newspaper Libération published an articlewarning of the danger of a 
bloodbath 
<http://www.liberation.fr/planete/2016/03/19/congo-brazaville-et-si-nous-vivions-un-bain-de-sang_1440599>
. But it was Brussels and not Brazzaville that, soon after, was paralysed by 
violence.

In France, following twin atrocities in Paris, the National Front seems likely 
to top the first round 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/marine-le-pen-leads-french-presidential-poll-30-vote-303066>
 ofnext year’s presidential elections 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opinion_polling_for_the_French_presidential_election,_2017>
. In the United States, Donald Trump is in the ascendancy, proposing a wall to 
stop Mexicans entering the country and a law to prevent Muslims doing the same. 
The UK is joining other EU states as amajor exporter 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/islamic-state/11660487/Islamic-State-one-year-on-Where-do-its-fighters-come-from.html>
 ofterrorism to Syria 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2014/08/the-british-beheaders/>, and the public is 
told that another domestic terrorist atrocity isall but inevitable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/22/what-are-chances-brussels-style-attack-isis-uk>
.

In Denmark, an author and her husband were last month fined for giving 
refugees a lift in their car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/11/danish-childrens-rights-activist-lisbeth-zornig-people-trafficking>
. The simple human kindness of giving some darker-skinned people a lift along 
the street and buying them a cup of tea – after they have, of course, been 
stripped by the state of their valuables – is illegal there.

Most Africans and their leaders demand security, prosperity and democracy, in 
that order. They do not accept that developed economies of the north are in any 
position to lecture them on how their democracies should operate.

On 20 March, six general elections and referendums 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35854768> took place across Africa. In 
Congo-Brazzaville, provisional results show that incumbent president Denis 
Sassou-Nguesso secured over 60% 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-congo-election-idUSKCN0WQ0MQ>of the vote 
after a high turnout.

Unlike its much larger and unstable neighbour, the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, “Congo-B” is a broadly functioning democracy with one of the highest 
levels of literacy in Africa. Oil has helped fuel economic growth over the 
democratic, post-Marxist period since early this century. The major cities are 
safe. Right now, in fact, to Congolese people watching French TV news channels, 
their cities seem a lot safer than those inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fafrica-hypocritical-criticism-three-term-leaders-presidents-constitution-african-countries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7d9368543c325ece84c123848021900ffe8cda9%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20should%20Africa%20listen%20to%20the%20hypocritical%20criticism%20of%20its%20three-term%20leaders%3F%20%7C%20Eric%20Joyce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fafrica-hypocritical-criticism-three-term-leaders-presidents-constitution-african-countries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20should%20Africa%20listen%20to%20the%20hypocritical%20criticism%20of%20its%20three-term%20leaders%3F%20%7C%20Eric%20Joyce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fafrica-hypocritical-criticism-three-term-leaders-presidents-constitution-african-countries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7d9368543c325ece84c123848021900ffe8cda9%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 President Paul Kagame of Rwanda at a rally in Gicumbi. Photograph: Margaret 
Cappa/AP 
However, last week’s election and president Sassou-Nguesso himself were 
roundly condemned, long in advance, most notablyby the EU 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/afp/article-3457351/EU-refuses-send-observers-Congo-vote-statement.html>
 and theFrench Socialist party 
<http://www.parti-socialiste.fr/republique-congo-parti-socialiste-souhaite-report-de-lelection-presidentielle/>
. This was because last year the country held a referendum on a new 
constitution. The new rules were, on the whole, progressive, including shorter 
presidential terms and abolition of the death penalty. But, crucially, they 
also reset Sassou-Nguesso’s clock in respect of the two-term limit for 
presidents operating in most African states.

There is currently a strong trend across Africa for leaders to sidestep term 
limits through the use of referendums in this way.Rwanda did the same last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/19/rwandan-president-paul-kagame-could-rule-until-2034-after-voters-lift-limits>
 and Sierra Leone looks likely to do the same next year. This has led to 
unrestrained condemnation in the north of those leaders and their regimes.
Headlines 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/afp/article-3382425/US-condemns-Kagame-run-term-Rwanda-president.html>
 and articles often present such popular African leaders as simply greedy 
despots and dictators.

The fact that Sierra Leone’s President Koroma has begun lining up a referendum 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35302119> is important because the UK 
and Tony Blair are often credited with ushering in a new, democratic regime 
after conflict there.Blair’s Africa Governance Initiative 
<http://www.africagovernance.org/> has staff in his office, and also in the 
office of Paul Kagame, the president of Rwanda.Here third terms are being 
presented as “a problem” 
<http://www.nation.co.ke/news/africa/US-condemns-Kagame-third-term/-/1066/3019796/-/3jawrfz/-/index.html>
 –essentially all about money, greed, personal authority and status 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/africa-third-term-problem-cling-power-403440>. But 
only in Africa, obviously. No mention of Germanyor Australia 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/australasia/australian-pm-howard-wins-third-term-9140124.html>
.

Criticism of leaders for amending constitutions in ways that help them is, of 
course, perfectly fair. But ultimately these are democratic sovereign states. 
Millions of voting Africans want to re-elect leaders whom they believe have 
kept them safe and brought economic growth. They understand, ironically, why 
safe and economically successful Germany seems likely to give its leader a 
fourth successive term in office next year. They notice, too, that the 
president of the EU commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, was appointed directly 
after serving several terms as leader of Luxembourg, an EU nation.

Rwandan president Paul Kagame could rule until 2034 after voters lift limits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/19/rwandan-president-paul-kagame-could-rule-until-2034-after-voters-lift-limits>
Fundamentally, many Africans believe that disproportionate and wholesale 
criticism of the governments they freely elect stems from a terrible moral 
failure on the part of powerful people and interests within former colonial 
powers.

Countries in the orbit of China and Russia are too difficult. Oil producing 
Middle Eastern states are untouchable. So African states end up as an Aunt 
Sally; the easy focus of attacks by northern, white-run international NGOs and 
commentators seeking to export their values abroad while courting popularity 
and funding at home.

Rich dictatorships are ignored in favour of chiding poor African democracies 
for their “flaws”. Africans are told to forego jobs and revenue through mineral 
extraction in return for a pittance in international aid, leaving the Middle 
East, Australia and North America to dominate the market. Only Africans are 
prosecuted at the international criminal court.All 39 indictees 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_people_indicted_in_the_International_Criminal_Court>
 are African, including two serving presidents. Indeed, following the ICC’s 
decision to prosecute over the Bamiyan statues,iconoclasm is a crime against 
humanity now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/28/iccs-first-cultural-destruction-trial-to-open-in-the-hague>
; but only in Africa.

It is not that Africans actually disagree with the general direction of travel 
that developed states urge; but they do demand the right to choose their own 
priorities and their own pace.

Meanwhile, China is by far the fastest-growing foreign influence on Africa, 
mainly through its vast construction projects in places like Congo-Brazzaville. 
And countries across the far east, including Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia, 
have chosen highly authoritarian versions of democracy that they believe are 
fundamental to economic success. Rwanda is essentially following this model. 
The world’s largest democracy,India, is increasingly looking east for its 
political influences 
<http://www.lowyinstitute.org/publications/indias-new-asia-pacific-strategy-modi-acts-east>
.

There is no law of social organisation that says democracy, let alone the very 
specific forms of it in Europe and America, is inevitable. Clearly, we in 
developed economies believe it is desirable, and most Africans agree with us. 
But self-indulgent and sometimes self-interested demands from deeply flawed 
developed states in the north will not influence the direction Africans 
themselves decide to take.
 