
Donald Trump’s cancellation of a news conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-postpones-business-interests-press-conference-january>
 about potential conflicts of interest between his presidency and his business 
dealings has only sharpened concerns. With roughly one month to go until the 
inauguration, a sense of urgency is building around Trump’s need to clarify his 
plans for his business.

The perceived hazard is not only potential self-dealing by Trump – who could 
conceivably use the presidency to boost his real estate developments at home or 
abroad, guide justice department activity, or renegotiate debts or leases – but 
also potential blackmail or bribery of Trump or his family members or 
associates based on their significant debts or other liabilities around the 
world.

Related: Trump's conflicts of interest take White House into uncharted 
territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest-business>

Here are the key questions in play:

What’s the big deal?

Nobody knows, exactly, because Trump has not released his tax returns, thereby 
hiding what he owns and what he owes. Any such analysis as presented in this 
Q&A, in fact, proceeds in moonless darkness. But financial disclosures by 
Trump, a few extant tax documents, and estimates of Trump’s assetsby Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/jenniferwang/2016/09/28/the-definitive-look-at-donald-trumps-wealth-new/2/#6076b3a4414f>
, which in September pegged Trump’s net worth at $3.7bn, and others give us a 
picture to work with.

Can’t a president be in business?

Yes. The nonpartisan Office of Government Ethics advised Congress on Tuesday 
that “it has been the consistent policy of the executive branch that a 
President should conduct himself ‘as if’ he were bound by ... financial 
conflict of interest law”. But it’s not clear that the president is in fact 
bound by said law. (There’s not muchprecedent 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/emoluments-clause-overturning-185-years-of-precedent-let-trump-off-the-hook>
 here to work with.) The emoluments clause of the constitution bans gifts from 
foreign entities to US officeholders, butthere’s some debate 
<http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2016/11/17/would-trumps-foreign-business-ties-be-constitutional/constitutional-restrictions-on-foreign-gifts-dont-apply-to-presidents>
 about whether the clause applies to the presidency. Trump himselfdoes not 
believe <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808528428123254785> that 
the law “mandates” that he leave his businesses.

What’s the worst that could happen?

That’s a tough one. Trump may scrupulously avoid using his political power to 
grow his fortune, to do his friends favors, or to benefit his children. Or he 
may commit an unprecedented ethics violation. The nature of such a potential 
violation is easy to imagine, although the examples we list here are 
speculative.

Trump could sign a weapons deal in exchange for a write-down on the hundreds 
of millions of dollars his companies owe to foreign banks 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/12/guide-donald-trump-debt>. Trump 
could turn a blind eye on a Russian incursion in Estonia after hislong-desired 
tower project <http://money.cnn.com/2016/07/29/news/donald-trump-russia-ties/> 
in Moscow suddenly gets the green light, in what is publicized as the first 
business mega-score of the Donald Jr-Eric Trump team. Trump’s administration 
could drop a protest about human rights abuses in the Philippines after his
Manila real estate project 
<http://www.newsweek.com/2016/12/23/donald-trump-foreign-business-deals-jeopardize-us-531140.html>
 gets a valuable easement or some such boost. A Trump-appointed director of the 
general services administration could decide for some reason to shrinkthe lease 
the Trump organization must pay the federal government 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/08/trump-conflict-of-interest-old-post-office-hotel>
 to run its hotel in the Old Post Office Pavilion in Washington DC.

We should emphasize that we’re not accusing Trump of being inclined to or 
capable of any of this – we’re just spitballing here. Trump’s willingness to 
allow questions to linger about whether he will divest from his businesses, 
after announcing that he would answer those questions definitively, is no 
discouragement to the imagination on this score.

Calm down. Trump is a patriot who loves America and would not subjugate its 
interests to his own

The level of risk of Trump’s conduct as an entrepreneur bleeding into his 
conduct as president is unclear. How strong is Trump’s desire to make money? 
His previous attempts at self-enrichment have ranged from casinos to branded 
liquor to a sketchy university.


Understand that the potential hazard here is not only Trump’s greed. Money he 
owes foreign banks, or secret foreign investors, or domestic banks or investors 
– or his desire to protect his assets abroad, or to create a favorable climate 
for the growth of those assets – or something we don’t know about could make 
him or his family members vulnerable to pressures from actors less scrupulous 
than he may be.

What does Trump intend to do?

We don’t know. He has made multiple statements. His lawyer, Michael Cohen, 
said two days after the election that Trump’s assets would be put in a “blind 
trust” to be managed by his three oldest children. Many experts havepointed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest-business>
 that it’s not blind if you know what’s in there and have a sense for how it’s 
run. The appointment of Trump’s children to his transition team further eroded 
their status as potential independent managers.

On 30 November, Trump unleashed a Twitter storm announcing the news conference 
he cancelled Tuesday. “I will be holding a major news conference in New York 
City with my children on December 15 to discuss the fact that I will be leaving 
my great business in total in order to fully focus on running the country in 
order to MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!” Trump tweeted. “While I am not mandated to 
do this under the law, I feel it is visually important, as President, to in no 
way have a conflict of interest with my various businesses.”

On 12 December, Trump announced a new plan, and said he was busy.

“Even though I am not mandated by law to do so, I will be leaving my busineses 
[sic] before January 20th so that I can focus full time on the Presidency,” 
Trumptweeted <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808528428123254785>. 
“Two of my children, Don and Eric, plus executives, will manage them. No new 
deals will be done during my term(s) in office.”

The timing was left vague. Trump’s spokeswoman said the news conference would 
be left until next month.

What’s Congress doing about this?

Twenty-three senators – not even half of the Democratic caucus – sent a letter 
to Trump on Tuesday calling on him to divest his business holdings and 
insisting: “Whether the President of the United States makes decisions about 
potential trade agreements or sending troops into war, the American people need 
to know that their President is acting in their best interest.

“In your public statements, you have referenced that the President is not 
subject to the restrictions of federal conflict of interest laws,” the letter 
read in part. “However, we understand the Office of Government Ethics has 
advised presidents across administrations to conduct themselves in a manner 
consistent with federal conflict of interest laws and standards of conduct 
regulations. The President is subject to the Emoluments Clause of the United 
States Constitution, which will prohibit payments or gifts to your businesses 
by entities owned by foreign governments.”

Related: Russia and conflicts of interest: Rex Tillerson embodies quandaries 
for Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-quandaries-trump-russia-conflicts-of-interest>

Separately, Senator Elizabeth Warren and Representative Elijah Cummings asked 
the government to open an investigation of possible conflicts of interest for 
Trump in his transition to the presidency and after he takes office.

“At this point, it is not clear if the line between Mr Trump’s Presidency and 
his and business ventures is blurred – or entirely nonexistent,” the two said 
in a 23 Novemberletter 
<http://www.warren.senate.gov/files/documents/2016-11-23-GAO_Letter_On_Trump_Transition.pdf>
 to the comptroller general asking for a review by the Government 
Accountability Office.

The letter continued:


Several weeks ago, the general counsel for the Trump Organization, Michael 
Cohen, explained that Mr Trump will transfer management of the Trump 
Organization to his adult children, who will run the company “through a blind 
trust”. But claims that Mr Trump’s will set up a “blind” trust do not appear to 
be consistent with the meaning of that term or with legal requirements that 
apply to such trusts. A qualified blind trust, which must be approved by the 
Office of Government Ethics, would allow Mr Trump to forgo reporting the 
details of some assets in his financial disclosures. The Ethics in Government 
Act explicitly prohibits Mr Trump’s children from managing such a trust. The 
Act requires that, “Any officer or employee of a trustee or other entity who is 
involved in the management or control of the trust of a qualified trust” not be 
“a relative of any interested party”. To date, there has been no information 
released to the public indicating that Mr Trump has prepared a blind trust.
 