
To this day, I don't know whether to blame or thank William Friedkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/william-friedkin> and Mark Kermode. The 
one-two punch of the 1998 BBC documentary, The Fear of God, and then finally 
getting to see the movie not long after, formed my obsession. After years of 
subsequent viewings – and nightmares – The Exorcist is now like an old friend. 
And no other movie has tapped into my own existential fears as much as this one.

The Exorcist <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-exorcist> was a phenomenon. 
Even within my own family, there's an Exorcist story. My father and his younger 
sister, who were raised in the Roman Catholic faith, went to see it together. 
My aunt usually relates the tale with a mixture of laughter and wounded 
annoyance, describing how my father walked up to the box office armed with a 
fistful of crucifixes and when enquiring if she too could have one, he said 
'No'. The idea that you needed protecting from a motion picture made by 
Hollywood, one deemed capable of manifesting (or was literally) evil is 
laughable, but does attest to the hysteria surrounding the adaptation of 
William Peter Blatty's novel, back then.

Everybody has a movie hero. Mine is Father Damien Karras. Dimmy's emotional 
struggles are not the sole reserve of the tortured Catholic, either. His 
doubts, guilt and questioning have a universal resonance. He's a rich mix of 
contradictions, like many of us. Karras is an intellectual and yet handy with 
fists. He has a wry sense of humour and loves the movies. A Jesuit and a 
Harvard-educated psychiatrist; Lt Kinderman playfully refers to him as "Father 
Paranoia". A rationalist longing for a sign from God, he looks as tough as old 
boots with his boxer's gait, but is fragile. When the subject of exorcism is 
broached by Chris MacNeil (Ellen Burstyn), he scoffs, but then finds redemption 
and purpose through the experience. And – here's the real kicker – in saving 
poor Regan (Linda Blair) from the demon, he damns himself as a suicide. Really, 
Damien Karras is American cinema's great unsung hero.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FYDGw1MTEe9k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FYDGw1MTEe9k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FYDGw1MTEe9k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch the trailer for The Exorcist 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YDGw1MTEe9k>

Played by ex-Spurs manager Juande Ramos – all right then, Jason Miller – the 
stage actor and Pulitzer prize-winning playwright, the performance is among the 
most mesmerising big screen debuts. The saintly aura and famous entrance into 
the MacNeil house by Father Lankester Merrin perhaps put his assistant into the 
shade. Karras's introduction is less showy, occurring at about the 15-minute 
mark, during the filming of Crash Course, a drama currently on location in DC, 
starring Mrs MacNeil. With his dark looks and immediately intense presence, if 
it wasn't for the warm smile and dog collar, you might mistake him as 
sinister-looking, even satanic. As the priest walks away from the crowd, he 
radiates melancholy and a world of worries. The landscape of 1970s New 
Hollywood is riddled with characters that exhibit antiheroic traits or figures 
who are complex and complicated souls. Father Damien fits right in. This lauded 
era, too, was unafraid of the downbeat ending. Forget it, Karras – it's 
Georgetown.

Appalled by the demon having caused Merrin's poorly ticker to finally stop 
working, the priest loses his shit, as the modern expression goes. He's had 
enough with the wicked taunts – "Your mother's in here with us, Karras" – and 
the projectile puke and mind games and puts Regan in a headlock and proceeds to 
punch and throttle her. When all else fails – fresh tactics, as Face/Off's 
Castor Troy would say. The demonic entity, at the furious man's invitation, 
enters the body. Karras hurls himself out the bedroom window and down those 
iconic M Street steps. His whole life was leading up to this valiant but 
intensely tragic moment.
 