
From Tuesday, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art will screen Sculpt 
<http://www.lacma.org/sculpt#landing>, a $1.5m feature film by the 38-year-old 
French artistLoris Gréaud <http://lorisgreaud.com/>. It will be shown at 
Lacma’s Bing theater, an auditorium that normally seats 600 people, but with an 
almighty caveat: Gréaud has requested that all of the seats be removed except 
for one, which will sit in the centre of the space, forlorn and exposed. The 
film, which is about two hours long, will be shown between four and six times a 
day. Viewers will be invited to watch it alone.

Exactly what they will watch is yet to be fully determined. Gréaud is making 
four versions of Sculpt, each similar in narrative arc but different in pacing, 
script and sequence of events. All versions follow a central character, a manic 
collector played byWillem Dafoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/sep/12/willem-dafoe-five-best-moments-most-wanted-man>
, whose voice, deep and hurried, anxiously permeates the film throughout. Dafoe 
is in the business of collecting moments of human value – anticipation, beauty, 
obsession, anger – and he amasses them like an art collector might accumulate 
paintings. Soon, collecting them is not enough. Wild-eyed, he descends into a 
dark, dystopian black market to make good with shady dealers from whom he 
commissions the production of replicas, which he then plans to sell on, 
presumably for a tidy profit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1GdNwAGfTU8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1GdNwAGfTU8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1GdNwAGfTU8&media=>
The plot is a not-so-subtle observation of the contemporary art market, which 
Gréaud laments as being driven by high-net-worth individuals who are becoming 
at once collectors, producers and gallerists. It is not meant as a critique, 
Gréaud insists; nor is it based on any specific personal experience. Rather, 
“it is a mimicry,” he explains, “pushed a little into the world of social 
science fiction.”

It is also more than a little conceptual. Commissioned and part-funded by 
Lacma, Sculpt took 30 months to produce and features sprawling sequences shot 
on seven of the earth’s eight continents. One scene was filmed inHang son Doong 
<https://vimeo.com/121736043>, a largely inaccessible cave in central Vietnam; 
another was shot at a voodoo temple in New Orleans (more on which later). There 
are turns by the actorMichael Lonsdale 
<http://www.slantmagazine.com/features/article/interview-michael-lonsdale>, the 
model and Yves Saint Laurent museBetty Catroux 
<http://www.vogue.com/13259964/yves-saint-laurent-beauty-muses/>, and Charlotte 
Rampling, a regular Gréaud collaborator, who here plays a character called 
Grumpy Bear. Music is supplied by the avant garde art collectivethe Residents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/26/the-residents-giant-eyeball-stolen>
, who also appear in the film, in hair-raising masks. When I met Gréaud in July 
to discuss the project, he had yet to reveal two additional characters, one of 
whom he described as “a very well-known French actor”. He was unsure whether or 
not to include them in the final edits. Parts of the trailer, which has amassed 
over 680,000 views on YouTube and is as ambiguous a teaser as you will likely 
ever witness, have already been cut from the finished article.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Floris-greaud-willem-dafoe-scult-film-lacma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b209c0342a6795907465fd7a868175a455b7bd5%2F0_1292_2577_2573%2F2577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Loris%20Gr%C3%A9aud%20and%20Willem%20Dafoe%20made%20a%20film%20few%20will%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Floris-greaud-willem-dafoe-scult-film-lacma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Loris%20Gr%C3%A9aud%20and%20Willem%20Dafoe%20made%20a%20film%20few%20will%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Floris-greaud-willem-dafoe-scult-film-lacma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b209c0342a6795907465fd7a868175a455b7bd5%2F0_1292_2577_2573%2F2577.jpg>
 Charlotte Ramping as Grumpy Bear. Gréaud describes his film as ‘dematerialised 
social sculpture’. Photograph: Nickolas Lorieux/Gréaudstudio 
Well, probably. I have not seen the film, and neither, when I met him, had 
Gréaud – not fully. (It was being colour-edited at the time. The film is tinted 
blood red throughout.) In fact, very few people will see it, at least 
initially. Lacma pulls in over a million visitors annually, but, because only 
one person will be permitted to see the film at a time, fewer than 500 people 
are likely to see Sculpt when it is screened at the museum. Viewers will be 
chosen via a lottery-like system that will reset every day, and they will watch 
the film for free. Gréaud has requested that press and staff viewings be 
restricted, to a degree that even Lacma’s director,Michael Govan 
<http://observer.com/2015/11/the-man-who-wants-to-make-nys-art-world-obsolete/>
, will be asked to stand in line. The film will not go on general release in 
the US. Neither will it be screened around the world, despite significant 
offers from major distributors. When its stint at Lacma ends, the film’s one 
and only set of master reels will be shipped to that temple in New Orleans, 
where it will sit, unprotected, in a public space that is filled with skulls 
and snakes. Did I mention how much it cost to make?

Why all the misdirection? For Gréaud, it is both part of the fun of the work 
and its major component. He considers the film to be one segment of a larger 
idea – Sculpt, the concept – which he describes as a “dematerialised social 
sculpture”. Much of the project centres on the blurring of the space between 
fact and fiction, truth and conjecture, and the film plays mischievously in the 
ambiguous pockets between the two. When, in one sequence, Gréaud captures the 
voodoo temple’s high priestess cursing a roll of film, viewers are led to 
wonder whether it is the one currently being projected. (That turns out to be 
the case.)

Talking to Gréaud about the project can become disorientating, but he has a 
knack for convincing people – with a salesman’s charm and the confidence of 
having previously followed through on similarly ambitious projects – to 
subscribe to and believe in his audacious plans and ideas. The Residents, who 
rarely collaborate beyond their own collective, decided to participate because 
they were “intrigued by the project’s calculated unknowns”. Rampling calls the 
film “an experience” that is to be “integrated and not necessarily analysed”. 
Dafoe, who initially turned the project down, until Gréaud flew halfway across 
the world and arrived one morning on his doorstep to explain the concept over 
coffee, believes Sculpt to be “an ambitious experiment”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Floris-greaud-willem-dafoe-scult-film-lacma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2cdd855f6f244b5f76e851c75f9a96b13c77d8a%2F0_0_2577_3865%2F2577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Loris%20Gr%C3%A9aud%20and%20Willem%20Dafoe%20made%20a%20film%20few%20will%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Floris-greaud-willem-dafoe-scult-film-lacma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Loris%20Gr%C3%A9aud%20and%20Willem%20Dafoe%20made%20a%20film%20few%20will%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Floris-greaud-willem-dafoe-scult-film-lacma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2cdd855f6f244b5f76e851c75f9a96b13c77d8a%2F0_0_2577_3865%2F2577.jpg>
 Charlotte Rampling on the set of Sculpt. Photograph: Nickolas Lorieux 
This willingness to generate and sustain high-profile support might be one of 
Gréaud’s defining talents. (He is not the only artist to do this: the Italian 
film-makerFrancesco Vezzoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/04/francesco-vezzoli-art-basel-prada-italy>
 has shown similar powers of persuasion; Natalie Portman, Michelle Williams and 
Helen Mirren are all collaborators.) But so, too, is his ability to hold his 
nerve. In 2006, at the Frieze art fair, he installed sculptures so small you 
couldn’t see them, forcing collectors into questioning whether they actually 
existed (before parting with significant sums of money). He has created a book 
whose words are invisible, a body of exhibition work that was destroyed (by 
performers, at the artist’s request) on opening night. Gréaud’s work taunts and 
challenges. But is it showmanship, or conceptual daring?

Govan describes the project as containing “a kind of surreal absurdity, but 
with a point”. Though a crucial part of his job entails getting the general 
public to engage with art, he believes that it matters little that few people 
will see the film at Lacma. Word of mouth, he argues, is more important for the 
success and longevity of the project than the number of people who actually see 
it. The idea, Govan believes, is for the artwork to live on in a collective 
memory, rather than on Netflix. “He is playing with the truth,” Govan says, 
“and the way that we know things … In a modern medium, he is making something 
that is instantly lost.”

In fact, the film will not be lost entirely. Gréaud is currently engineering a 
kind of second life for the work. During the Lacma screenings, dealers will 
hand out bootleg copies of the film on DVD, almost ridiculing the idea of 
having to queue for a one-on-one encounter. (When Gréaud and I met, he had yet 
to let Lacma know of this decision.) Beyond the museum, the artist has employed 
a network of hackers to distribute incomplete sections of the film on to the 
dark net, where, again, they will be accessible for free. Parts of the feature 
will also be screened in select theatres around the world – in London, San 
Francisco, Paris – although they will be shown at very late notice and at 
inaccessible times. Viewers who don’t see the film at Lacma might still be able 
to see it, although it’s unlikely they’ll see the whole thing in one place and 
in one go, leading to complicated and imprecise discussion among viewers. Facts 
will be hard to come by, Gréaud thinks, and in their place fictitious elements 
will evolve.

“It’s a simple mechanism,” Gréaud said during our conversation in July. “When 
you take something and make it rare, you create desire, and slight 
frustration.” It is those emotions that Gréaud is hoping to tap into; feelings 
that are familiar among players in the art market. “It could become a 
phenomenon,” he says. Then again, it might not.
 