
Republican presidential candidates have almost uniformly declared their 
intentions to unravelBarack Obama’s nuclear accord with Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-programme-world-powers-historic-deal-lift-sanctions>
 if elected to the White House in 2016.

But according to numerous foreign policy experts their bold campaign pledges 
might be difficult to keep 18 months from now.

Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> have thus far 
had little power to scuttle the agreement, reached last week between six world 
powers and Iran after nearly two years of negotiations and designed to restrict 
Iran’s nuclear programme in exchange for sanctions relief.

The party has thus set its sights on the power of the presidency to reverse 
course, with vows from the top brass of presidential contenders to reimpose US 
sanctions onIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> – as early as on the 
first day in office.

“I’m telling everyone now that, if I’m elected president of the United States, 
we will not use the national security waiver to hold back US sanctions against 
Iran, especially not as a result of this flawed deal that he’s pursuing,” 
Florida senator Marco Rubio, a Republican who has made foreign policy a central 
theme of his campaign, said on Sunday.

The Wisconsin governor, Scott Walker, said he would terminate the deal “on the 
very first day in office, put in place crippling sanctions and convince our 
allies to do the same”, while former Florida governor Jeb Bush said he would 
“begin immediately” the process of pulling the US out of the accord.

The statements are not surprising in an election year where national security 
has emerged as a highly potent issue among Republican primary voters, who view 
the Iran deal as the latest in a string of foreign policy failures under the 
Obama administration. But political reality could force the next president to 
uphold the agreement regardless of how sceptically they view it – especially if 
Iran appears to be complying with its terms come January 2017.

“If there is a relatively good record of compliance with the deal for the next 
year and a half or so, it would be quite challenging for the next president, 
whoever that may be, to actually throw that out,” said Liz Rosenberg, a senior 
fellow and director of the energy economics and security programme at the 
Center for a New American Security.

Although a future president technically has the power to reimpose sanctions 
for which Obama has offered relief, such a move would come with all sorts of 
challenges to international and diplomatic relationships with both allies and 
adversaries, she added.

The US and European sanctions were successful in bringing Iran to the 
negotiating table due in no insignificant part to the fact that they operated 
in tandem. Without buy-in from Europe to also reimpose its own sanctions on 
Iran, such action by an American president would serve as more of a symbolic 
move than one bearing substantial leverage.

“There is a mistaken belief amongst many that the US has an overwhelming and 
punishing amount of economic pressure that it can turn on whenever it wants, 
against whomever it wants in any circumstance,” said Rosenberg.


Indeed, the European Union has already telegraphed its approval 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/07/20/us-iran-nuclear-eu-idUSKCN0PU0S520150720>
 of the deal to the US Congress, where lawmakers have 60 days to review the 
terms before holding an up-or-down vote to either approve or reject it. The 
Senate foreign relations committee will hold its first hearing on Iran on 
Thursday, and a vote is not anticipated until after Congress returns from 
recess in September.

Obama has said he will veto any efforts to block the agreement, and 
Republicans would need 43 House Democrats to band with them in order to achieve 
the two-thirds majority required to override a presidential veto. Although 
Democratic lawmakers were cautious in their reaction to the deal last week, 
it’s unlikely that many of them would buck their own president on what is being 
viewed as a legacy-defining moment for the Obama White House.

In a bid to persuade sceptics of the deal, EU foreign ministers emphasised 
that there was no better alternative following a unanimous vote by the UN 
security council that endorsed the nuclear accord.

How much international support there would be if the US walked away from the 
deal and called for the restoration of sanctions would be a critical factor in 
any new administration’s assessment of how to proceed, said Robert Einhorn, a 
senior fellow at the Brookings Institution who served on the US delegation to 
the Iran nuclear negotiations from 2009 to 2013.

“If the assessment was that no one would follow the US in striking the 
sanctions, that would be a factor arguing against walking away … If Iran is 
complying with the deal and is not making trouble in the region, then the 
administration may well find it may not have support,” he said. “On the other 
hand, if Iran is dragging its feet and compliance problems have arisen, that 
would make it much easier for a new president to walk away from the deal.”

Einhorn also expressed doubts that a Republican president, for all of the 
bluster among the current crop of candidates, would actually turn his back on 
an agreement if it appeared to be working.

“Whatever candidates may say today, his administration will take a look at the 
situation prevailing at the time. It won’t rely exclusively on what was said a 
year and a half earlier,” he said.

Bush has conceded as much in recent days, pointing out in what was seen as a 
thinly veiled shot at Walker that a day-one promise to rescind US support for 
the deal would be impractical.

“One thing that I won’t do is just say, as a candidate: ‘I’m going to tear up 
the agreement on the first day.’ That’s great, that sounds great but maybe you 
ought to check in with your allies first, maybe you ought to appoint a 
secretary of state, maybe secretary of defence, you might want to have your 
team in place, before you take an act like that,” Bush told reporters after a 
town hall in Carson City, Nevada, on Friday.

He later expanded upon those comments amid criticism from some on the right 
that he was weakening his position, reiterating his belief that the deal must 
be revoked – but again taking a more nuanced approach that acknowledged the 
role that must be played by US allies in order for a new round of sanctions to 
be impactful.

“As president I would begin immediately to responsibly get us out of this 
deal, with a comprehensive strategy that is responsive to the conditions at the 
time and confronts Iran’s continued pursuit of a nuclear weapons capability, 
its support for terrorism and instability, its ballistic missile proliferation, 
and its horrific human rights record,” Bush said in a statement to theWeekly 
Standard 
<https://www.weeklystandard.com/blogs/bush-vs-walker-catches-fire-over-iran-nuclear-deal_994073.html?page=2>
.

“Such a strategy will require a new national security team that is committed 
to rebuilding our defences and restoring our alliances, starting with our 
relationship with Israel. It will require sustained diplomatic efforts to put 
significant financial, diplomatic, and military pressure on Iran to change its 
behavior. And because of the massive sanctions relief provided by this terrible 
deal, the impact of unilateral US sanctions will be limited and it will be 
important to work with our allies to reimpose multilateral sanctions and 
pressure.”

Rubio took an opposing view during an interview with CNN on Sunday when asked 
what he would do as president if allies refused to go along with the US.

“Our foreign policy as a nation is not subject to what China wants to do or 
Russia wants to do or the EU wants to do or anybody wants to do,” he said. “We 
have our own foreign policy. It needs to be in the national security interests 
of the United States.”

But in charting its own course of action, irrespective of whether Iran was 
complying with the deal or not, the US might only be inflicting harm upon 
itself.

“The US would be in a situation where it would presumably then say we’d 
reimpose sanctions which would only hurt, for the most part, US businesses, 
which would then turn on whichever administration,” said George Perkovich, 
vice-president for studies at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

Pushback from the business community, which traditionally favours Republicans, 
would be especially salient. Perkovich, an expert on Iran who focuses on 
nuclear strategy and nonproliferation, added that the US acting alone to 
dismantle the deal would also do little to change Iran’s behaviour if they’re 
already complying with the agreement and not beholden to similar threats from 
other supporters of the agreement.

If anything, he said, it could backfire and energise moves by other countries 
to become less dependent on the US financial system.

“The only thing that it could accomplish is to make Republican primary voters 
feel better that their candidates are expressing their fears and passions,” 
Perkovich said. “One of these people might get elected … the question will be, 
do they feel like they’re obligated to do something just because they said it 
at this moment.”

Polling 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/wp/2015/07/20/56-percent-of-people-support-obamas-iran-deal-but-they-dont-think-it-will-work/?postshare=7661437409146106>
 at this particular moment finds that a slim majority of Americans, at 56%, 
supports the Iran deal but remains sceptical that it will succeed.


Views differ sharply when broken down by party affiliation, offering further 
rationale for Republican candidates blasting the agreement - just four in 10 
Republicans support it, while 54% are opposed. Democrats, on the other hand, 
support the deal by a 69 to 25% margin.

Obama, for his part, projected confidence last week that history was on his 
side as far as how the deal would ultimately be viewed – as would efforts to 
squander it.


“If we don’t choose wisely, I believe future generations will judge us harshly 
for letting this moment slip away,” he said.

 