
Dear Lonely Planet, 

OK, we get the message. We're deleting your number from our phone, we won't 
expect to hear from you again and we'd just ask that you respect our heartache 
at this difficult time.

Frankly, we're a little confused as to why our simple, yet attractive city 
does not even merit a perfunctory mentionin your latest edition of Discover 
Great Britain 
<http://www.sundaymercury.net/news/midlands-news/2011/08/28/lonely-planet-book-ignored-birmingham-in-latest-guide-to-uk-66331-29317315/>
. We're a little bewildered as to why we have fallen so far from favour in your 
cold, geoanalytical heart. After all, as recently as 2005, you were all 
lovey-dovey with us 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2005/may/24/regeneration.communities>, 
praising our warm, throbbing city centre nightlife and the pleasing curves of 
our architecture, bigging us up, assuring us that no, you weren't remotely 
interested in that awful London â€“ after all, everybody's been there and done 
that.

But we knew things were starting to go sour in 2009 when you decided that our 
little sister city Wolverhampton, with whom we share so many vowel sounds and 
nocturnal eating activities, deserved to be called"the fifth-worst city on 
earth." <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/west_midlands/8435823.stm>Did you 
not see how that would hurt us by association, Lonely Planet? Were you not 
being a little harsh on us?

But we let it pass. We thought things would pick up between us. We thought 
that we could target your heart through your stomach with our legendary Balti 
triangle, or woo you anew with culture and grand nights out at the Rep or the 
Museum and Art Gallery. Hell, if we're being too grand for you, just say and 
we'll take you out for a few pints ofBanks's 
<http://www.bankssbeer.co.uk/verify-age.aspx?ru=%2f> and some faggots and peas 
<http://britishfood.about.com/od/eorecipes/r/faggots.htm>.

In our heart of hearts, we know you won't call. But, Lonely Planet, let us 
tell you something. We are beautiful, no matter what you say.

Love and regrets,

Birmingham (as told to @tweetcashmore <http://twitter.com/#!/tweetcashmore>)
 