
Coming up the steep ascent I start to zigzag, blowing hard. The early mist is 
clearing and sunshine breaks around the corner of the mountain. A grouse 
chuckles nearby in the heather. Then, suddenly, I am at 500 metres and on the 
top, gazing out over a vast panorama of lakes and mountains. Far to the west is 
a golden smudge of sea and, even as I stand there, the sky is clearing, patches 
of blue joining hands over Buttermere and out beyond Scafell Pike. I take a 
panoramic shot with my phone and tweet it. Within a minute I get a text back 
from a friend: “It’s raining here.”

Further along the ridge, the view is down into Crummock Water, the entire lake 
a dappled mirror of russet and gold. The air is utterly still and clear. “Where 
are you?” comes a second text.

I send another pic. “The Lakes.” I look at the photo with its blue skies and 
alpine clarity of light and add: “In winter.”

Most people just don’t bother. January to March are by far the quietest times 
in the Lakes, as you might expect. There is a 50% chance of rain or snow on any 
day, and a lot less daylight – seven hours, if you’re lucky. I’ve been there 
when the roads have flooded, when snow has blocked passes, when you would not 
want to send a dog outside. But I love it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Flake-district-winter-break-walking-pubs-spas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421161487584%2F6ee48669-aace-4458-b205-16d27cbc70d1-2060x1039.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20a%20Lake%20District%20winter%20break%20is%20the%20perfect%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Flake-district-winter-break-walking-pubs-spas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20a%20Lake%20District%20winter%20break%20is%20the%20perfect%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Flake-district-winter-break-walking-pubs-spas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421161487584%2F6ee48669-aace-4458-b205-16d27cbc70d1-2060x1039.jpeg>
 The wintry fellside mirrored in Crummock Water. Photograph: Nick Bodle/Alamy 
Let’s start with the night before that walk. As I drive up over Honister Pass, 
a dark sheet of cold cloud squeezes a thin bronze bar of fading light across 
Fleetwith Pike. In the headlamps, a torrent of rainwater and dead leaves is 
coming down the road. Then I drop into Lorton Vale and somehow get lost in 
pitch darkness in the wiggly lanes between Crummock Water and Loweswater. I am 
searching for theKirkstile Inn <http://kirkstile.com/>, a place I want to find 
for no better reason than they make, and sell, the best beer in the world. No 
wait, I don’t want to be falsely accused of hyperbole, best beer in the 
universe. It’s called Loweswater Gold. I had it once before at a beer festival 
and have pined for it ever since.

I find the place, eventually: a solid black-and-white farmhouse under the 
looming presence of Melbreak fell, a 512-metre midget that, in the gloaming, 
has the look of a giant volcanic monster. There is a fire in the inn’s bar, 
live music, roast lamb off the fell, and – heaven – Loweswater Gold by the 
barrel. You need to walk in from the cold, from the savage gloom, to appreciate 
these things. Summer just doesn’t compare.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Flake-district-winter-break-walking-pubs-spas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421161624999%2Fddb013e8-78c3-4344-9bd0-4c48ffa971ad-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20a%20Lake%20District%20winter%20break%20is%20the%20perfect%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Flake-district-winter-break-walking-pubs-spas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20a%20Lake%20District%20winter%20break%20is%20the%20perfect%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Flake-district-winter-break-walking-pubs-spas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421161624999%2Fddb013e8-78c3-4344-9bd0-4c48ffa971ad-1020x612.jpeg>
 Loweswater Gold beer at the Kirkstile Inn 
Next day, coming down off the eastern end of Melbreak, I explore Scale Force, 
the highest waterfall in the Lakes. Between May and October, it’s nothing but a 
pathetic mossy dribble – and it’s not always that impressive in winter either, 
to be honest. Then I go down alongside Crummock Water where there is a moment 
of perfection: warm sun, the lake all golden, no sound at all, and no one else 
around.

And what if the weather is just too horrible, as it is the following day? I 
drive over to Keswick and spend a couple of hours climbing at the brand newKing 
Kong Climbing Centre <http://www.kingkongclimbingcentre.co.uk/prices/> (adult 
from £7, child £4.50). Don’t be put off by the childish name: this has some 
serious indoor climbs, plus a cave, an ice climb and a place to leave the kids 
while you try it all out. At least it keeps me away from the camping and 
climbing shops – normally I can’t resist and the town has a wonderful array. 
And if you really want outdoor climbing, there’s always the newVia Ferrata 
Xtreme <http://honister.com/via_ferrata_xtreme.asp> at Honister – open all year.

From Keswick, I head across to Bassenthwaite Lake, where Paul Currie has just 
opened theLakes Distillery <http://www.lakesdistillery.com/en/> (tour £12.50), 
the first whisky distillery here for a century – well, the first official one, 
as there were a few distinguished but highly illegal operations in the past.

It’s a lovely spot and Paul is an enthusiast: he cut his teeth by opening a 
distillery on the Isle of Arran with his father 20 years ago. He spotted this 
derelict farm where the Derwent river comes charging out of Bassenthwaite.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Flake-district-winter-break-walking-pubs-spas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421161995544%2Fa2166524-8365-4e5f-a138-e87012e34c50-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20a%20Lake%20District%20winter%20break%20is%20the%20perfect%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Flake-district-winter-break-walking-pubs-spas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20a%20Lake%20District%20winter%20break%20is%20the%20perfect%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Flake-district-winter-break-walking-pubs-spas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421161995544%2Fa2166524-8365-4e5f-a138-e87012e34c50-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Skiddaw Range, Blencathra, Keswick and Derwentwater from the top of 
Catbells. Photograph: KPA/Zuma/REX 
“I had the water tested and found it was perfect for whisky,” he says, “I 
couldn’t resist giving it a try.”

I nod sympathetically: I always have that same feeling about whisky.

The giant copper stills are already humming, sending out delicious warm 
aromas, as will the restaurant soon enough: they are just putting the finishing 
touches to it when I visit.

Outside, the temperature is dropping and I know what I want: a steam room or a 
hot tub. I drive over to Langdale, savouring the lack of traffic jam on the 
road past Wordsworth’s cottage in Grasmere. In summer, this stretch of road can 
be a solid line of cars. Even Ambleside is a pleasure: there are parking spaces 
in the street, a thing rarer than hen’s teeth between May and October. Then 
it’s into the spa complex at the Langdale Hotel.

Thoroughly warmed up, I walk through the rain to Elterwater village and the 
Britannia Inn <http://thebritanniainn.com/>. The only thing that has changed 
here in the past 40 years appears to be the firewood and the barrels. In front 
of the fire, I settle down with a pint of Bluebird Bitter from the Coniston 
Brewing Company; it’s not Loweswater Gold, but second-best in the universe is 
still pretty good.
• The trip was provided by the Cumbria tourist board, golakes.co.uk 
<http://www.golakes.co.uk/>. The Kirkstile Inn (01900 85219, kirkstile.com 
<http://kirkstile.com/>) offers half-board from £59.50pp pn until 26 March 
(two-night minimum). Langdale Hotel & Spa (015394 38053,langdale.co.uk 
<http://langdale.co.uk/>) has doubles from £155 B&B spa free to guests, day 
passes from £10 Mon-Thur, £15 weekends
 