
Potties, plates and pill-boxes. Sick-bags, donuts and embroidered velour 
nappies. From the sublime to the ridiculous, everyone is cashing in on the 
birth of the royal baby. Even the royal family is getting in on the act – the
Royal Collection Trust <http://www.royalcollectionshop.co.uk/royal-baby.html> 
has produced a range of named memorabilia that includes single mugs for £195 
and teddy bears for £90.

The Nottingham Center for Retail Research 
<http://www.retailresearch.org/royalbaby2013.php> estimates that the 
proliferation of royal baby paraphernalia and festivities will generate £243m 
for the UK economy in the two months following his birth. And it's not just the 
British who are clamoring for a tangible piece of history. International 
exports of souvenirs and media are expected to amount to an impressive £37m.

What is it about celebrity memorabilia that gets us so hot and bothered and 
willing to part with our cash? The items themselves rarely work any better than 
a cheaper, generic equivalent and often don't even look much different. One 
possibility is market value – invest now and reap the rewards later when 
desperate fans are willing to pay the earth to complete their collections.
 Royal baby cushion. Photograph: PR 
However, an article in Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/helaineolen/2013/07/23/should-you-buy-royal-baby-memorabilia/>
 says that the odds against making money on any of these items in the long run 
are "incredible". Given the manufacturing bonanza that is occurring at the 
moment, the market will be awash with millions of souvenirs over the next few 
weeks meaning that any collector is likely to be spoiled for choice on eBay and 
at car boot sales for years to come. So market value can't explain it.

Psychology points to a different answer: that in a strange way, the objects we 
possess appear to becomeextensions of ourselves 
<http://difi.uniud.it/tl_files/utenti/crisci/Belk%201988.pdf>. In 2011, 
psychologists at the University of Chicago used a clever act of deception to 
test this idea. The researchers first made their participants feel uncertain 
about themselves by telling them that answers they had given on a questionnaire 
were too erratic to produce a clear personality profile. Crucially, those who 
were given this feedback then rated their belongings as more self-expressive 
than those in a control group. So, undermine someone's sense of who they are 
and they turn to their belongings to define themselves.

Researchers at Yale University have recently shown that this extension of self 
to objectshas a biological signature in the brain 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23696692>. When volunteers in an MRI scanner
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_magnetic_resonance_imaging> were 
asked to think about objects they owned, the same brain regions were activated 
as when they talked about their own personality. But this overlap in brain 
activity wasn't found when they were asked to imagine objects that belonged to 
other people.
 Royal baby Aston Villa football shirt. Photograph: Neville Williams/Getty 
If we use objects to define who we are then collecting memorabilia might help 
to align our self image with aspects of celebrity culture we find most 
attractive. Consider yourself a rebel? Get a Marilyn Manson t-shirt. Want to 
topple the capitalist regime? Let people know by investing in a Che Guevara tea 
towel.

This idea that a person's "selfhood" spills into the things they own verges on 
a belief in magic. In the Middle Ages, Christian churches were obsessed with 
owningreligious relics <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relic#Christianity> such 
as the robes of saints and martyrs. These days stardom is the new religion – 
even in a recession there has been a roaring trade at celebrity auctions. 
Michael Jackson's crystal-studded glove sold for $190,000, 10 times the amount 
predicted, and his Thriller jacket sold for $1.8m.

Why such a towering price tag? Psychologists have found that people act a bit 
like medieval bishops, treating celebrity objects as containers for the 
"essence" of their owners. Inone such study 
<http://mba.yale.edu/faculty/pdf/Newmang_celebrity_contagion.pdf>, researchers 
asked people to rate how willing they would be to buy a sweater owned by their 
favourite celebrity. You might think this decision would be made by weighing up 
the market resale value or the boasting rights. Not so. Willingness to own the 
sweater remained much the same even when people were told they wouldn't be able 
to resell it or that they couldn't tell anyone whom it had belonged to.

What made a big difference was being told that the celebrity had never worn 
the sweater. In that case the sweater went to the reject pile. Interest dropped 
even more in people who reported being sensitive to contagion and disease. So 
the more worried they were about catching cooties, the more they rejected the 
unworn celebrity sweater but valued the one that had been worn. It seems that 
people value celebrity belongings in part because they feel they will "catch" a 
little bit of celebrity.
 Royal Baby iPhone cover. Photograph: PR 
Viewed through a rational lens this seems ridiculous. After all, how could an 
intelligent person believe that someone's intangible "essence" bleeds into the 
things they own? Then again, perhaps we shouldn't be surprised. Our belief in 
our own rationality is in large part an illusion – we already know that 
"rational" consumers are actually driven by a whole host ofodd but consistent 
biases 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Predictably-Irrational-Hidden-Forces-Decisions/dp/0007256531>
.

Celebrity souvenirs provide a strange glimpse into our own cognition, offering 
extensions of who we are and allowing us totouch "greatness" 
<http://research3.bus.wisc.edu/file.php/157/papers/Touching_Greatness.pdf>. So, 
if you're impressed by the frenzy for royal baby memorabilia now, just wait 
until George's outgrown babygros and used nappies hit the market.
 