
A ripped Che Guevara poster in fluorescent pink and turquoise was my first 
contact with a so-called “iconic image”. Later came Tiananmen Square:the 
picture of a man blocking the path of a column of tanks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography-blog/2014/jun/03/stuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man>
 in China, in 1989.

I’ve mulled over both recently in connection with the label “iconic”. Of 
course, growing up in another time or place might prompt other “iconic” 
pictures. In Hollywood, there were the crafted photographs of Greta Garbo; in 
China, Mao. But isn’t “iconic image” a tautology? After all, icon and image 
mean the same thing.

Think about the Byzantine church-image conflict. Those who sided with Pope 
Gregory I thought that images could help the illiterate understand Bible 
stories. Those opposed, from the Greek-speaking Eastern church, went for a more 
tradition-based option of filling churches with pictures of saints – icons (the 
Greek work for image). For more than 1,200 years, saints, venerated in prayer 
via their icons, have been asked to intercede in all sorts of ways.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20adbca3f965f32b07abb6758797981ae66f26a3%2F138_75_4252_3515%2F4252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20there's%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20an%20iconic%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20there%27s%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20an%20iconic%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20adbca3f965f32b07abb6758797981ae66f26a3%2F138_75_4252_3515%2F4252.jpg>
 The Lamentation of Christ, circa 1480, by Andrea Mantegna. Photograph: Dea/G 
Cigolini/Getty Images/DeAgostini 
Reportedly, Saint Ernesto “Che” Guevara has joined the throng, at least in 
Bolivia, where he was executed in 1967. Alive, he looked like a primary-school 
picture of Jesus. Dead, in one memorable photograph, he resembled the prone 
figure in Andrea Mantegna’s The Lamentation of Christ. Uniquely, he’s become 
both a secular and religious icon.

Is it the event within an event, or the pictures themselves that are 'iconic'?

But is it Alberto Korda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/may/28/guardianobituaries.cuba>’s famous 
1960 photograph of Che 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/jun/03/art.art> – reproduced 
millions of times – that’s iconic or Che himself? René Burri’s1963 picture of 
Che 
<http://uk.phaidon.com/agenda/photography/events/2012/may/11/what-happened-when-rene-burri-met-che-guevera/>
 smoking a cigar has also been crowned “iconic” by – among others – the German 
author of Photo Icons, Hans-Michael Koetzle. Are they both “iconic”, or just 
Che? After all, nobody talks about an iconic picture of Adolf Hitler, despite 
there being a number of memorable photographs.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e9c36e1c3729ac5dcb2fbe8e835b64016434853%2F0_0_2048_1600%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20there's%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20an%20iconic%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20there%27s%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20an%20iconic%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e9c36e1c3729ac5dcb2fbe8e835b64016434853%2F0_0_2048_1600%2F2048.jpg>
 Che Guevara, shortly after his death. Photograph: STR/Reuters 
Turning to Tiananmen Square, four photographers (I was one of them) took 
pictures of the man standing in front of the tanks from the Beijing Hotel. Each 
version has – in different contexts – been labelled “iconic”. So is it an event 
within an event or the pictures themselves that are “iconic”? Or is the word 
meaningless, overused, politically loaded, or just a marketing term? To answer 
these questions let’s examine the rise of the secular icon from semiotics to 
hyperbole.


A century before pop culture, the icon turned up in the literature of 
semiotics, where words, and then images, were parsed and picked over. Actual 
“indexical” proof of presence, as in a photograph, was separated from painting 
or, for example, the Twitter icon on your phone (Charles Peirce’stheory of signs
 <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/peirce-semiotics/>); content disjoined from 
form (Erwin Panofsky’s “iconology”).


Where photography and the icon regrouped was in a 1979 Ansel Adams cover story 
published in Time magazine. That was the year they spoke of the “photo-boom”, 
when auction-house prices for photographs began to soar. Robert Hughes, the 
Australian art critic famous for his iconoclastic take on Damien Hirst’stiger 
shark suspended in formaldehyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2011/mar/03/damian-hirst-famous-art#img-1>
,wrote very differently on Adams 
<http://newsfeed.time.com/2012/08/07/remembering-robert-hughes-author-and-art-critic/slide/master-of-the-yosemite-monday-sept-03-1979/>
: “His photographs of lakes, boulders, aspens and beetling crags have come to 
look like icons, the cult images of America’s vestigial pantheism.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2861c15319326cba0c37f6aabb2617ef0dab56a4%2F0_145_1732_2041%2F1732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20there's%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20an%20iconic%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20there%27s%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20an%20iconic%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2861c15319326cba0c37f6aabb2617ef0dab56a4%2F0_145_1732_2041%2F1732.jpg>
 Campbell’s ‘souper dress’ reappropriated Andy Warhol’s screenprint designs. 
Photograph: Louisa Gouliamaki/AFP/Getty Images 
The icon was back out of the box as a marketing term, as former New York Times 
photography critic AD Coleman recalls: “Cultural journalists were bandying that 
term around in regard to all sorts of things: rock stars, fashion models, 
consumer goods, you name it. Everything from a Campbell’s soup can to the 
Empire State Building was becoming ‘iconic’, everyone from Muhammad Ali to Phil 
Spector was becoming an ‘icon’ of pop culture.”.


In 1983, alongside David Bowie, whom Newsweek dubbed “a distinctly icy icon 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/archives-newsweeks-1983-david-bowie-profile-414079?rm=eu>
”, the photojournalistic icon came of age, or at least that’s when people 
started referring to famous war pictures as icons. “The whole history of the 
Vietnam war”, a New Yorker editorial expounded, “is bound up with certain 
images, which assumed iconic importance: the Buddhist monk setting fire to 
himself in the street in Saigon; the American soldiers burning down peasants’ 
huts with their cigarette lighters; a young girl at Kent State kneeling with 
her arms outstretched next to a slain protester.”


The odd thing is, 30 years on, other Vietnam war images come more readily to 
mind,such as the girl fleeing from napalm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/apr/22/vietnam-the-real-war-a-photographic-history-by-the-associated-press-in-pictures>
. One problem with the idea of the photojournalistic “iconic image”, as it 
started to gather momentum, is that it tended to overwrite other, more telling 
stories. TakeJoe Rosenthal’s picture of the American flag-raising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/23/iwo-jima-photograph-investigation-marines>
 at Iwo Jima.

First, the Japanese would never describe that picture as iconic. Second, it 
totally elides the horror of war: the thousands of dead and dying bodies 
entrenched in black volcanic sand, images that stunned the writer James Agee 
when he reviewed the newsreels in 1945. Through the “iconic image” of the flag, 
the battle has gone. The pattern repeats itself in Tiananmen Square, where the 
images of the massacre, published widely at the time, have slipped from view.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92fc4e88cba994a027110ff5609daa3efb2a8e8f%2F0_0_3000_2333%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20there's%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20an%20iconic%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20there%27s%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20an%20iconic%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92fc4e88cba994a027110ff5609daa3efb2a8e8f%2F0_0_3000_2333%2F3000.jpg>
 US Marines raise the American flag on Mount Suribachi, Iwo Jima, in 1945. 
Photograph: Joe Rosenthal/AP 
Yet the term “iconic”, while becoming gradually superfluous for us, may be 
relevant and meaningful to the subjects of so-described “iconic” images. The 
camera has been a life-changer for the now-famous subject of Steve McCurry’s 
Afghan Girl, Sharbat Gula. McCurry’s 1984 picture of the “green-eyed girl” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/dec/04/audrey-hepburn-afghan-girl-the-pictures-that-changed-photography-part-four>
, for years a National Geographic magazine marketing tool, and lately the basis 
for a charitable mission, hascertainly affected the life of the photograph’s 
unwitting star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/national-geographic-afghan-girl-arrested-pakistan-false-papers-sharbat-gula>
.


Vietnam: The Real War – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/apr/22/vietnam-the-real-war-a-photographic-history-by-the-associated-press-in-pictures>
“Iconic” as a meaningful term has been zapped by ubiquity. What was already 
excessive in the 1980s has redoubled today. We read of Giacometti’s “iconic 
skinny statues”; Leon Russell’s “iconic white beard”; “iconic banana-leaf 
wallpaper”; “iconic animals heading for extinction”; “iconic V-tapers” – earned 
spending too much time in the gym; “iconic” false eyelashes, “iconic” Tommy 
Hilfiger trousers. Car lovers look to the “iconic” 1963 Corvette Stingray 
“split-window” coupe. Then there’s the heritage crusade: “Visit the Queen at 
Buckingham Palace, or take the perfect picture with Big Ben; just some of the 
many iconic places to go in London.” Or not.

When the science-fiction author HG Wells wrote about acceleration in the 
future. he saw our drug-induced cognitive processes accelerating while the 
world, in contrast, slowed down. Actually, it seems, the reverse is happening – 
especially in the image world. The new accelerator is social media, where 
images barely have a chance to circulate as “iconic” before being replaced by 
others. The case of theAlan Kurdi picture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/01/alan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades>
 is an example. “Iconic” one moment, then rapidly overtaken by yet more equally 
devastating pictures emerging from the war in Syria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4912e7ae8342ba1285b7ca075dd8f8aa6e3f12b5%2F0_11_1733_1040%2F1733.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20there's%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20an%20iconic%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20there%27s%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20an%20iconic%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhy-theres-no-such-thing-as-an-iconic-image-stuart-franklin-magnum-photos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4912e7ae8342ba1285b7ca075dd8f8aa6e3f12b5%2F0_11_1733_1040%2F1733.jpg>
 Five-year-old Omran Daqneesh, who was in a building in Aleppo, Syria, that was 
hit by an airstrike. Photograph: AP 
Let’s face it. The word “iconic”, like many, has fallen off the peak. It now 
roams injured in the valley below as a confusing modern-day synonym for 
legendary, or well-known, or just well known to locals. What does this mean for 
describing images, such as Tiananmen Square? Nothing. Often, it was the events 
or people in photographs (such as Che Guevara) that were being described as 
iconic. And the post-iconic image? So far I’ve only read of the post-iconic 
skyscraper. Watch this space.

 