
Hello!

Here’s the rub: no matter where you stroke or poke, coming can be tricky for 
some of us. Thefact 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jsm.12669/abstract> is, men are 
more likely to orgasm – but did you ever wonder why it’s so difficult for 
women? We tried to find out in episode three of our video series Vagina 
Dispatches, which we launched today.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vagina%20Dispatches%20episode%20three%3A%20the%20orgasm%20gap%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vagina%20Dispatches%20episode%20three%3A%20the%20orgasm%20gap%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video&media=>
Vagina Dispatches episode three: the orgasm gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/oct/28/vagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video>
Both Mae and I have found this tricky (and so did the neuroscientist we spoke 
to,and the pelvic floor therapist, and the sex educator) but that doesn’t mean 
we can’t work at it. If you can relate, or if you tried out some of our handy 
tips we mention in the video we want to hear from you. Email us at 
vaginadispatches@theguardian.com. Don’t worry, we won’t share anything you tell 
us without your permission.


If you’re reading this and haven’t already signed up for the newsletter, you 
can do so here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/23/sign-up-for-the-latest-from-vagina-dispatches>
.

Bloody vaginas

In episode two, we talked about menstruation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/oct/12/vagina-dispatches-stopping-periods-episode-two-video>
 – or, rather, the lack thereof. We interviewed Dr Coutinho who felt that 
having periods is unnatural and spoke to artist Jenn Lewis, who strongly 
disagreed. A number of commenters were inclined to agree with Jenn, as they 
wrote in to tell us:

The first episode in this series was about appreciating the natural beauty of 
the vulva. Having a period is natural, too.

– Camille (on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/theguardian/videos/1490883294272066/?comment_id=1491069710920091&reply_comment_id=1493522497341479&comment_tracking=%7B%22tn%22%3A%22R9%22%7D>
)

Mae and I explain in the video that we have a hormonal IUD which stops our 
periods. Viewers also had some valuable thoughts about this method of 
contraception:


I wanted to point out that there are IUDs that aren’t hormonal and don’t 
affect the period. I have used a copper IUD (commercial name Paragard) for 
years and years, I love it because it very effectively and conveniently does 
the job of birth control and does not change my hormonal balance in the 
process. Your show gives the impression that IUDs are beneficial because they 
affect your hormones and stop your periods, first and foremost. Because some 
women don’t want to tamper with their hormones, you may be discouraging them 
from IUD use.

It’s true. And we’re reading through all of your responses, questions, and 
concerns about stopping your periods – and taking them very seriously. In fact, 
we are compiling a list we plan to present to a doctor. So please keep them 
coming! Here are a few examples:

 * “I’m a pro-sex feminist and joyfully celebrate women and men who don’t want 
to be parents. And as a woman who had my daughters when I was 37 and 39, I feel 
very lucky that the plumbing still worked. Not sure it would have, if I’d 
stopped my period.” – Kathleen, via email 
 * “I recently read a science reporter’s article about menstruation being so 
very helpful in removing excess iron in women’s blood that the male scientist 
involved in the study chose to get bloodletting every other month for a similar 
outcome ... I wonder now if the health problems I had early in life might not 
have been exacerbated by the fact that I had so few periods, sometimes only two 
a year.” – Anonymous, via email 
 * “Is there any scientific research that is been done to understand painful 
menstruation in women?” – Victoria from Togo, west Africa 
Our colleague Aliza Aufrichtig (otherwise known as the brains behind the giant 
vulva wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ng-interactive/2016/sep/23/draw-a-vulva?wall=true>
) was especially interested in that last one. Inher words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/24/period-pain-menstruation-cramps-dysmenorrhea>
:


I started having two-week-long periods accompanied by cramps so bad I couldn’t 
move for days. I bled heavily for 12 to 30 days at a time, often with only days 
of a break in between. Put another way, the average ovulating woman has bled 
for a total of nearly one year since the 2012 election but I’ve nearly doubled 
that. Added together, I’ve had my period for longer than Trump’s presidential 
campaign. Hard to say which is worse.

Aliza did some digging and turns out, there’s a dearth of research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/24/period-pain-menstruation-cramps-dysmenorrhea>
 on painful periods.

And – even though no one has specifically asked the question – I started 
wondering about how your period affects your sex drive. It turns out,it does 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/15/how-period-affects-sex-drive-menstruation-ovulation>
.

Please forward this message along and share episode three to help spread the 
genital knowledge. And if you’re enjoying this series, please support our work
with a contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/home?INTCMP=co_us_editorial_copy_USVaginaDispatchesThirdNewsletter>
 or bybecoming a member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_USVaginaDispatchesThirdNewsletter_inarticle>
.

Got more? Email us at vagina.dispatches@theguardian.com. Especially about 
orgasms.

Sorry Mum,

Mona & Mae
We’ve got nearly 18,000 vulvas on the great wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ng-interactive/2016/sep/23/draw-a-vulva?wall=true>
! Photograph: Vagina Dispatches  