
On first inspection, Trafalgar Street in Brighton is about as unremarkable a 
city centre road as they come. Sat in front of the mainline train station at 
the top end of the North Laine, this pencil-straight street is often the first 
road visitors and commuters cut down to reach the centre of town. It’s only on 
closer inspection, however, that you realise that it’s actually much more than 
that. You see, Trafalgar Street – though it might not know it – is the very 
centre ofBrighton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton> and Hove’s booming 
coffee culture.

Take a stroll along the narrow pavements and you’ll find 16 places to buy a 
cup of coffee (not including the four pubs that all sell coffee too), and all 
within the space of maybe 400 yards; Café Motu,Coffee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/coffee> at 33, Yolanda’s, Toast of 
Brighton, Redwood, Café del Golfo – the choice is endless. And if you do happen 
to get to the top of the road without succumbing, then there are another seven 
places to buy a cup in and around the immediate vicinity of the station itself.

It’s a similar story right across the city. In fact, Brighton and Hove can’t 
get enough coffee. Recent research by Greggs and the University of Stirling has 
shown that the city’s residents now consume the most coffee per head of any 
place in the UK, spending an average of £177 per person on it, which, for the 
record, is £25 more per head than those in the capital.

But while all the usual suspects (Starbucks, Costa, Caffe Nero etc) are here, 
there and everywhere in Brighton, it’s the prevalence of countless independent 
coffee shops that’s most striking, with each offering something different and, 
at times, something entirely unique. It is, according to Professor Julie Tinson 
of the University of Stirling, typical of a market where customers want a 
little more than the familiarity and consistency of the high-street shops. “The 
independent coffee shops offer consumers a more unique experience than one of 
the chains,” she says. “Marketing any product will only take an organisation so 
far.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwhy-brighton-obsessed-coffee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415375210560%2F98500606-d501-4448-ad84-847c802214b0-2060x1003.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20Brighton%20so%20obsessed%20with%20coffee%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwhy-brighton-obsessed-coffee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20Brighton%20so%20obsessed%20with%20coffee%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwhy-brighton-obsessed-coffee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415375210560%2F98500606-d501-4448-ad84-847c802214b0-2060x1003.jpeg>
 Vicki Hughes at work in the Redwood coffee house 
In much the same way that the craft beer phenomeneon has helped breathe some 
much-needed life into the dying pub trade, so it is that the independent or 
‘artisan’ coffee shops appear to be reinventing the way people now take their 
caffeine. From young professionals to pensioners, from mums meeting up to 
students nursing a latte for three hours just so they can use the free Wi-Fi, 
they’re the new social hub for communities, as Julie Tinson explains. “It 
[coffee] can be used in social situations to bond with friends but it can also 
be used individually to make a statement,” she says. “For example, young coffee 
drinkers use coffee as a ‘transition’ product. That is, they use it to signify 
that they are ‘professional’ when they start working – rather than drinking 
soft fizzy drinks.”

Increasingly, the coffee shop (especially in Brighton) is also being used as a 
temporary workspace for those keen to get out of the house or escape the 
office. Vicki Hughes, for example, uses many of Brighton’s coffee shops to 
conduct a lot of the business for her company, Fugu PR. “There is definitely 
something unique about Brighton and coffee shops,” she says. “Go to London or 
other cities and our meetings tend to be held in company offices, but whenever 
we see our local clients, we nearly always ‘meet for a coffee’. Lattes are now 
a daily part of running our business and an increasing proportion of our 
expenses go towards supporting the local coffee economy.”

App developer Mark Brown favours Redwood and Mange Tout, both on Trafalgar 
Street. “I think what sustains Brighton’s coffee shops is the fact that there 
are so many freelancers and creatives in the city,” he says. “You just need to 
look at the amount of bearded young folk with laptops and tablets to see that 
they’re all using coffee shops as their offices.”
 Vicky Cohen in the Emporium cafe 
Certainly, Brighton is awash with quirky coffee shops. The Marwood in The 
Lanes, for example, is a wonderful hotchpotch of reclaimed bits and pieces with 
old cupboard doors as table tops and even Apple Mac hard drive towers as 
stools. At Tilt, in the Fiveways area of Brighton, meanwhile, they have regular 
tapas nights, local artists’ work for sale and even a regular fishmonger who 
pitches up outside to flog fish to the Fiveways faithful, And then there’s 
Emporium which is set in an old converted Methodist church on London Road which 
also houses its own theatre. It’s one of Digital Talent management specialist 
Vicky Cohen’s favourite haunts. “I live on coffee – wherever they do good 
coffee I’ll be there, especially if all of our meeting rooms at work are full,” 
she says.

The problem for the independent shops is that they’re not only up against the 
vast marketing budgets of the high-street chains but they can’t really afford 
to pay the rents on the properties in the most attractive and popular 
locations. The secret, it seems, is to stand out and by doing so, establish the 
kind of loyal clientele who come back time and time again.

All of which suggests that the success of coffee shops in places like Brighton 
and Hove has been driven not by marketing but by consumer demand – and that 
shows no sign of abating. “I think that, in the way that people stop drinking 
instant coffee after discovering the real stuff, people will stop drinking the 
mass-produced, over-roasted coffee which is all too prevalent on the high 
street,” explains Nick Barlow of Small Batch Coffee Company, a Brighton-based 
chain with seven shops across the city (including the little van outside the 
main train station). “That means there is always space for people who are 
passionate about what they do, so I think good quality coffee shops – provided 
they are in a decent location – will continue to open and thrive.”
 