
It’s not often I find myself woefully underprepared for a story, but watching 
Disney’s The Little Mermaid and cantering giddily through Newquay seaspray 
after a six-hour train journey do not, as it happens, prepare one adequately 
for a session of training to be a mermaid.

Apparently, being a mermaid has now become a profession. Ariel-esque women are 
employed in aquariums across the globe and as entertainment for guests at posh 
hotels.

I assumed I knew what the new activity class would involve: don a tail fin, 
find a pet crab, sit on a rock looking all sexy and pretend feminism never 
happened. Simple.

“I’m always trying to not have people dying,” said instructor Ian Donald when 
we met up the night before his mermaid course kicked off.

The warning bell in my head began to ring loudly. Being a mermaid is 
apparently a cross between free diving and synchronised swimming – with your 
feet strapped together.

Free diving, in which Ian is a master instructor, involves descending on a 
single breath, without apparatus, to depths of up to 253 metres, which is where 
the current world record stands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fswimming-like-a-mermaid-new-extreme-sport-cornwall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430932893650%2Ffbf38a39-feec-4115-864e-8a956fae9c25-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20swimming%20like%20a%20mermaid%20is%20the%20new%20extreme%20sport&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fswimming-like-a-mermaid-new-extreme-sport-cornwall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20swimming%20like%20a%20mermaid%20is%20the%20new%20extreme%20sport&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fswimming-like-a-mermaid-new-extreme-sport-cornwall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430932893650%2Ffbf38a39-feec-4115-864e-8a956fae9c25-1020x612.jpeg>
Inadequate training and knowledge of one’s physical limits can lead to 
unconsciousness and death. So, on one of Ian’s one-, two- or three-day courses 
intense breathing techniques are taught, as well as how to swim through hoops 
and pick seashells up off the floor without goggles on. Trust me, that’s harder 
than it sounds.

“I want to steer people away from thinking free diving is solely this extreme 
activity that’s really dangerous and show it can be fun. Free diving shouldn’t 
be intimidating. If being a mermaid gets more people into the sport, that’s 
great.”

Most of Ian’s free-diving clients are professionals in their mid-30s and 40s 
looking for a challenge, testing their physical limits. My fellow 
mermaid-in-training, Polly, was curious to see just how jealous her 
seven-year-old daughter would be when she saw the photos.

Mist wrapped the shoreline and hugged the headland as we gathered on the 
cliff-top above Porth beach in the warm morning sun, to get to grips with the 
theoretical basics of breath holding to depth. If Ian and his fellow 
instructors, Lissie and Rich, had planned the setting to inspire romantic 
notions of diving with dolphins along rugged coastlines, it worked. There’s a 
strong naturalist element to free diving because, without all the paraphernalia 
associated with scuba, it’s possible to experience an unencumbered closeness 
with marine mammals.

The theory became practical when we headed to the warm pool of the Glendorgal 
Hotel <http://www.glendorgal.co.uk/>, which hosts the course. The key to being 
happy under water for long periods is, I discovered – after panicking – not to 
panic, to keep the heart rate low by “breathing up” or belly breathing for two 
minutes before submersion, and to know that humans take a breath long before we 
need to. It’s the rule of thirds: for the first third of the time underwater, 
people are happy; the second brings the urge to breathe and it’s at this point 
most of us surface. But, resisting this urge means entering the third phase – 
the spleen will release more red blood cells, the diaphragm will stop juddering 
and this is followed by the discovery that the body has more oxygen than 
imagined.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fswimming-like-a-mermaid-new-extreme-sport-cornwall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F8%2F1431086225940%2Fb1806aef-c065-479b-a2c5-a5665ffb91be-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20swimming%20like%20a%20mermaid%20is%20the%20new%20extreme%20sport&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fswimming-like-a-mermaid-new-extreme-sport-cornwall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20swimming%20like%20a%20mermaid%20is%20the%20new%20extreme%20sport&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fswimming-like-a-mermaid-new-extreme-sport-cornwall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F8%2F1431086225940%2Fb1806aef-c065-479b-a2c5-a5665ffb91be-2060x1236.jpeg>
But how can natural instincts be overridden? Meditation techniques do this by 
focusing on the breath as a way of stilling the mind. Close the eyes, hum a 
song, repeat a mantra, listen to the heartbeat, make a shopping list and learn 
to get to a point where it’s possible to be alone and enjoy it.

When we took this to the pool, encased in wetsuits and masks, a feeling of 
claustrophobia crept in and it took a lot of willpower to believe I wasn’t 
going to die. I always surfaced before I meant to, caving to my craving to 
expel carbon dioxide. And yet I kept going back under, keen each time to push 
it a bit further. Time slowed down (two minutes 20 felt like an age) and I 
found a sense of liberation, almost transcendence: a brief suspension between 
vitality and inanimacy.

It’s definitely important to be confident in the water, and a confident 
swimmer, but I treasured the potential for solitude rather than the sporting 
aspect and, speaking frankly, I value being pushed out of my comfort zone and 
free diving leads you into a whole new realm. And not just underwater. Ian 
mentioned he’d just got back from a free-diving trip in Thailand and was off to 
Malta in a few months and I was hooked when I saw where holding my breath could 
take me. “Ah, but on a flat day the clarity of the water here in Cornwall is 
amazing,” he said. “If Britain had better weather, I’d free dive here forever.” 
That’s as maybe. But I was there to pretend to be a mythical creature and, 
frankly, water at 8 degrees wasn’t gonna cut it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fswimming-like-a-mermaid-new-extreme-sport-cornwall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430932954104%2F2bef5b35-7192-43dc-b109-f9b7294dc79a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20swimming%20like%20a%20mermaid%20is%20the%20new%20extreme%20sport&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fswimming-like-a-mermaid-new-extreme-sport-cornwall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20swimming%20like%20a%20mermaid%20is%20the%20new%20extreme%20sport&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fswimming-like-a-mermaid-new-extreme-sport-cornwall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430932954104%2F2bef5b35-7192-43dc-b109-f9b7294dc79a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Just as things were getting serious, Lissie lined up the mermaids’ tails, 
handed me a seashell necklace and informed me my name was now Sue-Sea. And this 
is when things got gnarly. Professional mermaids wear tails that can weigh up 
to 40kg and cost over £2,000. Have you tried swimming with a small child 
holding onto your legs and making it look effortless?

The undulation starts in your outstretched hands and works its way down to the 
tip of your monofin, without a great bend in your knees. We lapped the pool, 
first with goggles, then without, dived through hoops, swam upside down and 
practised holding an exhaled breath so we could lie comfortably on the bottom 
for long enough to pose and preen for photographer Al. (Note: you are a more 
convincing mermaid if you can look like you’re having fun.) Our instructors 
worked tirelessly to impart knowledge of how to swim with grace, and to see the 
water as an environment which liberates movement, rather than hinders it. Will 
I go on to star alongside Free Willy in a Floridian resort? Unlikely. Have I 
discovered a spectacularly fun way of bemusing the bejesus out of unsuspecting 
scuba divers? Oh yes.

 * Freedive UK (01637 621922, freediveuk.com 
<http://freediveuk.com/freediving-courses/mermaid-courses-uk/>) provided the 
one-day mermaid course, which costs £100, including all kit, entry fees, lunch 
and certificate. Accommodation at the Glendorgal hotel (01637 874937,
glendorgal.co.uk <http://www.glendorgal.co.uk/>) costs from £102 a night 
room-only. Return train tickets from London to Newquay were provided by First 
Great Western and cost from about £100
 