
"I can say, hand on my heart, that working in the public sector is the most 
rewarding way I can contribute to society and earn a living," says Suzy Walton, 
a former senior civil servant who wasforced to climb the ranks in the public 
sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/jan/19/familyandrelationships.family1>
 to provide for her small children after her husband's early death.

"I have not chosen an easy route. Having had over a decade as a senior civil 
servant in the Cabinet Office and the Ministry of Defence, I decided to leave 
to become a little closer to people, not policy, and to make a difference more 
directly. I became a non-executive director of many organisations in the public 
sector."

Walton sits on the board of, among others, HEFCE (which regulates 
universities), the RSA (a London thinktank) and Combat Stress (which has NHS 
money and three hospitals to treat war veterans with mental health conditions).

"A few weeks ago I had my sixth child," she says. "I was asked by a newspaper 
if I would be slowing down. The answer to that is a simple no. I not only help 
to make people's day-to-day lives better, but I am also (sometimes!) able to 
influence government policy. What could be more rewarding?"

As austerity bites harder and public servants are increasingly the target of 
public, political and media criticism, we asked people working in the public 
sector to tell us why they chose it – or why they stuck with it. Many of their 
responses mirrored Walton's sentiment.

Making a difference

@Guardianpublic <http://https://twitter.com/Guardianpublic> fell into public 
service by accident but stayed 30+ years because you could make a +/ive 
difference to peoples' lives#proud 
<http://https://twitter.com/search?q=%23proud&src=hash>

— Terry Moran CB (@terry_moran1) February 24, 2014 
<http://https://twitter.com/terry_moran1/statuses/437951051862642689>

Russell Jones (@JonesDRussell <http://https://twitter.com/JonesDRussell>), 
chair ofyoung and in gov students 
<http://https://www.facebook.com/YoungandinGovStudents>, says "when public 
services are done right they make a real impact on individuals and 
communities", whileBlair McPherson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/blair-mcpherson>, former director of 
community services at Lancashire county council, joined the public sector with 
"the desire to do something worthwhile".

Kate Findlay got hooked on local government, securing a place on the 
management graduate scheme at Hertfordshire county council. "I felt a personal 
responsibility for people and communities," she says. "Although I plan to move 
around, it would take something pretty special (and more than a big salary) to 
tempt me away from local government."

Working conditions and breadth of opportunity

For some, it was a good working conditions package that attracted them to the 
sector. Canadian Erning Han (@ErningHan <http://https://twitter.com/ErningHan>) 
gives three "less noble reasons" for choosing public – "salary, stability and 
benefit/compensation package". Zara May (@Yamaraz 
<http://https://twitter.com/Yamaraz>) says: "Flexibility is one of the key 
reasons. For me it was also curiosity, as I've only ever worked in the private 
sector".

For others, it was the wide range of opportunities. Carl Birch (@birch_carl 
<http://https://twitter.com/birch_carl>) "fell into public sector" but 
immediately felt valued. "I keep looking elsewhere but options were not as 
rewarding," he says. And Andy Ormerod Cloke (@AOrmerodCloke 
<http://https://twitter.com/AOrmerodCloke>), a civil servant with DCLG, says: 
"I didn't think of it as the public sector – just as work in government policy, 
so it allowed me to do the work I wanted."

But policy and public services require talents of all ilk, and some employees 
sign up so they can specialise and pursue personal interests. Roger Bearpark (
@RogerBearpark <http://https://twitter.com/RogerBearpark>) joined the sector 
"to help government use tech to deliver what users want, when they need it, for 
as long as they do". After taking politics at university, Louise Reeve (
@louisereeve1 <http://https://twitter.com/LouiseReeve1>), policy and 
information officer at Newcastle city council, "wanted a politics-related 
career that didn't require getting elected and offered more job security. 
(Looking back, that's rather ironic). I discovered that local government was an 
excellent environment to do social research that made a difference to people's 
lives."

The responses were not all good

@Guardianpublic <http://https://twitter.com/Guardianpublic> #whypublic 
<http://https://twitter.com/search?q=%23whypublic&src=hash>. I wanted to make a 
difference. I left cos i couldn't...

— dr nicola headlam (@networknicola) February 27, 2014 
<http://https://twitter.com/networknicola/statuses/438955018197426177>

Andy Stankard, an officer at Hull city council, took a pay cut because he 
wanted a different challenge within public services. He is scathing of the 
sector's critics: "What the government do not understand, or choose to ignore, 
is that the public sector, with all its faults – and there are a lot – is there 
when it's needed, not only in emergencies, but every day. I don't see the 
private sector clamouring to volunteer time and energy day in and day out. 
There is need for both. Without public sector input and support, much of the 
private sector would not be able to function properly."

While Eric Gavin, a former civil servant specialising in employment and 
equality, did not join public service with "any particular attachment to a 
public service ethos", he says he learned its value in listening to citizens. 
But he's losing faith in that value, and says, "Throughout my career the public 
service aped the culture, style, short termism, money obsession and lack of 
integrity of the corporate sector. The inappropriate adoption of corporate 
values is the root cause of much of today's pessimism, scandals and public 
service failures."

But there's still a sense that, however bad it gets, things could be worse. 
You could be working in banking.

@Guardianpublic <http://https://twitter.com/Guardianpublic> Because after 
years in the financial sector, I needed to do something to cleanse my soul.
#whypublic <http://https://twitter.com/search?q=%23whypublic&src=hash>

— James Arthur Cattell (@jaCattell) February 24, 2014 
<http://https://twitter.com/jaCattell/statuses/437977203394220032>

• Join the conversation on Twitter – tell us why you're working for the public 
sector via@Guardianpublic <http://https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> using the 
hashtag #whypublic.



Join the Public Leaders Network 
<http://https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for more comment, 
analysis andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>, 
direct to your inbox.
 