
On Saturday week, 8 September, the second Diggers Festival 
<http://wigandiggersfestival.org/> will take place in Wigan. Stephen Hall, one 
of the organisers, explains its significance to the town and his own enthusiasm:

It came about because I noticed the Gerrard Winstanley House  
<http://www.192.com/atoz/business/wigan-wn1/political-parties/the-labour-party/ae01135606c75092c52c80cf771572d10e2d0f25/comp/>
in the town centre, and, after some research, discovered that Gerrard 
Winstanley was born here.

Winstanley was the inspirational leader of the 17th century Diggers movement, 
whose members were also known as the 'True Levellers'. They were one of the 
first egalitarian political movements to represent the poor and those without 
property, and also argued for the equality of men and women.

Winstanley's politics were driven by his own experiences. In 1630, aged 21 
years old, he moved to London. He did well at first, but as a result of the 
abuse of power by both the King and Parliament and then the outbreak of the 
English Civil War in 1642 , Winstanley saw his business ruined and in 1643 
became bankrupt. His father-in-law helped him move to Cobham in Surrey, where 
he initially worked as a cowherd.
 Terry Higgins as Digger Tom Haydon in Kevin Brownlow's 1976 film Winstanley. 
Courtesy of the British Film Institute 
By the time of the defeat of the Royalist side and King Charles' execution in 
January 1649, Winstanley and a group of others in a similar situation had got 
together to represent the voice of the common people, and especially that of 
the propertyless poor. Their name 'Diggers' came from their belief that the 
land should be available to every person to dig and sow, so that everyone, rich 
or poor, could live, grow and eat by the sweat of their own brows, for 
according to them:

The earth was made to be a common treasury for all.

In 1649 Winstanley and the Diggers, who consisted of mainly poor families that 
had no land of their own, decided on direct action by taking over common land 
at St George's Hill in Surrey. It belonged to no one, and was not in use, so 
they started to farm it, to allow everyone who worked the land to eat. The 
government and wealthy landowners reacted by attacking the Diggers, destroying 
their homes and crops and eventually driving them from their land the following 
year.

Stephen Hall believes that Winstanley's work in 1649 was inspired by the 
successes of Wigan clay and coal diggers "who established their right to dig up 
common land to protect their livelihoods." He feels that this gives Wigan a 
claim to be "the home of socialism" and that Winstanley's views are as relevant 
today as they were in 1649, particularly given the economic situation.
 Relevant in modern times: a quote by Gerrard Winstanley at Heathrow climate 
camp in 2007. Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
The Festival is organised by local groups, including trade unions such as Unite
 <http://www.unitetheunion.org/>, the Labour Party, as well as the local Folk 
Group and the Wigan Historical Society. It has broad based support across the 
north-west and Stephen hopes it can be built as a northern alternative to the
Tolpuddle festival <http://www.efestivals.co.uk/festivals/tolpuddle/2012/>. 
They have also made contacts with other Diggers groups inWellingborough 
<http://www.wellsocialists.org.uk/diggers.asp> and Northamptonshire more widely 
<http://libcom.org/forums/midlands-east-anglia/leveller-digger-activity-northamptonshire-01052006>
.

On the day there will be a wide range of activities which aim to celebrate the 
life and ideas of Gerrard Winstanley and the Diggers movement. As well as an 
exhibition detailing Winstanley's life, an actor John Graham Davies will play 
the Diggers' leader in a symbolic, part theatrical 'Digging re-enactment' and 
tree-planting ceremony. The filmWinstanley 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0073911/>, made in 1975 by Kevin Brownlow and 
Andrew Mollo, will be shown.

The aim of the Festival is to raise local awareness of Winstanley and his 
political views, hence a town centre Diggers' Parade and a mass singsong. This 
will be led by theLiverpool Socialist Singers 
<http://liverpoolsocialistsingers.net/> who will perform the Diggers Song, said 
to have been written by Winstanley, as well asLeon Rosselson 
<http://www.leonrosselson.co.uk/>'s anthem to the Diggers A World Turned Upside 
Down.
 I went to Wigan Diggers Festival and came back with this lovely T-shirt 
There will over thirty community and political stalls, as well as food stalls 
such as the OccuPie, a Wigan beer tent with two locally-brewed special 
commemorative ales; the Prospect 'Diggers 1649 Ale' and Allgates 'Gerrard 
Winstanley Ale'.

Throughout the day there will music, poetry and monologues taking place on two 
stages. At theWigan Life Centre 
<http://www.wiganlife.com/Partnerships/Change4Life/WiganLifeCentre.htm> there 
will be an audio visual presentation and discussion onGerrard Winstanley and 
the 17th century Diggers' (True Leveller) movement.

Stephen hopes that the Festival will:

remind people of the significance of Winstanley and the Diggers and his 
relevance to present day politics. It is not about ramming politics down 
peoples' throats but we want to encourage a re-born sense of community spirit 
amongst ordinary people everywhere.

Full details are on the festival's website here 
<http://wigandiggersfestival.org/> and there's a Facebook page here 
<https://www.facebook.com/WiganDiggersFestival> and Twitter here 
<https://twitter.com/WiganDigger/statuses/225723988746305537>.
 Bernadette Hyland Photograph: Bernadette Hyland 
Bernadette Hyland is a freelance writer and blogger 
<http://lipsticksocialist.wordpress.com/>. She is active in her trade union, 
Unite <http://www.unitetheunion.org> , and volunteers at the Working Class 
Movement Library <http://www.wcml.org.uk/>in Salford.
 