
By lopping off his family surname, William Trevor Cox provided himself with a 
nom-de-plume that has become synonymous with good fiction throughout the world. 
Almost the only dispute dividing admirers of Trevor, who has died aged 88, is 
whether he is pre-eminent as a short-story writer or as a novelist. Perhaps 
majority opinion inclines to the short-story, with memories of such collections 
as The Day We Got Drunk on Cake (1967), The Ballroom of Romance (1972) and 
Beyond the Pale (1981), but the contrary view, recalling novels including The 
Old Boys (1964),The Children of Dynmouth 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Children-Dynmouth-Penguin-Decades/dp/0141041935> 
(1976) and Felicia’s Journey (1994), is just as strongly held.

His extraordinary skill with the short story, a form always relished in Ireland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, but one strangely orphaned 
elsewhere in contemporary literature, enabled him to flourish also as a TV 
playwright. His gift for establishing atmosphere quickly and for inventing 
idiomatic dialogue led to his becoming a master of the individual television 
play. Throughout the 1960s and 70s, viewers enjoyed watching Trevor turn his 
short stories into dramatic encounters between bewildered human figures that 
could seem sometimes the only adult dramatic material on offer. His friends 
will continue to see him sitting down at his neatly arranged desk in his 
country home in Devon, quietly determined not to be disturbed. As much as 
Mozart, he believed that working is the most effective way of relaxing.

Trevor was born in Mitchelstown, County Cork, Ireland, to James Cox and his 
wife, Gertrude (nee Davison), who came from Ulster. For most of his childhood 
and adolescence his father was a bank manager. He was a product of that 
extraordinary pool of talent, the Anglo-Irish Protestants. But he was not of 
the Protestant Ascendancy and resembled George Bernard Shaw and Seán O’Casey 
more than he did WB Yeats. He was born into Éamon de Valera’s diminished 
Catholic Ireland and his personality had none of “the big house” about it.

He once told me that he believed his ancestors had been Catholic smallholders 
in the west who had, for reasons probably venial, seen fit to convert to the 
Church of Ireland at the beginning of the 19th century. He suspected that their 
name had been something more rootedly Irish than Cox. Nevertheless, young 
Trevor was educated, as middle-class Protestants usually were, at Irish public 
schools, including St Columba’s College, Co Dublin, and destined for Trinity 
College Dublin.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0m2ucObX_Xw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0m2ucObX_Xw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0m2ucObX_Xw&media=>
 The Ballroom of Romance, 1982, based on a William Trevor short story 
As a child he moved about southern Ireland, his father being transferred often 
to distant regional towns. His fondest memories of his childhood peregrinations 
were attached to the town of Youghal in Co Cork., at one time home to Walter 
Raleigh and redolent of Anglo-Irish plantationism. His parents’ marriage was 
not happy, and it is tempting to relate some of the more scarifying 
confrontations and silences among characters in his fiction to memories of this 
clouded childhood. Both his brother and sister agreed that theirs was a chilly 
home. Trevor gives a brilliant, if partial, account of these years in his
Excursions in the Real World 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Excursions-Real-World-William-Trevor/dp/0140240292> 
(1993), a set of autobiographical essays covering episodes in his life up till 
the last decade of the 20th century. His picture of the Ireland of pre- and 
post-second world war decades, of its village life and its crumbling 
institutions, is even more strikingly presented in his later fiction.

It is a truism to say that Trevor’s most graphic depiction of real life will 
be found in his imaginative work. Though he is unequalled among modern writers 
for the keenness and accuracy of his eye and ear, and he is obviously 
influenced by personal experiences, he is not primarily an autobiographical 
writer. Excursions in the Real World is like a book of sketches by a great 
painter: the finished pictures are in the stories and novels. His early 
memories of Ireland are more richly furnished in Fools of Fortune (1983) and 
Beyond the Pale. And his sardonic vision of seedy private schools and 
provincial towns is exploited in those disturbing early novels, The Old Boys, 
The Love Department (1966), and Mrs Eckdorf in O’Neill’s Hotel (1969). He once 
wrote that the novelist is first and foremost a storyteller. He might have 
added that storytelling is the best way to comment on society.

The most important event in Trevor’s life was meeting his future wife, Jane 
Ryan, at Trinity College, from which he graduated in history in 1950. Jane, 
whose father had been a British army officer, is one of those remarkable people 
whose family origins in Ireland were overlaid by an almost exemplary 
Englishness, but whose residual loyalties took her back to Trinity to study. 
She and Trevor married in 1952 and he dedicated book after book to her. They 
were seldom separated and enjoyed travelling together in Italy and Switzerland.

At first, the newlyweds found themselves short of cash and Trevor spent some 
time teaching in an Evelyn Waugh-style academy in Ulster. His first reputation 
came as a wood-carver, and in 1953 he jointly won the Irish section of the 
international Unknown Political Prisoner competition. The following year he and 
Jane moved to England, settling first in the Midlands, then in the West 
Country. Trevor taught at local schools and continued to sculpt. Pilgrims on 
the William Trevor trail should make their way toAll Saints Church, Braunston, 
Northamptonshire <http://www.allsaintsbraunston.org.uk/>, where the carved 
lectern and screen is entirely his work (years later he was to review with 
great insight a book on Grinling Gibbons).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmK_JG_s3xDM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmK_JG_s3xDM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmK_JG_s3xDM&media=>
 Fools of Fortune, 1990, a film based on William Trevor’s novel 
Sculpting was not so much a false start as a training by other means, and 
Trevor was always cut out to be a writer. Two events changed his life at this 
point, the birth of his sons, Patrick and Dominic, and the publication of his 
first novel, A Standard of Behaviour (1956). Although prescient in some ways of 
his mature work, the novel made no impact on the literary world at the time. He 
and Jane decided to leave their quiet and comfortable life in the country and 
Trevor was obliged to seek, as one of his characters might put it, “gainful 
employment”. This brought him to London and to advertising.

He applied, in 1959, for a copywriter’s job at Notley Advertising 
<http://archive.spectator.co.uk/article/7th-september-1962/7/c-d-notley-i-dont-know-much-about-advertising-but>
, where the chief of staff was the formidable Marchant Smith, an awesomely 
de-haut-en-bas figure but a true friend to indigent literary types. Notley’s in 
the 1960s employed a remarkable assembly of writers includingOliver Bernard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/30/oliver-bernard>, Edward 
Lucie-Smith,Peter Redgrove <https://www.theguardian.com/international>, Gavin 
Ewart 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-gavin-ewart-1579164.html>and 
myself. Although the work was uncongenial, as were some of the accounts 
executives and a few of the professional copywriters, Trevor was able to turn 
advertising to his advantage and launch himself on his brilliant career as a 
fiction writer.

As we all managed to do, he composed some of his literary work in the boss’s 
time. Once when one of the agency’s top brass came across Trevor and a helpful 
secretary using the firm’s photocopier to prepare a literary manuscript after 
working hours, his comment was the genial: “It’s good to see you two working so 
late.” In Trevor’s pages there are portraits of our fellow workers at Notley’s, 
or at least shadowy gestalts of the sort of people who drifted into advertising 
in the 60s. The closed-circuit nature of advertising life exactly fitted 
Trevor’s natural gift for delineating claustrophobic personalities.

The Old Boys, equipped with a pre-publication testimonial from Evelyn Waugh, 
made for an audacious launching from which Trevor’s career thereafter never 
faltered. To say that the novel was a hit is to underestimate both its 
brilliance and originality. This story of an obsessional school feud carried on 
into senility combined the grotesquery of Dickens with a scalpel-sharp 
awareness of the persistence of snobbery, cruelty and infantilism in English 
life. It was also very funny. Trevor’s remarkable ear not just for the 
mannerisms of speech but for the underlying fear and vulnerability of which 
they are the signs made it a visible and audible tour-de-force.

Perhaps he never wrote a better book: I would rank only The Children of 
Dynmouth and Two Lives (consisting of the pair of novellas Reading Turgenev and 
My House in Umbria, 1991, which was made into a TV film starring Maggie Smith 
in 2003) as its equal, although its immediate successor The Boarding-House 
(1965) is even more virtuosic in construction, more misanthropic and funnier.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du-ohqrN6_q0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du-ohqrN6_q0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du-ohqrN6_q0&media=>
 My House in Umbria, 2003, starring Maggie Smith and Ronnie Barker 
In his later years he both made more of his Irishness himself, and came to be 
seen by commentators as more characteristically Irish, but I continue to stress 
how superbly English and suburban his early novels are. If he is truly 
Anglo-Irish, then it is in the strain of Congreve, Swift and Goldsmith; his is 
a hard-edged world where Celtic Twilight never reaches.

The success of these novels was soon followed by equally successful 
collections of short stories and commissions from television and radio, so that 
by 1966 he was in a position to leave advertising. In that year he also bought 
Stentwood House, near Dunkeswell Abbey in the Blackdown Hills on the borders of 
Somerset and Devon. While they retained their flat in Putney, south-west 
London, this move back to the West Country marked the end of his and Jane’s 
days in the capital. Increasingly it was work alone that would bring Trevor to 
London.

His Stentwood days were happy and productive ones. The house had been built in 
Victorian times for a former governor of the Bank of England. When, early in 
the 80s, Trevor moved to another and quite different house in Devon, gloomy 
Stentwood had been transformed by the Coxes into a charming rural dacha. I 
recall Trevor looking at a line of quick-growing trees he had planted when 
moving in, and reflecting that at a height of nearly 40ft they had moved away 
from him just as he was about to move away from them. It struck me as a 
metaphor of the writer’s relationship with his own creation.

Trevor’s great success led to an inexorable increase in literary fame. The US, 
Ireland and Britain honoured him with degrees and awards. His name became 
pre-eminent when critics listed the best purveyors of modern fiction, though 
his reputation was always more solid than that of whichever genius of the 
zeitgeist was in the news. Monographs were written about his fiction, none of 
them encouraged by their subject. Listing a few titles will speak for Trevor’s 
finest achievements – Elizabeth Alone (1973), Other People’s Worlds (1980), 
Fools of Fortune and The News from Ireland (1986). His final novel, Love and 
Summer, came out in 2009.

His eye, which had looked at the bizarre and the cruel, though still with 
comic tolerance, gradually developed into a more severe limner of human nature. 
The key book in this change is The Children of Dynmouth. Young Timothy Gedge, a 
teenage liar, blackmailer and devoted tempter of everything natural and 
trusting, provides a devastating study of evil in action. It is Trevor’s great 
tact never to fit the boy out with any Iago-like credo: wickedness is seen as 
natural however deplorable, and the rest of us, whether decent or just 
averagely unpleasant, as helpless victims of Timothy’s and the world’s 
depredations.

Like Dickens, Trevor came to view life in terms of its unswervable 
unpleasantnesses, as Felicia’s Journey and Death in Summer (1998) demonstrate. 
Critics have often spoken of his humanity and belief in redemption, but surely 
his readiness to face the way the human species behaves is more realistic and 
courageous than any readiness to seek transcendence.

Trevor and Jane devoted much of their later life to travelling in Italy. They 
were never so contented as when renting a flat in Montepulciano or walking 
round the Ticino, that unfashionable bit of “Italia in Germania”. Tuscany 
remained their ideal, but it was the Tuscany of the myriad churches, galleries 
and museums, not Chiantishire. Trevor and I used to compete for who could find 
the least-frequented church or museum, and he always won. I would turn up at a 
remote corner of Siena only to discover that the church there was closed for 
the next five years. After all, Trevor had visited it already.

As early as the 60s he was adding to his income by that customary resort of 
the novelist, selling the film rights of his novels. Darryl F Zanuck had 
planned to film The Love Department as a vehicle for Rita Hayworth’s return to 
the screen, but the star’s encroaching Alzheimer’s put an end to this. There 
must be a number of screenplays written by Trevor himself gathering dust in 
studios – he often undertook such adaptations himself, since the fee for rights 
alone was seldom generous. Finally in 1999 a Trevor book made it to the screen 
when Atom Egoyan directed an affecting film version of Felicia’s Journey. His 
TV work included adapting the classics for serial broadcasting, with Dickens a 
speciality. Few writers would have relished having to dramatiseThe Old 
Curiosity Shop <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0227938/?ref_=nm_flmg_wr_15>, one 
of Dickens’ least appreciated works, but one which Trevor recognised as a 
natural for TV.

He was a prodigious winner of literary prizes from the Hawthornden in 1965 up 
to the David Cohen prize for a lifetime’s literary achievement, which he won in 
1998, only its fourth recipient. In 2002 he received an honorary knighthood, 
and in 2015 was made Saoi of Aosdána, the highest honour of the state-supported 
association of Irish artists.

Trevor had a genius for friendship. I have never met a writer more loved and 
courted by his acquaintances. There was perhaps a slightly flirtatious charm to 
his affections: basically he was a very private person, guarding his time and 
space rigorously. The order of his daily priorities went: first work, then 
family and last, his much-loved home in the undulating green of Crediton, Devon.

Ireland remained close to his heart, but I am convinced that he reserved his 
best writing for his adopted land, England. One of the great creators of 
fiction of recent decades, he was not modern, but neither was he reactionary. 
Every sentence he wrote was perfectly crafted, yet he had a natural love of 
storytelling: his first loyalty was always to the reader’s desire to find out 
what was going to happen next. It is hard to conceive of an English-speaking 
literary landscape without him.

He is survived by Jane, Patrick and Dominic.

• William Trevor <https://www.theguardian.com/books/william-trevor> (William 
Trevor Cox), writer, born 24 May 1928; died 20 November 2016

• Peter Porter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/peter-porter> died in 2010
 