
As the sun rose over Kinshasa on 9 November, Martin Fayulu was awoken by a 
phone call from a relative in the US telling him to switch on his television –
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> appeared set to 
become the next US president.

Fayulu, an opposition politician at the forefront of recent protests calling 
for elections to be held on time in theDemocratic Republic of the Congo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo>, immediately switched on a French 
channel.

“Many Congolese were watching, and a lot had mixed feelings,” he said.

Across Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> the interest was 
equally intense, with the surprise result prompting fierce speculation about 
the unexpected winner’s possible policy towards the continent.

Many have asked if Trump actually cares about Africa at all. Observers noted 
that notone of the 29 leaders the president-elect had spoken to 
<http://qz.com/839576/another-sign-that-sub-saharan-africa-isnt-on-donald-trumps-radar/>
 in the week following his election was from sub-Saharan Africa.

Trump’s victory may allow more autocratic African rulers to tweak 
constitutions to retain power and harass dissidents

“The simple question is, does Africa matter enough to Trump for him to change 
much?” said Peter Fabricius, a Johannesburg-based foreign affairs expert. The 
news and analysis website The Conversation described Trump’s likely foreign 
policy on Africa as “where’s that?”

There are some on the continent, however, who would welcome a lack of interest 
from Washington, experts say. Trump’s victory may allow more autocratic African 
rulers freedom to tweak constitutions to retain power, harass dissidents, shut 
down media organisations or, in some cases, simply make more money.

“A bunch of democratic gains are slowly being eroded in a lot of quite 
important countries … This is a really bad moment for the continent, to have 
somebody take over in Washington who is not necessarily going to be so sharp on 
supporting democratic values abroad,” said Nic Cheeseman, an expert on 
democracy in Africa at Oxford University.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F365099302a93e4bd85700da3cac298f47e6b1571%2F0_105_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Donald%20Trump's%20victory%20empower%20Africa's%20strongmen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20victory%20empower%20Africa%27s%20strongmen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F365099302a93e4bd85700da3cac298f47e6b1571%2F0_105_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Demonstrators in Kinshasa demand the resignation of DRC’s president Joseph 
Kabila. Photograph: Mustafa Mulopwe/AFP/Getty Images 
The US election campaign was scrutinised particularly closely the DRC capital 
of Kinshasa, by Fayulu and others in the opposition movement. In recent months 
the Obama administration had supported their cause, and had increased the 
pressure on the country’s president, Joseph Kabila, to hold elections before 
the end of his mandate in December.

Sanctions had also been imposed on Kabila’s close associates after protests 
were violently repressed, and relations deteriorated to the point where 
government supporters attacked the US special envoy to the region.

When Trump’s victory became clear, Lambert Mendé, the DRC’s information 
minister 
<https://actualite.cd/2016/11/09/mende-critique-ladministration-obama-espere-meilleurs-rapports-trump-audio/#UzgrKpYFhxPLFY5u.99>
, made it plain Kabila’s government would welcome a change in policy.

“I would just say that at a governmental level we have not enjoyed the last 
few years of the administration, which has behaved with a very cavalier 
attitude towards us … We hope that relations will now be much more respectful 
of our dignity and our sovereignty,” he said.

Kabila, who has ruled DRC since 2001, also sent an effusive letter to Trump 
congratulating him on his “brilliant election”.


Another African ruler to welcome Trump’s election is Pierre Nkurunziza in 
Burundi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi>, DRC’s tiny neighbour. 
Nkurunziza won a disputed election last year to retain power and has been 
accused of widespread human rights abuses by the UN and local campaigners. His 
associates, too, have been placed under US sanctions.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F040bdf3a8b7c323600bd5006b90bf867ef3f2b90%2F35_342_5036_3022%2F5036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Donald%20Trump's%20victory%20empower%20Africa's%20strongmen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20victory%20empower%20Africa%27s%20strongmen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F040bdf3a8b7c323600bd5006b90bf867ef3f2b90%2F35_342_5036_3022%2F5036.jpg>
 The funeral of Theogene Niyondiko, shot dead by police during a protest 
against Burundi’s president, Pierre Nkurunziza. Photograph: Rick 
Findler/REX/Shutterstock 
Nkurunziza told Trump his “victory is the victory of all Americans”, and 
officials say they expect “a certain improvement” in relations.

“There’s a new administration that will have a different view. In my personal 
opinion, the last was misled by a few individuals who influenced the way 
decisions were taken and that will fade away now,” said Nubwacu Lionel Yves, a 
press councillor of the president.


Willy Nyamitwe, a key presidential aide, compared Trump’s election to 
Nkurunziza’s, saying both candidates were vilified by the media but supported 
by the people.

Such reactions are easily explained, said Prof Filip Reyntjens, a central 
Africa specialist at Antwerp University. “[Rulers in DRC and Burundi] will 
assume, perhaps correctly, that Trump’s world will be restricted to direct US 
interests with a view that human rights in far-off places do not concern,” he 
said.

Robert Mugabe, who has ruled Zimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zimbabwe> for 36 years, has not commented 
directly on Trump’s election. His government has been under US sanctions since 
2001 following the violent seizure of land from farmers and the systematic 
repression of dissent. Mugabe’s officials have repeatedly accused the US of 
seeking regime change, a common charge levelled by rulers across the continent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F129a344835b4a1c8feffee5f60ee4eb4a7b01f33%2F0_31_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Donald%20Trump's%20victory%20empower%20Africa's%20strongmen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20victory%20empower%20Africa%27s%20strongmen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F129a344835b4a1c8feffee5f60ee4eb4a7b01f33%2F0_31_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Robert Mugabe addresses his Zanu-PF party. Photograph: Philimon 
Bulawayo/Reuters 
Chris Mushohwe, Zimbabwe’s information minister, said the Trump administration 
“would restore our long-term relationship that we have enjoyed with the 
American people”, while an editorial in the Herald, a pro-government newspaper, 
lambasted Hillary Clinton for seeking to destabilise Zimbabwe and thanked US 
voters for “keeping this warmonger from the reins of power”. The opposition in 
Zimbabwe was “gutted by Clinton’s loss”,the newspaper reported 
<http://www.herald.co.zw/zim-ready-to-work-with-new-us-admin-govt/>.

Not all rulers are so pleased at Clinton’s defeat. The president of Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>, Paul Kagame, who can now 
theoretically rule until 2034 following a change to the constitution, had a 
close relationship with Clinton and her husband, and observers noted that his 
congratulations to Trump on “a well-earned victory” were less gushing than 
others.

“I think they are pretty disappointed … A Clinton victory would have meant a 
friend in the White House,” said Reyntjens.

Three-thousand miles to the north, in the Saharan desert state of Chad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chad>, Trump’s victory received one of its 
most effusive welcomes. Idriss Déby, the country’s strongman and one of 
Africa’s longest-serving presidents, hailed the tycoon’s “brilliant” win, and 
his “great qualities as a statesman”.

In South Sudan, where relations between president Salva Kiir and the US have 
broken down in recent months,a pro-government youth organisation called for a 
“welcome march” for Trump. 
<https://radiotamazuj.org/en/article/south-sudan-youth-union-call-demonstration-support-trump-election-victory>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F539a5d022e7a0ed19657729549de7d0966251cc3%2F0_119_1521_913%2F1521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Donald%20Trump's%20victory%20empower%20Africa's%20strongmen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20victory%20empower%20Africa%27s%20strongmen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F539a5d022e7a0ed19657729549de7d0966251cc3%2F0_119_1521_913%2F1521.jpg>
 A presidential guard soldier approaches a photographer during a campaign rally 
for Chad’s president Idriss Déby. Photograph: Issouf Sanogo/AFP/Getty Images 
There is little clarity on Trump’s potential policies in Africa, but most 
analysts believe the fight against Islamist extremism will be a central 
element. In his sole foreign-policy speech as a candidate, Trump mentioned 
Africa only once, referring to the 1998 al-Qaida bombings of the US embassies 
in Kenya and Tanzania.

In recent years, the US has reinforced its military presence across the 
continent and has contributed air support, special forces and training in 
conflicts in Somalia, Nigeria and across the vast Sahel region.A major new $50m 
base is being built in Niger. 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/us-building-50-million-drone-base-niger-504522?rm=eu>

Many African leaders have sought to burnish their counter-terrorism 
credentials in recent years to gain Washington’s favour. Rulers and their 
advisers may now be calculating that any local human rights abuses will be 
overlooked by a president who has explicitly stated his desire to aggressively 
counter Islamic militancy as well as his belief that “torture works 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/24/donald-trump-on-waterboarding-even-if-it-doesnt-work-they-deserve-it>
”.

Déby has committed Chad’s army to the fight against Boko Haram, the west 
African affiliate of Islamic State, and may be hoping for support from Trump. 
Amnesty International accuses the 64-year-old, who has been in power since 
1990, ofjailing critics, including journalists, and using security forces to 
break up demonstrations. 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/countries/africa/chad/report-chad/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F469fa9ec8d730c3d3a432b086b1456aab5b8d985%2F0_248_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Donald%20Trump's%20victory%20empower%20Africa's%20strongmen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20victory%20empower%20Africa%27s%20strongmen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-is-a-gift-to-africa-dictators-opposition-groups-fear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F469fa9ec8d730c3d3a432b086b1456aab5b8d985%2F0_248_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
 Donald Trump waves as he arrives at Trump International Golf Club for a day of 
meetings. Photograph: Drew Angerer/Getty Images 
“We’re going to see less money going to supporting civil society groups, less 
money going into the administration of US policy in Africa, and I expect we’re 
going to see a hit to USAid … This will be a very tough time for all the people 
who have been involved in democracy support and human rights support over the 
last few years,” said Cheeseman.

“This stuff does make a real difference to ordinary lives … The chances of 
getting beaten up in the streets, or having poor water, healthcare and 
education, are going to increase for a lot of poor Africans.”

Many African opposition politicians and dissidents, however, say they have 
faith in US institutions and their long-established networks of supporters in 
Washington, whoever is president. Last week,Republicans voted with Democrats in 
Congress <https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-resolution/780> to 
intensify sanctions in an effort to force elections in DRC, observers noted.

Fayulu said: “African affairs has long been a bipartisan issue, and whatever 
[Trump] thinks personally. There are some advisers, Congress … others who don’t 
want Kabila to stay in power. Personally I don’t think [policy] will change 
that much.”

Africa leads outcry over setback for feminism after Trump victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/liberia-president-ellen-johnson-sirleaf-hillary-clinton-defeat-donald-trump-women-rights-equality>
André Mtaba, a professor of constitutional law at the University of Kinshasa, 
said DRC citizens should not count on any help from overseas. “The biggest 
players are the Congolese people themselves. Sovereignty and democracy belong 
to the people, so the people will have the final say,” he said.

The veteran Zimbawean opposition leader Tendai Biti, who was arrested for 
treason and detained for month in 2008 after suggesting his MDC party had 
defeated Mugabe in a vote, has previously called Trump“a gift to all tinpot 
dictators on the African continent.” 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-trump-rigging-africa-idUSKCN12K23D>

Last week, however, he said the continent’s dictators should not take any 
comfort from Trump’s victory.

“You are dealing with institutions. The State Department has a whole section 
devoted to Africa. Trump may not care, but others will,” Biti said.

Saleh Kebzabo, the head of Chad’s main opposition, said in a Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=545459555653362&id=420801614785824>
 that he did “not believe America will change much”, pointing out that under 
Obama and previous administrations the US never criticised Déby.

“Obama leaves with a mixed record on Africa. Haven’t we wrongly expected too 
much from him, because he is black and of African origin? Africans must be more 
mature and stop seeking help elsewhere: let us choose our own leaders 
ourselves, freely,” he wrote
 