
William Chaloner, who has died aged 87, was one of the world’s leading 
authorities on fossil plants. He pioneered new methods for their study and is 
considered one of the founders of the research field of palynology, which uses 
fossil pollen and spores from ancient rocks to interpret plant evolution and to 
reconstruct environments of the past.

His research was wide-ranging and included work on some of the earliest plants 
to colonise the land, fossil plants of the coal age, and the use of plant 
fossils to infer ancient climates and the composition of the atmosphere in the 
distant past.

Born in London, Bill was the son of journalists, Lenore “Len” (nee Barling) 
and Ernest Chaloner. He attended Kingston grammar school and evening classes in 
geology at Chelsea Polytechnic before going to Reading University in 1947, to 
study botany, chemistry and geology. He graduated with first-class honours in 
botany in 1950 and remained at Reading to study extinct plants with Tom Harris, 
who influenced him greatly, including encouraging the importance of fieldwork 
as the main way to gain new and interesting fossil material.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwilliam-chaloner-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa20a9387d420935df1f9569ff6b10d8495eb0f2c%2F0_124_661_396%2F661.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=William%20Chaloner%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwilliam-chaloner-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=William%20Chaloner%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwilliam-chaloner-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa20a9387d420935df1f9569ff6b10d8495eb0f2c%2F0_124_661_396%2F661.jpg>
 William Chaloner became fascinated by the link between carbon dioxide 
concentrations in the atmosphere and climate. 
For his doctorate, Chaloner studied spores from the extinct club-moss trees of 
300m years ago, showing that these strange plants were highly diverse, and 
using them to understand the ecology of the vegetation that formed some of the 
world’s most important coal deposits. In 1953 he accepted a Commonwealth Fund 
fellowship (now a Harkness fellowship) and travelled to North America to work 
with one of that continent’s premier palaeobotanists, Chester A Arnold, at the 
University of Michigan, on the spores of similar plants to those he had studied 
in Britain. On the voyage home he met Judith Carroll, whom he married in 1955.

In 1956, Chaloner was appointed an assistant lecturer in the botany department 
at University College London. He was promoted to lecturer in 1958, and then 
reader in palaeobotany in 1963, spending a year as a visiting professor in the 
geosciences department at Pennsylvania State University and teaching at the 
University of Nigeria at Nsukka in 1965-66, which gave him new insights into 
tropical vegetation. This phase of his career included his important 1970 
review on the colonisation of the land by plants, which integrated information 
from plant fossils of all kinds into an influential overview that showed the 
stepwise accumulation of the features, such as water-conducting tissues and 
leaves, that today characterise almost all land plants.

Chaloner was appointed to the chair of botany at Birkbeck College, London, in 
1972, where he remained until 1979. During this period he pioneered the use of 
scanning electron microscopy to study fossil plants at high magnifications and 
in three dimensions, which opened up many new fields of study, including the 
possibilities of detailed work on spores and ultimately the study of fossil 
flowers. He also became interested in forest fires in ecosystems of the past, 
and the use of fossil charcoal to estimate the concentration of oxygen in 
ancient atmospheres.

In 1979 Chaloner moved to the chair of botany at Bedford College, University 
of London. There he pioneered the use of growth rings in fossil woods to 
reconstruct ancient climates. He showed that forest growth, mainly of conifers, 
was possible close to both poles during the global warmth of the Cretaceous 
period, about 100m years ago, and hence that these ecosystems were capable of 
supporting a diverse fauna, including dinosaurs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwilliam-chaloner-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b7e128b4b6db6521958c7fcf9f0abb349460c55%2F0_0_1414_2098%2F1414.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=William%20Chaloner%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwilliam-chaloner-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=William%20Chaloner%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwilliam-chaloner-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b7e128b4b6db6521958c7fcf9f0abb349460c55%2F0_0_1414_2098%2F1414.jpg>
 The trunk of a fossil known as Lepidodendron, an extinct coal-forming tree 
found in Radstock, Somerset. By studying a latex cast under a scanning electron 
microscope, Chaloner showed that the trunk surface has stomata (gas exchange 
pores). Photograph: Andrew Scott 
When Bedford College merged with Royal Holloway College, University of London, 
in 1985, Chaloner became the first chair of the school of life sciences. There 
he developed the use of stomata (gas exchange pores) on fossil plants to 
reconstruct levels of carbon dioxide in ancient atmospheres. It had been shown 
that the number and density of these pores bore a direct relationship to the 
concentrations of carbon dioxide in the Earth’s atmosphere. Chaloner was able 
to document differences in stomatal number and density in fossil leaves at 
different times in the past, creating a record of changing concentrations of 
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere that related to warming and cooling of the 
climate. He became passionately interested in the link between carbon dioxide 
concentrations in the atmosphere and climate, believing that knowing more about 
past changes would help us to understand the future.

Chaloner received numerous honours for his services to science, including 
election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1976. He was a trustee of the 
Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, president of the International Organisation of 
Palaeobotany and president of the Linnean Society in its bicentennial year. He 
received both the Linnean and the Lyell medals and also served as 
vice-president of the Geological Society of London.

After retirement in 1994, he continued to publish research up until his death, 
including editing a volume on the past, present and future of fire in the 
history of the Earth, including recommendations for future research as well as 
for policymakers. With a warm sense of humour and a self-effacing manner, he 
was ever approachable, especially for young researchers. His thoughtful, polite 
and generous approach won him many friends.

He is survived by Judith, their three children, Caroline, Michael and Sarah, 
and six grandchildren.

• William Gilbert Chaloner, palaeobotanist and palynologist, born 22 November 
1928; died 13 October 2016
 