
How do Irish and Northern Irish people feel about themselves, and each other, 
after the Brexit vote? In the tangle of questions arising fromthe EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, some of the most knotty 
relate to the new relationship the UK must forge with Ireland over immigration, 
customsand borders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/16/brexit-hard-borders-ireland-trade-peace-agreement-brexit>
.


But with Northern Ireland – where a majority of people want to stay part of 
the UK – voting by a clear 12-point margin to remain in the EU, has Brexit also 
reopened the question ofa united Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/24/arlene-foster-northern-ireland-martin-mcguinness-border-poll-wont-happen>
?

After the 23 June poll, both Enda Kenny, the Irish taoiseach, and Martin 
McGuinness, Northern Ireland’s deputy first minister, called for a referendum 
on the Irish border.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwill-brexit-bring-ireland-and-northern-ireland-closer-together%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74dd9bcf11edee043904e8ef88e927e69450f8f5%2F1032_661_1427_856%2F1427.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Brexit%20bring%20Ireland%20and%20Northern%20Ireland%20closer%20together%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwill-brexit-bring-ireland-and-northern-ireland-closer-together%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Brexit%20bring%20Ireland%20and%20Northern%20Ireland%20closer%20together%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwill-brexit-bring-ireland-and-northern-ireland-closer-together%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74dd9bcf11edee043904e8ef88e927e69450f8f5%2F1032_661_1427_856%2F1427.jpg>
 Martin McGuinness and Enda Kenny. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA 
The Guardian asked readers in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and the Republic of Ireland 
for their reactions.

For some, the referendum result was so significant that it has changed their 
own feelings about a potential united Ireland. Sean, a Green party supporter 
from Belfast, said that as a nationalist with Irish citizenship living north of 
the border, he had nonetheless always been content with the status quo, with 
NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> part of the UK.

But the 2015 general election swayed him towards supporting a united Ireland. 
He said: “The referendum result cemented that. My reasoning being, Great 
Britain doesn’t care about us, doesn’t want us, and if we are going to get 
screwed, I’d rather get screwed from Dublin.”

One Belfast-based remain voter, Peter, a supporter of the cross-community 
Alliance party, said that on the day of the referendum he “went to bed a small 
‘u’ unionist and woke up a small ‘n’ nationalist”. “The EU is something that 
tries to bring us together,” he said. “And if it takes me being Irish rather 
than British to be part of that, then I really don’t care.”
 Anthony Stafford 
A border poll should be held, he said, “if and when Brexit is effected by the 
UK government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/11/hard-brexit-treasury-66bn-eu-single-market>
 and we know what it means to the citizens of Northern Ireland”.

Anthony Stafford, also from Belfast, described himself as a nationalist allied 
most closely with Sinn Féin. And yet, he said, before the referendum, “I would 
have considered myself a unionist with the UK firmly in the EU. After the 
referendum I would no longer classify myself as unionist, and would seek a 
united Ireland.” Northern Ireland, he said, “has benefited most from the EU 
system, and it is disgraceful we’re being dragged out of it”.

Others, however, including Olli Thomson, an Ulster Unionist party supporter 
and leave voter from Northern Ireland who is currently based in Manila, felt 
the referendum was unlikely to change most people’s positions.
 Olli Thomson 
“The driving force behind the vote to remain was economic,” he said. 
“Specifically the perception that Northern Ireland has done well out of the EU. 
Were the option of a border poll on the agenda, the driving force behind that 
vote would be the same.” GivenIreland’s post-2008 financial turbulence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ireland-bailout>, he said, “I suspect 
there would be a much greater majority in favour of retaining the current 
arrangements”.

“There is absolutely no evidence that those from a unionist background support 
reunification,” agreed Robert Osborne, a remain voter and Alliance supporter 
who lives in Belfast. “If Brexit is an incredibly difficult process, imagine 
what merging two parts of the island would involve [after] separation for 100 
years.”

The harder the Brexit, the worse for Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/harder-brexit-worse-for-ireland-sterling-fall>
“People who voted to stay in the EU are not going to change their nationality 
because of Brexit,” said Mark, an Ulster Unionist party voter and remain 
supporter from Bangor, County Down. “I know lots of people who voted remain, 
and none of them would vote for a united Ireland. Apart from the nationality 
aspect, it doesn’t make financial sense. Britain outside the EU is still going 
to be a better place to live financially than Ireland.”

The Guardian’s survey illustrated one fact frequently overlooked about 
Ireland, north and south: people’s views on sovereignty do not always conform 
to preconceptions.

Joan, from Dublin, said: “I think people fail to understand that the Irish 
Republic does not actually want Northern Ireland any more. Ireland has changed 
greatly, more than the north, and the central issue is ... ‘the economy, 
stupid’. On the one hand, the south can’t afford the north, on the other the 
north does not want to be treated as Ireland was [during the bailout]. These 
factors have not changed with Brexit.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwill-brexit-bring-ireland-and-northern-ireland-closer-together%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd69512085f4b05e0639c86e1ea5d785fc3884f8b%2F1490_97_2350_1410%2F2350.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Brexit%20bring%20Ireland%20and%20Northern%20Ireland%20closer%20together%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwill-brexit-bring-ireland-and-northern-ireland-closer-together%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Brexit%20bring%20Ireland%20and%20Northern%20Ireland%20closer%20together%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwill-brexit-bring-ireland-and-northern-ireland-closer-together%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd69512085f4b05e0639c86e1ea5d785fc3884f8b%2F1490_97_2350_1410%2F2350.jpg>
 Anti-austerity protesters in Dublin this year. Photograph: 
NurPhoto/Rex/Shutterstock 
Fiona Clare, a fellow Dubliner, agreed. “The real question, the one that is 
rarely asked, is whether those of us in the republic would wish for 
reunification,” she said. “I would not, either on economic or security grounds. 
I don’t know anyone within my family, friends, colleagues or general 
acquaintance who do. Whenever it is mentioned it is roundly scoffed at and 
considered to be a mad plan by both young and old.”

Some welcomed the idea of a poll, even though most felt there was no appetite 
for it in either country. “It would allow people to have their say once and for 
all,” said Carol Ann, a remain voter and Alliance supporter from Belfast. 
“We’ve always said we would abide by the will of the people, so I think it 
might not be a bad thing to see what that actually means.” In practical terms, 
however, “my friends and I, from both sides of the political divide, tend to 
feel that unification is really not financially viable”.
 Reader Brian, from Sligo. 
Many others made the point that given recent history, a poll on the island’s 
border is the last thing Northern Ireland needs. As part of the1998 Good Friday 
agreement <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1998/apr/12/northernireland1>, the 
Irish Republic dropped its historic territorial claim over the six counties 
that make up Northern Ireland. The overwhelming votes to accept the agreement 
in separate referendums north and south of the border was seen as having 
effectively settled the question of unification, for the foreseeable future at 
least. In the context of a still fragile peace, many dread poking that 
particular hornet’s nest again.

To Brian from Sligo, talk of a united Ireland in the near future is “naive and 
dangerous”. He said: “People forget how horriblethe Troubles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/06/our-family-divided-by-the-troubles>
 were and that was only 20 years ago. It took years of difficult negotiations 
to attain the peace we have today. That could very easily fall apart if there 
was to be a referendum on a united Ireland.
 Robert Osborne. 
“Getting people to debate national identity in a small place where there were 
Troubles up until the recent past could be a dangerous thing.”

Osborne said: “It is quite clear that a border poll will only be held if there 
is a decisive shift in public opinion in both parts of the island. The reality 
at the moment is that those seeking a united Ireland are failing to convince 
most of the nationalist/Catholic population in Northern Ireland that it is a 
practical prospect. A push towards a poll would create real disturbance in the 
political settlement here and for no practical gain.”

It was, he concluded, “an idea whose time has not come”.

Some names have been changed
 