
William Peter Blatty, who has died aged 89, was miscast as a writer of horror. 
He shot to worldwide fame in 1971 withThe Exorcist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/11/the-exorcist-william-friedkin-dvd-blu-ray-philip-french-classic>
, a novel about the efforts of two Roman Catholic priests to exorcise a demon 
from a 12-year-old girl. The book sold more than 13m copies in the US alone, 
and two years later became a groundbreaking and immensely successful film, with 
Blatty winning an Academy Award for his adapted screenplay.

But The Exorcist marked the fulcrum of Blatty’s career. He had previously been 
known as a talented comic novelist and screenwriter, but afterThe Exorcist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-exorcist> found himself having to fight 
the expectations of his audience for another horror shocker – when in reality 
the book is a story about faith and sacrifice.

Related: Exorcist author William Peter Blatty dies aged 89 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/13/exorcist-author-william-peter-blatty-dies-aged-89>

It reflected Blatty’s own Catholic faith. He was born in New York; his parents 
were immigrants from Lebanon. His father, Peter, a cloth cutter, abandoned the 
family when Blatty was eight. He was raised by his mother, Mary (nee Mouakad), 
a devout Catholic and the niece of a bishop, in what he called “comfortable 
destitution”. She sold quince jelly on the street, and moved the family from 
flat to flat just ahead of eviction. But she made sure William was educated by 
Jesuits, on scholarships, first at Brooklyn Prep, then at Georgetown 
University, from where he graduated in 1950.

Blatty took menial jobs while studying for a master’s degree in English 
literature at George Washington University, then joined the US air force, where 
he worked in psychological warfare. After his discharge he worked for the US 
Information Agency in Beirut, then returned to the US to become head of public 
relations at what is now Loyola Marymount University, a Jesuit college in Los 
Angeles.

Moving to the bigger University of Southern California, in his spare time he 
wrote a comic memoir of his air force service, Which Way to Mecca, Jack? 
(1960). The following year he appeared on Groucho Marx’s television game show 
You Bet Your Life and, with the $10,000 he won, quit his job and began writing 
full time.
 LInda Blair, Max von Sydow and Jason Miller in the director William 
Friedkin’s film of The Exorcist. Photograph: Allstar/Hoya Productions 
His first novel, John Goldfarb, Please Come Home! (1963), was a farce that 
combined the U2 spy plane crisis with American football in the Middle East, and 
drew comparisons with SJ Perelman. He went on to movies with the screenplay for 
Frank Tashlin’s Danny Kaye comedy The Man from the Diners’ Club (1963), but 
wrote two more novels, I, Billy Shakespeare (1965) and Twinkle Twinkle “Killer” 
Kane (1966), a black comedy set in a military psychiatric facility, influenced 
byCatch-22 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/30/catch-22-joseph-heller-reading-group-jokes>
 and by his own experiences in “psy-ops”.

In 1964 he began collaborating with the writer/director Blake Edwards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/16/blake-edwards-obituary> on the 
second Pink Panther film, A Shot in the Dark. They then did the war comedy What 
Did You Do in the War, Daddy? (1966) and the underrated noirish thriller Gunn 
(1967), an updating of Edwards’s 1950s hit television detective. He also 
scripted Promise Her Anything (1966), The Great Bank Robbery (1969) and a 
Charlie Chan parody, The Mastermind, which took seven years to gain release in 
1976, with Blatty’s credit changed to a pseudonym. After a final film, Darling 
Lili (1970), with Edwards, he changed direction.

Blatty’s mother died in 1967, prompting in him the crisis of faith that lay at 
the heart of The Exorcist, though its direct inspiration was a notorious case 
of exorcism by Jesuits of a 13-year-old boy in Washington DC that occurred 
while Blatty was at Georgetown. The novel also benefited from the huge success 
ofIra Levin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/nov/15/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
’s novel andRoman Polanski’ <https://www.theguardian.com/film/romanpolanski>s 
film Rosemary’s Baby a few years earlier.

Rosemary’s Baby ends with the triumph of evil, but Blatty saw his book, and 
Father Karras’s sacrifice, as a triumph of good. That point was overlooked 
somewhat, as the story of the priest’s internal struggle with faith was 
subsumed by Linda Blair’s performance in the film as Regan, and its special 
effects of spinning head and projectile vomiting. The Exorcist became the first 
horror film nominated for an Academy Award for best picture; the film and 
Blatty’s screenplay both won Golden Globe awards.
The Exorcist (1973) trailer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YDGw1MTEe9k> 
Publishers clamoured for a sequel, but Blatty’s next book was a memoir of his 
father, I’ll Tell Them I Remember You (1973). He refused to have anything to do 
with the film The Exorcist II: The Heretic (1977), though in 1983 he wrote his 
own sequel, Legion, which would become the basis for The Exorcist III (1990), 
Blatty’s second film as writer/director.

The first had been The Ninth Configuration (1980), based on his 1978 novel of 
that name, itself a rewrite of Twinkle, Twinkle. The original intention was 
that this should be directed by The Exorcist’s director,William Friedkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/william-friedkin>, but Blatty wound up 
funding half the costs himself after Friedkin dropped out and no studio would 
pick it up. It starred Stacy Keach,Jason Miller 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/05/15/arts/jason-miller-playwright-and-actor-dies-at-62.html>
 (Father Karras in The Exorcist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/aug/06/the-exorcist-jason-miller-father-damien-karras-role-model>
) and Scott Wilson, and is a darker and wilder remake of the original novel; 
the astronaut character in the military asylum being consciously connected with 
the astronaut whom Regan warns against going into space in The Exorcist. 
Unsuccessful at the time, and appreciated more in Europe (he won his second 
Golden Globe, voted for by Hollywood’s foreign press, for the screenplay), it 
is now considered an underground cult classic.

Related: The Exorcist review – Philip French on William Friedkin’s stark, 
demonic horror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/11/the-exorcist-william-friedkin-dvd-blu-ray-philip-french-classic>

It was hard to escape The Exorcist, and Blatty addressed that in a comic 
novel, Demons Five, Exorcists Nothing (1996), and in a book about the making of 
the film, If There Were Demons (2001). The film was reissued in adirector’s cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interview/interviewpages/0,,398729,.html> in 
2000, with Friedkin making changes to make the ultimate triumph of Karras more 
obvious. For the 40th anniversary reissue of the book, Blatty added an 
additional chapter aimed at further clarification. The Exorcist was eventually 
remade as a 2016TV miniseries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/29/the-exorcist-tv-remake-poster>
; a stage adaptation starring Richard Chamberlain and Brooke Shields premiered 
in 2012 in Los Angeles, andin the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/oct/17/ursula-martinez-exorcist-suppliant-women-theatre-top-tickets>
 in 2016.

Blatty’s later writing included a short horror novel, Elsewhere, which 
appeared in a 1999 anthology; Dimiter (2010), about the execution of a priest 
in Albania, which Friedkin tried to get made as a film; and Crazy (2010), an 
offbeat novel set in 1940s New York that combines religious, psychological and 
horror elements of his previous work. His 2015 memoir, Finding Peter, deals 
with the death of his son, and “evidence of life after death”.

Blatty’s first three marriages ended in divorce; he is survived by his fourth 
wife, Julie (nee Witbrodt), whom he married in 1983, three daughters and two 
sons, seven grandchildren and six great-grandchildren.

• William Peter Blatty, writer, born 7 January 1928; died 12 January 2017
 