
If you ever have a spare couple of hours, may I recommend a hilarious novella 
calledThe Underminer: Or, The Best Friend Who Casually Destroys Your Life. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/02/27/books/review/the-underminer-have-you-lost-weight.html?_r=0>
 A masterclass in passive aggression, it is told in the form of a series of 
monologues from one “friend” to another over a number of years. Many will 
recognise the archetype of the chum who brutally diminishes you, despite only 
appearing to offer sympathetic support.

Might Michael Jordan be Tiger Woods’s undermining friend? Let’s have a look at 
an interview the NBA legend has given, which featured in the epic anddeeply 
gripping long read about Woods 
<http://espn.go.com/espn/feature/story/_/id/15278522/how-tiger-woods-life-unraveled-years-father-earl-woods-death>
 which ESPN published last week, written by Wright Thompson. “The thing is,” 
Jordan declared solicitously of his buddy, “I love him so much that I can’t 
tell him: ‘You’re not going to be great again.’”

Tiger Woods ‘heck of a lot better’ but no timetable for return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/02/tiger-woods-heck-of-a-lot-better>
Fortunately, telling ESPN in a major landmark feature on Woods is the 
equivalent of writing it in a secret diary. Even so, I can’t help feeling that 
with friends like Michael, Tiger is all set for detractors.

“What does he do all day?” wonders Jordan, rather unwonderingly. “I don’t 
know. I haven’t the slightest idea. I don’t know.” Of Woods’s failed marriage, 
he observes: “It’s a ship he can’t right and he’s never going to.” Alrighty. 
Might he not find someone else? “I don’t know if he can find that type of 
happiness.” Oof. There is, of course, a fine line between tough love and toxic 
buddydom – even if it feels like we crossed it a couple of fairways back.

In fact, some have long theorised that the moment Woods struck up a friendship 
with Jordan 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/309431-did-tiger-woods-problems-begin-when-he-befriended-michael-jordan>
 was a significant one in his downfall. Wright Thompson’s piece puts new flesh 
on the anatomy of a friendship, claiming that right back when he shot to fame, 
Woods approached Jordan (and Derek Jeter) in a New York club with that age-old 
inquiry: “What do you do to talk to girls?” Something of a seasoned pro on this 
front, Jordan was baffled he had to ask. “Go tell ’em you’re Tiger Woods,” came 
the reply.

Soon they were friends. In many ways Jordan was the perfect buddy for perhaps 
the greatest ever golfer, who could hardly have found a soulmate among his 
fellow US PGA players, even if they hadn’t been tedious evangelical shitehawks, 
almost to a man. World No1s don’t have a huge peer group from which to draw, 
and – albeit not contemporaneously – Jordan fitted that bill.

There was a time when Michael Jordan was the NBA, just as Tiger Woods was 
golf, and the former’s creation of an apparently consequence-free environment 
for himselfmay well have rubbed off on the latter 
<http://www.golfdigest.com/story/michael-jordans-insight-on-tig>. Perhaps they 
also bonded over their decidedly apolitical passage through sporting 
megastardom. Certainly the failure of both men to become standard bearers for 
black causesdisappointed many in the movement 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/tiger-woods-athlete-or-brand/>. When Jordan 
declined to endorse the progressive black Democrat Harvey Gantt over the racist 
Jesse Helms in a North Carolina Senate race, he observed deathlessly that
“Republicans buy shoes too” 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/kurtbadenhausen/2011/09/22/the-business-of-michael-jordan-is-booming/#48fa342f3955>
.

The selling of shoes at any cost may then have been another source of common 
ground, conscious or otherwise, between Woods and Jordan.

What was the most Tiger Woods thing ever to happen off the course? Second 
place definitely goes to that preposterous, presidential-style press 
conference, at which he apologised to the world and his sponsors for infidelity 
while his mother sat purse-lipped in the front row.But the top spot will 
for ever be taken by the Nike advert 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V7Mnm3E7iDo> he put out on the occasion of his 
unmasking as a cocktail waitress addict, in which the disembodied voice of his 
own dead father was co-opted in the cause of selling shoes.

“Did you learn anything?” intoned Earl Woods, over footage of Tiger staring 
silently at the camera. If Tiger did it certainly wouldn’t have been a lesson 
the serial womaniser Earl had ever taken. Among the more intriguing details in 
the very crowded field of ESPN’s feature is the revelation that Tiger buried 
Earl in an unmarked grave.

Quite what succour Woods’s friend Jordan is providing him now, many months 
into his non-recovery from back surgery, is unclear. But a few years out from 
the sound and fury of his tabloid implosion, the Woods narrative feels like one 
of those classic American downfall stories of the last century, which find 
their fictional analogues in movies such as Citizen Kane and There Will Be 
Blood. They typically end up with the once all-powerful protagonist in 
seclusion, as marooned among the trappings of his wealth as he is profoundly 
unsatisfied.

Truth offers just as much as fiction to the armchair psychologist, as ESPN’s 
mind-boggling stuff about Tiger’s intervention-level obsession with military 
training indicates. (Earl was a Green Beret.) No one in real life would give 
their estate such a literary signpost of a name as Xanadu, you might think – 
except thatTiger Woods <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods> called 
his yacht Privacy. He has checked into hotels under Wolverine’s alias Logan 
Howlett, though the latter’s primary mutant power of accelerated healing can 
only be said to have eluded him.

The notes to his unfinished work The Last Tycoon contain F Scott Fitzgerald’s 
famous observation that “there are no second acts in American lives”, and it is 
difficult not to see Woods’s trajectory in these terms. Having never liked him 
at his peak, these days I confess to feeling there is such a tragic grandeur to 
his story that I devour any and all news related to it. This week, the hopeless 
fairytale believer in me leapt at news thatWoods has registered for June’s US 
Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/25/tiger-woods-us-open-submits-entry>
. And if he somehow manages to get fit in time, I’m sure Michael Jordan will be 
there, cheering him all the way.
 