
As places to live, the suburbs may not have much cachet, but that has never 
been their appeal. Out-of-town developments tend to be places city dwellers 
move to when they have a family. To manage the rent or mortgage, plus the cost 
of bringing up children, it’s always been essential that travel back to the 
centre remains quick and easy.

How far is too far? The distance workers commute to cities – mapped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/jun/08/how-far-distance-workers-commute-uk-cities-mapped>
But not all is well in our suburbs. In many outlying areas, it’s becoming more 
difficult in many places to reach centres of growth and employment. Anew report 
by the Smith Institute 
<http://www.smith-institute.org.uk/book/towards-urban-renaissance-agenda-city-suburbs/>
 has found that many once aspirational, or at least affordable, areas of family 
housing are falling behind city centres in terms of their ability to offer a 
decent quality of life.

Central to that decline is a failure to provide frequent, well-routed, 
affordable and sustainable methods of travel.

Rising suburban poverty

The report found that the number of jobs in suburbs has stagnated over the 
past decade, more people are claiming jobseeker’s allowance and pension credit, 
and that poverty has subsequently become more concentrated in many suburban 
areas. “People who might once have been able to get a job locally are now 
either travelling for a very long time at a high cost or, when they do the 
calculation on transport cost and [commute] time, they’re [ending up] not 
working,” says the report’s author, Paul Hunter.

The UK is uniquely awful at joining up transport and development
Stephen Joseph 
Campaigners argue that poor travel connectivity has partly been a consequence 
of central government legislation and partly because of local government 
transport commissioning, but that the way we think about house building and 
“place-making” is also to blame.

“The UK is uniquely awful at joining up transport and development,” says 
Stephen Joseph, chief executive of the Campaign for Better Transport. Lack of 
thought in the layout of an ever-expanding suburban sprawl means buses can’t 
easily get to many residents, he notes. “Cul de sacs, for example, are very 
hard to serve well, because they don’t have links between them.

“There’s also been an assumption that everybody will drive. We’re seeing a lot 
of market town developments that are impossible to get to except by car. 
Sometimes there aren’t even pavements. Cycling has not been designed in, 
whereas in other countries it has.”

A culture of car dependency in and around suburbs conflicts with the reality 
that many people either don’t drive or can’t afford to. This, together with a 
lack of local transport services, has led to “huge social isolation and social 
costs,” Joseph says.

Evidence of growing innovation

But there are reasons to be cheerful. Jonathan Bray, director of the Urban 
Transport Group, says in some places, creative thinking has prompted innovative 
solutions to public transport conundrums. “There are a lot of developments 
around places like airports – [such as] logistics sheds or light industry – 
where you get a lot of lower-paid jobs, and these aren’t easily served by 
public transport,” he explains. The council estates where potential employees 
for such jobs live are rarely situated nearby, and the nightshifts that they 
need workers for aren’t serviced by de-regulated bus companies’ timetables.

To plug the gap in Greater Manchester, Transport for Greater Manchester (TfGM) 
runsLocal Link <http://www.tfgm.com/buses/local_link/Pages/index.html>, a taxi 
and minibus service that picks people up and drops them off at public transport 
hubs. As a result, employment opportunities that would otherwise be 
inaccessible without a car are opened up.

In West Yorkshire, a scheme operated by a housing developer and local 
transport authority provides residents on a new housing estate with a full 
discount on public transport in their first year of living there. There is a 
25% reduction in year two and a 10% reduction in year three. “It’s designed to 
mitigate traffic generation from new development,” says Bray. “We are creatures 
of habit, so when there is a disruption to our lives like moving house, it’s a 
good opportunity for change.”

Reclaiming Britain's abandoned stations, tracks & trains: share your pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jul/19/britains-abandoned-stations-trains-share-pictures-devolution-transport>
Smaller district train-lines once connected many smaller towns and villages to 
larger metropolitan areas: the Borders railway, dismantled in the Beeching cuts,
recently re-opened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/04/borders-railway-opens-scotland>
 the route from Edinburgh, through settlements all the way to Tweedbank. 
Campaigners say that, despite the expense, this route is only a first step.

There are the beginnings of other plans for rail to take more of the strain 
off the roads from the government, such as “siting new developments close to 
railway stations”, says Joseph. This may be the case, but rail is expensive, 
and hopes of reinstating decommissioned stations don’t always succeed, as the
recent problems besetting the proposed Bristol Road 
<http://www.stroudnewsandjournal.co.uk/news/13843096.Setback_for_plans_to_re_open_Bristol_Road_railway_station_in_Stonehouse/?ref=rl>
 station near Stroud demonstrate.

The importance of devolution

Ad-hoc plans can help to some extent, but to really connect suburbs in the 
economic doldrums with growth – and help them thrive in their own right – 
careful strategic planning is essential. “We look to link areas of need with 
areas of opportunity, and also improve the potential for areas of need to 
become areas of opportunity,” says TfGM interim strategy director, Simon 
Warburton. “However, the direct influence of combined authorities such as 
Greater Manchester is partly limited because the most used form of public 
transport – the bus (which carries 80% of all public transport journeys in this 
metropolitan area) – has routes, fares and timetables decided by private bus 
operators. This is why devolution, and particularly the bus services bill, is 
so important as it can give local politicians the ability to directly influence 
service delivery to achieve holistic policy objectives.”

The bus services bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2016-17/busservices.html> is considered by 
many interested in better public transport as the big prize. If passed early 
next year, it will give the new mayors in combined authorities the power to 
re-regulate bus services, and control fares and route planning. From a 
commuter’s point of view, it means the possibility of a single ticketing 
systems for all public transport systems in their area (as is already the case 
in the Greater London area). It could make a significant difference to 
transport connectivity and make services more affordable for residents of 
suburban and outlying areas that public transport currently struggles to reach.

Some local authorities are doing what they can to integrate better bus 
services for areas outside city centres even before the bill is passed. There 
is the joint project across council boundaries in Bristol, North Somerset and 
South Gloucestershire that aims to provide anew bus network 
<http://travelwest.info/metrobus>, which is complemented by dedicated cycling 
routes and public transport link-ups 
<http://travelwest.info/metrobus/benefits/cyclists-peds>. It’s designed, says 
Bristol city council “to provide through services from where there is higher 
unemployment levels to where there are more jobs, providing access to the city 
centre and assisting with the regeneration of South Bristol”.

What will your commute be like in 2030? - send in your questions for our live 
chat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/live/2016/jul/18/commute-future-2030-transport-online-debate-live-chat>
And looking to address the knotty problem of travel between suburban areas and 
satellite towns, TfGM has just published itsdraft 2040 strategy 
<http://www.tfgm.com/2040/Documents/14-1882%20GM%20Transport%20Vision%202040.pdf>
 for travel in the Great Manchester region, which Warburton says anticipates 
significant long-term investment in “better orbital transport in and around our 
towns”. In the future people might be able to travel directly around and 
between suburban areas without having to travel in and out of city centres. 
This might just seem sensible, but in public transport terms, it’s radical.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 