
A woman who is suing Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> for allegedly raping her as a 
child abandoned a plan to speak publicly on Wednesday, citing death threats.

The woman, known by the pseudonym Jane Doe, hid from media who were invited to 
her lawyer’s Los Angeles office for a press conference in which she was 
expected to reveal her identity.

Instead, her attorney, Lisa Bloom, cancelled the event in a brief, apologetic 
statement to a phalanx of cameras.

Trump lawyers given court date over lawsuit alleging rape of 13-year-old
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/donald-trump-jeffrey-epstein-alleged-rape-lawsuit>
“Jane Doe has received numerous threats today as have all the Trump accusers 
that I have represented. She has decided she is too afraid to show her face. 
She has been here all day, ready to do it, but unfortunately she is in terrible 
fear. We’re going to have to reschedule. I apologize to all of you who came. I 
have nothing further.”

Hours earlier Bloom, a prominent attorney, stoked such anticipation with the 
announced press conference that her firm’s website crashed. With just six days 
to the election and polls showing a tightening race the stakes could scarcely 
be higher.

The anticlimax was the latest twist to the explosive and so far 
unsubstantiated claim that the Republican presidential nominee raped Doe in 
1994 when she was 13 years old.

Doe has alleged the casino owner assaulted her on four occasions at parties in 
New York hosted by the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein, a friend of Trump 
whom she also accused of rape. A civil lawsuit is slated for an initial status 
conference in a New York district court on 16 December.

Trump has vehemently denied the accusations, calling them fabrications 
designed to smear him in the run-up to the 8 November election.


Doe filed a lawsuit 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/326057027/Amended-Complaint-Filed-9-30-2016#from_embed?platform=hootsuite>
 in April which was dismissed for technical filing errors. She filed fresh 
lawsuits in June in New York and California.

The allegations have received less media attention than other claims of sexual 
assaults by Trump partly because they appeared to have been orchestrated by an 
eccentric anti-Trump campaigner with a record of making outlandish claims about 
celebrities.

A Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/donald-trump-sexual-assault-lawsuits-norm-lubow>
 this summer found that Norm Lubow, a former producer on the Jerry Springer TV 
show, has been associated in the past with a range of disputed claims involving 
the likes of OJ Simpson and Kurt Cobain.

Rape lawsuits against Donald Trump linked to former TV producer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/donald-trump-sexual-assault-lawsuits-norm-lubow>
The federal lawsuit alleged Trump sexually assaulted Doe in 1994 at Epstein’s 
Manhattan home and at other parties Epstein hosted on the Upper East Side. 
Epstein, an associate of the UK’s Prince Andrew, and who was convicted of 
underage sex crimes in Florida in 2008, has denied the allegations.

Thomas Meagher, a patent and intellectual property attorney, filed the lawsuit 
for Doe even though he said he had never been involved in a case of this kind 
before.


With Bloom coming on board Doe appeared – until the press conference fiasco – 
to have acquired considerable additional legal and media firepower.

The founder and owner of The Bloom Firm 
<http://www.thebloomfirm.com/lawyer/lisa-bloom/>, which handles family, civil 
and criminal cases in California and New York, has in the past sued the Boy 
Scouts of America and the Los Angeles police department. Bloom hosts a Court TV 
talkshow and is a legal analyst for NBC News.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-rape-lawsuit-13-year-old-cancels-public-event%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00dc1a2c3e0cb608e7fc272da2b5cd79333176e2%2F0_82_4146_2487%2F4146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woman%20accusing%20Trump%20of%20raping%20her%20at%2013%20cancels%20her%20plan%20to%20go%20public&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-rape-lawsuit-13-year-old-cancels-public-event%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woman%20accusing%20Trump%20of%20raping%20her%20at%2013%20cancels%20her%20plan%20to%20go%20public&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-rape-lawsuit-13-year-old-cancels-public-event%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00dc1a2c3e0cb608e7fc272da2b5cd79333176e2%2F0_82_4146_2487%2F4146.jpg>
 Lawyer Lisa Bloom, representing the woman accusing Donald Trump, speaks to 
media on 2 November. Photograph: Mario Anzuoni/Reuters 
She is the daughter of Gloria Allred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/27/gloria-allred-lawyer-donald-trump-sexual-assault>
, another prominent attorney who is representing three different women who 
accuse Trump of inappropriate sexual contact, plus others who accuse Bill Cosby 
of wrongdoing.

In a Huffington Post article 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/lisa-bloom/why-the-new-child-rape-ca_b_10619944.html>
 in June, apparently before she took on Doe’s case, Bloom said her allegations 
appeared credible given Trump’s “longstanding and well documented contempt for 
women” and abuse allegations made by his former wife Ivanka and Jill Harth, who
detailed her accusations to the Guardian in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/20/donald-trump-sexual-assault-allegations-jill-harth-interview>
.

Judge Ronnie Abrams has ordered counsel for Trump and Epstein to appear in his 
New York district court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/donald-trump-jeffrey-epstein-alleged-rape-lawsuit>
along with Doe’s legal team for an initial status conference on 16 December. 
That raises the extraordinary prospect, were Trump to win the election, of 
counsel for a US president-elect being called into federal court in proceedings 
relating to allegations of rape of an underage girl.


A timeline of Donald Trump's alleged sexual misconduct: who, when and what
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/list-of-donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations>
The court order gives no details of the legal complaint raised by “Jane Doe”. 
It instructs all parties in the case to set out in advance the nature of the 
allegations and the “principal defenses”, as well as any previous motions and 
discovery as well as the “estimated length of trial”.

A Guardian investigation in July found that a publicist calling himself “Al 
Taylor” attempted to sell a videotape of Doe relating her allegations for $1m. 
It linked Taylor through a variety of means including shared email addresses 
and phone numbers to Lubow, formerly of Springer’s daytime talkshow.

Lubow was connected to a contentious claim, raised in the 1998 documentary 
movie Kurt and Courtney, that Courtney Love offered a fellow musician $50,000 
to murder her husband, Kurt Cobain of Nirvana. Love denied the charge.

According to the New York Post, Lubow was also behind a tabloid newspaper 
story that OJ Simpson bought illicit drugs on the day his estranged wife Nicole 
Brown was killed.

When the Guardian quizzed “Al Taylor” about his true identity, the publicist 
replied: “Just be warned, we’ll sue you if we don’t like what you write. We’ll 
sue your ass, own your ass and own your newspaper’s ass as well, punk.”
 