
It’s a pub crawl that could last a lifetime but, thanks to the dedicated work 
of an international team of mathematicians who have plotted the shortest 
possible route to visit 25,000 boozers across the country, roaming ale drinkers 
of the UK now have a serious new challenge to consider.

Led by Professor William Cook from the University of Waterloo, Canada, the 
two-year project <http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/pubs/index.html> is an 
example of the “travelling salesman problem”, which aims to work out the 
shortest route between any number of locations before then returning to the 
starting point. It is described as one of the most intensively studied problems 
in computational mathematics.
 Whose round is it this time? The tour in its entirety. Photograph: 
math.uwaterloo.ca 
In this case, the team plotted the coordinates of 24,727 of the pubs listed on 
the comprehensivePubs Galore <http://www.pubsgalore.co.uk/> website, before 
setting out to solve the problem of calculating the shortest possible route 
between them all.

The result is a 45,495km tour – that’s longer than the circumference of the 
Earth – laid out on an eye-bogglinginteractive Google Map 
<http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/road/uk24727_tour.html>, featuring a dizzying 
number of red pins, linked together by a never-ending blue line.
 A close-up of the Brighton leg of the tour. Photograph: math.uwaterloo.ca 
The route is circular, so travellers can start at any point, but on the list 
used by the team, calculations began at theThe Green Shutters in Portland 
<https://www.facebook.com/Green-shutters-659871584148755/> and ended at its 
neighbour,The Rodwell in Weymouth 
<https://www.facebook.com/Rodwell-Pub-177086622328947/>, a 6km walk away.

The average distance between each pub is an hour, but there are some dry 
patches; the longest is a 435km, 50-hour trip, from the Sango Sands Oasis in 
Durness to the Bells But & Ben in Shetland. However, the research team points 
out that this journey would include two ferry rides on which beer and other 
alcoholic drinks are available. Phew.
 The Liverpool map with its red pins. Photograph: math.uwaterloo.ca 
Pubs <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pubs> aside, the project 
represents the largest road-distance travelling salesman problem ever solved to 
date, with 100 times more stops than any previous projects.

As Cook says, the UK pub problem was used “as a means for developing and 
testing general-purpose optimisation methods, which have wide applications in 
science, industry and commerce”.

He adds: “We did not set out to improve the lot of a wandering pub aficionado.”

 * This story was amended on 21 October 2016 to clarify that the route only 
plots a subset of pubs listed by Pubs Galore, not every pub in the country as 
previously stated.  