
Better late than never. No doubt Lancastrians had an excellent time yesterday, 
celebrating their annual Day <http://www.forl.co.uk/lancday.html> with black 
puddings <http://www.forl.co.uk/lancday.html>, red roses and even more artistic 
tributes to thePendle Witches 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/the-northerner/2012/aug/15/carol-ann-duffy-poet-laureate-lancashire-witches-pendle>
.

November 27 is the county's riposte to the rather older Yorkshire Day, 1 
August, <http://www.yorkshireridings.org/news/yorkshire-day.html> which was 
itself introduced only in 1975, shortly after local government changes ceded 
precious acres around Saddleworth and Barnoldswick to the old enemy.

The Lancastrians caught up in 1996, choosing yesterday because it was on 27 
November 1295 when the county sent its first representatives to Parliament. 
Some of them may still be there.

Joshing aside, these days are good for promoting the undoubted virtues of each 
county, and there is no reason why others should not join in, aslittle 
Huntingdonshire did <http://www.rahbarnes.demon.co.uk/hunts/huntsday.htm>in 
2002. Yesterday saw a good example: a new guide to the history of Lancashire's 
county town was published, written by an undoubted expert, Colum Giles, who has 
recently retired fromEnglish Heritage <http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/>.

His late chief, Baroness Andrews 
<http://www.parliament.uk/biographies/lords/elizabeth-andrews/27107> who chairs 
EH, is doing her bit for his new project. She says:

When English Heritage's Commissioners met in Lancaster at the beginning of 
2011, we were hugely impressed with the city's outstanding historic character 
and distinctiveness. The book celebrates everything that has made Lancaster 
such a special place, for the benefit of local communities and visitors alike.
 Gloomy prison? Future visitor attraction. Especially if they floor it with 
colourful lino. Photograph: GTP /Alamy 

The city's best recent heritage news has been plans to open Lancaster Castle 
<http://www.lancastercastle.com/> after many years as a sinister-looking jail. 
Famous in the Witches story, among many other tales of crime and punishment, 
the prison stood conveniently next to the court with its mini-branding iron in 
the dock. This is still used for Crown Court trials, and guided tours with 
shiver with horrified fascination.

The Duchy of Lancaster which owns the castle is now considering ideas  
<http://www.duchyoflancaster.co.uk/2012/11/07/thousands-turn-out-for-lancaster-castle-exhibition/>
for making it a really big attraction in due course - though probably not until 
2017, and Giles' book has plenty about the history which such a project would 
celebrate. He says that needs doing:

What sparked the project was a recognition by all concerned that, despite the 
wonderful historic fabric which makes the city a special and important place, 
Lancaster was surprisingly little known beyond its immediate area. Each year 
thousands of tourists pass by on the motorway, within a couple of miles of one 
of England's great historic cities. 
 
Not enough of them pause in their journey to enjoy what the city has to offer 
- two thousand years of history from Romans, who built a fort and civilian 
settlement on the hilltop, to the present, a massive castle and beautiful 
priory church on the site of the Roman fort, an unrivalled waterfront which 
shows how important Lancaster was as an international port in earlier 
centuries, and fine buildings wherever one looks.
 All built on lino. The Ashton Memorial. Photograph courtesy Lancaster City 
Council. 
One of the most prominent is a monument to another of Lancaster's great 
contributions to the world, which may well be beneath your feet as you read 
this. The Ashton Memorial high on its hill like a continental Catholic shrine, 
records the greatest manufactury of linoleum that the world has ever seen.Read 
more here, 
<http://www.lancaster.gov.uk/council-and-democracy/civic-ceremonial/lord-ashton-lino-king/>
 and it's well worth doing so.

The book, Discovering Historic Lancaster, covers this side of the city's 
history too, and the city council's Cabinet member for tourism and culture, 
Coun Ron Sands, is well pleased. He says:

The book really sparkles and includes probably the best collection of colour 
photos on Lancaster ever brought together as well capturing what our district, 
steeped in history, has to offer those visiting, living and working in it today.
 Linos-R-Us. Lord Ashton. 
'Discovering historic Lancaster; a visitor's guide' is available from Visitor 
Information Centres at Lancaster and Morecambe, Waterstones (Lancaster) and 
Lancaster museums as well as on-line at www.shopccc.co.uk, price £4.99.
 