
In my teenage years, a summer spent youth hostelling with friends was one of 
the only holiday options that met with universal parental approval. A 
painstakingly wholesome, budget-friendly dose of communal self-catering, making 
new chums over a couple of jolly rounds of cribbage, then going upstairs to 
sleep with them. No, mum, not like that.

But single-sex dormitories filled with snorers and mud were a tough sell to 
those of us who’d moved on from Enid Blyton to Hunter S Thompson and feared 
sharing a bunk bed with some prematurely bearded, Kumbaya-humming hostel 
stereotype of the age.

The extent to which the phenomenon has fallen off the radar became clear as I 
questioned my teenage daughters en route to theYHA’s branch in the Cotswold 
town of Stow-on-the-Wold 
<http://www.yha.org.uk/places-to-stay/region/south-west/stow-wold>: neither had 
ever heard of a youth hostel. The eldest admitted she was expecting to spend 
the weekend with troubled runaways.

“Times have changed,” read the youngest aloud from our YHA accommodation 
guide. “You don’t have to share, do chores or stay out in the rain.” Her tone 
made it plain that this was a misguided attempt at reassurance. The YHA has 
reinvented itself of late, but it still sounded like a modestly enlightened 
regime of National Service.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fyha-voted-best-uk-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416498006604%2Ffc96c231-c867-4a36-ba26-46211f99764d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=YHA%20voted%20best%20UK%20hotel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fyha-voted-best-uk-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=YHA%20voted%20best%20UK%20hotel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fyha-voted-best-uk-hotel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416498006604%2Ffc96c231-c867-4a36-ba26-46211f99764d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A modern YHA self-catering kitchen 
We walked past the hostel twice before spotting the little green-triangle 
logo. Being a majestic double-fronted 17th-century townhouse, it hardly looked 
the part. Then again, very few YHA hostels do: founded in 1930, the association 
snapped up most of its properties either side of the war, when grand old houses 
were going cheap.

Heaving open the big front door, it felt as if we’d chanced upon some portal 
into a furtive realm of modestly priced self-catering accommodation known only 
to the few. How right we were. The fleece-clad manager explained that due to a 
rash of cancellations his only other guests were a trio of Taiwanese cyclists 
who’d already gone to bed.

Ours was one of the family rooms that are steadily replacing the dorms of old. 
A pair of bunk beds, a huge window overlooking the golden-stoned houses 
opposite, and – hostel diehards look away now – an en suite loo and shower, 
with hot water and everything. Atop each bare mattress lay an uncovered duvet 
and two pillows, plus a sealed plastic bag containing the necessary linen. For 
my daughters, the no-frills, DIY accommodation vibe was an exciting novelty: 
“It’s like camping indoors.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fyha-voted-best-uk-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F21%2F1416579995998%2Fa406aa5f-113c-4cc7-b26d-203c7272e8e4-2060x1369.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=YHA%20voted%20best%20UK%20hotel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fyha-voted-best-uk-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=YHA%20voted%20best%20UK%20hotel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fyha-voted-best-uk-hotel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F21%2F1416579995998%2Fa406aa5f-113c-4cc7-b26d-203c7272e8e4-2060x1369.jpeg>
 Entrance to Stow-on-the-Wold YHA. Photograph: Alamy 
Cooked meals were on offer, but in keeping with the cost-conscious, 
self-sufficient spirit of hostelling we repaired to the kitchen, via the Co-op 
up the street. The catering facilities were impressive and well-ordered: my 
youngest, an obsessive administrator, was delighted to find a roll of adhesive 
labels and a biro beside the communal fridge, and eagerly tagged our breakfast 
provisions to prevent them falling into Taiwanese hands.

The hours of darkness, we discovered, remain the novice hosteller’s greatest 
challenge. Aside from a modest telly, the entertainment options were in tune 
with my laziest preconceptions: a couple of dozen careworn paperbacks, and a 
stack of well-used board games.

I didn’t tell the girls that for a small charge we could have Wi-Fi: how much 
more convivial and rewarding, I insisted, how much more hostelly, to stroll en 
famille through the comely streets of Stow.

Stratford <http://www.yha.org.uk/hostel/stratford-upon-avon>-upon-Avon 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0CEIQFjAC&url=http%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FStratford-upon-Avon&ei=tAtuVLG3CZOracWCgcAO&usg=AFQjCNEMfKt5dIuC8N0fTRxqvqU8sckzUA&sig2=VqZ92CZoOshiXgkIZ4IFgQ&bvm=bv.80120444,d.aWw>
, where we stayed the night after, was better still: a £1.2 million renovation 
has added a new restaurant and cafe to a regal Georgian mansion in three acres 
of landscaped grounds. The grandly proportioned, eclectically decorated 
communal areas contained a dozen or so fellow guests: a large barefooted woman 
of middle years, a spirited gaggle of young Spaniards, and – yes! – a 
prematurely bearded teenager with his earnest girlfriend. Such a motley 
gathering in such an inappropriate residence – it was as if we’d been thrown 
together by fate, like multinational refugees in a requisitioned wartime 
mansion. We ate amid a babel of laughter. Hostelling is cheap (beds here from 
£15); it’s also dependably cheerful.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fyha-voted-best-uk-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416497825905%2F646f0860-687c-45a8-adc9-32c452fa4977-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=YHA%20voted%20best%20UK%20hotel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fyha-voted-best-uk-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=YHA%20voted%20best%20UK%20hotel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fyha-voted-best-uk-hotel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416497825905%2F646f0860-687c-45a8-adc9-32c452fa4977-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Stratford YHA restaurant and bar 
The after-hours facilities were a step up too: a cosy little TV lounge, and a 
vast games room that allowed the Spaniards to destroy all-comers at pool. Also: 
a bar, offering ideal preparation for a night in Family Room 11, with its bold 
furnishings and tightly packed bunks. I had set off on this trip expecting to 
suffer a return to travel’s austere and awkwardly communal past. Clambering 
into bed, I instead beheld a vision of its virtuous, sustainable and – sorry, 
kids – beerily snore-ravaged future.

• 01629 592 700, yha.org.uk <http://www.yha.org.uk/>. Stow-on-the-Wold: 
private rooms from £23, dorm beds from £13.50. Stratford-upon-Avon: rooms £29, 
beds £15

The dawn of youth hostelling

The first youth hostel in Britain opened at Pennant Hall, near Llanrwst, North 
Wales, in December 1930 – and closed the following year due to sewage 
contamination,writes Rachel Dixon. In 1931, another 75 hostels opened, two of 
which are still in use today: YHA Idwal Cottage, Snowdonia, and YHA Street, 
Somerset. Motorists weren’t welcome, alcohol was banned, dorms were single-sex, 
strict curfews were imposed and duties ranged from washing up to replenishing 
water supplies. Nevertheless, by 1939 there were 297 hostels and 83,418 members.
 