
An isolated, derelict cottage, perched on a ledge of Welsh mountainside might 
not strike everyone as the ideal holiday retreat. However one feature will make 
the heart of every railway enthusiast beat faster: it has a private platform 
from which residents can hail regular passing steam trains.

Coed y Bleiddiau – or the wood of the wolves, named according to legend that 
the last wolf in Wales was killed nearby – was inhabited as recently as 2006. 
But since the death of the last tenants, who had lived in the cottage since the 
50s, it has fallen into dereliction, a mournful landmark to tourists who come 
from all over the world to ride the steep railway line betweenBlaenau Ffestiniog
 <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/may/30/wales-rail-travel-trains-steam>
, once the heart of the largest slate quarries in the world, and the harbour at 
Porthmadog 13 miles below.

A major rescue plan has now been agreed, which should see the cottage 
inhabited once more by summer 2017, with the trains adding an extra stop at the 
tiny private platform.

The Landmark Trust <http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/> has a reputation for 
restoring historical oddities and transforming them into holiday homes – 
including a Greek temple pigsty and a giant pineapple gardener’s lodge – and 
has now entered into partnership with theFfestiniog & Welsh Highland railway 
trust <http://www.festrail.co.uk/> to bring the cottage back to life. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwelsh-cottage-railway-blaenau-ffestiniog-landmark-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3697b3162c47c2f2401e66c549371d2c3924097d%2F0_273_4912_2947%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Your%20own%20private%20hideaway%3A%20Welsh%20mountain%20cottage%20with%20railway%20platform&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwelsh-cottage-railway-blaenau-ffestiniog-landmark-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Your%20own%20private%20hideaway%3A%20Welsh%20mountain%20cottage%20with%20railway%20platform&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwelsh-cottage-railway-blaenau-ffestiniog-landmark-trust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3697b3162c47c2f2401e66c549371d2c3924097d%2F0_273_4912_2947%2F4912.jpg>
 All materials to repair Coed y Bleiddiau will be brought to the cottage by 
steam train. Photograph: Ffestiniog Railway and Landmark Trust 
Emergency work on the cottage has already been carried out to stop the rain 
pouring through the shattered roof and rotting the interiors. A £400,000 appeal 
is being launched for full restoration of the building, which cost just £350 to 
build in the 1860s. All the construction materials will be brought to the site 
by the same route used by the Victorian builders – railway wagon.

Anna Keay, the director of the trust, said it was determined to rescue the 
abandoned building. “Coed y Bleiddiau has much in common with some of 
Landmark’s earliest projects: it is modest in scale but deeply special for its 
place in our history and landscape.”

The Ffestiniog railway <http://www.ffestiniograilway.org.uk/>, the oldest 
narrow-gauge steam railway in the world, which closed in the late 30s and was 
restored and reopened in the 50s by enthusiasts, is the reason the cottage was 
built in 1863, as a home for the supervisor and his large family. The trains 
are still the only way of getting to the house, apart from a steep scramble up 
a footpath from the nearest road.


My life in travel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2009/mar/01/steam-trains-ffestiniog-railway>
The supervisor, Henry Hovenden, and his two wives reared seven children in the 
cottage and he continued living there and working for the railway until two 
years before his death in 1903.

Later tenants included the composer Granville Bantock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/apr/19/proms-2013-granville-bantock>
, a friend ofEdward Elgar <https://www.theguardian.com/music/edward-elgar>, who 
dedicated his second Pomp and Circumstance March to him. Bantock rented the 
cottage for 10 years as a retreat from his work as professor of music at 
Birmingham University and founder of the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra. 
Bantock’s daughter recalled that groceries came just as they had in Hovenden’s 
day, with a list and a basket handed to the engine driver on the up train, and 
brought back full of provisions by the driver of the down train. Harry Philby, 
the father of the spyKim Philby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/24/mi6-defended-kim-philby-spy>, 
was also a tenant of Coed y Bleiddiau.

The railway was built to take slate down the steep mountainside to the sea to 
ship across the world. As the quarries grew, the community of scattered 
farmsteads became a boomtown, with the residents of Blaenau Ffestiniog growing 
to 11,000, twice its present population. The original railway ran down the 
mountainside by gravity, with the wagons hauled back up by horses, but was 
converted to steam to keep pace with production.

In the 20th century, the quarries gradually declined and closed as a result of 
rising costs and cheaper imported slate, and the railway seemed doomed. 
Passionate 50s enthusiasts worked hundreds of thousands of unpaid hours to 
restore the track and build new sections, and who are still crucial to its 
survival today. The railway, which runs wagons and locomotives that are more 
than 150 years old, is now one of the UK’s top tourist attractions, and the 
Landmark Trust expects keen interest in the holiday cottage with an unmatched 
view of the tracks.
 