
1 Recognise we already have youth who are leaders in development


Young people are already spearheading the social entrepreneurial movement 
across the world. My own first venture, which worked on rural 
solar/biomass-based electricity generation, was launched when I was 19. I faced 
some difficulties initially due to being patronised, and working with 
government officials and even private sector leaders was challenging. How can 
we make sure others don’t have the same problems?Shrey Goyal, co-founder and 
director, Sustainable Growth Initiative, New Delhi, India@ShreyGoyal 
<https://twitter.com/ShreyGoyal> @ThinkSGI <https://twitter.com/ThinkSGI>

2 Make young people the solution not the problem
 <https://twitter.com/ThinkSGI>

YouTube and aid: How NGOs can harness the power for good
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/05/youtube-aid-wateraid-the-lean-machines-john-chapman-leon-bustin-carly-rowena>
There are currently two ways the sector talks about young people – as the 
beneficiaries of “youth development” or as participants of “youth-led 
development” but a lot of the time it’s not clear whether as a group we’re 
being portrayed as the problem or the solution. Youth marginalisation now 
channeling young people’s energy towards violence. Seven thousand young 
Tunisians have joined Daesh for example, even though 95% of the youth in 
Tunisia are educated. These are potential doctors, teachers and engineers.Aya 
Chebbi, founding chair, African Youth Movement 
<http://african-youthmovement.org/>, London, UK @aya_chebbi 
<https://twitter.com/aya_chebbi>

3 Get rid of youth side events


We should be focusing on inter-generational work. Currently young activists 
are given their own spaces, but at the cost of not being in the room for the 
“grown-up” discussions. Young people are equipped to interact and inform 
decision-making on thematic issues, so should be involved in all discussions. A 
great example of this is theEuropean Development Days Young Leaders Programme 
<https://eudevdays.eu/young-leaders> which involves young people in high-level 
panels alongside other experts in the field.Marion Osieyo, editor, EDD Young 
Leaders for Development <http://youngleadersfordev.org/>, and enterprise 
development programme officer,Cherie Blair Foundation for Women 
<http://www.cherieblairfoundation.org/>, London, UK @Marion_AO 
<https://twitter.com/Marion_AO> @CherieBlairFndn 
<https://twitter.com/CherieBlairFndn> @EDDYoungLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/EDDYoungLeaders>

4 Involve young people in government consultations


We need more young people participating in the nitty gritty of decision-making 
at local as well as global levels. For example, national policymaking inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> often involves consultation with 
industry groups, community leaders, and other sections of society. Rarely do 
these involve youth consultations, and even advisory groups formed to work on 
youth issues such as employment do not include a single member below the age of 
40.Shrey Goyal

5 Acknowledge that we’re not one homogeneous group


Effective advocacy 101: how to bring about change in five steps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/12/effective-advocacy-101-how-to-bring-about-change-in-five-steps>
I have always been so frustrated seeing “youth leaders” who do not talk about 
race, gender or class, so I feel having more intersectional youth-led 
organisations should be a priority. Increasingly young people are getting “a 
voice” at the table, but like everyone else in society, young people have many 
different perspectives and won’t always feel they identify with any given 
platform’s “youth voice”.Ani Phoebe Hao, freelance researcher and journalist, 
and founder ofAgora Juntas <http://www.facebook.com/agora.juntas>, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil@aniphoebe <https://twitter.com/aniphoebe>

6 Create more economic opportunities 


One major constraint in Mombasa where I work is that the population is growing 
faster than the economy. In Africa generally, we need improved policies that 
create economic opportunity for young people, and increases trade between 
countries on the continent.Chloe Stull-Lane, team leader of The Kuza Project 
<http://thekuzaproject.org>, Adam Smith International 
<http://adamsmithinternational.com>, Mombasa, Kenya @ChloeStullLane 
<https://twitter.com/ChloeStullLane> @thekuzaproject 
<https://twitter.com/thekuzaproject> @AdamSmithInt 
<https://twitter.com/AdamSmithInt>

7 Encourage participation in civil society at a young age

Adult civic participation is determined by habits of participation developed 
during youth and has a positive correlation with education and employment. 
Supporting young people to engage socially, politically and economically and 
creating opportunities for them to contribute to development processes creates 
effective policy and builds a generation of engaged citizens. Too often, 
however, their engagement is inhibited by traditional, customary and legal 
structures that do not value their perspectives. Dramatic examples of youth 
engagement in political and social processes, such as the Arab spring, are 
often treated as threats to stability rather than opportunities to harness.
Saket Mani, UN global youth advocate,World We Want 2030 
<https://www.worldwewant2030.org/>, Pune, India @SaketMANI 
<https://twitter.com/SaketMANI> @WorldWeWant2030 
<https://twitter.com/WorldWeWant2030>

8 Share knowledge and experience

Young social entrepreneurs and civil society leaders often face issues related 
to resources, access, and accountability. This is where more experienced 
leaders can step in and provide assistance. I have seen many examples of 
industry leaders serving on boards of social enterprises and NGOs, partnering 
with younger organisations to channel funds and mentoring young entrepreneurs.
SELCO Incubation Centre <http://www.selcoincubation.org/> in India is a great 
example, where a mature social enterprise is helping younger ones in the same 
field.Shrey Goyal

9 Start your own initiative to hold leaders to account

How can the UN fight inequality when it doesn’t pay its interns?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/03/how-can-the-un-fight-inequality-when-it-doesnt-pay-its-interns>
There are many watchdog initiatives to hold governments accountable, it’s 
about learning and finding solutions that respond to your own context. In Egypt 
they didMorsi Meter <http://morsimeter.com/en> basically tracked the leader’s 
promises during his mandate. In Tunisia they adopted the project for both their 
previous leader with theJomaa Meter 
<http://jomaameter.org/?locale=en#.V7NDmtfKDIo> and now the Sebsi Meter 
<http://sebsimeter.org/>, which tracks the current president’s promises as well 
as the government’s mandate. The information is public so ordinary people can 
be part of the accountability process.Aya Chebbi

10 Get everyone together to keep on top of youth priorities

A good example of best practice on how young people can take decisions 
together with governments is theCouncil of Europe co-management system 
<http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/youth/Coe_youth/co_management_en.asp>. 
Representatives from youth NGOs sit down in committees with government 
officials who together then work out the priorities for the youth sector and 
make recommendations for future budgets and programmes.Dimitris Makrystathis, 
president ofYouthnet Hellas <http://www.youthnet.gr>, Athens, Greece @makrystath
 <https://twitter.com/makrystath> @Youthnet_Hellas 
<https://twitter.com/Youthnet_Hellas>

11 Listen and act on what young people say

We are tired of spaces where we are the topic of the discussion, not the 
leaders of it. Listening doesn’t mean creating more youth adviser positions and 
working groups. It means taking those voices seriously. No one benefits if 
young people are a wasted resource.Aya Chebbi

Read the live Q&A here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/04/live-qa-how-can-young-people-wield-more-power-around-the-world>
.


Is there anything that we’ve left out? Leave your thoughts in the comments 
below.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 