
Zaha Hadid, the British-Iraqi architect who died suddenly last March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/01/zaha-hadid-obituary>, 
left a fortune worth £67m, her will reveals.

The designer of the London Olympics aquatics centre, Guangzhou opera house and 
buildings in countries ranging from Saudi Arabia and South Korea to Azerbaijan, 
bequeathed a lump sum of £500,000 to her business partner Patrik Schumacher. 
Hadid also left a total of £1.7m to four nieces and nephews, as well as her 
brother Haytham Hadid, whose share was £500,000.

The architect, who was made a dame in 2012, was unmarried with no children and 
left her international design businesses, which account for the bulk of her 
wealth, in trust.
 London aquatics centre. Photograph: View Pictures/Rex/Shutterstock 
Hadid rose to become one of the world’s most famous architects with her brand 
of mathematically inspired curving buildings. Shedied aged 65 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/03/zaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore>
 after suffering suspected heart failure while on holiday in Miami following an 
earlier bout of bronchitis.

Her will, obtained by the Architects’ Journal 
<https://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/10016416.article?utm_source=newsletter&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=AJ_EditorialNewsletters.Reg:%20Send%20-%20Daily%20bulletin&mkt_tok=eyJpIjoiWmpOaVpEZzFaakpoT0RFNSIsInQiOiJ2WG1cL2xMTHVJTzFFNk5laVdYZEc3XC9uMldqWVh2NExFUm5TcG93VzF2ekdZb01zdnVnT2w5aFZESUpYRVlxcit6QmZicTNjalQ3RWhFSUFGUDVhS0FJUnRqNTRnNHhSU2UxbG9kNGxSeWFiOElKeHBhUFI2Z1RVTkN5bTZiQlpoIn0%3D>
, shows that the net value of her estate was £67,249,458. The calculation was 
filed in the high court dated 14 December 2016.

Schumacher, a German architect who has taken over the running of Hadid’s 
London-based practice,angered 
<http://www.architectmagazine.com/practice/zaha-hadid-architects-distances-the-firm-from-recent-statements-by-patrik-schumacher_o>
 his fellow executors of Hadid’s will in November after making aprovocative 
speech that advocated abandoning social housing, the closure of art schools and 
building over Hyde Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/24/zaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing>
. The executors are Schumacher, Peter Palumbo, the property developer, Brian 
Clarke, the artist, and Rana Hadid, the architect’s niece. They upbraided 
Schumacher in a public statement, saying Zaha Hadid “would have been totally 
opposed to these views”.

The will shows Hadid is leaving her architecture practice, of which she was 
the sole owner, in trust. In the year to the end of April 2015,Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid> Ltd turned over £48m and 
employed 372 people.
 Patrik Schumacher. Photograph: Andrew Innerarity/Reuters 
Hadid gave her executors powers to distribute all or some of the income from 
her several businesses, including the practice, to a wide range of parties. 
They include “past, current and future employees and office holders of the 
companies”, and the Zaha Hadid Foundation, which was set up to promote 
architectural education and exhibitions of Hadid’s work. Others who could 
benefit are family members and charities.

The will states that “for the moment” the trustees are her executors: 
Schumacher, Clarke, Palumbo and Rana Hadid.

Hadid was born in Baghdad in 1950 and became a revolutionary force in British 
architecture even though she struggled to win commissions in the UK for many 
years. She studied mathematics at the American University of Beirut before 
launching her architectural career in London at the Architectural Association.

By 1979, she had established her own practice in London – Zaha Hadid 
Architects – and gained a reputation across the world for groundbreaking 
theoretical works including the Peak in Hong Kong (1983), Kurfürstendamm 70 in 
Berlin (1986) and the Cardiff Bay opera house in Wales (1994).

The first major build commission that earned her international recognition was 
the Vitra fire station in Weil am Rhein, Germany (1993), but her scheme to 
build the Cardiff opera house was scrapped in the 1990s and she did not produce 
a major building in the UK until the Riverside Museum of Transport in Glasgow 
was completed in 2011.

She became the first female recipient of the Pritzker architecture prize in 
2004 and twice won the UK’s most prestigious architecture award, the RIBA 
Stirling prize.
 