
It started with a picture. A simple drawing in typical eight-year-old style 
that was titled My Family. It was evident how much time had been spent getting 
it right: lines had been drawn and rubbed out; every colour of pencil had been 
used.

Guardian children's fiction prize 2016, the longlist – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/jul/08/guardian-childrens-fiction-prize-2016-longlist>
But this was not a typical drawing. Instead of the bright happiness of 
childhood beaming from the page, it was an image of utter despair. One figure 
lay dead and bloodied; another stood weeping bright blue teardrops. There was a 
fence, stretching almost to the top of the page, the lines a wobbled check 
across the paper and barbed wire pencilled in sharp across the top. A small 
figure with the label “Me”, stared out from the centre of the page, crying 
tears of blood.

I had seen pictures like this before. They appeared on an internet trail when 
I searched the phrase “children immigration detention Australia”. What really 
got to me about this picture was how the child had drawn the sun: it was an 
angry, yellow face, hatred evident in the twisted mouth and severely angled 
eyes. And it was staring directly at the “Me” in the centre. I looked at the 
picture for a long time.Even the sun doesn’t want us here.

This became the story I had to write. I didn’t yet have a plot, or characters 
– just a wobbled fence and an angry sun and sadness. A friend commented that it 
wasn’t a great start for a kid’s book: “It’s kind of depressing, isn’t it?” I 
agreed, but only in part.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fzana-fraillon-writing-about-refugee-children-the-bone-sparrow-guardian-childrens-fiction-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bc9d27a60d8218034b97d924b82075154c63d71%2F0_0_1524_2339%2F1524.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zana%20Fraillon%20on%20writing%20about%20refugee%20children%3A%20%E2%80%98Their%20resilience%20keeps%20hope%20alive'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fzana-fraillon-writing-about-refugee-children-the-bone-sparrow-guardian-childrens-fiction-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zana%20Fraillon%20on%20writing%20about%20refugee%20children%3A%20%E2%80%98Their%20resilience%20keeps%20hope%20alive%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fzana-fraillon-writing-about-refugee-children-the-bone-sparrow-guardian-childrens-fiction-award%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bc9d27a60d8218034b97d924b82075154c63d71%2F0_0_1524_2339%2F1524.jpg>
One of the wondrous things about reading – and writing – is that it helps us 
grapple with questions, prod situations and test boundaries. Reading lets us 
search for answers. As readers, we can disappear into worlds totally unknown, 
and test our own strengths, courage and beliefs. We can walk in the darkest 
places imaginable in a book, and experience a taste of someone else’s reality. 
We can wonder, and we can hope for the happy ending.

The Bone Sparrow was based on experiences of refugees in Australian detention 
centres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-immigration-and-asylum>. 
Centres that have been built in the most remote areas, or offshore on virtually 
inaccessible islands away from the eyes and minds of most of us. Centres that 
have been described byAmnesty International as torturous 
<https://www.amnesty.org.uk/press-releases/australia-conditions-nauru-detention-centre-amount-torture>
 andlikened to concentration camps 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/our-detention-centres-are-intentionally-cruel-and-must-be-closed-20160504-golr04.html>
 of the second world war. My research showed that Australia’s detention centres 
are, in many ways, very similar to refugee camps and detention centres 
worldwide. I searched through heavily redacted incident reports, documentaries, 
interviews and media reports – all of which left me drained and questioning my 
belief in the strength of the human spirit. How does anyone – especially a 
child – survive this?


I almost gave up. A few times I did, only to find myself pulled back in. And 
then I saw a short video of two children in a detention centre. It was pouring 
with rain and they were splashing in puddles, smiles lighting up their faces. 
Despite everything they were going through, they had found a single moment of 
joy and they had grabbed it.

Refugee week: too many adults have forgotten a very human part of themselves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jun/22/refugee-week-the-bone-sparrow-zana-fraillon>
I realised that it is because my character, Subhi, is a child that he can 
survive. The resilience of childhood – and that unwavering belief in an imagined
Someday – that keeps his hope alive. In books, we can hope for a happy ending.

I kept returning to the drawings of the children being kept indefinitely in 
detention, looking for small details that would bring the story to life. I came 
across another drawing, this one a detailed picture of a bird collecting 
berries from a plant. It was beautiful – and joyous. Among all the sorrow and 
anguish, this child was able to imagine the beauty and wonder in the world – 
the world denied to them, but the will that would one day be theirs. As long as 
they can hold on to hope.

• The Bone Sparrow is published by Orion Children’s Books at £12.99 and is 
available from the Guardian bookshop at £10.39 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-bone-sparrow.html>. The winner of the 
Guardian children’s fiction prize 2016 will be announced on 17 November.
 