
Many of the reviews I’ve read of DeLillo’s latest book, Zero K, talk about 
“late period” DeLillo, suggesting that since Underworld, he’s been prone to 
writing similar books – marked by slender plotting, elusive meanings and dense, 
elliptical prose. What most reviewers don’t say is that another characteristic 
of these late novels is that they generally need to be read more than once to 
be understood, and that they sometimes take years to mature in the reader’s 
mind.

Most famously, the New York Times’s Michiko Kakutani derided Cosmopolis as “a 
major dud” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/03/24/books/books-of-the-times-headed-toward-a-crash-of-sorts-in-a-stretch-limo.html>
 when it came out in 2003 – but it now seems like a near-magical (and 
hilarious) pre-imagining of the 2008 financial crash. Personally, I 
misunderstood and didn’t enjoyDeLillo’s The Body Artist 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2001/02/22/the-hunger-artist/> the first time 
I read it – but have been haunted by its evocation of loss ever since.

Zero K by Don DeLillo – profound and beautiful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/15/don-de-lillo-zero-k-review> 
So right now, I’m not going to venture anything like a definite judgment on 
Zero K. I’ve finished it, but I haven’t really come to terms with it. I reserve 
the right to change my mind – to let it grow or diminish. I suspect there’s 
much I’ve missed and I know there’s plenty I haven’t yet understood. The prose 
is rich, chewy and best consumed in small mouthfuls, so I had to plod through 
it haltingly – but I relished it all the more in consequence.

While I’ve been reasonably sure of my feelings about White Noise over the past 
few weeks of our Reading group, it’s challenging to turn from that book to Zero 
K. But it’s also fascinating, because the two books have a lot in common. In 
fact,my initial reaction to Zero K 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/03/white-noise-by-don-delillo-is-mays-reading-group-book>
 was that it was an ideal companion to White Noise, that the later novel wraps 
up many of the ideas in the earlier one – and so it makes sense to move direct 
from one to the other.

A character in White Noise suggests “all plots end in death”. Zero K suspends 
its characters in a never-ending death, when they are cryonically frozen in a 
place called the Convergence, somewhere in the former Soviet Union. As in White 
Noise, the characters are confronted by torrents of information, news, nonsense 
and media static assailing them in the back of taxis, in their homes, in the 
otherwise sterile corridors of the Convergence.



DeLillo’s new narrator, Jeffrey Lockhart shows a delight in language similar 
to Jack Gladney’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/10/don-delillo-white-noise-a-novel-way-of-dismantling-consumerism>
: “She was my lover. The idea consoled me, the word itself, lover, the 
beautiful musical note, the hovering letterv.” There are familiar riffs on 
simulacra and unreality: “I stood in the booth, counting … It didn’t seem to be 
me. It seemed someone else, a recluse who’d wandered into semi-public view, 
standing here and counting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fzero-k-and-making-sense-of-late-period-don-delillo-white-noise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56e5dce807fc5f9439b5c256d8acebacf4714f91%2F792_0_2164_2706%2F2164.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zero%20K%20and%20making%20sense%20of%20'late%20period'%20Don%20DeLillo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fzero-k-and-making-sense-of-late-period-don-delillo-white-noise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zero%20K%20and%20making%20sense%20of%20%27late%20period%27%20Don%20DeLillo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fzero-k-and-making-sense-of-late-period-don-delillo-white-noise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56e5dce807fc5f9439b5c256d8acebacf4714f91%2F792_0_2164_2706%2F2164.jpg>
 In Zero K, is DeLillo is self-consciously playing on his own canon? 
Photograph: Jean-Christian Bourcart/Getty Images 
Such parallels are striking, but I suspect I would find just as many in other 
DeLillo books. Even with my rusty memory I could link a series of violent, 
murderous and apparently “real” films in the Convergence to the footage of the 
Texas Highway Killer inUnderworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/03/100-best-novels-underworld-don-delillo>
 and repeated motifs of flickering images from other novels. It’s also possible 
to see those details about screens in the back of a taxi rebroadcasting ideas 
from Cosmopolis. And there are similar reflections in dozens of other ideas 
about bankers, cults, remote desert underground facilities. In a fine essay in 
the Vulture,Christian Lorentzen even notes 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/04/genius-of-don-delillos-post-underworld-work.html?mid=twitter_vulture#>
 that a passage where Lockhart does squat jumps reminded him of one in End 
Zone, and that some of Zero K’s comic dialogue will sound to devotees like a 
“master playing tennis with himself across the decades”.


I’m open to the possibility that these parallels with earlier works are 
incidental. They relate to ideas that have fascinated and troubled DeLillo 
throughout his career and his intention may be simply to give them new 
iterations here, rather than to be self-referential. But if DeLillo is 
self-consciously playing on his own canon, that would fit neatly with what I’ve 
come to see as a major theme in the book.

While I originally took Zero K as a reflection on mortality and what it means 
to die, it now also seems to me to be about the artist’s contest with infinity. 
“All plots end in death” is developed into the question of what happens to 
stories once their creator moves on – or, how much of the creator remains in 
those stories. For instance, the first person we see anaesthetised and frozen 
is called Artis (genitive of “ars”, if you’re a Latin fan – which is to say, 
“of art”). We are told that “death is a cultural artifact” and that their 
frozen clients will be “subjects for us to study, toys for us to play with”. We 
are even shown frozen bodies arranged around the Convergence building like so 
many macabre sculptures.

If this version of the afterlife is a metaphor for art, it’s a grim one, even 
if it’s also amusing: the implication being that striving for immortality in 
art is as absurd as paying a fortune to have someone freeze your dead body. 
Entering the bargain with the assumption that you will be given an escape from 
death, the best you can hope for is to have your cold husk displayed for the 
amusement of future generations, after everything that actually made your 
conscious being has long since left the building.

Don DeLillo: ‘I think of myself as the kid from the Bronx’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/06/don-delillo-kid-from-the-bronx-interview-xan-brooks>
Neatly, this idea has already appeared in DeLillo. In Point Omega, we’re told: 
“The true life is not reducible to words spoken or written, not by anyone, 
ever.” In White Noise, meanwhile, Jack Gladney already feels like he is the 
false character following his name around. Set in this context, DeLillo’s 
references to his earlier works throughout Zero K become another brilliantly 
deadpan joke. The book also becomes the place where all those wonderful books 
meet their end, although I hope not. I hope I’ve got it wrong – like most of us 
do when first reading late period DeLillo. I hope that there will be more 
books, both to blast apart this thesis and to intrigue us anew.
 