
More than 100 prominent people from literature, the arts, science, academia, 
human rights and the law have signed a declaration urging newspaper and 
magazine publishers to embrace the royal charter system of press regulation.

They join people who have been victims of press misbehaviour in arguing that 
charter will give "vital protection to the vulnerable" from abuse of power by 
the press.

The signatories include broadcasters Stephen Fry, Clare Balding, Gary Lineker 
and Rory Bremner. Actor Emma Thompson has signed, as have ProfessorRichard 
Dawkins <https://www.theguardian.com/science/dawkins> and Sir Jonathan Miller.

Several film directors are on the list, such as Stephen Frears, Alan Parker, 
Mike Leigh, Beeban Kidron, Guy Ritchie, Stephen Daldry, Bill Forsyth,Peter 
Kosminsky <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peter-kosminsky>, Terry 
Gilliam and Michael Apted.

Among the writers and playwrights are Alan Bennett, William Boyd, Alan 
Ayckbourn, Tom Stoppard, Monica Ali, Helen Fielding, Michael Frayn, Ian McEwan, 
A C Grayling, David Hare, Alan Hollinghurst, JK Rowling,Salman Rushdie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/salmanrushdie>, Willy Russell, Claire 
Tomalin and Irvine Welsh.

Comedians are represented by John Cleese, Terry Jones, Victoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/victoria-wood>, John Bishop, Rufus Hound 
and Marcus Brigstocke. James Blunt is the sole singer.

Four leading lawyers have also signed: Helena Kennedy, Michael Mansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/michael-mansfield>, Geoffrey Bindman and John 
Bowers.

And there are a handful of journalists: Yasmin Alibhai-Brown, an Independent 
columnist; Nick Davies and Polly Toynbee of The Guardian; former Observer and 
Independent writer Neal Ascherson; and the former Sun editor David Yelland.

The launch of the declaration is timed to coincide with the anniversary of the 
publication of theLeveson report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-report>.

The full declaration, which was co-ordinated by the victims' body Hacked Off, 
states:


"We believe that a free press is a cornerstone of democracy. It should be 
fearless in exposing corruption, holding the powerful to account and 
championing the powerless. It has nothing to lose, and can only be enhanced, by 
acknowledging unethical practice in its midst and acting firmly to ensure it is 
not repeated.

We also believe that editors and journalists will rise in public esteem when 
they accept a form of self-regulation that is independently audited on the 
lines recommended by Lord Justice Leveson and laid down in the royal charter of 
30 October 2013.

It is our view that this charter safeguards the press from political 
interference while also giving vital protection to the vulnerable. That is why 
we support it and that is why we urge newspaper publishers to embrace it."



Hacked Off's director, Brian Cathcart, said: "Leading figures in free 
expression and this country's cultural life, like the public, are expecting 
change in the conduct of the press and are backing the royal charter as the 
only credible way to deliver it.

"It is time for newspaper publishers to put aside groundless claims of a 
threat to free expression, embrace the improvements offered under the royal 
charter system and rebuild the public's trust."
 