
Job: chairman, ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv>

Age: 56

Industry: broadcasting

Turnover: £1.88bn

Staff: 4,000

Salary: £300,000 (basic salary)

New entry

It is a little early to start talking about a magic touch, but the outlook for 
ITV already appears to have improved undernew chairman Archie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/18/archie-norman-itv-chairman1>. 
Advertising revenue is up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/07/tv-ad-revenue-rise>, its share 
pricebounced back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/16/itv-high-goldman-sachs-media> 
and Norman finally ended ITV's prolonged hunt for a chief executive with the
appointment of former Royal Mail man Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv>.

But a mountain remains to be climbed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/23/archie-norman-itv> with 
increased competition from rival channels andhuge structural challenges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/26/itv-adam-crozier-challenges> at 
the broadcaster, whichlost £2.7bn just two years ago 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/itv-starring-role-in-pound-2-7bn-horror-show-1.904332>
.

Norman, the former Tory MP dubbed the "turnaround king" 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/financetopics/profiles/5734674/Archie-Norman-the-ex-Asda-boss-who-saves-businesses-on-the-shelf.html>
 aftertransforming Asda in the 1990s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/1999/nov/10/9>, will have his work cut 
out to do the same at ITV.

With Crozier just a few months into the job, and Norman taking a hands-on role 
at the channel, where he will be paid £300,000 a year (and 1.2m ITV shares), 
our panel put the ITV chairman in this year's MediaGuardian 100 at the expense 
of his chief executive. Whether Crozier will be in the ascendant in next year's 
list depends on his performance over the next 12 months.

The broadcaster axed about 1,200 of its workforce last year and Norman has 
warned there could be more to come, saying it will be"another difficult year" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/07/archie-norman-radical-changes-itv>
.

Norman said ITV required nothing short of a "transformation" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/07/itv-archie-norman-five-year-plan>
 and is looking to boost digital revenue, expand in-house production and stem 
the decline in audience at ITV1 as part of his five-year plan for the 
broadcaster.

He also wants to free ITV from regulation and the shackles of Contract Rights 
Renewal,possibly in return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2010/may/17/itv-corporate-rights-renewal>
 for a renewed commitment to both regional and national news. With his 
impeccable political connections, he might have more luck with the new 
government than his predecessor had with the old one, but it will be no easy 
task.

Norman took up his new post at the beginning of this year. Crozier quickly 
followed – Norman said he was a"great leader" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv-transformation-norman>
 with "steely resolve" – as did theappointment of Kevin Lygo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv-transformation-norman>
, hired from Channel 4 to boost ITV's in-house production slate as the new 
managing director of ITV Studios.

After the record losses of 2008, ITV reported a pre-tax profit of £25m in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/03/itv-results-2009>, with group 
revenue down 7% to £1.88bn.

"Clearly there is an upturn in the advertising market and of course that is 
helpful,"said Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/10/itv-archie-norman-adam-crozier>.

"But I also want to reassure you we are not fooled by that in terms of how it 
affects the fundamentals of the business. The ITV problem has not been one of 
failure of ambition or aspiration. We have struggled with delivery. From now on 
we need to make that process of change irreversible. We can't afford more false 
dawns. This time we don't have an option."

The only FTSE 100 chairman to have sat in the House of Commons, Norman was 
Tory MP for Tunbridge Wells between 1997 and 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/18/itv-archie-norman-profile>. A 
Conservative high-flyer, he had roles as deputy chairman, foreign affairs 
spokesman, shadow environment minister and the party's chief executive.

The Norman-Crozier partnership promises to be one of the most fascinating 
double acts of the year.
 