
The American Music awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2015/nov/22/american-music-awards-2015-justin-bieber-taylor-swift-one-direction-live>
 – now in its 43rd year – has always felt a lot more relaxed than either the 
Grammys or the controversy-hungry MTV video music awards. It is the awards show 
of the people. It has also produced some of the best pop performances of recent 
times, from Whitney’sbarnstorming medley 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sVtx9_hdqmM> at the 1994 ceremony to Michael 
Jackson’sbarnstorming medley <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XDaBBkTVLr8> in 
1993 and, of course, Lady Gaga’sbarnstorming medley 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uRxofVOgtRk> in 2009. Held in the mundane 
environs of LA’s Microsoft theatre and presented by an ageless Jennifer Lopez, 
Sunday night’s show featured 23 award-givings and 19 performances in three 
hours. The big winners included One Direction, who won Artist of the Year for 
the second year in a row, Nicki Minaj and The Weeknd. But the most memorable 
moments involved an unnecessary snog and an even more unnecessary slice of a 
cappella nonsense.

Here are 10 things we learned on the night: 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3181985a12062fe958cc83b8a4f0ebebf997fc81%2F404_187_1606_2946%2F1606.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20American%20Music%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20American%20Music%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3181985a12062fe958cc83b8a4f0ebebf997fc81%2F404_187_1606_2946%2F1606.jpg>
 Vegas awaits … presenter and consummate professional Jennifer Lopez dances to 
some of the songs of the year. Photograph: Kevin Mazur/WireImage 
Jennifer Lopez gave the people what they wanted

Jennifer Lopez <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jennifer-lopez> was 
officially the presenter of this year’s AMAs, but she was barely on screen 
during its three-hour duration. When she did appear, she handled the whole 
thing with charm, brushing off mistakes by pointing out that she’s currently 
quite a busy woman (she stars in a new TV detective series starting in America 
in January, and will begin a residency in Las Vegas in the same month).

She also put a lot of effort into the show’s opening seven minutes, crooning 
her way through a stripped back version of Waiting for Tonight before realising 
that no one wants to hear her sing (“Tonight is all about the music,” she said) 
and discarding the mic for a relentless dance assault on the year’s best songs 
(andNicki Minaj’s Anaconda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2014/aug/22/nicki-minaj-anaconda-video-black-women-sexuality>
). It’s easy to take J-Lo for granted, but there are very few pop stars who 
still perform like she does, and it was clear from the rest of the night’s 
performances that dancing in time and with enthusiasm is fast going out of 
fashion.

Taylor Swift was the big winner, but you wouldn’t know it

Reigning award-show queen Taylor Swift was this year’s big nominee with six 
nods, and if she’d swept the board she would have become the AMAs most 
decorated winner (overtaking Whitney Houston). In the end, she won three – more 
than anyone else on the night – including Song of the Year for Blank Space. She 
was a no-show (she’s currently on a break from her1989 world tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/03/taylor-swift-1989-world-tour>, 
and could have been there in theory), and all of her categories were pointedly 
announced off camera. In fact, unlike most award shows, there were no absent 
winners and no “sorry we couldn’t be there” video messages.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c96da31cf7cbcbe26a448f3370412742de14871%2F0_186_2904_1744%2F2904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20American%20Music%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20American%20Music%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c96da31cf7cbcbe26a448f3370412742de14871%2F0_186_2904_1744%2F2904.jpg>
 Nineties throwback … Alanis Morissette and Demi Lovato duet on You Oughta 
Know. Photograph: Buckner/Variety/Rex Shutterstock 
The 90s are back!

Not only did former Singled Out <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singled_Out> 
host Jenny McCarthy present an award, but so did Paula Abdul and Donnie 
Wahlberg, before Clueless starsAlicia Silverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/26/alicia-silverstone-new-play-of-good-stock>
 and Jeremy Sisto introduced Gwen Stefani. Meanwhile,5 Seconds Of Summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/16/5-seconds-of-summer-the-australian-punk-pop-band-some-critics-love-to-hate>
 came dressed as Pearl Jam and Justin Bieber appeared on the red carpet wearing 
a Nirvana t-shirt, for heaven’s sake. Things got really 90s and angsty with the 
night’s token bizarre duet: Alanis Morissette and Demi Lovato scowling and 
prowling their way through the former’s scorned-woman anthem You Oughta Know. 
Lovato, who was three when the song first came out, gave it the requisite 
snarl, while Morissette squeezed out every last drop of anger, and provided the 
night’s one controversial moment when she failed to censor the song’s “fuck”.

Pop stars now have to be on at all times

Perhaps in response to Swift’s usual award show behaviour – dancing about to 
other people’s performances like a poorly coordinated but instantly gif-able 
toddler – all pop stars must now be on high alert. Throughout the evening, the 
camera would cut to poor unsuspecting audience members so their reactions to 
other performers could be scrutinised and judged.Nicki Minaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/22/nicki-minaj-debate-bigger-than-taylor-swifts-ego>
 has already taken to Twitter to say she wasn’t being mean about Jennifer 
Lopez’s version ofAnaconda 
<https://twitter.com/NICKIMINAJ/status/668648875276632064>. During Selena 
Gomez’s performance of Same Old Love, the various members of Fifth Harmony were 
given as much screen time as she was. And pity poor Ellie Goulding, who kept 
being caught looking incredibly bored.

Harry Styles is our new fashion icon

While his soon-to-be-estranged bandmates stuck to the script vis-a-vis red 
carpet attire for men, Harry Styles sauntered into the show in a suit seemingly 
made from a pair of his grandma’s Laura Ashley curtains. With Liam, Niall and 
Louis dressed for a day at the bank, Harry came as Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen and 
basically owned the evening. Aware that the suit was perhaps a bit much for the 
stage, he later switched to a pair of black flares, a yellow rose bowtie and 
some silver sparkly platform boots. This is what being a pop star is about: 
making the ridiculous look vaguely aspirational.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F009ba39311cd0849ee2188478cb357010340b20e%2F0_0_2291_3000%2F2291.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20American%20Music%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20American%20Music%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F009ba39311cd0849ee2188478cb357010340b20e%2F0_0_2291_3000%2F2291.jpg>
 Curtain raiser … One Direction arrive at the 2015 American Music awards. 
Photograph: Jon Kopaloff/FilmMagic 
Never has the sight of two people kissing seemed so uncomfortable

Not since Madonna snogged Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/aug/29/artsfeatures.madonna>at the 2003 
MTV VMAs has an awards show kiss caused such a fuss. What Meghan Trainor and 
Charlie Puth did last night was so spectacularly uncomfortable that it managed 
to erase the awfulness of the song they’d just finished performing. Puth’s 
Marvin Gaye, which features Trainor, is by far the worst single of 2015, so it 
makes sense that they’d try and distract the audience. There is video of the 
pair trying to swallow each other’s lips below, but please bear in mind that it 
is massively NSFW. Or any other time really.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQIQEIJSGJY8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQIQEIJSGJY8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQIQEIJSGJY8&media=>
Ariana Grande has finally changed her hair!

A pop star changing her hairstyle isn’t news, necessarily, but in the case of 
Ariana Grande <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariana-grande>, it is the end 
of a ponytail-related saga that has gripped a nation. Or at least, some 
hardcore Ariana fans. In January 2014, Grande posted a picture of herself 
without her trademark beehive ponytail, referring to it as her “new look” for 
her new album. She quickly deleted the picture and returned to her old ways, 
leading some fans to call her a pop puppet. She then went on Facebook to have a 
bit of rant: “My real hair is back to brown and I wear extensions but I wear it 
in a ponytail because my actual hair is so broken that it looks absolutely 
ratchet and absurd when I let it down,” she said. “So as annoying as it is for 
y’all to have to look at the same hair style all the time … It’s even more 
difficult for me to have to wait forever for my natural hair to grow back and 
to have to wear more fake hair than every drag queen on earth combined.” 
Finally, while performing her new single Focus and winning Best Female Artist – 
Pop/Rock, Grande got to wear a different, non-ponytail hairstyle. So let’s all 
just take a moment to celebrate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd08282c0848ec9dde26e6485c937edae1b9c34d5%2F335_82_2487_2848%2F2487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20American%20Music%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20American%20Music%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Famerican-music-awards-meghan-trainor-taylor-swift-one-direction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd08282c0848ec9dde26e6485c937edae1b9c34d5%2F335_82_2487_2848%2F2487.jpg>
 Hair today … Ariana Grande and her American Music award. Photograph: Frederic 
J Brown/AFP/Getty Images 
Coldplay – Coldplay! – provided the night’s WTF moment

The 2015 AMAs wasn’t exactly jam packed with surprising moments, but Coldplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/06/beyonce-noel-gallagher-coldplay-new-album-a-head-full-of-dreams>
 managed to cause a ripple of confusion during their performance of Adventure 
of a Lifetime. While the first half was fairly standard Coldplay – Chris Martin 
dressed like a paint-spattered student and dancing around like he needs a wee 
in front of some spinning colour wheels – the second half featured dancers 
dressed like chimps, giant bouncing beach balls and Martin doing yoga moves 
that would make Gwyneth Paltrow wince. It was a refreshing moment of 
eccentricity in a night of fairly straight performances.

The Weeknd is a proper superstar now

Having mumbled his way through four albums’ worth of drug-fuelled bore&B, 
Canada’sthe Weeknd  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/01/the-weeknd-next-face-r-and-b-michael-jackson>
saw the light and hooked up with Max Martin to make some proper pop songs on 
this year’s Beauty Behind the Madness. He has since had two US No 1 singles in 
a row and a global No 1 album. Last night, he took another move towards 
cementing superstar status, not just because he won two awards but because his 
rendition of The Hills was probably the night’s only effortlessly captivating 
performance. Even when accepting an award from Prince – a man who knows a thing 
or two about being effortlessly captivating – he didn’t seem overawed, allowing 
just the right amount of mystery to combine with some proper Michael 
Jackson-esque love-to-the-fans chat.

No one needs an a cappella version of the Star Wars theme tune

It’s surprising that someone, somewhere, decided that what a music awards show 
needs is a quick rendition of the Star Wars theme tune. It’s even more 
surprising that someone then decided that what would make it even better is if 
an a cappella group hummed and mumbled it while apparently dressed in Kanye 
West’s latest Adidas designs. The only redeeming bit of this section of the 
show was when a slightly dazed Harrison Ford introduced the a cappella group 
Pentatonix – the night’s true villains – as “Penatonix”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3_Hc12Lca1I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3_Hc12Lca1I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3_Hc12Lca1I&media=> 