
First Test, Lord’s, 21-24 July: Australia won by 239 runs 

At 12.26pm on 21 July a bomb went off at Shepherd’s Bush tube station on the 
Hammersmith & City line. Only the detonator cap exploded. The rest of it, 
mostly a mixture of chapatti flour and cheap hydrogen peroxide, failed to 
ignite. At that very moment, and just a couple of miles away, Englandtook their 
fifth wicket of the first morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/jul/21/ashes2005.ashes9>. Michael 
Clarke lbw to Simon Jones for 11. While the players ate lunch, a second bomb 
went off at Oval and a third at Warren Street. Twenty minutes intothe afternoon 
session <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/jul/21/ashes2005.ashes11>, so 
did a fourth on board the No26 bus on Hackney Road. Like the first, all three 
malfunctioned.By stumps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/jul/21/ashes2005.ashes13> England were 
92 for seven, 88 runs behind, and London’s public transport network was pretty 
much up and running again. Leaving the ground, spectators experienced what 
Wisden described as “minor transport disruption” travelling home.

The failed attacks and their aftermath filled the front pages as the Ashes did 
the back. During the first Test English police were in the middle of the 
largest manhunt in their history. On the second day Jean Charles de Menezes was 
shot dead at Stockwell tube station. All this in the wake of the 7/7 attacks, 
which themselves had come the day after the city had been chosen as the host 
city for the 2012 Olympic Games. Australia’s fast bowler Jason Gillespie spoke 
about his unease. “If another bomb did go off here in England there’d be 
serious questions asked about the tour.” If there was another attack, he said, 
he would fly back to Australia. Behind the scenes the ECB’s support staff met 
the police to make plans for tighter security around the grounds.

Ashes 2015: the A to Z of Ashes history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/06/ashes-2015-a-to-z> 
The attacks would have a direct effect on the shape of the Ashes summer, as we 
shall see. But they had a diffuse influence on it too. The euphoria so many 
people felt in August and September can be seen, in a small way, as a reaction 
to the horrors of July. On the weekend of the fifth Test at The Oval, more than 
20,000 people gathered in Regent’s Park to watch the match on a big screen. A 
pair of tickets for the second day’s play were sold on eBay for £1,115, and a 
penthouse flat with a view of the ground was let for the week for a fee of 
£20,000. Much as we reminisce about the series, it is easy to forget just how 
extraordinary the summer was; how, when it was all over, the England team 
became the first identifiable living people outside the Royal Family to be 
depicted on a set of stamps. Or that the manufacturer Danilo reportedly had 
100,000 advance orders for its official Andrew Flintoff calendar.

There were a lot of reasons for all this lunacy: the brilliance of the 
contest, the charms of the players, the fact it was all on free-to-air TV and 
the 16-year wait for a win. But on top of all that, perhaps Britain needed a 
source of pride, something to celebrate, an excuse to have a party. On the eve 
of the Oval Test, Brendan Barber, general secretary of the Trade Union 
Congress, urged employers to “make arrangements” to allow employees to watch 
the cricket. People, Barber explained, had to be allowed “to follow their 
heroes”.

The crowd at Lord’s on the first day of the series was the largest to have 
gathered at the ground in 60 years, since, in fact, England played the 
Dominions in August 1945, the very first first-class match at the ground after 
the war. England lost then too.

Second Test, Edgbaston, 4-7 August, England won by two runs
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436137278017%2F58cfdc9c-cb5f-4a50-a1b0-e909de05a099-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2005%20and%20all%20that%3A%20an%20alternative%20history%20of%20the%20greatest%20Ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2005%20and%20all%20that%3A%20an%20alternative%20history%20of%20the%20greatest%20Ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436137278017%2F58cfdc9c-cb5f-4a50-a1b0-e909de05a099-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The picture of the series: Andrew Flintoff and Brett Lee shake hands after the 
second Test. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
“I remember on my way to the ground that morning, thinking ‘This shouldn’t 
take long’,” says Tom Jenkins, the Guardian’s chief sports photographer “just 
half an hour or something.” Englandneeded two wickets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/aug/07/ashes2005.ashes6>, Australia 
needed 107 runs to win. Once he was there the first task was to pick a spot. He 
had one in mind, on the low bench behind the boundary hoardings in front of the 
pavilion. The idea being that from there he could get a shot of the players 
coming back into the dressing room after they had completed their victory. Tom 
Shaw, a snapper working for Getty, had the same idea, and the two of them sat 
side by side.

The shot they both got, the one that came to symbolise the 2005 Ashes, was not 
exactly an accident but it was not taken by design either. “The one thought I’d 
had in my head all morning was ‘I hope Fred takes the last wicket’,” Jenkins 
says. “Because it would have suited the occasion so well. He had such an 
amazing match.” So he had. Flintoff scored 68 runs in England’s first innings, 
73 in their second. In between he had taken 3 for 52. And then, the previous 
evening, he had dismissed Justin Langer and Ricky Ponting inthe space of a 
single extraordinary over <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FH2UnMxR3IM>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFH2UnMxR3IM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFH2UnMxR3IM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFH2UnMxR3IM&media=>
 An extraordinary over by England’s Andrew Flintoff 
Jenkins, along with everyone else, made the inevitable comparison. “I was 
thinking about Botham in ’81 and how, after he had bowled Terry Alderman to win 
the Test, he had run down the pitch and stoopedto pick up a stump as a souvenir 
<http:>. In my head I had a vision of a similar thing happening with Flintoff. 
He was bowling towards me and I had this vision of him sending Kasprowicz’s 
stumps flying.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrjSDvdgTOzg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrjSDvdgTOzg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrjSDvdgTOzg&media=>
 Ian Botham is not stumped in a choice of souvenir after his magical Ashes 
performance in 1981 
The crowd had been raucous throughout the match, especially in the Hollies 
Stand. On the Friday a group of drunken fans threw an inflatable shark at Sir 
John Major. Major gamely tossed it right back at them. And on the Saturday two 
more were evicted after a stewardess complained that she found their outfits 
offensive. They had come dressed as bunny girls. But as Sunday wore on, the 
ground fell quiet. “People were terrified of what was going to happen. And I 
knew that, if I had been watching at home, I would have been an absolute wreck 
too. But because I was working, I had to keep focused.”

When the last wicket fell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/aug/07/ashes2005.ashes7>, the first 
thing Jenkins thought was:“Oh, that wasn’t great.” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hr-4F_SFWxA> From a photographer’s point of 
view, “it was a mess, with Kasprowicz fending off a bouncer down the leg side.” 
And then everyone went absolutely bonkers. “And I immediately started thinking, 
‘Where’s Flintoff? What is Flintoff doing?’” He found him just in time. 
“Flintoff had broken away from the pack and was over by Brett Lee. He dropped 
down and held out his hand to him. It lasted only a second and I didn’t think 
that much of it at the time” – or later, when he was looking through his photos 
on his laptop, trying to decide which to send through to the Guardian. “I 
looked at it and thought, ‘It’s quite nice but I’m sure the desk will want 
something more celebratory.’” He was right. The Guardian ran a shot of Marcus 
Trescothick jumping on top of a pile of his team-mates.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHr-4F_SFWxA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHr-4F_SFWxA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHr-4F_SFWxA&media=>
 Not the best moment from a photographer’s point of view but delight for 
England in 2005. 
It was only after the Ashes was over that the photo was resurrected. “I still 
find it strange because it wasn’t a revolutionary picture or a revolutionary 
act. It was just one guy shaking another by the hand and saying ‘bad luck’. And 
so it’s surprising to me that that picture seems to have come to symbolise so 
much.” People often tell Tom that it reminds them of another famous photo, of 
Bobby Moore hugging Pelé after England’s defeat by Brazil in the 1970 World 
Cup. “One thing, now I think about it,” Jenkins says. “Is that TV didn’t get a 
good shot of it. The picture was fresh. People hadn’t seen it before.”

What TV did get, however, was enough to fill a DVD. Jeff Foulser was, and 
still is, the chairman of Sunset + Vine, who were producing the coverage for 
Channel 4. Almost as soon as the match was over, Foulser got a text message 
from Gary Franses, his executive producer. “There’s a DVD in this match – The 
Greatest Test”. The ECB agreed. They wanted it ready ASAP. “Editing, 
production, distribution, it all had to be done by the end of that same week,” 
says Franses. “No one had ever done anything like that for cricket before.” By 
the time the next Test started The Greatest Test was in the shops. It sold 
55,000 copies.

Third Test, Old Trafford, 11-15 August: match drawn
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436137497424%2Ff4060a17-55c9-46dd-a30c-92f7844b37a0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2005%20and%20all%20that%3A%20an%20alternative%20history%20of%20the%20greatest%20Ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2005%20and%20all%20that%3A%20an%20alternative%20history%20of%20the%20greatest%20Ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436137497424%2Ff4060a17-55c9-46dd-a30c-92f7844b37a0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A packed Old Trafford watches on with thousands of ticketless fans locked 
outside. Photograph: John Sibley/Action Images 
On 15 August Ken Grime was up shortly after the sun. Usually he worked in the 
marketing department at LancashireCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Club but during Tests he doubled up 
as the match manager. He had to start early, to make the drive in to Old 
Trafford from his house in Bury. By 6.30am he was on his way. When he passed a 
bus stop, they saw a lad waiting for a ride. He was wearing an England top. 
‘He’s keen,’ Grime thought. Then he passed the next bus stop, and saw two more 
teenagers, both in England shirts. At the third stop there were two men, 
obviously cricket supporters, you know the type, in hats, holding plastic bags 
full of food and clutching flasks. “And it was at that point,” Grime says, 
“that I got a sudden lurch in my stomach.”

The day before, while England were still batting in the third innings, Grime 
had been in a meeting with his colleague Peter Ash, and Lancashire’s chief 
executive, Jim Cumbes. “It was a very brief conversation,” remembers Grime. 
They had to decide on the ticketing arrangements for the final day since 
tickets had not been sold in advance. They agreed they would charge £10 for 
adults, half that for children, cash on the door, gates open 9am. They put an 
announcement out around the ground, on TV and radio.

“It was almost a goodwill gesture, really,” Grime says. “The one thing about 
that meeting I’ve never forgot was that somebody said, ‘Do you think we’ll sell 
out?’ No one knew. So I said, “I think we’ll get about 14,000.” That would have 
been two-thirds capacity. At stumps on day three, Australia were 24 for 0, 
needing a record 423 to win, or to bat out 98 overs to draw the match. At 4am 
that night, Lancashire’s head of security, Pat McCabe, was woken by a phone 
call. It was the nightwatchman down at the ground. “Pat,” he said. “You’re not 
going to believe this, but there are people camping out down here, waiting for 
tickets.”

Grime pulled on to Brian Statham Way at 7.30am. Ash had made the same journey 
an hour earlier. “I remember driving along Talbot Road thinking, ‘Have I 
overslept?’” Ash says, “because there were all these people walking towards the 
ground, more and more and more of them. I was sure my watch was broken.” By the 
time Grime arrived “the ground was absolutely surrounded. I will never forget 
it. I thought, ‘Oh My God! What have we done?’”

Michael Clarke has evolved into a captain Australia has finally learned to 
love | Geoff Lemon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/05/michael-clarke-captain-australia-ashes-england>
Ash was already inside. “We got a load of market trader aprons and reels of 
tickets, the old ones where you rip the stubs off, and opened up early, at 8am. 
Thing was we were letting more and more people in but the queues weren’t going 
down, they were getting bigger and bigger. People kept appearing from all 
over.” The queues finally stretched all the way back to the metro station and 
it was then that the police stepped in. They shut the tram stations in town, to 
stop more people boarding. “We knew by then we couldn’t get everyone in. But 
people were shoving their money at us and shouting, ‘I’ll pay more than the 
person in front!’”

Colin Gibson was the ECB’s head of communications. “I remember I had to do an 
interview with BBC radio Five Live, on the breakfast show with Victoria 
Derbyshire. And she said, ‘What’s your message to people who are planning to 
come today?’ and I had to say ‘Please, please don’t, because you’ll never get 
into the ground.’” Even the players were struggling to get to the ground. 
Andrew Flintoff was actually staying at his own home for that match, and the 
traffic was so bad that he had to skip the wrong way down a one-way street. “I 
got stopped by the police and had to say, ‘Please, I really need to get there.’ 
They just waved us through.”

By 9am the ground was full. Around 20,000 people were stuck outside. “I 
remember we got a call saying, ‘You can only do 20 more people,’” Ash says. 
“And it was quite frightening, because I was thinking, ‘These people have been 
in the queue for that length of time and we’ve got to turn them away. So we 
sort of retreated back inside and had to push the gates across. And I just 
remember seeing all these hands coming through the gates clutching their 
10-pound notes, people shouting, ‘Please, please will you let me in.’ It felt 
awful but you just couldn’t do anything about it. I’ve been here 21 years, and 
it is the most memorable day in all that time. The only thing that could have 
made it any better wasif England had taken that last wicket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/aug/15/ashes2005.ashes11>.” Australia, 
371 for 9 at the close, survived by one wicket. Lee ended the match on the 
ground again, this time pounding it in triumph after surviving the final 24 
balls with Glenn McGrath for company.

Fourth Test, Trent Bridge, 25-28 August: England won by three wickets
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436137686848%2Fbe69f2a3-4baa-4d92-92e9-7438265b4b87-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2005%20and%20all%20that%3A%20an%20alternative%20history%20of%20the%20greatest%20Ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2005%20and%20all%20that%3A%20an%20alternative%20history%20of%20the%20greatest%20Ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436137686848%2Fbe69f2a3-4baa-4d92-92e9-7438265b4b87-1020x612.jpeg>
 The partnership of Matthew Hoggard and Ashley Giles, pictured here between Ian 
Bell Geraint Jones, at the Oval, was crucial in the fourth Test. Photograph: 
Mike Finn-Kelcey/Reuters 
One of the least well known of the many accomplishments of Mark Nicholas is 
the fact that he is the man who made Mambo No5 a hit in Britain. In 1999 the 
production team at Sunset + Vine were struggling to find a piece of music for 
their new gig producing Channel 4’s cricket coverage. “We were all sitting 
around thinking, ‘What the hell are we going to do for opening titles?’” says 
the executive producer Franses. “Until one day Mark came in and stuck this 
track on. And after a second we all thought, ‘Thank you!” First time around 
that year, Mambo No5 stalled at No31 in the UK chart. Re-released in August, it 
shot to No1 and stayed there for a fortnight.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbCEHREGc6yY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbCEHREGc6yY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbCEHREGc6yY&media=>
 One of the flops of the series … but at least it was off the field of play. 
The ECB wanted the soundtrack to the summer of 2005 to be Jerusalem. In the 
end the long (and best) forgottenofficial version was one of the team’s few 
flops <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bCEHREGc6yY>, peaking at No19. But for 
most cricket fans it is almost impossible tolisten to Mambo No 5 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MRNaKp0hUg8> without a) thinking of Michael 
Vaughan’s pull shot and b) smiling at the memory. Which is odd, since, as Bega 
explains, his song is really about “sitting in the English Gardens in Munich, 
watching all these lovely ladies walk by”. (Turns out Jessica, Sandra, Rita and 
Monica were all real people.) Bega is German “and, as you know, cricket isn’t 
really a sport we follow in mainland Europe”. But his record company did 
arrange for him to visit a match. “I liked it because to me cricket seemed like 
baseball without all the spitting. And besides, I’d say that I’m, like, at 
least 50% of the reason why England won.”

Sunset + Vine’s coverage was designed to make the sport accessible to people 
who were not necessarily experts. “Connoisseurs watch all the time, win or 
lose,” Franses explains. “But we hoped that at some point it would catch on 
with the general public so that a few uncommitted people might get into it.” 
They bought in the Snickometer, Hawk-Eye and the pitch mat, all designed to 
make the game easier to understand. They gave over the little breaks between to 
Simon Hughes, to explain the tactics and terminology of the game. “By 2005 we’d 
been doing it for six years by then so we knew what we were doing.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMRNaKp0hUg8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMRNaKp0hUg8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMRNaKp0hUg8&media=>
 The new sound of cricket in 2005 
In previous years Channel 4’s coverage had been pulling in “two million 
viewers on a good day”. In 2005 “the ratings were sensational. I think there 
were more than five million people watching on average each day. Which is 
unheard of.” Compared with the 2001 Ashes, the proportion of female viewers was 
up by just under 10% and the proportion of under-15s by almost 75%. At first 
the cricket had to fight for screen time with the horse racing, and there were 
often a lot of complaints that it cut into Channel 4’s evening programming. 
Later in the summer the executives stopped worrying about that. “Racing hardly 
got a look in, because the cricket was delivering,” says Foulser. “Never mind 
the number of times Hollyoaks got cancelled because the cricket was 
over-running!”

The ratings peaked late on the fourth day at Trent Bridge, as Matthew Hoggard 
and Ashley Gileseked out the runs England needed to win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/aug/28/ashes2005.ashes8>. 8.4m people 
tuned in to watch. “It became prime time,” says Franses. “You felt the whole 
country was watching that. We realised then that this was bigger than anything 
we had been before. And to be honest, I think it was probably bigger than 
anything that has happened in cricket since.” Foulser agrees. “That was the 
one. That was when it began to feel like a national event.” By the end of the 
year Sunset + Vine’s boxset of the series had become the biggest-selling sports 
DVD of all time. “We shifted 635,000 units.”

Shame was the success felt bitter-sweet. “We’d been told the previous December 
that Channel 4 had lost the rights, so we knew it was going to be our last 
summer,” says Foulser. “When they saw the ratings, people at C4 were asking, 
‘Have we made a bit of a cock-up here?’ But they were just outbid. Sky paid a 
lot of money for the rights and everything has a price. But I remember C4 had 
very mixed feelings about it, because the cricket had really over-delivered for 
them.”

“We connected with an audience probably as much as anybody has ever done,” 
Foulser says. “On the last day at The Oval the camera guys got a shot of some 
fans holding a banner saying ‘Thanks 4 the memories’, with the C4 logo. And 
that sort of summed it up for us, because it meant we had done something that 
had really got into people’s minds and homes. It was the perfect time for 
cricket and the perfect time for Sunset + Vine. Best summer of our careers, we 
always say.”

Fifth Test, The Oval, 8-12 September: match drawn
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436137751647%2F7f0f5780-7d7b-43e8-bc47-de2c360bb4d9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2005%20and%20all%20that%3A%20an%20alternative%20history%20of%20the%20greatest%20Ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2005%20and%20all%20that%3A%20an%20alternative%20history%20of%20the%20greatest%20Ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436137751647%2F7f0f5780-7d7b-43e8-bc47-de2c360bb4d9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 England’s Kevin Pietersen acknowledges the applause of the crowd as he walks 
off having scored 158 runs during the final day of the fifth Test . Photograph: 
Kieran Doherty/Reuters 
On the last day it felt as if everything stopped, because so much actually 
had. Trading on the stock market was down by 20%. Trafficlink, the firm 
providing real-time traffic information, reported that in London the roads were 
“a lot quieter than usual as people stay home or stay on longer in the office 
to watch the cricket”. Tony Blair, taking a tour of the City of London Academy, 
had to apologise for dragging his audience away from the small television set 
in the corner of the hall and ended his speech with an update from The Oval.

At Southwark Crown Court, a clerk opened the proceedings in a complex fraud 
trial by offering to provide a series of display cards through the day to show 
the latest scores. The Confederation of British Industry approved. They advised 
employers that “on an occasion as exciting and as big as this week’s Ashes” 
employers should “be flexible in allowing staff to keep tabs on the score”. 
Even The Queen, we were told, was watching at Balmoral. Certainlywhen the match 
was drawn and the Ashes won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/sep/12/ashes2005.ashes12>, she sent her 
“warmest congratulations” to the two teams.

By then it was all over, except for one little group who were just beginning 
the longest night of the summer. On the Sunday evening of the fourth Test, a 
handful of ECB employees gathered together to work out what to do if England 
won. They called it Operation Victory. It was top-secret. England’s coach, 
Duncan Fletcher, insisted that the players could not be allowed to find out 
about it, which was why the ECB denied the story whenever journalists got wind 
of it.

The plan, pushed by the team’s sponsors, was to stage a “people’s parade” in 
Birmingham, ending at Edgbaston. “Because of the bombings we had always thought 
that, if England won the Ashes, it would be very unlikely we would do a street 
parade,” says Gibson. “Because there was so much nervousness about doing it.” 
But on Monday 5 September, three days before the start of the final Test, the 
ECB got a call from the Mayor of London’s office. Ken Livingstone was adamant 
that, if there was going to bea victory parade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/sep/13/ashes2005.ashes12>, it had to be 
in London and specifically in Trafalgar Square – the same spot, of course, 
where there had been a party when London won the Olympic bid. “He really wanted 
the world to see that London was open for business and he thought that this was 
the way to do it.”

On the Tuesday the ECB was given the green light. Its event manager, David 
Clarke, popped along to the mayor’s office for a meeting. “I was expecting 
there would be about five people around a table and there were about 30, 
including the river police and the man in charge of wastebins on the route, all 
sorts.” The ECB had to organise the stage, the security and the broadcasting 
arrangements with all four of Sky, ITV, the BBC and Channel 4. Everyone wanted 
live coverage. Then it had to negotiate with the City of London, the mayor’s 
office and its own sponsors. There was a late twist to the plan when another 
call came through from the prime minister’s office, explaining that Blair would 
be keen to host the team after they had left Trafalgar Square.

Ashes 2015: Mitchell Starc and Australians plan to sting England’s tail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/ashes-2015-mitchell-starc-australians-england-tail>
And then the ECB had to wait. No one knew whether any of this was actually 
going to happen and, as the fortunes of the two teams fluctuated through the 
final day, the parade was on, then off, then on, then off, then on again. 
England were 127 for 5 at lunch, with a lead of only 133. “It was only in the 
last hour of the last day of the last Test that we knew for sure,” Gibson says. 
The ECB had two buses ready in a depot in Hertfordshire, waiting to be painted 
in the sponsor’s colours. “Those buses were going in and out, and in and out, 
of the garage. At 6pm I remember someone asked me, ‘Do you think it’s safe we 
can get the bus painted now?’” By 6am the next day the buses were outside the 
team hotel at Tower Hill. So were several crates of champagne sent by Elton 
John, one reason why Flintoff had to be poured off the bus into Trafalgar 
Square.

Everyone had been so busy making the last-minute arrangements that no one had 
really stopped to ask how many people were actually going to turn out. “That 
morning we all wondered, ‘Will anybody actually come out?’” says Gibson. “And 
then when we left the hotel and the bus turned the corner, we saw all these 
people lining the road up Tower Hill. It was packed at nine o’clock.” Clarke 
was already in Trafalgar Square. “I got there at 5.30 that morning and there 
were people already there,” he says. At one point he got a call from a steward 
asking if he knew who Brian Lara was “because there was a man claiming to be 
him down in the crowd and he wanted to get through to see the team.” It really 
was Lara, who had stopped off on his way to the airport.

Best estimates are that around 50,000 came out to cheer on the team. “And I 
remember thinking,” Clarke says, “‘All this? Over a bloody cricket series?” A 
cricket series and so much more.
 