
This awards season begins with a rousing chorus of the Star-Spangled Banner, 
the crash of civil war gunfire, a strangled rebel yell and the sound of my 
crystal ball falling to the ground and shattering. Since the end of last summer 
I have been variously opining, tweeting and generally banging onabout the 
brilliance of Paul Thomas Anderson's The Master 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/sep/02/the-master-review> and its 
disturbing vision of a quasi-scientology cult leader in postwar America – and 
how it was of course bound to clean up at Oscar time. Wrong! The Baftas denied 
it best film and best director nominations and now the Oscars have done the 
same thing, effectively declaring that it is inferior to, say, David O 
Russell's hyperactive dramedy Silver Linings Playbook.

Oh well. Every Oscar year has its forehead-slapping moment of bad taste and 
Anderson's film does at least have acting nominations for Joaquin Phoenix, 
Philip Seymour Hoffman and Amy Adams – of which Hoffman might be worth a bet.

But it's quite clear that as far as the Academy is concerned there is room for 
only one master, and that is the16th president of the United States, Abraham 
Lincoln <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149491/lincoln>. Steven 
Spielberg's movie about Lincoln's constitutional dark night of the soul in the 
civil war – a choice to end slavery or end the bloodshed – leads the field with 
12 Oscar nominations and offers Academy voters something reassuringly 
mainstream and essentially, unimpeachably patriotic. Perhaps it is odd that a 
non-American should have been chosen to play Lincoln, but Lincoln's 
Shakespearian greatness meant that Daniel Day-Lewis was entirely appropriate, 
and Hollywood and the Academy have always had great respect for Day-Lewis's 
sheer, Olivier-esque classiness.

There is a similarly patriotic charge to the seven nominations for Ben 
Affleck's Argo <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/nov/08/argo-review>, his 
feisty, funny but oddly lightweight true-life political thriller about the 1979 
Iranian hostage crisis. For all the satire and absurdity and craziness 
pinballing around the place in this movie, it ends on a deadly serious 
patriotic note.

This Oscar list – and I think this award season – has a quiet triumphalism to 
it, an assertion of traditional mainstream Hollywood liberal values at a time 
when President Obama has been returned to office and the Republican right has 
retreated, although it is a very mainstream liberalism, and the hero of 
Spielberg's film is a Republican. Kathryn Bigelow's nailbiting thrillerZero 
Dark Thirty <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149492/zero-dark-thirty>, 
about the military campaign to execute Osama bin Laden, has performed less well 
than expected, with just five nominations. This was a film American 
conservatives complained was a pro-Obama manifesto, but the Academy has 
evidently decided that it was at all events pretty strong meat, maybe too 
strong and less obviously sympathetic to the American fighting man than 
Bigelow's last Oscar-winner The Hurt Locker.

As it happens, it is one of this year's Oscar films that comes with a side 
order of op-ed controversy. With Zero Dark Thirty, it isthe depiction of torture
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jan/09/zero-dark-thirty-premiere-protest>
, with the implication that torture got results. With Quentin Tarantino's 
brilliant and provocative Django Unchained (five nominations) it is the charge 
thatits handling of the slavery issue 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jan/09/django-unchained-action-figures> is 
disrepectful and offensive. With The Impossible, the movie about the 2004 
Indian Ocean tsunami which picked up a best actress nomination for Naomi Watts, 
it is the charge ofemphasising western tourist experience 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2013/jan/04/the-impossible-beautifully-accurate-film>
 at the expense of indigenous communities. (There is in theory another 
controversy charge, incidentally: the romanticisation of leftwing violence in 
Les Misérables. But the Academy clearly think that revolutionary insurrection 
is happening in a safely picturesque context.)

The movie that Spielberg can see in his rearview mirror, inexorably gaining on 
him, isAng Lee's Life of Pi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/dec/20/life-of-pi-review>, with 11 
nominations. It's a technically staggering adaptation of Yann Martel's 
Booker-winning novel about an Indian teenager who finds himself adrift in a 
lifeboat with a tiger. The effects are wonderful – but in my view the story and 
ideas very much less so. Could it be that Life of Pi is poised for a novelty 
landslide, like Danny Boyle's Slumdog Millionaire? Maybe. But Spielberg's 
Lincoln will almost certainly impose a blanket ban on this happening.

A remarkable success story that just keeps on getting more successful is 
Michael Haneke's Amour <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147440/amour>, his 
lacerating chamber drama about an octogenarian couple facing a crisis when one 
of them suffers a stroke. This Cannes Palme D'Or-winner is nominated in both 
the best foreign film and best film categories, a remarkable double – and a 
directing nomination for Haneke also. Its Oscar success may confirm the qualms 
of those who think Michael Haneke has gone soft, or softer.Bret Easton Ellis 
famously derided Amour 
<https://twitter.com/BretEastonEllis/status/253415396810579968> as "On Golden 
Pond directed by Hitler". Maybe some Academy voters simply think of it as On 
Golden Pond directed by someone classy and European, and the fact that they 
have given an acting nomination to Emmanuelle Riva but not her male co-star 
Jean-Louis Trintignant suggests that it is the more conventionally poignant 
aspect of the film which is pushing the right buttons. Well, the success of 
Amour is a counterbalance to the red, white and blue of this year's Oscars and 
it is very good to see this outstanding film being recognised.

The best actress race is relatively open. Emmanuelle Riva could actually win 
it – but my bet is on Jennifer Lawrence, an astonishingly mature and 
accomplished 21-year-old performer, for her starring role in the mental-health 
drama Silver Linings Playbook. Or it could go to another eerily good young 
actor, Quvenzhané Wallis from Benh Zeitlin'sBeasts of the Southern Wild 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/oct/18/beast-southern-wild-review>, a 
dreamy vision of Katrina-esque disaster.

As far as the best supporting actress race goes, I agree with all those who 
say that Anne Hathaway has it locked up for her strident, confident performance 
as the poverty-stricken Fantine in Les Misérables. It will be a question of 
playing a clip from her rendition of I Dreamed A Dream and getting her up on 
stage. (Although it would be fun to seeSally Field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sally-field> win it for her performance as 
Mary Todd Lincoln, and give one of her famously excitable Oscar victory 
speeches: "You really,really like me!")

As for best supporting actor, the winner could be Christoph Waltz for his 
hilarious, dapper portrayal of the German dentist-turned-bounty hunter in 
Django Unchained. But it is far more likely that Tommy Lee Jones will bag it 
for his portrayal of Thaddeus Stevens in Lincoln. To paraphraseDaniel Day-Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danieldaylewis> in Martin Scorsese's Gangs of 
New York: this will be a night for Americans. And probably an award season for 
Americans, too.
 