
With less than a year to go until the 2015 general election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/general-election-2015>, and following 
Ukip's win at the European elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/26/ukip-european-elections-political-earthquake>
, Britain's political parties are already drawing battle lines. However, this 
time they are armed with the latestadvertising technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/advertising>. Just as Obama's 2012 
victory was boosted with social media 
<http://wallblog.co.uk/2012/11/07/the-obama-road-to-victory-digital-lessons-from-the-us-election-campaign/>
, next year's election will be fought with a world first: a powerful 
combination of real-time data and digital out-of-home (DOOH) advertising 
platforms. This means parties will gain the ability to react instantly to 
opponents' announcements, dialling up campaign messages based on political 
polls or real-time social media sentiment analysis. This has the potential to 
revolutionise political campaigns, like we've never seen before.

Out-of-home (OOH) advertising has a long history in UK political campaigns, 
with billboards and posters featuring prominently in many UK elections. In 
1979, thefamous "Labour isn't working" poster helped Margaret Thatcher achieve 
electoral victory and in 2001 <http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/news/1281255/>, 
Labour's controversial mash-up of Margaret Thatcher and William Hague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pictures/image/0,8560,-10304163852,00.html>
made headlines. In fact, OOH has become such a key part of election campaigns 
thatpolitical parties spent Â£7m on outdoor adverts in 2010 
<http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21601263-pros-and-cons-britains-favourite-political-campaign-tactic-posters-arent-working>
, equivalent to nearly a third of total political ad spending.

Today, OOH remains one of the most popular and powerful political campaigning 
channels. This has been demonstrated in the run-up to the European 
parliamentary elections, with Ukip's successful campaign and controversial 
national billboard poster campaign.Funded by businessman Paul Sykes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2014/apr/23/paul-sykes-ukip-britain-out-of-europe>
, the campaign features a series of provocative statements about the European 
Union and the impact it is having on UK families.

With TV campaigning opportunities limited to the party debates, it's 
unsurprising politicians choose to focus on OOH efforts. However, campaigners 
also recognise this method has the ability to reach a large audience where they 
spend a significant percentage of their time: out of their homes.

In the US, DOOH was hugely important during the 2012 elections. Digital 
signage and digital billboards were a significant component of political 
campaigning. For example,Mitt Romney's campaign 
<http://www.campaignsandelections.com/print/334147/digital-billboards-thrive-on-campaign-trail.thtml>
 used digital billboards in states such as Florida and Colorado to coincide 
with Obama's campaign rallies, while Obama's campaign launched a digital 
advertising campaign throughout the DC Metro system totarget voters in Northern 
Virginia 
<http://www.campaignsandelections.com/print/334147/digital-billboards-thrive-on-campaign-trail.thtml>
.Rock The Vote <http://www.rockthevote.com/>, an organisation which aims to 
encourage young people to vote, also capitalised on DOOH during the election to 
raise awareness with young voters. Its "We Will" campaign, which aimed to defy 
voter suppression, incorporated digital billboards in high visibility areas.

With access to big data insights from polling information, together with the 
flexibility of using a digital screen, English political parties will be able 
to increase or decrease the severity of campaign messages depending on how they 
resonate with the public, and tweak policy messages depending on public 
sentiment. They'll also be able to drill down into location-based data, which 
will provide parties with the flexibility to address specific local issues, and 
strengthen the campaign in areas where they might not be polling strongly 
enough.

There is no doubt this technology, powered by real-time information, has huge 
potential for British politicians. We will no doubt see ads that are more 
innovative and more targeted than ever before. I can't wait.

Glen Wilson is managing director at Posterscope <http://www.posterscope.com/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 