
By the summer of 1991 it was clear that the Soviet empire’s days were numbered.

After widespread shortages of food and other supplies, rising nationalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/jul/14/soviet-union-collapse-in-pictures>
 and demands for independence across Central Asia,a coup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/aug/17/ussr-soviet-countries-data>
 against leader Mikhail Gorbachev ultimately ended his political career and 
resulted in the birth of 15 new and independent nations.

Collapse of the USSR – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/jul/14/soviet-union-collapse-in-pictures>
But a long and complicated shared history meant that the transition was never 
going to be simple.

“Like a marriage, there was so much that was jointly owned that it was hard to 
make a clean break. Industries, military units, whole populations, were 
scattered across an empire, indivisible,” the Guardian wrote to mark the 20th 
anniversary of the fall of the Soviet Union. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/aug/17/ussr-soviet-countries-data>

From the EU-leaning Baltic states, to those who’ve stayed closely connected 
with Russia, nations have trodden different paths in forming new identities. 
Some regions still haven’t found their place in the new world order, with
“breakaway” republics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2015/aug/24/soviet-gianluca-pardelli-in-pictures>
 remaining frozen in conflict.

Were you there? 

As some post-Soviet countries begin to mark 25 years since the Soviet Union 
collapsed, we are looking for people across the region who have had the unique 
experience of living at least of half of their life under Soviet rule and the 
rest in a independent nation.

What do you remember about the last days of the USSR? How did the transition 
affect you personally? After quarter of a century, what have been the most 
positive and negative changes to your daily life?

If this isn’t your personal experience but you have a story of a family member 
you’d like to share, we’d like to hear from you too.

Fill in your details in the form below and we’ll use some of your submissions 
in our coverage marking 25 years since the Soviet Union fell apart. 
Alternatively, you can email maeve.shearlaw@theguardian.com.
 