
Job: chairman, ITV
Age: 57
Industry: broadcasting
Turnover: £2bn
Staff: 3,947
Salary: £300,000 (basic pay)
2010 ranking: 10

A fan of the vivid metaphor, Archie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> has described ITV as a 
"burning platform". His new chief executive, Adam Crozier, has been busy 
putting out the fires, leaving Norman to take a back seat and a lower position 
in this year's MediaGuardian 100.

Norman's arrival at ITV in January 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/18/itv-archie-norman-profile> was 
well timed, coinciding with an advertising recovery that helped treble profits 
to £321m, beating analysts' forecasts. The former Tory MP spent a decade 
transforming the once ailing Asda into Britain's second largest supermarket 
chain before selling it to Walmart. He has given Crozier half that time to 
revive ITV.

Top of their to-do list is increasing revenues from making programmes, both 
for ITV, other UK broadcasters and foreign networks.Kevin Lygo has been hired 
from Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/may/30/itv-studios-kevin-lygo> to lead 
the charge.

There is a long way to go, and ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> 
has been lambasted for missing out on a share in the rights to Simon Cowell's 
lucrative The X Factor. That is being addressed, and the broadcaster will 
co-produce the media mogul's next project, the £1m jackpot gameshow Red or 
Black.

But our panel asked: "If Norman quit ITV, would it have more of an impact than 
if Simon Cowell left?"
 