
Job: founder, Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>, senior 
vice-president of mobile, Google
Age: 48
Industry: technology and telecommunications
New entry

Andy Rubin <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/andy-rubin> is the general 
leading Google's battle against Apple for control of the mobile operating 
systems of the future.

The search giant has expanded its lines of business, and is now replaying the 
technology war Microsoft fought against Apple 20 years ago. Then the prize was 
to supply the dominant software for desktop computers and Microsoft won. Now 
it's about smartphones and tablet computers.

Rubin grew up in New York state, surrounded by electronic gadgets promoted by 
his father's direct-marketing business. He founded Android in 2003 to write 
operating software for mobile phones, and it was bought byGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> two years later for an 
estimated $50m.

That looks like a paltry sum given that 100m phones, tablets and other devices 
now run on Android, which was created as an open platform for any manufacturer 
and app developer to use. Sales of Android-enabled phones outstrip those of 
BlackBerrys and even iPhones.

"The volume and variety of Android devices in the market continues to exceed 
even our most optimistic expectations," Rubin blogged recently.

Our judges believe Rubin matters to media because smartphones are fast 
replacing traditional PCs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/jun/05/smartphones-killing-pc> as 
the primary means of accessing the internet, and whoever controls them will act 
as "gatekeeper" to what appears on their screens. Apple may be ahead, but 
Google is catching up fast.
 