
December was a month of list-making, weighing up the best films of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ng-interactive/2015/dec/04/best-films-of-2015-uk>
 in a variety of outlets and metrics. No amount of reconsideration, however, 
could knock45 Years (Curzon, 15) from its perch as the year’s finest for me. 
Andrew Haigh’s slow-developing snapshot of a marriage falling into a late-life 
crevice is as simultaneously tender and brutal a relationship study as any in 
modern film, its stiff upper lip trembling and dashed with shaving cuts.

Well-to-do Norfolk retirees Kate (Charlotte Rampling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlotte-rampling>) and Geoff (Tom Courtenay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-courtenay>) plan their 45th anniversary 
celebrations under the cloud of resurrected tragedy from Geoff’s past: the 
discovery of a former girlfriend’s corpse from half a century ago. Haigh 
fashions their crisis neither as melodrama nor as kitchen-sink realism, but as 
ghost story, haunted not just by the spectre of an unwitting other woman, 
posthumously splintering a marriage in a cruel twist of time travel, but by 
those of the living, the former lives and buried selves of our partners that we 
never quite know. It’s performed like a dream, of course: Rampling and 
Courtenay play an immaculately synchronised duet of ache, watching each other 
through repeatedly refocused lenses throughout. A sustained shiver of a film, 
it will sit in your bones long past winter.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM9LNsSjnqBM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM9LNsSjnqBM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM9LNsSjnqBM&media=>
 Watch the trailer for The Diary of a Teenage Girl. 
As fizzing with hormonal curiosity as 45 Years is wearied of desire, Marielle 
Heller’sThe Diary of a Teenage Girl (eOne, 18) is fast, funny and more of a 
landmark than you might guess: a brave, vivid articulation of adolescent female 
sexuality that imposes no teacherly moral judgment on its protagonist’s most 
reckless erotic urges, even finding a kind of empowerment in error.

When 15-year-old San Francisco comic nerd Minnie (the vital British newcomer 
Bel Powley) initiates an affair with her mother’s deadbeat thirtysomething 
boyfriend (Alexander Skarsgård 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alexander-skarsgard>), Heller’s 
camera neither endorses nor condemns – and certainly doesn’t soften – what 
ensues: for better or worse, a carnal and emotional education that will have 
parents and teens shielding their eyes even as they empathise.

Minnie’s diary certainly makes Alfonso Gomez-Rejon’s Me and Earl and the Dying 
Girl(Fox, 12) – an insipid, twee-tastic, coming-of-age story to which Heller’s 
film unaccountably lost the top prizesat Sundance last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/01/sundance-film-festival-me-and-earl-and-the-dying-girl-sweeps-top-prizes>
 – look doubly anaemic by comparison. Filtering the misfortune of a 
leukaemia-stricken high schooler through the puny angst of a precocious 
classmate and aspiring film-maker with a vague crush on her, the film could be 
a frank study in typical teenage self-orientation – if any one character were 
more than a scriptwriter’s vessel for precious observations on love and art and 
the whole damn thing. As for Earl, a colourlessly black sidekick whose 
catchphrase is a mumbling appreciation of the dying girl’s “titties”, the less 
said the better.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-F5WcFPDzko&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-F5WcFPDzko>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-F5WcFPDzko&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Straight Outta Compton. 
African American masculinity gets a more vigorous shake in Straight Outta 
Compton (Universal, 18), F Gary Gray’s initially fiery but largely conventional 
account of west coast hip-hop giantsNWA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/14/nwa-straight-outta-compton-mainstream>
’s rise to fame and fatally fought-over fortune. Much has been rightly made of 
the film’s laundering of the legend – withIce Cube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/icecube> and Dr Dre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/drdre> as producers, the group’s more 
egregious acts of violence and misogyny 
<http://gawker.com/heres-whats-missing-from-straight-outta-compton-me-and-1724735910>
were never going to get much of a look-in – but even on those curtailed terms, 
this absorbing, spikily acted film finally disappoints, narratively 
prioritising internal contract disputes over their era-rumbling artistry. Its 
side-view on US police brutality still feels harshly of the moment, but NWA 
deserved a rougher, riskier portrait.

Taking a peppier view of corruption in the LA music business, We Are Your 
Friends (Studiocanal, 15) stars Zac Efron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/zac-efron> as a fresh-faced DJ chicly chewed 
up by the Hollywood party scene. Its story beats are as predictable as its 
musical ones are propulsive, but it’s shot and cut with sun-bleached energy and 
Efron’s easy charm carries it like a one-strapped rucksack.

There’s no such ease of presence among the pretty but dour ensemble of Gaspar 
Noé <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/16/gaspar-noe-enter-the-void>’s 
Love (Curzon, 18), which, contrary to its billing as a boundary-busting 
sextravaganza, emerges as a lugubrious critique of modern-day erotic mores. At 
one point, its American-in-Paris protagonist states his intent to make a movie 
about “sentimental sexuality” and Noé delivers on that promise: the sex itself, 
including one arresting vaginal-view shot of penetration, is bounteous, but 
hardly worth the puddly personal philosophising that surrounds it; without even 
the inventive use of 3D that distinguished the film in cinemas, it’s like a 
night spent lying in the wet patch.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Duq6SFO9YLHc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Duq6SFO9YLHc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Duq6SFO9YLHc&media=>
 Watch the trailer for L’enfance nue 
On the classic front, Maurice Pialat’s underseen 1968 debut L’enfance nue gets 
Mubi.com’s 2016 selectionoff to a marvellous start 
<https://mubi.com/films/lenfance-nue>. That Pialat remains better known for his 
later works often divorces him in film discussion from the French New Wave to 
which he was a late arrival, butFrançois Truffaut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/francoistruffaut> was a producer on this hard 
but unflinchingly compassionate portrait of unmoored youth that acts as 
something of a reply, one decade on, to Truffaut’sThe 400 Blows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/82440/400.blows>. The reckless, 
unwanted 10-year-old at its centre is less immediately engaging than400 Blows’ 
Antoine Doinel, but Pialat’s film is perhaps more concerned with the tentative 
sympathy the boy himself slowly finds for the outside world.
 