
Andrew Haigh, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/09/andrew-haigh-interview-45-hours> 
director of45 Years <https://www.theguardian.com/film/45-years> and Weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/03/weekend-film-review>, is working 
on a biopic of fashion designer Alexander McQueen,according to Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/01/andrew-haigh-set-to-direct-alexander-mcqueen-biopic-for-pathe-and-damian-jones-1201687326/>
.


McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen>, who killed 
himself in 2010, was a mercurial talent who developed a reputation as one of 
haute couture’s brightest stars. The four-time British fashion designer of the 
year worked with David Bowie on his 2006-07 tour wardrobe and countedMikhail 
Gorbachev <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mikhail-gorbachev> and Prince 
Charles among his clients when he was a Savile Row apprentice.


McQueen became infamous for his dramatic and sometimes controversial catwalk 
shows. HisHighland Rape show in 1995 showcased bedraggled models with ripped 
clothing that exposed their breasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/10/alexander-mcqueen-into-the-light>
. The designer claimed he was commenting on the Highland clearances of the 18th 
and 19th centuries, when thousands of Scots were displaced by wealthy 
aristocratic landowners.


Andrew Haigh, director of 45 Years: 'You don’t need to share everything with 
your partner'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/18/andrew-haigh-45-years-interview> 
McQueen, who struggled with drug addiction in the later stages of his career, 
killed himself nine days after the death of his mother, Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/apr/28/alexander-mcqueen-suicide-verdict-inquest>
. An inquest found that the 40-year-old had taken cocaine, sleeping pills and 
tranquillisers before hanging himself.


The biopic will be based on a script by playwright Chris Urch, author of Land 
of Our Fathers andThe Rolling Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/29/the-rolling-stone-royal-exchange-manchester-review>
. It’s thought he’ll be working from Blood Beneath the Skin, a biography of 
McQueen written by Andrew Wilson.


Haigh is on a critical high after 45 Years, named in the top five of many 
critic’s best of 2015 lists. That film, which tells the story of a retired 
couple whose long-term relationship is shaken by the discovery of a long-buried 
secret, has earned its star, Charlotte Rampling, a best actress Oscar 
nomination. Rampling and her co-star, Tom Courtenay, were givenacting prizes at 
the London Critics’ Circle awards last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/18/45-years-mad-max-fury-road-uk-london-critics-circle-film-awards>
, where 45 Years also won best British or Irish film.
 