
Noosa has long been the jewel of the Sunshine Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sunshine-coast>. The main drag of 
Hastings Street is a triumph of sensitive planning, with its canopy of trees, 
excellent boutiques and restaurants, and low-rise buildings overlooking the 
beach.


And what a beach! The long, beautiful sweep of sand stretches to the national 
park and is suitable for surfing and swimming. Along the beachfront there are a 
couple of great cafes. One of the pleasures of Noosa is to emerge from an 
early-morning swim then get a great coffee only a few steps away.

The whole place is so idyllic that you can understand why it has long been a 
destination for Melbourne’s monied class, who make annual pilgrimages up here. 
On the weekend of my visit there are a lot of “Prue and Trude 
<http://kathandkim.com/fun-times-ahead/prue-and-trude/>” accents, and tanned, 
healthy-looking retirees in head-to-toe white linen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26d9e5d46e920f5216704c2c9bcb80fb2197ab7d%2F0_369_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can't%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can%27t%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26d9e5d46e920f5216704c2c9bcb80fb2197ab7d%2F0_369_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Flame Hill Vineyard in Montville focuses on paddock-to-plate dining. 
Photograph: Visit Sunshine Coast 
But it would be a mistake to visit the region and only see Noosa. The Sunshine 
Coast hinterland has national parks, great produce, cute townships, quality 
accommodation and excellent restaurants. Some of the best food I’ve had in 
Australia I’ve had in this region and it should be a destination in its own 
right for foodies.

48 hours in the Gold Coast: rainforest walks, organic food and fine dining 
shake up expectations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jun/06/48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations>
Friday


2pm: late lunch at Flame Hill Vineyard 

I don’t usually associate Queensland with wine but, after flying into Sunshine 
Coast airport, my first stop is the picturesqueFlame Hill Vineyard 
<http://www.flamehill.com.au/>. The Razorback Red – at a reasonable $20 – is my 
pick at the cellar door.

The restaurant’s motto is “paddock to plate” and, sure enough, there are Angus 
cattle roaming the vineyard slopes and their beef appears on the menu. Herbs 
and vegetables from the vineyard’s garden are included in the cooking.

6pm: check into Spicers 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9caa0fe18bd56a877b22f4ec719f566761096e49%2F0_0_850_510%2F850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can't%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can%27t%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9caa0fe18bd56a877b22f4ec719f566761096e49%2F0_0_850_510%2F850.jpg>
 Spicers Tamarind Retreat in Maleny serves up sensational Thai food. 
Photograph: Visit Sunshine Coast 
The standalone villas of Spicers Tamarind Retreat 
<https://spicersretreats.com/> are set in a garden estate. Each comes with a 
spa bath on the deck and a log-burning fire, and kangaroos and great bird life 
can be seen from the balcony. There’s also a day spa a golf buggy ride or 
stroll up the hill away.

But at Spicers it’s all about the food 
<https://spicersretreats.com/spicers-tamarind-retreat/dining/menus/>. The 
restaurant does a modern Asian degustation for $95 a person, serving up 
possibly the best Thai food I’ve had outside Thailand. Matching beers and wines 
are also offered. My tip is the black vinegar-braised pork belly with scallop 
toast, XO, radish and celery salad.

Saturday

9am: visit Maleny

The township of Maleny <http://www.malenyqueensland.com> is a short drive from 
Spicers, about 45 minutes from Sunshine Coast airport and 90 minutes north of 
Brisbane. I’d visited about 10 years before, for a friend’s wedding (the town 
has a massive wedding industry), and remembered an organic store, a hippy vibe 
and good markets.

Returning, Maleny was bigger than I remembered. The high street winds down a 
hill and overlooks the hinterland. Give yourself at least an hour to browse: 
there are plenty of cafes, clothes and shoe stores and an excellent bookstore, 
the independentRosetta Books <http://www.indies.com.au/rosettabooks/>. 


My guide for the day is Lynn from Mystic Mountain Tours. 
<http://www.mysticmountaintours.com.au/> She specialises in gourmet food tours 
and knows all the best places to graze. Our first stop isColin James Fine Foods 
<http://www.colinjamesfinefoods.com.au/>, which has a fromagerie and an ice 
creamery. On the walls are numerousawards 
<http://www.colinjamesfinefoods.com.au/awards/> for best ice-cream from the 
Royal Queensland Food and Wine Show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5af7204529c60167554f1a972b21afc3d9745dc0%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can't%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can%27t%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5af7204529c60167554f1a972b21afc3d9745dc0%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The Glasshouse Mountains glimpsed from Maleny Botanical Gardens. Photograph: 
Visit Sunshine Coast 
I sample the chocolate ice-cream. Made daily, it’s thick and rich – almost 
like frozen fudge. The milk and cream are from the Guernsey cows down the hill, 
with Italian chocolate added to the mix. It’s easily the best chocolate 
ice-cream I’ve ever tasted.

48 hours in the Grampians, Victoria: mountain hikes, fine food and live music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/nov/03/48-hours-in-the-grampians-victoria-mountain-hikes-fine-food-and-live-music>
Then we’re off to Maleny Cheese <http://www.malenycheese.com.au/> where you 
can peer through a window and see workers on the factory floor making yoghurt. 
We order a cheese board, which has numerous excellent cheeses including some 
great fetas. There are too many to do justice to and we end up packing up the 
leftovers to take away. The outlet also has a range of camel milk products.

Next we stop is the Maleny Botanical Gardens 
<http://www.malenybotanicgardens.com.au/>, a private garden set on 14 acres 
and` surrounded by a rainforest. I miss seeing the famous view of the 
Glasshouse Mountains because of fog but there’s plenty to explore, including an 
aviary. Devonshire tea is served in one of the gazebos.

11.30am: visit Montville

Montville is as cute as its name. Everything in this town is adorable – 
although it does have a Toytown vibe and is filled with daytrippers. It feels 
less likeQueensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> and 
more like a village you might find in Europe. There’s a romantic-looking cafe 
called Poets Corner and an inn called Connemara that looks Irish and 
atmospheric.

Also worth exploring is the nearby town of Eumundi 
<http://www.eumundimarkets.com.au/>, which does excellent markets each 
Wednesday and Saturday. The markets, which have been going since 1979, feature 
everything from craft to produce to live music.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1fdb3f90f73068519d6eb1e29ca137d95a736b4%2F0_291_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can't%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can%27t%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1fdb3f90f73068519d6eb1e29ca137d95a736b4%2F0_291_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
 Montville is adorable – in a Toytown kind of way. Photograph: Eason Creative 
Photography/Visit Sunshine Coast 
12pm: arrive in Noosa

As we pull in to the town, one of those once-in-a-generation super storms is 
passing down the coast. It will be the storm thathammers Sydney’s northern 
beaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2016/jun/08/sydney-storm-beachside-homes-at-risk-of-collapse-as-gales-expected>
 but right now it’s just hanging around downtown Noosa, sulking.

Never mind. Even though Noosa is very much an outdoors town (particularly for 
walking and watersports), it has plenty of good shops and restaurants to make 
the bad weather bearable.

Lunch is at Season Restaurant <http://www.seasonrestaurant.com.au> with 
Louise, a Noosa local. The food is delicious and the fresh local fish is highly 
recommended.

Somehow Noosa manages to get it just right. You can eat right on the beach, 
with a view of the ocean and national park. Yet unlike other beach restaurants, 
this doesn’t feel tacky oras if you are party to some environmental travesty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3cfa6485dca2bd9f16bdee291c1f5b3f8859dcb%2F0_0_3568_5495%2F3568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can't%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can%27t%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3cfa6485dca2bd9f16bdee291c1f5b3f8859dcb%2F0_0_3568_5495%2F3568.jpg>
 The most popular walk in Noosa national park snakes along the coast to 
Sunshine Beach. Photograph: Visit Sunshine Coast 
2pm: shopping on Hastings Street


But what to do in the rain? There is shopping. Most of it is along Hastings 
Street, the posh main drag. It’s like Mosman or Armadale here, with lots of 
homewares shops, places selling $80 T-shirts plus a few tasteful chain stores.

I am staying at On the Beach <http://onthebeachnoosa.com.au/> – which is 
actually on the beach. It is and a great place to watch the storm come in.

6pm: cocktails and pizza

A stop at Miss Moneypenny’s <http://www.missmoneypennys.com/> in Hastings 
Street for a pre-dinner martini (rosé with fairy floss) is a good place for 
people watching. I have some friends over and we order pizza fromZachary’s 
<http://www.zacharys.com.au/> ($20 for a large pizza). I recommend the Nicomeli 
with prosciutto.

Sunday

7am: walk and swim

A friend who lives in Noosa part-time says the locals’ general pattern is to 
get up really early and go to bed early. I follow suit and rise at dawn. It’s 
spectacular down at the beach. Even though it’s June – and cold by Noosa 
standards – I go for a swim. It’s 22 degrees! Brisk outside but still warm in 
the water.

Then it’s on to the national park. Visitors get there by walking along the 
footpath that winds along the coast and through a carpark. There’s an excellent 
cafe here serving good strong coffee, which is popular with local surfers. Up 
at the headland there are a range of walks that are signed and timed. The most 
popular, judging by the foot traffic, is the walk that snakes along the coast 
to Sunshine Beach.

1pm: lunch on the river
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88d3d331bfe74eaa7e6016e28e7362e7f4f167d5%2F0_58_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can't%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20the%20Sunshine%20Coast%3A%20even%20storms%20can%27t%20spoil%20an%20idyllic%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2F48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88d3d331bfe74eaa7e6016e28e7362e7f4f167d5%2F0_58_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Noosa Boathouse is the ideal spot for a long lunch by the water. Photograph: 
Visit Sunshine Coast 
It’s easy to forget that Noosa is also a town on a river. It’s too stormy 
today for standup paddle boarding, a popular activity. Instead we catchthe ferry
 <http://www.noosaferry.com/Default.aspx> from the stop behind the Sheraton and 
glide along, past the yachts in Woods Bay, down Noosa sound and along Noosa 
river.

We disembark at Noosa Boathouse <http://www.noosaboathouse.com.au/>, the ideal 
spot for a long lunch by the river. Most tables have a stunning water view and 
the seafood is as fresh as it comes.

The writer travelled to Maleny and Noosa courtesy of Visit Sunshine Coast
 