
Why is it, whenever I meet cool people at parties, they went to university in 
Newcastle?

48 hours in Sydney: what to do, where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/22/48-hours-in-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go>
It seemed to be a utopia compared with Sydney. You could live in the centre of 
town in an old woolshed and pay $60 a week rent, surf every morning and go to 
gigs every night where mini-Silverchairs prepared for world domination.

Two hours’ drive from Sydney – or three by train or bus – the city is home to 
200,000, which means there’s plenty to do, particularly for those coming for 48 
hours. But happily, Newcastle has managed to retain its large country/coastal 
town vibe.


At the time of my most recent visit, it was a hot weekend in Sydney – and when 
I returned there, all I heard was moaning about the crowds and the difficulty 
in finding a parking spot at Bondi beach. This was not an issue in Newcastle, 
where there was plenty of space to go around.

Then there’s the creative vibe. Newcastle is a city of arts festivals. My 
favourites include theNational Young Writers festival 
<http://www.youngwritersfestival.org/> (29 September to 2 October 2016), where 
old pubs, cafes and halls are turned into places to debate and discuss books, 
computer game design, sound engineering, journalism and current affairs; and the
This Is Not Art festival <http://www.thisisnotart.org/> – on the same weekend – 
is also worth the visit.

When I visited this month, the city was hosting the Newcastle Writers festival 
<http://www.newcastlewritersfestival.org.au/> in the civic precinct and the 
place exuded a buzzy vibe, particularly with the Saturday market nearby, where 
you could get a massage, buy clothes from local designers and sample food from 
the food trucks parked along the market’s perimeter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F809492ad5156ab945e269e38de2346f41a569ea9%2F0_150_5466_3281%2F5466.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Newcastle%3A%20buzzy%20by%20night%2C%20active%20by%20day%20and%20a%20great%20short%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Newcastle%3A%20buzzy%20by%20night%2C%20active%20by%20day%20and%20a%20great%20short%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F809492ad5156ab945e269e38de2346f41a569ea9%2F0_150_5466_3281%2F5466.jpg>
 Newcastle’s popular Civic Theatre is one of the city’s main venues for arts 
events. Photograph: Newcastle Council/Destinations NSW 
But that creative energy is not limited to festival time. Renew Newcastle 
<http://renewnewcastle.org/> has been repurposing old buildings as creative 
spaces since 2008 and the initiative is a worthy template all cities could use 
to transition from a primary manufacturing economy to a creative and tourist 
economy.

Friday


6pm: check in to Novotel

After arriving from Sydney via public transport, I check into the new Novotel 
<http://www.novotel.com/gb/hotel-8771-novotel-newcastle-beach/index.shtml> 
hotel on the eastern edge of the city. It’s a modern tower with great views of 
the beach, and 88 clean and spacious rooms. My room on the sixth floor looks 
out on to the ocean and has a balcony. Already I feel like I’m on a beach 
holiday. 

7pm: cocktails and Israeli food

A thriving cocktail scene is not one that would normally be associated with 
the steel city image of Newcastle. Plus, the problems with booze and violence 
were so great that the city was the original home of lock-out laws later 
adopted in Sydney.

I meet my friend Div for a drink. He grew up in Newcastle and cheerfully 
admits he was bashed pretty much every time he went out.

48 hours in Melbourne: what to do, where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/18/48-hours-in-melbourne-what-to-do-where-to-go>
There’s a different vibe now, he reckons, and urges me to check out old-school 
pubthe Lass <http://www.lassogowriehotel.com.au/>, which is a bus or taxi ride 
out of the CBD, as it’s famous for its live music.

But for now, we are enjoying cocktails in the centre of town at a bar called 
the Basement on Market Street 
<https://www.facebook.com/Basement-on-Market-St-1465637127097141/>.

In addition to an impressive drinks menu (I have a Chilly Tommy’s cocktail, 
chilli blanco tequila with agave and lime, served with a chilli salt rim; my 
friends try Passionfruit Peacock with vodka, lychees and passionfruit), 
Basement on Market Street also has a terrific tapas menu. We try beef 
carpaccio, house-made falafel and hummus on recommendation from the chef, who 
worked at some of the top restaurants in Israel.

I chat to one of the bar’s managers, who tells me:“I went to uni here five 
years ago and there was nothing here in terms of bars. It was really violent. 
The lock-out laws have changed it. There are some really great smaller bars, 
plus the pubs and two main nightclubs.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4dd7e00a1f15734e141c23016490e47382762e8%2F0_160_4785_2871%2F4785.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Newcastle%3A%20buzzy%20by%20night%2C%20active%20by%20day%20and%20a%20great%20short%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Newcastle%3A%20buzzy%20by%20night%2C%20active%20by%20day%20and%20a%20great%20short%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4dd7e00a1f15734e141c23016490e47382762e8%2F0_160_4785_2871%2F4785.jpg>
 A surfer taking part in Newcastle’s annual Surfest competition. Photograph: 
Daniel Boud/Destinations NSW 
Saturday 

8am: swim

A great way to start the day is with a swim at the Newcastle Ocean Baths 
<http://www.newcastle.nsw.gov.au/Explore/Recreation/Beaches-Baths/Ocean-baths>. 
With its art deco pavilion, the baths are one of the city’s outstanding 
historic landmarks and a popular place to sunbake, lounge and read, and do laps.

Newcastle is not short of great places for breakfast. I stuck close to home 
with breakfast at the excellent East End Hub next to the Novotel. The coffee is 
excellent and the service friendly. 

11am: walk along the foreshore

There are remarkable harbour foreshore walks and the council has done a great 
job opening up the natural beauty of Newcastle’s coastline to cyclists, runners 
and walkers.

48 hours in Hobart: what to do, where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/08/48-hours-in-hobart-what-to-do-where-to-go>
Bikes are available for hire from automated stations at Crowne Plaza or the 
nearby Maritime centre, operated bySpinway Newcastle 
<http://www.spinway.com.au/>. Swipe your credit or debit card, choose a bike 
and hit the trail. Prices start from $11, with free helmets, locks, maps and 
24-hour returns.

The pick of the walking paths is the newly opened Memorial Walk, billed in the 
tourist brochures as Newcastle’s most spectacular coastal walk.

Built to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the 1915 landing at Gallipoli, 
the route features a 160-metre clifftop bridge adorned with steel silhouettes 
of soldiers, inscribed with almost 4,000 surnames of the thousands of Hunter 
Valley men and women who enlisted during the first world war.

It links to the Bathers Way promenade development, a six-kilometre coastal 
walk linking Newcastle’s beaches and stretching from Merewether ocean baths to 
Nobby’s beach.

1pm: lunch on Honeysuckle Drive 

This new development on the harbour front is shiny in a Melbourne Docklands 
way. The food and drinks (including many awesome local Hunter Valley wines) in 
the outlets along the drive are good, and you can watch the ships come in from 
the port, but there is nothing particularly striking about the precinct.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff996b678e16c6d06545682d908dcae27b785e8c9%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Newcastle%3A%20buzzy%20by%20night%2C%20active%20by%20day%20and%20a%20great%20short%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Newcastle%3A%20buzzy%20by%20night%2C%20active%20by%20day%20and%20a%20great%20short%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff996b678e16c6d06545682d908dcae27b785e8c9%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Newcastle Farmers market is held on Sunday mornings and Wednesday evenings at 
the Newcastle showground and neighbouring Hunter stadium. Photograph: Newcastle 
Council/Destinations NSW 
3pm: visit Newcastle Art Gallery and shop

One of NSW’s best regional art galleries, the Newcastle Art Gallery 
<http://www.nag.org.au/> is family friendly with artists’ talks, workshops, 
children’s art trails and weekend interactive programs.

48 hours in the Snowy Mountains – what to do, where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/17/48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go>
For shopping, visit the boutiques on Darby Street. The quirky and unique 
Odditorium <https://www.facebook.com/odditoriumvintage/>, which is only open on 
Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays, is located nearby, at 14 Thorn Street.

7pm: dinner at Restaurant Mason

After opening in November 2011, Restaurant Mason <https://restaurantmason.com/>
 received its first chef’s hat, in its first year, and has maintained the hat 
for four consecutive years.

 We enjoyed the six-course degustation menu with matching wines,which included 
a course of steamed fish, squid ink linguine, scallops, crispy prawns, sharred 
shallot and X.O Sauce, followed by confit egg yolk, King brown mushrooms, black 
garlic, wild rice, truffle and woodland sorrel with garlic flowers.

Also recommended for splashing out: Subo, 
<https://www.facebook.com/subonewcastle/> the only two-hatted restaurant in 
town. Their autumn menu looks deliciously light and full of flavour – and 
includes Mooloolaba scallops and steamed barrumundi from Arnhem Land.

For something more casual, Napoli Centrale  <http://www.napolicentrale.com.au/>
comes recommended as Newcastle’s best pizza, or if you’re after takeaway fish 
‘n chips on the beach then visitScotties <http://www.scottiescafe.com.au/menu>, 
which has been operating since 1950.

10pm: time for a nightcap 

Newcastle has some great bars including the Red Baron 
<http://www.theherald.com.au/story/2523630/strong-taste-of-old-berlin-features-at-king-street-business/>
 – a Berlin-themed bar that channels the spirit of the 1920s and 30s and also 
serves Japanese food,The Edwards <http://www.theedwards.com.au/> – an old 
coin-op laundry morphed into one of Newcastle’s buzziest venues by musician 
Chris Johnston and Silverchair bass player Chris Joannou, andCoal & Cedar 
<http://coalandcedar.com/> – a dark, watering-hole in the wall reached via an 
unnamed door at 380 Hunter Street. It has a speakeasy vibe and a few drinks 
there will make you want to move to Newcastle. It’s as good as anything you’ll 
find in Sydney – without the attitude. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa83e0b5eff9565315f7bfc88759557c1f803b719%2F0_184_5524_3315%2F5524.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Newcastle%3A%20buzzy%20by%20night%2C%20active%20by%20day%20and%20a%20great%20short%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Newcastle%3A%20buzzy%20by%20night%2C%20active%20by%20day%20and%20a%20great%20short%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2F48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa83e0b5eff9565315f7bfc88759557c1f803b719%2F0_184_5524_3315%2F5524.jpg>
 Merewether Ocean Baths is a popular local swimming spot. Photograph: Daniel 
Boud/Destinations NSW 
Sunday 

9am: trip to the Farmers market

48 hours in Albury, NSW: what to do, where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/27/48-hours-in-albury-what-to-do-where-to-go>
The Newcastle Farmers’ market <http://www.newcastlecityfarmersmarket.com.au/> 
is held on Sunday mornings and Wednesday evenings at the Newcastle showground 
and neighbouring Hunter stadium. Port Stephens oysters and saltbush lamb are 
among the delicious local produce for sale.

11am: time for a surfing lesson


I meet Dan Frodsham, the founder of Newcastle Surf School 
<http://www.newcastlesurfschool.com.au/about/> at Nobby’s Beach for a 
one-on-one surf lesson.

Dan provides all the gear and will even push the back of your board into the 
surf so you don’t get too tired paddling out. After an hour, I had fallen down 
plenty of times, but at the very end of the lesson, tentatively – for a 
millisecond – I stood up.

1pm: to the lighthouse

Nobby’s Lighthouse Grounds are currently open to the public every Sunday from 
10am to 4pm. Access is free, with views of Newcastle city, the harbour and the 
ocean. It’s a great spot for whale watching from May to November each year, 
with peaks in sightings occurring in July and September.

 * Guardian Australia travelled to Newcastle as a guest of Destination NSW 


 