
Like many of my friends and colleagues, I moved to Sydney as an adult, leaving 
behind a much smaller town and embracing what was, by comparison, a bustling 
metropolis.


But most of those who grew up in Sydney did so in the suburbs, which cover a 
massive 12,000 square kilometres and stretch from the Blue Mountains to the 
ocean.

The regions to the north, south and west of central Sydney each have 
distinctive identities, with western Sydney being the most populous (about 1.6 
million residents) and, by many measures, the most diverse.

On a recent weekend, my boyfriend and I decided to explore the area for the 
first time.

Jamie's Italian Trattoria Parramatta – restaurant review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/may/19/jamies-italian-trattoria-parramatta-restaurant-review>
We discovered a region bursting with attractions and primed for interstate and 
international visitors. Western Sydney is connected to the inner city by 
efficient trains and well-maintained roads, and if you avoid peak commuting 
times it is possible to move around fairly quickly.

The hotels are decent, and considerably cheaper than their CBD counterparts, 
and the restaurant scene is thriving. Families are particularly well looked 
after, especially those with a sporty bent. And if you’re keen on experiencing 
more of New South Wales, basing yourself in western Sydney gives you easy 
access to the Blue Mountains.

Friday

6pm – Check in at Atura Blacktown hotel

After an easy 40-minute train trip from Central Station to Blacktown (about $5 
one way with the Opal smartcard), we catch a taxi (about $20) to western 
Sydney’s newest hotel, theAtura Blacktown <http:// 
https://www.aturablacktown.com.au/>. The property, set in bushland, is part of 
a cluster of attractions that also includes theWet ‘n’ Wild  <http:// 
https://wetnwildsydney.com.au/>waterpark and the 19th-century Cricketers Arms  
<http:// http://mycricketers.com.au/>pub. 

It’s a sleek but welcoming hotel with an open-plan lobby that incorporates an 
inhouse restaurant and a comfy lounge area. Upstairs, we quickly warm to our 
modern guestroom, which features reliable, free WiFi, free movies on a large 
wall-mounted TV, and in the bathroom Malin+Goetz toiletries. It’s good value at 
about $160 for a king room.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441066820502%2Fc14854ce-3aa4-40bd-8207-bf7dc1bdf7de-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20western%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20western%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441066820502%2Fc14854ce-3aa4-40bd-8207-bf7dc1bdf7de-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The pool at the Atura in Blacktown – a sleek, welcoming hotel. Photograph: Dan 
Stapleton/The Guardian. 
8pm – Dinner and a drive-in movie


The hotel’s Roadhouse Bar and Grill has an upscale menu (mains $25-$40) but a 
casual ambience, with an open kitchen and families seated at several tables. 
We’ve been told not to fill up on dinner (we have plans for later) so we 
reluctantly leave our tender scotch fillet and expertly pan-fried barramundi 
unfinished. At the reception, we pick up keys to the hotel’s white Cadillac, 
which is parked out front, and drive around the corner to theSkyline Drive-In 
<http:// https://www.eventcinemas.com.au/cinema/drive-in-blacktown> ($20 for 
one car with two passengers).

Coming here is a rite of passage for western Sydney teenagers, and as we lean 
back on the Caddy’s leather seats, slurping malt shakes and watching a 
foul-mouthed Amy Schumer on-screen, we feel an adolescent rush ourselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441066971336%2F5e9a0be5-cbde-4821-b83c-b2fc3f00a91d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20western%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20western%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441066971336%2F5e9a0be5-cbde-4821-b83c-b2fc3f00a91d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A cadillac is a perfect perch for the drive-in. Photograph: Dan Stapleton/The 
Guardian. 
Saturday

9am – Faith and feasting in Bonnyrigg

A friend who lives nearby meets us at the hotel, and the three of us drive to 
the suburb of Bonnyrigg. It’s without a big shopping centre or major 
recreational facilities, but there’s still plenty to see here.

A non-profit group called Taste runs what it calls “cultural food tours”  
<http:// http://www.tastetours.com.au/>of the area (for about $100 per person), 
focusing on the ways that cuisine and religion interact. We visit Bibbys Place, 
a cul de sac where a Turkish mosque, a Presbyterian church, and a Laotian 
Buddhist temple were built side by side in the 1990s. Speaking with the leaders 
of each venue, we hear how Bonnyrigg’s religious groups decided to band 
together and share facilities.


Everywhere we go, there is food. At the temple, we watch a renowned Laotion 
chef prepare pawpaw salad, while at the mosque we are offered feather-light 
fairy floss. Later, in a low-ceilinged Asian grocer, we are fed sublime 
rice-paper rolls by a proprietor who speaks five languages. Those who dismiss 
ordinary Australians as insular and intolerant have clearly not visited 
Bonnyrigg.

3pm – Strolling in Parramatta

If you have never been “out west”, Parramatta’s size and energy may surprise 
you. Sydney’s second CBD boasts office towers, an enormous mall, hundreds of 
restaurants and charming green space. The vibe here is diverse and modern, with 
most of Sydney’s ethnic groups represented in one way or another.

We wander across to Parramatta Park <http:// http://www.parrapark.com.au/>, an 
85-hectare, national-heritage-listed expanse with playgrounds, formal gardens 
and cycling tracks. Guided tours are available. Don’t forget to check out
Riverside Theatre <http:// https://riversideparramatta.com.au/>, Parramatta’s 
cultural focal point and a satellite venue for many of Sydney’s big festivals, 
like the Writers’ festival and the Arab film festival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441066600179%2Ff183684b-0be1-43e6-bfe2-57bacd4965aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20western%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20western%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441066600179%2Ff183684b-0be1-43e6-bfe2-57bacd4965aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Giant inflatable Rubber Duck installation by Dutch artist Florentijn Hofman 
floats on Parramatta river as part of the 2014 Sydney festival. Photograph: 
Jason Reed/Reuters 
7pm – People-watching at The Emporium

Western Sydney has long been known for its no-fuss international restaurants, 
but in recent years the dining scene has become noticeably trendier, catering 
to the region’s increasingly affluent population.

In Parramatta, the venue of the moment is The Emporium, a 150-seat 
exposed-brick space with a mod-Oz menu which leans Mediterranean. Unlike many 
of the more casual places we visit over the weekend,The Emporium 
<http://theemporiumparramatta.com.au/> has a decidedly grown-up atmosphere, 
full of well-dressed couples and smart wait staff. Dishes like a delicate stew 
of Moreton Bay bugs ($36) and truffle-stuffed chicken breast (also $36) are 
delicious. Don’t expect to get a table on Saturday night unless you book ahead.

Sunday


10am – Museum of Fire

Like many of western Sydney’s cultural attractions, the Museum of Fire  
<http://www.museumoffire.com.au/>in Penrith is compact, community-run and 
decidedly quirky. Early on a Sunday morning, we have the place almost to 
ourselves. The lovingly maintained fire trucks (including horse-drawn models) 
and the interactive science exhibits are interesting, but the real stars of the 
museum are the volunteers, all of whom are former firefighters. We speak with 
them at length about the hazards of firefighting, the history of bushfires in 
the area, and the thrill that many of us feel when we see flames.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441067175292%2F3cfc6afc-53d3-4261-bad2-21071c6b669e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20western%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20western%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2F48-hours-in-western-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441067175292%2F3cfc6afc-53d3-4261-bad2-21071c6b669e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Skydiving in Penrith – inside. Photograph: Dan Stapleton/The Guardian. 
1pm – Skydiving in Penrith

Imagine a giant hairdryer pointing upwards. Now imagine jumping into its 
air-stream and being held aloft by the sheer power of the updraft. That’s 
indoor skydiving in a nutshell. It’s tricky and kind of scary, but when you see 
primary-school-aged children gleefully throwing themselves into the abyss, it 
seems cowardly not to join in.

My boyfriend loves it – particularly when the hairdryer is switched to turbo 
mode, sending him rocketing 25 m into the air – but I can’t find my rhythm. The 
friendly staff at iFly assure me that practice (from $89 per session) makes 
perfect, so I resolve to have another go next time I’m in Penrith. After an 
enlightening, hassle-free weekend in Sydney’s wild west, it seems likely that 
I’ll be back in the area before too long.

The writer travelled as a guest of Destination NSW
 