
With the mining boom waning, the Australian city that once boasted the highest 
per-capita Harley-Davidson motorbikes, breast implants and tattoo sales is now 
facing the doldrums. The Harleys are for sale on eBay. Not much can be done 
about the implants or the tattoos. And Mackay – one of the hubs of the 
resources boom – is at a crossroads.

48 hours in far north Queensland: what to do and where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/03/48-hours-in-far-north-queensland-what-to-do-and-where-to-go>
The figures are stark. According to the Courier-Mail in April 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/unemployment-doubles-in-mackay-as-mining-meltdown-hammers-town/story-fnn8dlfs-1227290708702>
, “The city … has weathered the fallout from depressed coal prices since late 
2012, but a leap in unemployment, from 6% in December to 10.3% in January, has 
crystallised the severity of the district’s economic collapse.”

Yet the area is primed for tourists. I’m staying at the Quest 
<http://www.questapartments.com.au/Accommodation/112/Australia/Queensland_Regional/Quest_Mackay/Welcome.aspx>
 which has the fresh-paint feel of smart new apartments. Out at the airport, a 
newIbis  <http://accorhotels.com.au/hotel/ibis-mackay-airport>with more than 
100 rooms has been built. The streets of Mackay’s CBD are messy and cluttered 
with roadwork in a revitalisation program that speaks to investment, as opposed 
to decay.

Sugar is still a viable industry here (producing a third of Queensland’s 
sugar), as is tourism, particularly with the airport close to town and a range 
of accommodation options.

The city is popular for conferences and trade shows (and the weekend I was 
there, for the horse races on a beach) – it’s also a jumping off point to the 
Great Barrier Reef, the Whitsunday Islands and Eungella national park.


The area around Mackay is gorgeous. I would recommend flying into the town, 
which is 950km north of Brisbane, and using it as a base to explore Cape 
Hillsborough and Eungella national park. Tiger Airways, Qantas and Virgin all 
fly into Mackay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2F48-hours-in-mackay-north-queensland-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31d6eb2b999a6bcec3e68ec942741f7ecc20a147%2F0_31_1300_781%2F1300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Mackay%2C%20north%20Queensland%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2F48-hours-in-mackay-north-queensland-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Mackay%2C%20north%20Queensland%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2F48-hours-in-mackay-north-queensland-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31d6eb2b999a6bcec3e68ec942741f7ecc20a147%2F0_31_1300_781%2F1300.jpg>
 The Mackay marina at the harbour, north of the city. Photograph: Dean 
Whitling/Tourism Queensland 
Friday

The Quest in the centre of Mackay is handy if you want to walk into town for 
dinner.

I can recommend Burp <http://www.burp.net.au/wordpress/> (not a great name, 
but the food is good) which is also central. Burp does yummy oysters and cheese 
boards. There are also large cuts of meat – including beef and pork – to share.

After dinner, head upstairs to the Dispensary 
<http://www.tripadvisor.com/ShowUserReviews-g255338-d2241697-r180658339-BURP_eat_drink_The_Dispensary-Mackay_Queensland.html>
 for a nightcap. There are lovely, comfortable couches, pressed-tin ceilings 
and a good range of whiskies.

If you feel like something more casual – perhaps eaten out of a brown paper 
bag – former Mackay local Nikki Marshall (Guardian Australia’s production 
editor) reckons you can’t go to the region without trying its delicious meat 
pies.Byrne’s Pie Factory 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Byrnes-Pies/156959804351317> is beloved for its 
peppery fillings and perfect pastry – order one topped with with peas and eat 
it looking out over the sandy-bottomed river.

Saturday

Heritage abounds in Mackay. Get up early and go for a stroll around town and 
check out some of the art deco buildings, including old pubs and council 
chambers. After breakfast set off for Cape Hillsborough, 45 minutes north of 
the city.

We drive through the coastal village of Seaforth, which has beaches fringed 
with palms. It’s a hotspot for caravanners – with not much here except a 
beautiful beach and a general store. (On Sundays there’s a market.) Much of the 
accommodation around Mackay caters to campers, caravanners and motorhomers. 
It’s also a popular stopping off point for backpackers making their way between 
Brisbane and Cairns.

Although I’m travelling sans caravan, I’m staying at the Cape Hillsborough 
Nature Tourist Park <http://www.capehillsboroughresort.com.au/> in a cabin 
close enough to the beach to hear the waves at night. Prices at the caravan 
park start at about $29 for an unpowered site and go to $180 for a family cabin.

The owners, Ben and Renae, are from the area and moved from mining services 
into running the park. They’re doing a great job. They are welcoming and 
knowledgeable – and have beautified the resort while keeping prices down.

From its general store, you can buy a bottle of sauvignon blanc for about $20 
to take back to your van to drink with some cheese.

But before you get stuck into the wine, there are a number of spectacular 
walks through the surrounding national park to choose from. One is theAndrews 
Point track <http://www.nprsr.qld.gov.au/parks/cape-hillsborough/about.html>, 
which is 5.2km return and takes about two hours. There’s a steep climb at the 
start but you’ll be rewarded with spectacular views of the ocean and the 
dramatic coastline from several lookouts.

The area is thick with monarch butterflies during my walk, and the trees run 
right down to the beach. The walk begins in rainforests and gullies; the later 
stages open out into eucalypt forests. Check the tide times before you start: 
at low tide you can return to the van park along the beach (otherwise you’ll 
need to retrace your steps along higher ground).

The diversity boardwalk is also a great – and shorter – walk near the resort. 
The track, which takes 40 minutes, passes through melaleuca woodland, 
mangroves, eucalypts and vines. We are on the land of the Yuibera people and 
there is a midden area, plus plants the Indigenous people used for food and 
medicine.

Perhaps the nicest thing to do at Cape Hillsborough is to take a book down to 
the beach and just lie on the sand under a palm tree. There’s plenty of beach 
to go around – and much of it is empty.

48 hours in Bamurru Plains: luxury safari, the Australian way
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/20/48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way>
I take a swim – and am the only person in the ocean. It’s chilly but bearable. 
Locals assure me it’s safe to swim in the winter but, come summer, the stingers 
are out and it’s advisable to cover up with a special stinger suit before 
jumping in.

For dinner we have fish and chips at the caravan park, freshly cooked for $6. 
If you want to self-cater, there is a microwave in the cabin and barbecues in 
the park.

The resort has an outdoor movie screen and, on the night of my visit, is 
showing a children’s film. The weather is mild enough for everyone to sit 
outside and enjoy the movie.

But it’s early to bed for me: Ben and Renae assure me there will be something 
the next morning that is well worth getting up early for.

Sunday

My alarm sounds at 5.45am in time for sunrise. I’m thankful it’s just a short 
stumble from my hut to the beach. There on the sand are dark shapes silhouetted 
by the sun rising over the sea. Gradually, as it gets lighter, the shapes start 
to move. Kangaroos! Despite having seen plenty of roos (and having hit them 
while driving), I’ve never seen them hanging out on a beach at sunrise before.

There are about five kangaroos and a small mob of wallabies on the sand and, 
as the sun continues to rise, more tourists gather, forming a semicircle around 
them. Closer we creep. The mob are used to tourists taking their pictures, 
though, so don’t hop away. The “main” roo, “Brigid” has been described by one 
person working in the park as a “bitch who bullies other roos”.

But Brigid loves the camera and gives us some great shots – obliging until the 
sun is high enough in the sky for us to return to the park for breakfast.

I grab a coffee from the kiosk. It’s delicious. Breakfast is in my cabin – 
some cereal and a piece of fruit are provided in the hut. Then it’s back in the 
Land Cruiser with Col Adamson, who knows the area like the back of his hand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2F48-hours-in-mackay-north-queensland-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f4cf53e8792915920d666d83be641b24d7f6fb6%2F0_0_14055_3985%2F14055.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Mackay%2C%20north%20Queensland%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2F48-hours-in-mackay-north-queensland-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Mackay%2C%20north%20Queensland%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2F48-hours-in-mackay-north-queensland-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f4cf53e8792915920d666d83be641b24d7f6fb6%2F0_0_14055_3985%2F14055.jpg>
 Canefields in the Mackay region. Photograph: Tourism Queensland 
Col runs Reeforest Adventure Tours <http://www.reeforest.com.au/>, which also 
offers guided tours of the region, including its sugar mills. I opt for a 
half-day tour to see another native creature that few Australians can claim to 
have glimpsed in the wild, the platypus. We drive an hour west of Mackay to 
Eungella on Broken river – something of a hotspot for platypus fans.

To get to the national park we drive through the absolutely lovely Pioneer 
valley. Every 10 minutes or so we drive through a small community of several 
dozen houses, with maybe a pub and school, that doesn’t appear to have changed 
much since the 1950s. The land around here is incredibly green and fertile and 
the sugarcane tops two metres. On the side of the road farmers sell macadamia 
nuts and mandarins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2F48-hours-in-mackay-north-queensland-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F151e9e3c36f047c731b582619f4a66f4427eaa43%2F293_222_1246_1872%2F1246.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Mackay%2C%20north%20Queensland%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2F48-hours-in-mackay-north-queensland-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Mackay%2C%20north%20Queensland%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2F48-hours-in-mackay-north-queensland-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F151e9e3c36f047c731b582619f4a66f4427eaa43%2F293_222_1246_1872%2F1246.jpg>
 A view back down the Pioneer valley from Eungella. Photograph: Brigid Delaney 
for the Guardian 
We whiz past the house of the opera great Dame Nellie Melba. Melba didn’t stay 
in the area very long (she didn’t like the spiders and the humidity), but her 
home in Marian has been preserved for visitors.

The next town along is Mirani, where the Pioneer Valley Diner serves up the 
best pie my colleague Nikki has tasted. It’s a big call she knows, but this is 
a region that takes Australia’s national dish very, very seriously.

The valley’s villages couldn’t be described as bustling but there are signs of 
community life. Pinnacle, for one, has a playhouse. Rows of shiny 
Harley-Davidsons are parked outside one country pub, with the roads around here 
and up into the mountains popular for those taking a Sunday ride.

We climb 600 metres above sea level. Col tells me that in summer Eungella is 
at least 10 degrees cooler than Mackay. Even in winter the air here feels 
crisper than it does in the valley. We have breakfast at Oscars, which is run 
by a chef originally from Austria.

The coffee is good and strong and the lunch of bacon and eggs (about $15) is 
delicious. Oscars also serves burgers (including a Swiss yodel burger – chicken 
served on sourdough), hot dogs and schnitzels.

Near to Oscars is Broken river, where the platypus are. Parks and Wildlife 
officers have set up information boards and viewing platforms but the key to 
platypus spotting is patience. They are notoriously shy. The trick is watching 
the rings of water. It’s quite meditative.

After 10 minutes Col points out one near a branch. It’s moving around, smaller 
than I expected, its fur slick and black, its feet tiny.

Soon we see more. The water is alive with them. So much for being shy. These 
guys are swimming from one side of the bank to the other, regularly sticking 
their heads up.

Eventually it’s us who get tired. We leave the platypus to it and drive back 
down the mountain.
 