
When I think about holidays on the Gold Coast, it’s Wet ’n’ Wild, Sea World 
and Dreamworld that spring to mind. I don’t think of organic farms, night 
markets, world-class dining, eco tourism and pampering.

But the Gold Coast as a tourism destination – it hosts 11m visitors each year 
– is changing. The theme parks, the beaches, the sun ’n’ surf and the tacky 
souvenir shops are all still there but an explosion of hip cafes, top 
restaurants and farmers’ markets has added a new cool element to the old GC.

The Gold Coast is accessible from either the Brisbane (one hour by car or 
train) or the Gold Coast airports. Gold Coast airport is a one hour flight away 
from Sydney, a less-than-two hour flight from Melbourne and Canberra and 
two-and-a-half hours from Adelaide.

Thursday 

1pm: chef’s selection 

Our first stop is The Fish House <http://thefishhouse.com.au> in Burleigh 
Heads, a seafood restaurant that was named the second-best fine dining 
restaurant in Australia, according to TripAdvisor’s Travellers’ Choice 2015 
awards 2015.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b6f1a13b45ee9264be052be922aeaccfffb8289%2F0_0_3024_4032%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Gold%20Coast%3A%20rainforest%20walks%2C%20organic%20food%20and%20fine%20dining%20shake%20up%20expectations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Gold%20Coast%3A%20rainforest%20walks%2C%20organic%20food%20and%20fine%20dining%20shake%20up%20expectations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b6f1a13b45ee9264be052be922aeaccfffb8289%2F0_0_3024_4032%2F3024.jpg>
 Fresh herbs for sale at Miami’s organic farmers market. Photograph: Amanda 
Meade for the Guardian 
We are seated at the front of the restaurant under the expansive open windows, 
which look out over a relatively empty Burleigh beach. It’s a typically relaxed 
beachside location but the dining experience in this top-end venue is serious 
business. The waiters explain in great detail how the seafood is flown in not 
once but twice a day to ensure freshness and they give us the rundown on the 
precise sourceof each scallop and oyster we are about to consume.

Restaurateur Simon Gloftis insists we have the chef’s selection ($90 per 
person), which includes but is not confined to Sydney rock oysters from 
Pambula, Pacific oysters from Blackman Bay, simple lemony fish soup, 
flash-fried calamari (my favourite), crustacean risotto and Patagonian 
toothfish with caramelised spring onion (the house speciality).

By the time we get to the very rich signature dish of toothfish, we are 
struggling to enjoy its strong flavour. Holidaymakers on a budget will likely 
give this place a miss but, if you fancy a spectacular fine dining experience 
with exceptional food, wine and service, this would be the place to choose.

4pm: check in at 19th Avenue on the Beach

Our two-bedroom apartment at 19th Avenue on the Beach 
<http://www.19thavenuepalmbeach.com.au/>, Palm Beach, has a large balcony, 
stunning views of the beach and is fully self-contained with a well-equipped 
kitchen, laundry and two bathrooms. The tower block is designed so every room 
has a view of Palm Beach and no one is facing the ugly highway at the back.

The other great thing is you really are right on the beach. We got out of the 
lift, walked through the gardens past the swimming pool and tennis courts right 
on to the beach through a private security gate. The bedrooms have enormous 
sliding windows so you can sleep with a sea breeze and the sound of the rolling 
waves. Heaven.

5pm: relaxing at the Endota spa 

Endota spa <https://endotaspa.com.au/> in Broadbeach is located in the 
appropriately-named Oasis shopping centre, which is home to dozens of cool 
restaurants and across the road from the beach.

We are booked in for a mother and daughter organic facial. We climb a spiral 
staircase to a relaxation room, are asked a series of lifestyle questions by 
our therapists and ordered to disrobe and lie down under the big fluffy towels.

48 hours in Newcastle: buzzy by night, active by day and a great short break
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/23/48-hours-in-newcastle-buzzy-by-night-active-by-day-and-a-great-short-break>
The room is filled with soothing music, candles and oil burners. My skin is 
cleansed, scrubbed, massaged and oiled using certified organic and Australian 
ingredients. (The bliss is interrupted only by a lecture on how I really should 
be using a special eye cream and exfoliating at least twice a week).

The time goes by way too fast and soon we are sitting up and being shown a 
customised list of all the Endota spa products we could buy if money was no 
option. We decide to splurge and buy one product each: an exfoliant and a mask. 
For $105 each for the 45-minute facial, the experience is pricey but we float 
out of the spa into the warm evening air feeling invigorated and determined to 
cleanse and moisturise every day.

7pm: traditional Japanese dinner at Etsu

Etsu <http://www.etsu.com.au> restaurant, on the nondescript Gold Coast 
Highway at Mermaid Beach, is the next stop. It truly is a hidden gem: the 
wooden barn-like doorway carries no sign and is identified only by a pink paper 
lantern.

We cautiously slide the door open to reveal a warm, bustling izakaya bar with 
a giant tree branch built into a round table in the centre of the room. The 
walls are curved and covered in street art, and there is a long bar running 
down the left-hand side of the space.

Our waiter explains that Etsu Izakaya is a traditional Japanese izakaya-style 
of dining and the small dishes are designed to be shared. We order miso soup, 
tempura, agedashi tofu, sake teriyaki salmon and “omakase” sushi roll, sashimi 
and nigiri mix plate. For dessert we share a green tea brûlée and green tea ice 
cream. The dishes range between $12 and $30 and the wide variety allows you to 
design your own menu and price range. It’s a unique experience for a Japanese 
restaurant and the friendly service makes for a very pleasant evening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8af23474a8a3ad07e609f763c72aac57477ea115%2F0_0_3024_4032%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Gold%20Coast%3A%20rainforest%20walks%2C%20organic%20food%20and%20fine%20dining%20shake%20up%20expectations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Gold%20Coast%3A%20rainforest%20walks%2C%20organic%20food%20and%20fine%20dining%20shake%20up%20expectations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8af23474a8a3ad07e609f763c72aac57477ea115%2F0_0_3024_4032%2F3024.jpg>
 Possibly the world’s best eggs benedict served at Espresso Moto cafe and 
bikeworks on the Gold Coast. Photograph: Amanda Meade for the Guardian 
Friday


9am: breakfast amid the bikes

After an early morning visit to the beach, we walk down to Espresso Moto Cafe 
<http://www.espressomoto.com.au> and Bikeworks not far from the apartment. This 
stylish little eatery wedged between the highway and the beach is a combination 
of motorcycle repair shop and cafe. The walls are covered in biker memorabilia 
and vintage oil and petrol tins are displayed on the higher shelves.

The food is simple but delicious and fresh. Everything is house-made including 
the tomato sauce, aioli, preserves, relishes and chutney, onion jam and 
mayonnaise. The kitchen and the workshop are both open so diners can watch 
everything that goes on behind the scenes. Espresso Moto is famous for its Eggs 
Benedict so we order two of same and declare them to indeed be the best eggs 
benny we’ve ever had.

10am: visiting James Street 

After breakfast, we head for the Gold Coast hinterland and into the 
Springbrook national park, which is less than an hour’s drive from Burleigh 
Heads.

We stop along the way to pick up a pre-ordered picnic hamper from Golosi food 
emporium on James Street in Burleigh Heads. James Street is a great shopping 
strip with a mix of upmarket boutiques and typically tourist shops. Golosi, a 
gourmet food and fresh flower shop, is a highlight of the strip. Shopkeepers 
tell us that before Golosi opened its doors it was impossible to get 
high-quality, imported small goods on the Gold Coast. The chef has packed a 
selection of specialities for our picnic: house-made dips, cheeses, olives, 
sun-dried tomatoes and crackers, along glasses, linen napkins and a picnic 
blanket.

11am: a picnic with a view 

We drive out of Burleigh Heads and head for the Springbrook national park, 
stopping off at the “Best of All” lookout, which has been highly recommended by 
locals. We park alongside several other tourists who all have the same idea and 
set off on a 15-minute walk through ancient Antarctic beech rainforest to a 
platform which provides a breathtaking view across New South Wales to Mount 
Warning and beyond to Byron Bay.

Later we read that the rainforest we walked through is very rare and is one of 
our only remaining links to the ancient forests of Gondwana. It’s pretty chilly 
and wet in the undergrowth so take a jumper and even a raincoat to make the 
30-minute round trip more comfortable.

After that we stop for a picnic at the Goomoolahra Falls picnic grounds, a 
delightful spot surrounded by a creek and a waterfall. The Gold Coast 
hinterland offers over 260km of bush walking tracks through world 
heritage-listed rainforest, many lined with rock pools, waterfalls and glow 
worms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2a0ebe54251a62a6f17f9c1890b07357fcb9ef8%2F0_0_3024_4032%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Gold%20Coast%3A%20rainforest%20walks%2C%20organic%20food%20and%20fine%20dining%20shake%20up%20expectations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Gold%20Coast%3A%20rainforest%20walks%2C%20organic%20food%20and%20fine%20dining%20shake%20up%20expectations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2a0ebe54251a62a6f17f9c1890b07357fcb9ef8%2F0_0_3024_4032%2F3024.jpg>
 The secluded Mouses House rainforest retreat. Photograph: Amanda Meade for the 
Guardian 
3pm: the sweet seclusion of the Mouses House


We check in at the Mouses House Rainforest Retreat 
<http://www.mouseshouse.com.au> and Wayne, the owner, hands us an iPad 
pre-loaded with information about the retreat and tips for bushwalking tracks 
nearby. Our chalet’s name is Sleepy, one of the rainforest spa and stream 
chalets ($295 per night), which means you have your own stream outside, just 
under the front porch. As you sit in the lounge room, you can hear it gently 
bubbling.

All of the 13 chalets are very homely and are furnished with Queensland 
hardwood timber furniture. You could stay a week and never see another soul 
because each chalet is tucked away in its own little part of rainforest and has 
a fully equipped kitchen, wood fireplace, barbecue and Wi-Fi. We prepare dinner 
from the generous food hamper which is left in the fridge and enjoy the sounds 
of nature all around us.

After dinner we indulge in a spa in our own tub, which looks out on to the 
rainforest through ceiling-to-floor windows. Only the bush turkeys can see in, 
we hope. A couple of the more luxurious chalets feature an outdoor spa for the 
more adventurous.

Saturday

10am: organic products and fine dining 

After an early morning bush walk, we check out of the Mouses House reluctantly 
and drive back to town via the Currumbin Valley. We stop in atFreeman’s Organic 
Farm <http://www.freemansorganicfarm.com.au/> for a coffee and some fresh 
produce. The family-owned farm has been going for 100 years and was once the 
largest commercial banana farm in Australia. Today the family grows top-shelf 
organic tropical fruits, bananas, vegetables and herbs.

We continue along Currumbin Creek Road for our lunch destination: the 
award-winning restaurantAllure on Currumbin 
<http://www.allureoncurrumbin.com.au/>. It’s a quiet day and there are only 
three other tables, all enjoying a birthday or other celebratory lunch. This is 
a special occasion restaurant and a favourite spot for romantic dinners. It’s 
situated in a shopping strip across the road from Palm Beach but inside it’s 
stylishly decorated and the service is charming.

We order potato gnocchi with asparagus, mushrooms and wild rocket on a beurre 
noisette ($34) and pan-seared crispy skin atlantic salmon with horseradish 
mash, sweet potato crisps and lemon beurre blanc ($39). We share a huge 
dessert: bittersweet Belgian chocolate marquise with cherry compote and 
23-carat gold ($18). The food lives up to its reputation.

4pm: night markets at Miami 

 After a final trip to the beach, we stroll down to the night markets for an 
early dinner.Miami Marketta <http://www.miamimarketta.com/> is a bustling 
street food market where you can listen to live music and try food from one of 
the dozens of food trucks which turn up on the weekends. On any night you may 
find vendors including The Hungry Belly, Cycho’s Wings, Easy Peasy Japan’easy, 
Good Food Catering Co, Kransky Brothers and Monkey Magic Dumplings. Started by 
local artists in 2011, this is a very cool addition to the Gold Coast night 
life and is helping to dispel the image of the Gold Coast as a boozing haven 
for bogans and schoolies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb15467d047aed8654bc7ecf24bdde08a221b9574%2F0_0_3024_4032%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Gold%20Coast%3A%20rainforest%20walks%2C%20organic%20food%20and%20fine%20dining%20shake%20up%20expectations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Gold%20Coast%3A%20rainforest%20walks%2C%20organic%20food%20and%20fine%20dining%20shake%20up%20expectations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2F48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb15467d047aed8654bc7ecf24bdde08a221b9574%2F0_0_3024_4032%2F3024.jpg>
 Delicious ricotta hotcakes served at the Barefoot Barista in the Gold Coast. 
Photograph: Amanda Meade for the Guardian 
Sunday


8am: hotcakes and healthy food 

For breakfast, we drive to the Barefoot Barista 
<http://www.barefootbarista.com.au> on Palm Beach Avenue, another one of the 
excellent local cafes with great coffee. We have ricotta hotcakes with fresh 
fruitand mascarpone ($16) and organic sourdough, avocado, Meredith goat cheese, 
organic truss tomatoes and leaves ($14). Of all the beautiful food this 
weekend, the hotcakes were the prettiest.

After checking out of the beach apartment, we drive north on the Gold Coast 
highway to Miami for a visit to the weekly organic farmers’ market. We browse 
the stalls, buying handmade soaps for our cat-sitter.

Our final stop is at a healthy food cafe called BSKT Cafe 
<http://www.bskt.com.au> just off Mermaid Beach and jumping with enthusiasm. It 
is run by Selasi Berdie, whose philosophy is to use the best available food to 
fuel our bodies. But this place offers far more than brown rice and tofu. We 
order a protein falafel plate: falafels with chickpea and lupin served on 
hummus and tzatziki, rocket and harissa ($15) and Special K Salad: fresh kale, 
baby spinach, gluten-free croutons, soft boiled egg, topped with warm smoked 
trout ($18). The food is incredibly tasty and the coffee is excellent.

Forget your expectations about the Gold Coast. It is possible to enjoy the 
beautiful beaches and the surf lifestyle but also indulge in gourmet food,the 
local cafe culture and take in some of the most pristine and breathtaking 
natural sights in the country.

 * Guardian Australia was a guest of Gold Coast Tourism. For more information 
VisitGoldCoast.com <http://www.visitgoldcoast.com/> and on Instagram 
#VisitGoldCoast #SeeChange
 