
More than $2bn in vocational loans will remain unpaid due to poor program 
design being exploited by unscrupulous training providers, the auditor general 
has found.

In a report released by the Australian National Audit Office 
<https://www.anao.gov.au/sites/g/files/net2251/f/ANAO_Report_2016-2017_31.pdf> 
on Tuesday, the auditor general found the federal education department did not 
manage risk effectively, encouraging growth in loanswithout recognising the 
incentives created for providers to sign up vulnerable student 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/15/vocational-students-saddled-with-debts-by-private-sector-feeding-frenzy>
s.

The report found the uptake of student loans significantly increased when they 
were extended to vocational education in 2008, peaking at $2.9bn in 2015.

Vocational students saddled with debts by private sector 'feeding frenzy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/15/vocational-students-saddled-with-debts-by-private-sector-feeding-frenzy>
It said a “significant” amount of the money loaned would not be recovered, 
including $1.2bn provided in “inappropriately issued” loans in 2014 and 2015 
and a further $1bn raised in 2015-16 that will not be repaid because recipients 
will not meet income repayment thresholds.

The auditor general said the program was “weighted heavily towards supporting 
growth in the vocational sector, but an appropriate quality and accountability 
framework addressing identified risks was not put in place”.

The education department “inadequately considered the implications of the 
changed incentives” for providers and students. The report said the department 
lacked data analytics capability, internal management reporting or analysis to 
identify emerging problems.

The auditor general said concerns were raised in 2012 about insufficient 
safeguards for students and inadequate monitoring, investigation and payment 
controls for poor or non-compliant providers.

Safeguards did not include provisions to prevent misleading prospective 
students and referral of complaints where people with an intellectual 
disability had been targeted for enrolment or gifts or incentives were offered.

Vocational education loans will lead to Help debt blowout, budget office says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/20/vocational-education-loans-will-lead-to-help-debt-blowout-budget-office-says>
Compliance activity was “very limited and reactive” until 2015, the report 
found. The department had little visibility of students entering the system and 
could not ensure they understood they had taken on a student loan.

The report concluded the vocational loan scheme “did not achieve many of its 
stated objectives”. Increased participation was not backed up by evidence from 
the department relating to quality, value and sustainability of the sector.

In its response, the education department said it had addressed the 
“significant areas of concern” identified in the report, including through 
improved monitoring and compliance.

The education minister, Simon Birmingham, welcomed the report saying it made 
clear that “Labor did not effectively design or administer the [vocational 
loan] scheme despite various warnings”.

“This report clearly spells out the extent of the mess Labor made of [the 
vocational loan scheme] which opened the floodgates to shonky providers who 
ripped off vulnerable students and taxpayers.”

Coalition overhauls vocational training loans in private college crackdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/05/coalition-overhauls-vocational-training-loans-in-private-college-crackdown>
Legislation passed in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/05/coalition-overhauls-vocational-training-loans-in-private-college-crackdown>
, to apply from 1 January, will:

 * Limit loans to courses with a high likelihood of leading to jobs 
 * Set loan caps depending on courses’ delivery cost, up to $15,000 
 * Require students to access an online portal to ensure they are active and 
legitimate enrolments 
 * Feature a new application process for providers wanting to access student 
loans with a higher bar to entry including assessment of their track record 
 * Strengthen compliance conditions including the ability to cap provider loan 
amounts and student numbers 
 * Provide powers to suspend poor performing providers from the scheme, cancel 
their payments and revoke their approval 
 * Prohibit approved providers from using “brokers” or directly soliciting 
prospective students and limiting the subcontracting of training.

Birmingham said the changes would mean training providers had met tougher 
benchmarks and taxpayers could have confidence the loans were “for genuine 
students, learning skills that will contribute to the economy and increasing 
the likelihood the loans will be repaid”.

Before the election Labor had proposed tighter loan caps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/dodgy-vocational-education-operators-will-have-business-model-smashed>
, limited to $8,000 with exemptions for high cost courses to crack down on 
dodgy loans.
 