 Led Zep on stage. 
One record, three signatures, a delighted friend

There's little more terrifying for an interviewer than the journalist who's up 
before you coming out of the room and saying: "That was awful. He was so 
horrible to me." Which was my experience when I went to meet Jimmy Page one 
September day on whichI also spoke to his Led Zeppelin comrades 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/oct/11/led-zeppelin-swagger-knew-were-good>
, Robert Plant and John Paul Jones.

Page, it turned out, was perfectly amiable (I can only assume the person 
before me had readHammer of the Gods 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hammer_of_the_Gods_%28book%29> and went through 
the book asking him to confirm or deny the truth of the various horror stories 
therein), and – like his bandmates – did something for me graciously and 
kindly, something I'd feared he would wave off contemptuously.

I have a friend who adores Led Zeppelin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ledzeppelin>. Who has "Zoso" – Page's symbol 
from the fourth Zep album – tattooed on his flesh. Who swears his life motto 
is: "What would Jimmy Page do?" Whose greatest sadness in life appears to be 
that he wasn't born in time to spend the mid-70s trailing Zeppelin around, 
compiling bootlegs and comparing performances. So the day before I met 
Zeppelin, I popped down to Music and Video Exchange and paid £25 for a vinyl 
copy of the fourth album. Then I went to a stationery shop and bought a 
permanent marker pen.

At the conclusion of each interview, I presented the album and the pen to 
first Plant, then Page, then Jones, and explained that it wasn't for me and it 
wasn't for eBay, but for a friend, and asked if they could sign the record. All 
did, Jones observing that Page's signature took up "a lot of real estate" on 
the cover. And then I emailed my friend to say I had something for him.

"What? Are you fucking with me?" he emailed back. "I need a moment. 
Reflection." A few moments later, he emailed again. "Wow. I'm speechless, Well, 
clearly not completely. But I'm overwhelmed. The Mighty Zep? And the Dark 
Master put his hands on it??? I'll sleep with it under my pillow … For 
starters."

Before passing the record on, though, I made the mistake of looking on the 
internet to see how much signed Zeppelin albums fetch. Oh dear. In September, a 
copy of IV signed by the three living members went for $2999.99 at auction. I 
saw copies of other albums signed by the same three selling for £950. Even a 
signed copy of Page's Death Wish II soundtrack is up for £600 on eBay.

My kids urged me to sell the album and take them to Disneyland on the 
proceeds. But I didn't. I did the right thing. It was the happiest I made 
anyone all year.Michael Hann

Shake Your Rump for the opposite of death 
 Adam Yauch photographed in Los Angeles in 1987. Photograph: Michael Ochs 
Archives 
A certain ritual unfolds when a musician dies. You tweet an RIP, maybe add a 
link to a suitable song, feel sad for a day and move on. But whenAdam "MCA" 
Yauch <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/05/adam-yauch%E2%80%9D 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/05/adam-yauch> of the Beastie Boys was 
struck down by cancer in May, he was on my mind for weeks and it took me a 
while to work out why. I'd never met him and hadn't even been a big Beastie 
Boys fan since Ill Communication in 1994.

It was partly the manner of his passing. Musicians tend to die from youthful 
misadventure or in old age. To die from cancer at 47 (he was survived by both 
his parents) is rare enough to feel shocking. But it was also the nature of his 
band: a trio of middle-aged men who never lost touch with what bonded them in 
adolescence. A band is a fragile coalition, subject to enormous strain and to 
sustain the same lineup for over three decades is no small achievement.

It's not as if Yauch stood still, of course. Formerly the band's biggest party 
animal inthe inflatable-penis era 
<http://entertainment.ca.msn.com/music/photos/gallery.aspx?cp-documentid=28221356&page=2>
, he was the first to disown their youthful misogyny as he embraced Buddhism 
and political activism in the early 90s. Some found his U-turn hypocritical 
but, he countered in the sleeve notes to the band's The Sounds of Science 
anthology: "In this fucked up world all you can hope for is change, andI'd 
rather be a hypocrite to you than a zombie forever 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/167768/mcas-feminist-legacy>."

Beastie Boys - Sabotage 
<http://www.muzu.tv/beastieboys/sabotage-music-video/215551/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
But on stage and in the studio, he held onto the absurdity and fearlessness of 
youth. He valued his bandmates so highly that he would pursue ideas they 
considered throwaway jokes, like theSabotage video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z5rRZdiu1UE>'s parody of a 70s cop show. A 
broken-heartedAdam "Ad-Rock" Horovitz told Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/beastie-boys-adam-horovitz-opens-up-about-adam-yauch-he-was-in-charge-20120523>
: "In a group of friends, you all come up with stupid shit to do. But you never 
do it. With Yauch, it got done. He had that extra drive to see things through." 
He was also, by all accounts, a mensch. The music industry affords its stars 
ample opportunity to be selfish, ungracious and careless with those around 
them, but I've never read a bad word about Yauch.

His life in music is hardly the stuff of a juicy three-act biopic but it 
represents a kind of ideal. He formed a band to have fun with his friends and 
he maintained that spirit until the end, which isn't easy. Normally when a 
musician dies you reach for a song with a poignant, valedictory air but the 
Beastie Boys don't have any like that, so I went back to the likes ofShake Your 
Rump <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BptQHAW2T5M> and Sabotage instead, and 
revelled in the sheer pleasure they radiated. I heard humour, adventure, 
camaraderie and joy. I heard the opposite of death.Dorian Lynskey

A gulp of joy at the Scala
 Future Islands. Photograph: Frank Hamilton 
This was not the happiest of years for me; all through January, on into spring 
and the summer, I took a slow lesson in falling apart. I could no longer see 
the beauty in anything – days stood grey and flat, food was flavourless, even 
music seemed muffled and blunt. By the first Tuesday in March I was 
experiencing daily panic attacks, and often felt too fearful to leave the house.

But that evening Future Islands 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/may/07/new-band-future-islands> were 
playing the Scala in London. For the uninitiated, Future Islands is a 
three-piece from Baltimore with three albums under their belt, including last 
year's sublimeOn the Water 
<http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/15903-future-islands-on-the-water/>. Its 
music is a marriage of synthesisers, bass and guitar, it can be breathy, 
brassy, a Wurlitzer of sound, while the vocals carry an unexpected majesty, a 
haughty kind of grandeur. Synthpop, indie rock, new wave, call it what you will 
– the point is that I believe them to be one of the most under-celebrated bands 
in the world. And so, despite my deteriorating mental state, I was determined 
to attend.

The Scala was rammed that night. I remember the heat rising off all those 
bodies as we pressed our way to the front and looked up. Sam Herring does not 
look like a lead singer; he is part bull, part ballet dancer, a chemistry 
teacher playing Hamlet. He performs with a compelling kind of urgency – 
gesturing to the crowd, sweat trickling through his hair, eyes wild, jaw set. 
Imagine a man singing love songs while simultaneously spoiling for a fight, a 
sweaty-toothed madman miming a forest fire.

They played my favourites of course, and it was one of the finest gigs of my 
life, but what really made it was the stage invasion – a sudden surge of 
excitement at the beginning of, I think,Heart Grows Old 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uvytG0VklAE>, and suddenly we were all up 
there, dancing among the cables and the synths.

And I remember in that moment looking down from the edge of the stage, out at 
all the bright faces and euphoria and glee, and feeling my chest swell with a 
brief, sweet gulp of long-lost joy.Laura Barton

Dancing through the shame 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FC6wgwZR0KFs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FC6wgwZR0KFs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FC6wgwZR0KFs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Given that Robyn's Dancing on My Own 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CcNo07Xp8aQ> was voted the Guardian's best song 
of 2010, it might seem odd that the same song was responsible for my favourite 
musical moment of 2012. Yet when Lena Dunham used it on the third episode of 
her HBO sitcomGirls <http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/girls>, it made the 
hairs on the back of my neck stand up like I was hearing it for the very first 
time. In times of trouble, music can act as your best friend, making even the 
most awful situation bearable – yet rarely has a TV show managed to convey this 
fact so accurately.

In that episode, Dunham's character, Hannah, has staged a meeting with an 
ex-boyfriend, Elijah, with the vague thought that they might rekindle things. 
The encounter doesn't go well – not least because Elijah has since come out and 
found happiness with a guy.
 Robyn. Photograph: Rankin/Press shots 
Later that night, home alone and depressed enough to be playing Sarabeth 
Tucek's Get Well Soon <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CTFfoc4aeYg> on her 
laptop, Hannah attempts to tweet something that sums up her sorry state. She 
tries out, "You lose some, you lose some," and, "My life has been a lie, my 
ex-boyfriend dates a guy," but nothing really conveys the dramatic misery she's 
feeling. Then Dancing on My Own pops up on shuffle.

After a few head bobs, Hannah takes the song's title literally and starts 
flinging herself around the bedroom like nobody's watching. When she realises 
someone is watching – her friend Marnie has returned home and is standing in 
the doorway, grinning – this doesn't put her off. Instead she simply recounts 
the horrors of her day while shimmying across an imaginary dancefloor. With a 
new musical backdrop, what had seemed traumatic only minutes earlier is now 
shrugged off. "Yeah, he seemed gay!" they both laugh, before Marnie joins 
Hannah in a dance that eventually becomes an embrace.

Girls <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/girls> has been praised for 
the honesty of its characters. But by playing Robyn's song almost in its 
entirety, Dunham made music itself the lead character in this scene. It played 
its role to perfection. Tim Jonze

The mile-high endurance club
 Rihanna’s promotional flight with 150, ever-so-slightly tipsy, journalists. 
Photograph: Kevin Mazur/WireImage 
In October I received an email asking if I'd like to go on a press trip with 
Rihanna. It would involve travelling to seven cities in seven countries in 
seven days to watch Rihanna play seven shows to promote her seventh album.
Rihanna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna> and I would travel together 
on a specially chartered Boeing 777 plane (do you see?) and would be joined by 
150 other journalists (including 11 from the UK), a handful of competition 
winners and her seemingly endless entourage. This, I thought, sounded like it 
could be a lot of fun.

Rihanna swag #777tour <https://twitter.com/search/%23777tour> 
twitter.com/MichaelCragg/s… <http://t.co/d9qB88w9>

— Michael Cragg (@MichaelCragg) November 14, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/MichaelCragg/status/268803058941698051>

In fact, it was a week-long endurance test – in the parlance of TV reality 
show contestants, an emotional rollercoaster. Arriving in LA for the start of 
the jaunt I felt excited, nervous and intrigued – the industry doesn't really 
do these expansive press trips any more. By the beginning of the European leg 
in Stockholm (having flown from LA to Mexico City to Toronto without staying a 
night in a hotel), however, I felt exhausted, frustrated and, let's be honest, 
trapped in a perpetual hangover. From Stockholm we flew to Paris where we 
waited up until 4am to spot the now increasingly elusive Rihanna in a nightclub 
so tacky Joey Essex would have left citing fears for his reputation.

Paris merged into a rainy Berlin, which drifted slowly into a freezing London 
where we rested for the day before watching the sixth show at the Forum and 
flying to New York that night. By that point emotions had become a thing of the 
past: a strange numbness and an oddly disorientating calm descend when you've 
not really slept properly for six days and as all 300 of us waited on the floor 
of a private departure lounge at Stansted airport before the New York flight, 
which had now been delayed by five hours, I had an out-of-body experience. My 
second self looked down at me and said: "This pop star life is really boring."

Rihanna - We Found Love 
<http://www.muzu.tv/rihanna/we-found-love-music-video/1165405/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
But amid all the monotony of travelling and waiting and drinking and waiting 
some more, there were seven incredible shows. Regardless of Rihanna slowly 
morphing in my head from pop star to captor, on stage she was still an 
incredibly forceful pop cyclone you couldn't take your eyes off. Whether she 
was strutting around to Phresh Out the Runway like a teenager playing at being 
a catwalk model, or gyrating her way on to a permanent residence on the Daily 
Mail home page during Cockiness (Love It), or looking genuinely pained on the 
new ballad Stay, those seven shows – with their world-dominating, gold-plated 
hits – somehow made the whole thing worthwhile.

Each night would end the same, with the one-finger synth riff of We Found Love 
sending everyone into a feverish stupor, and somewhere in the crowd a bunch of 
UK journalists – by this point bound together as family via the principles of 
shared traumatic experience – were having the time of their lives, lost in the 
thing that makes pop music so amazing: pure unadulterated joy.Michael Cragg

Hearing from Harry, at first hand
 Harrison Birtwistle. Photograph: Graeme Robertson/Guardian 
All right, so this was something I was on stage to present, but one of the 
most memorable moments for me from 2012 came at the end of May at the Queen 
Elizabeth Hall when I interviewed Harrison Birtwistle fora concert by the 
London Sinfonietta 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/25/birtwistle-portrait-review>. The 
concert included a line-up of some of Birtwistle's greatest hits for ensemble, 
and two of the finest ensemble pieces he's ever written – the ritualistic and 
elegiac theatre of Cortege and the warped dances and mechanics of Carmen 
Arcadiae Mechanicae Perpetuum – as well as the world premiere of In Broken 
Images, a piece that went straight into the canon of Birtwistle masterpieces 
(as soon as I heard it, at least).

What was thrilling about talking to Harry before each of the pieces in the 
programme was hearing how he has spent a lifetime wrestling with finding a 
precarious balance of instinct and structure, of improvisation and rationality, 
of heart and head, in his music. He was also very funny, either in taking the 
mickey out of my questions, and in his typical manner of gentle, sardonic 
understatement and wicked, revelatory asides. He said he had taken more than 35 
years to get from the hard graft and sheer bloody labour of writing Carmen 
Arcadiae to the spontaneous torrent of ideas of In Broken Images, and revealed 
along the way the connections between that by turns deadpan and witty, 
irascible but warm personality, and his unpredictable, volatile, and endlessly 
compelling music.Tom Service

Shouting obscenities in public (part one)
 Nicki Minaj. Photograph: ADMEDIA/SIPA / Rex Features 
Nicki Minaj <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nicki-minaj> was responsible 
for a disproportionate number of my favourite musical moments in 2012, whether 
alone, in public, or – more dangerously – in that liminal space between them: 
more than once I've had to concentrate very hard on not rapping Nicki lyrics 
out loud when on public transport only to belatedly realise that I'm 
involuntarily making Nicki faces instead, and people are looking at me as 
though I'm a lunatic.

That is because Minaj possesses a rare knack for being able to transform her 
own idiosyncratic tics, the qualities that make her distinct as an artist, into 
communal points of unity. Seven brief, incongruous seconds dropped without 
explanation into the middle ofCome on a Cone 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pl35X82lF3Q> illustrated it perfectly in 2012. 
The music (stomach-pummeling bass, wildly oscillating synths, clattering beats) 
drops out suddenly and Minaj croons, angelically, eyes raised towards heaven: 
"Dick in your face. Put my dick in your faa-aaa-aaace." It's a profane, 
gender-queering gauntlet thrown down to hip-hop machismo in the form of a 
parody of a hymn.

The first time I heard the Pink Friday album, it was an instant, 
WTF-just-happened rewind, but its apotheosis as a pop moment came at Minaj's 
first UK live show, at the Hammersmith Apollo in June. This was a long-overdue 
occurrence, and the long wait her British fanbase had endured was at its 
tipping point: the barely-contained excitement and palpable levels of 
anticipation inside made for one of the best atmospheres at any show I attended 
this year. Contra so many buzz band showcases, it's always better when there's 
genuine enthusiasm among the audience: it was evident just how much Minaj meant 
to almost everyone present, and when Come on a Cone came along, it was also 
evident why. Minaj's audience is a diverse one, but largely skews female and/or 
gay: people for whom an icon who transgresses social acceptability is 
inherently valuable. Thus, when the music dropped out for those few seconds, 
8,000 fans – tweens in tutus there with their dads, teenage girls in puffa 
jackets who had made the pilgrimage all the way from Somerset, jagged-haired 
hipsters on day release from East London – raised their voices to sing lustily, 
meaning every word: "Dick in your face. Put my dick in your faa-aaa-aaace."Alex 
Macpherson

No thanks from the loading bay ranks

The Fall - Container Drivers 
<http://www.muzu.tv/cherryredrecords/the-fall-container-drivers-music-video/731547/>
 onMUZU.TV <http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
On 17 March 1981, I was a callow schoolboy who had just started to experience 
the thrill of live music, and about to experience the particular thrill ofthe 
Fall <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/fall?INTCMP=SRCH>. The fact that the 
guitarist was called Marc Riley and the singer called Mark E Smith and they 
were playing Leeds University's Riley Smith Hall seemed tremendously 
significant, and already major developments in my life seemed bound up with the 
Fall. My first girlfriend had also given me my first Fall album –Grotesque 
(After the Gramme) 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/grotesque-after-the-gramme-mw0000094077> – under 
the table, in a brown paper bag, like you would with pornography. It contained 
what – 20something albums later - remains my favourite Fall song:Container 
Drivers 
<http://www.muzu.tv/cherryredrecords/the-fall-container-drivers-music-video/731547/>
, a barbed tale of truckers' unhealthy living and battles with "customs 
bastards" set to a rip-roaring Northern rockabilly soundtrack.

Alas, that first Fall gig coincided with my underage self's first pint of 
Tetley's bitter, an experience so overwhelming and disorienting that I managed 
to miss the start of the gig, including the opening number – Container Drivers. 
In subsequent years, the song took on another cruel significance when my 
long-term partner left me for a container driver. Maybe one with "bad 
indigestion, bad bowel retention".

For years, I resigned myself to the fact that I'd never get to hear the song 
live, because the Fall hardly ever do old material and then because I'd vowed 
never to see them again after a particularly shambolic gig last year when Smith 
was barely onstage and mumbled the songs through a mic from the dressing room. 
But I first said "no more" in 1985, and just as a dog returns to its own sick, 
a Fall fan can never walk away.

Thus, a couple of weeks ago I found myself drawn to the Brudenell Social Club 
in Leeds – a stone's throw from the Riley Smith – to see their umpteenth 
line-up. Now in his 50s, and reading some of his lyrics using spectacles, Smith 
is a far cry from the needle-sharp, urgent warrior of early Fall, but after a 
few songs, something clicked and songs were suddenly hurtling along with the 
same intense otherworldliness that captured me all those years ago.

A fantastic gig became dreamlike when there was a familiar drum roll and they 
launched into Container Drivers. The song sounded very different to how it must 
have done in 1981. There seemed to be two extra middle eights, and Smith kept 
singing the same verse over and over again. But it sounded every bit as 
thrilling and ear-popping as ever. My eyes suddenly felt all glassy, and I 
swear that I could see my hapless teenage self, pint in hand, and wanted to 
tell him: "Kid, this song's for you."Dave Simpson

Learning to roll with it

One afternoon in the first week of August I found myself on a train rolling 
through the Welsh or possibly Shropshire countryside, a part of the world I'm 
quite sure I'd never visited. More fool me because the view was gorgeous. But 
my gaze out the window didn't linger because in the next-door carriage I could 
hear a group of musicians starting to play. This was TheAfrica Express 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/africa-express>, carrying over 80 acts around 
the UK for a week for a series of pop-up shows and sprawling gigs in the 
evening. The previous evening we'd been in Manchester, where the highlights 
included a surprise appearance by Peter Hook, who joined Spoek Mathambo for the 
latter's cover version of She's Lost Control – a song by the bassist's old 
band. Coming off stage, Hooky said how much he'd loved it, but now he had to 
rush because of a cock-up on the babysitting front. Two nights later, it was 
Bristol, and John Paul Jones had joined the ride. On a speculative setlist for 
the evening, he saw the mis-spelt title "Cashmere", and asked "is thatthat 
song?" – and ended up guesting on a extraordinary version of the Led Zep 
classic, with a lineup including the Temper Trap, oud player Mehdi Haddad, 
Amadou Bagayoko on guitar, Seb Rochford on drums and the rappers Kano, Bashy, 
M1 and Karim Rush. Both moments testified to the hallucinatory nature of the 
whole enterprise, as did a trip with Damon Albarn and Afel Boucoum and his band 
to a music community centre in Cardiff. Smug as this might sound, though, the 
best part of the four days I spent as part of this travelling carnival came on 
the train itself.

It's often assumed that the point of Africa Express is to dismantle audience's 
perceptions of African music, but to my mind it comes from a more modest 
starting point: it's just about putting musicians from different backgrounds in 
a room together. At the start of this trip, hardly any of those on board knew 
each other. Rehearsals like the one as we barreled from Manchester and down 
into Wales (involving the Noisettes, theAfrica Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/africa-express> horn section and kora player 
Diabel Cissohko) were the only preparation for the shows. That takes some 
courage for any musician, so it was a privilege to see the process in action. 
More than that, no-one brought their management or publicist or entourage with 
them – and because, to begin with, no-one was sure of anyone's role, it meant 
that a hack could talk to these artists without either party being too much of 
a dick.

In one carriage I came across the great Baaba Maal deep in conversation with 
the young beatboxer Reeps One, each trying to soak up information from the 
other. Later that evening, halfway through Baaba's performance on stage, Reeps 
joined in, mimicking the sound of the percussionist. And I could only agree 
with Baaba when he told me late one night that this was the best project he'd
ever been involved with. Caspar Llewellyn Smith

Rising out of the swamp
 Alabama Shakes.  Photograph: Marilyn Kingwill 
In July I was sent to Kinross in Scotland to attend T in the Park 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/t-in-the-park>. I was there to write an 
article about "morphsuits" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2012/aug/05/morphsuits-fancy-dress-costumes-tom-lamont>
, brightly coloured lycra outfits that were, apparently, popular among summer 
festival-goers. My plan was to hang around the stages, chat to anybody who 
showed up in eye-catching lycra, and incidentally hear some live music. Dappy 
was playing! Also Simple Minds and the Stone Roses. I hoped it would be sunny.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU7tp0tWuuoM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU7tp0tWuuoM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU7tp0tWuuoM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It wasn't sunny. It was one of those festival days when the rain travels 
horizontally and tides of liquid brown roll in, just horrifyingly, from the 
direction of the portable loos. The mud was shin high and the smell was 
terrific – the sort of Somme-like conditions that turns things savage, quickly. 
Even Dappy seemed alarmed by the number of crowd fights that broke out during 
his 20-minute afternoon slot (and the rapper had to make a strained plea from 
the stage to stop edge-hangers from hurling more bottles and cans into the 
melee). The feral mood was best captured by a camera-phone picture that later 
went viral, showing a boy and a girl in sopping waterproofs, crushed against 
some siding or fence, shagging in public view.

It was, for me, the worst musical experience of 2012 ... And then, somewhere 
in the middle, it contained the best. I'd given up on meeting anyone fool 
enough to wear skintight morphsuits in the rain, and ducked into the nearest 
tent, whereAlabama Shakes <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/alabama-shakes> were 
on. The space was packed to capacity with people escaping the weather, and the 
air was thick with moisture. The swampy conditions matched, ideally, the band's 
music – raw and elemental.

To be honest my judgement might have been confused by relief: I was suddenly 
warm and not soaking wet. There might even have been some delirium kicking in, 
a sort of psychosomatic anticipation of the terrible disease I guessed I'd 
caught from the toilet mud. But Alabama Shakes doing You Ain't Alone seemed, at 
the time, like one of the most perfect performances I'd witnessed.Watching the 
video now <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U7tp0tWuuoM> it's still pretty great. 
And look – you can see the fog of evaporating human damp, billowing around the 
band on stage.Tom Lamont

Shouting obscenities in public (part two)
 Azealia Banks 
"What do you gon' do when I appear?!" screamed 21-year-old Azealia Banks to 
the crowd at theHackney Weekender 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jun/25/bbc-radio-one-hackney-weekend-review>
 in June. The answer, it seems, is to shout wildly in unison about vaginas. At 
an event funded by the taxpayer. If nothing else, it's safe to say that rap has 
come a long way.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fiw4BLQAatE4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fiw4BLQAatE4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fiw4BLQAatE4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The weekend-long festival, organised by Radio 1, was part of a reinvigoration 
of an area that a year before had been a riot hotspot. The weekend saw 
performances from such huge stars as Rihanna, Nas, and Jay-Z, but none made as 
much of a mark as Banks. Although 212 had been released last year, this was the 
year it became an anthem, seized upon on dancefloors in clubs across the 
country,receiving Sam Cam's co-sign 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/shortcuts/2012/sep/18/samantha-cameron-loves-azealia-banks>
, and becoming the soundtrack to one of the most euphoric moments of the year.

The uncensored original version featuring the c-word was omitted from radio 
play, but not even the BBC could silence the crowd in a tent in Hackney 
Marshes. "If you know this song, please sing along," Banks implored as she 
geared up to unleash supersonic rhymes and provoke winces from BBC execs.

It's worth noting that for a big part of the audience, most of whom were Radio 
1 listeners, this was a true counter-cultural moment – screaming "cunt" with 
force and without fear of recrimination. Probably not exactly what Germaine 
Greer had in mind, but an amazing moment in pop nevertheless.

Not since Peaches, Bikini Kill or Courtney Love has female pleasure been sung 
about so explicitly, or with so much attitude, and certainly not in such a 
mainstream environment. The energy on stage was electric, and thousands of 
people were singing themselves hoarse.

But what was thrilling was not just the shock factor. The real excitement was 
that such a statement wasn't being made by Riot Grrrls with guitars but by a 
fresh faced MC taking her place in the mainstream. Banks's position as a 
youthful, thrilling antidote to the hyper-glossy women in rap – she has yet to 
levitate from the rafters or channel an alter ego a la Minaj – is what made a 
performance like this so engaging.

Whether this posed a feminist moment of reclamation of a new female identity, 
her own reappropriation of the word, or a gratuitous ploy for attention, what 
is certain is that this was a groundbreaking pop moment. One that broke real 
ground, created a space that teeters between thrilling pop and grassroots rap, 
and taught us exactly what to do when Banks appears on stage.Kieran Yates

Feeling 16 again
 Ty Segall on stage. Photograph: Getty Images 
A few weeks ago, Radio 1's head of music, George Ergatoudis, suggested that 
rock music might experience a revival of fortunes in the not-too-distant 
future. It was a bold claim, and it didn't seem to have much foundation in 
fact. 2012 was a pretty thin year for bands with guitars. The charts have been 
filled with pop music. What's left of the weekly music press has visibly 
struggled to find artists with which to fill their pages, desperately pinning 
great expectations on bands that aren't exciting enough to fulfill them; bands 
that are trapped by their own reverence for the past.

Perhaps this has something to do with the availability of technology: why 
would a teenager with a burning desire to express themselves pick up a guitar, 
when it's easier and cheaper to make music on a laptop (and with more 
innovative and interesting results)?

So I wasn't particularly gripped by the prospect of going to review San 
Franciscan garage-rock auteurTy Segall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/ty-segall> live in Brighton, although I liked 
his own description of his music (like "Satan in space"). But then he and his 
band started playing. Every song seemed to be over in less than two minutes: 
snotty, pissed-off, ear-splitting explosions. They seemed to be hanging on to 
the music they made by their fingernails, as if they were only just in control 
of it. At any minute, it seemed, the gig might collapse into complete chaos. 
But it never did.

Beneath the shrieking and howling of Segall's guitar and the echo that 
rendered his vocals largely incomprehensible, these were really good songs. 
This was rock at its most basic and reductive: it felt incredibly vital and 
alive, at a time when most guitar music seems moribund. The audience got so 
carried away that they pulled Segall into the crowd midway through the final 
song. Someone in the front row grabbed the microphone and started screaming 
down it. If I was 16, I would have left the gig urgently considering forming my 
own band: who wouldn't want to do something as primally thrilling as that? As 
it was, I reeled home feeling close to 16 again, as excited by a gig as I've 
ever been, unexpected pleasures being the greatest pleasures of all. Alexis 
Petridis

Two minutes to make an impression on the morally suspect

The Weeknd - The Zone 
<http://www.muzu.tv/the-weeknd/the-zone-music-video/1664334/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
Even in a year during which I interviewed everyone from Stevie Wonder and 
Brian Wilson to De La Soul and Depeche Mode, my meetings with Drake and the 
Weeknd, the Bowie and Eno of modern Rap'n'B, stood out (I'd already met the 
Iggy of the piece –Tyler, the Creator 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/may/07/tyler-the-creator-odd-future> – 
last year).

My Drake <https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> encounter was memorable not 
just because I'd played his music to death since his debut album came out in 
2010, but because it was for a G2Film&Music cover story. He didn't turn up for 
the interview till 7pm and the copy was due in the following morning, and 
between those two events there would be a train journey from south-east London 
to spith-west Hertfordshire to negotiate. So pretty tense, all told.

Meeting Drake's protege the Weeknd at Supperclub in west London was also 
fraught, not because I would have to transcribe the results on the tube home – 
I was only at the venue to write a live review – but because I wasn't sure what 
to say to someone whose music has left me so impressed and yet so conflicted. 
What do you say to someone whose depiction – on his three mixtapes, compiled on 
the recently released Trilogy – of the lengths people will go to in the name of 
pleasure don't just leave you chilled (as in shivering with paroxysms of 
disquiet), but makes you doubt the morality of the artist? Do you attempt to 
start a deep and meaningful conversation right there, backstage, among the 
vapid chatter of the beautiful people, with his entourage and minders listening 
in? Do you yell in his ear, "What on earth did you mean, on your song 
Initiation, by the line: 'There's just something that I need from you/ Is to 
meet my boys <http://rapgenius.com/The-weeknd-initiation-lyrics>'?", and wait 
for a reasoned reply?

In the end, I decided such a probing would require a more intimate setting. So 
instead I queued up behind the journalist from the NME and the presenter from 
Kiss FM for my two-minute meet and greet with Abel Tesfaye – who is the Weeknd 
– told him the gig was great, and had my photo taken with him. You can see it 
now on Twitter and Facebook. I'm the one trying to look cool but secretly 
thinking: "His POV may be morally suspect but he's the new wunderkind of 
dolorous penthouse soul and I love him!" It's written all over my face.Paul 
Lester

Loving Jolene
 Susanna. Photograph: Guri Dahl 
Most of my big musical moments over the years haven't involved songs with 
words – or songs at all. For that matter, they've often been stirred by artists 
whose stage charisma or photogenic qualities make a party of undertakers look 
like a song-and-dance act. So it was breaking all those patterns to realise, in 
pondering memorable 2012 moments (there have been a few), that the one still 
tingling my spine was thesolemnly terrifying version of Dolly Parton's Jolene 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sUBRLkCslcg> performed by Susanna Wallumrod 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/feb8655f-ef35-478e-8e52-679221f96508> 
at LSO St Luke's church in London in October.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsUBRLkCslcg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsUBRLkCslcg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsUBRLkCslcg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
By the time she reached that point in her show, Susanna (she only works under 
her forename, and attaches it to her bands as well) had already opened the 
stream of limpid lost-love songs, dreamwalks and oddball rockers she had made 
her own since she first showed up in the noughties in the electronica duo 
Susanna and the Magical Orchestra. But her partners this time – Norwegian 
originals Helge Sten on guitar and Erland Dahlen on drums – combine sharp-end 
jazz, electronica and avant-pop connections with traditional tools like 
bottlenecks and musical saws, and the trio's mix of edginess and glacial 
lyricism played a big part in the moment to come.

Jolene started as a pristine vocal murmur over trickling piano figures, in 
which Susanna sounded not so much jealous of her rival as reverentially stunned 
by her. She had reworked the song as a reverie of awed disquiet, until an 
astonishing moment of drama, at a point when it seemed to have ended. Susanna's 
voice stilled and her hands left the piano. An abstract whirr, almost too quiet 
to catch and apparently destined to fade to silence, came from Sten quivering 
the tremolo arm of his guitar. The noise hummed on and on. And only when it 
seemed as if it must stop or the crowd would conclude the singer was ill or 
bewitched, or the PA had frozen, did Susanna's voice return in a tone of 
now-demented purity, simply repeating Jolene's name over and over as her 
register rose to a screech. It was about everything at once – music as notes 
and music as noise, love as anguish, a glamorous star who looked as if she'd 
rather be playing behind a curtain, expert musicianship pared to the bone and 
played only for the sake of music-making, careful composition stretched by 
improv, the works. Susanna is less explicitly a jazz musician than her pianist 
brother Christian and drummer brother Fredrik, but her groups improvise, she 
takes a scalpel to familiar songs and stitches them back together in 
extraordinary ways, and blues, jazz, soul and contemporary rhythmic ideas run 
deep in the work of a unique contemporary artist.John Fordham

Fighting on
 Nile Rodgers of Chic on stage. Photograph: Ben Statham/Redferns via Getty 
Images 
In June, in a muddy field full of drunk, daytime ravers, I had my moment of 
the year. But the man who made it happen looked out of place and out of time.

Dressed in dazzling white, with the guitar he played so perfectly slung across 
low his body – the body coming back to recovery after his prostate cancer, and 
how – Nile Rodgers' show with Chic at theLovebox 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jun/18/lovebox-review> festival in June 
came across like a battlecry. Here I am, he said, listen to all the incredible 
music I've made. His extraordinary life story sat behind that statement: here 
was a man born to a 13-year-old mum addicted to heroin, who spent time as Black 
Panther and a Sesame Street session musician, not only became disco's greatest 
pioneer, but one of pop's most enduring songwriters and producers.

In that unprepossessing corner of Hackney, the hits Rodgers made for his band 
and others rang out like bells. Le Freak, We Are Family, I'm Coming Out, Like a 
Virgin, Let's Dance. The euphoria each one prompted was overwhelming. It was 
especially humbling to think Rodgers nearly didn't make it, and how his illness 
made him come back fighting, collaborating and innovating.

After that glorious Sunday afternoon, I spent the rest of the year keeping up 
with his tweets, and his regular, inspirational blog,Walking On Planet C 
<http://nilerodgers.com/blogs>. I lapped up news that he had gigged with Johnny 
Marr, and been in the studio with Daft Punk. And the emotional effect of that 
hour in his presence chimed through it all – the power of great pop to bring 
such joy and bliss out of the darkest of circumstances.Jude Rogers
 