
And now a few more words from Ioan. The newsagent poet, at the very top of the 
steep main street of the infant Blaenavon booktown, published his last book 
about half an hour ago. Here comes his second, "from the prolific pen of Ioan 
Pearce", and inscribed: "I dedicate this book to .... making a couple of bob 
for Christmas". That's what the whole town has been dedicated to in the last 
month, with mixed fortunes.

 Up on the sleety mountaintop the tarot card reader and the window painter, 
who live in an old bus by an under-employed industrial estate, developed an 
excellent sideline in Christmas trees. The Santa Claus specials chuffed up and 
down the Pontypool and Blaenavon Railway line, the least mysterious tour in the 
world. The little trains start from a platform in a lunar wasteland, which was 
once the heart of the ironworks and one of the busiest places in the world. The 
publicity promises "you can chug chug chug through the beautiful Welsh 
landscape" - and so you can, all half a mile of it.

 It's almost 20 years since the railway's arteries - its link into the main 
railway network - were severed. Now when they want to run a steam weekend, the 
steam engine has to come on the back of a low loader by road, all the way up to 
the top of the valley. It costs a fortune, so Santa is running on diesel.

 When the retired Eton school master, wrapped up in his splendid Edwardian 
motoring coat, waves his flag, the train trundles up a gentle incline to the 
Whistle Inn, plainly visible on the hilltop. The place was thick with elves, 
hopping about on the platform, offering to take Polaroid snaps for Â£2, checking 
names and ages while the man himself waited by the fire in the pub. And every 
one of them, Mr Claus, Mrs Claus, Assistant Mrs Claus elfing the urn in the 
site hut tea-room, every last elf-mother's son and pointy eared daughter, came 
equipped with a strong Coventry accent.

 It was Simon Richards who discovered the little stump of a railway first, 
while visiting his uncle who was working for a lift company two valleys away. 
Now at least once a month the Richards and Moore families pack up after work on 
Friday, drive all the way from Coventry to South Wales, camp out in a mobile 
home, and spend the weekend working on the railway. Trevor Richards, who worked 
on the big railway as a boy, like his father and grandfather before him, before 
becoming a fork lift truck driver in a car assembly plant, looked slightly 
puzzled himself. "We like it," he said finally.

 Down in the town on Sunday the wind was whistling up the main street but the 
lights were out. Two anoraked figures were hunched, hands cupped so they could 
peer in, against the windows of the neighbouring bookshops, Brownings and 
Chattertons. They looked in agony, as if they had just spotted the last vital 
missing ingredients from their Christmas present lists. The only lights were in 
Jonathan-the-Clock's, but the shutters were up. Behind them he was racing to 
finish his new shop counter, and a pair of antique French clockwork jacks for 
turning a roasting spit. The jacks are urgent: he's been invited to deliver 
them in person to France, and if he has them ready in time for Christmas and 
New Year, to join in the feast cooked on them. His door is locked because if he 
leaves it open bloody stupid people keep wandering in. Jonathan-the-Clock was 
trained at the Vlad the Impaler school of customer care. Every shop in town now 
sells some class of books, so anyone who does manage to get across the 
threshold asks what sort of books he sells. "Books for people who can't read," 
he snarls.

 The bookshops have given up opening on Sundays, and even the Saturdays before 
Christmas were painfully quiet. "I thought we'd be run off our feet," said Lata 
sadly in Broadleaf Books, looking out at the deserted street. But it's not so 
mysterious. You can buy books, books, books, and wonderful sausages on a 
Saturday afternoon in Blaenavon. You can't, however, buy trainers, i-Pods, red 
nylon padded bras, lava lamps, barbecue kettles, skateboards or any of the 
other horrors on the average Christmas shopping list.

 Coal is gone, iron is gone, but the whistling wind remains, tireless. The 
next fight, still only a storm cloud over the shoulder of the mountain, is 
about wind farms. It's not so much that most people have strong views about 
wind farms, more that they have extremely strong views about the centuries of 
outsiders coming in and hoovering up their resources, and then buggering off 
when the last drop of blood is squeezed from the stone.

Alan Fossey, author of a fine monthly rant in the free newsletter, Blaenavon 
and Area First, headed his Fighting Windmills. "Whilst we might be blighted by 
the windmill towers on our horizon, we will not be blessed by the electricity 
they are to produce. The farm's eventual output of 30 megawatts will be fed 
exclusively to consumers in Blaenau Gwent." He rang the energy company's press 
office a few weeks ago: his mood was not notably improved by being advised not 
to bother them, but to go away and read the Western Mail instead. Or as 
Ioan-the-Newsagent put it:

"This message from Blaenavon
 Comes with love and kisses.
Take your ugly windmill
and shove it up your missus."
 