
When adman Sir John Hegarty approached Levi’s <http://www.levi.com/GB/en_GB/> 
in the summer of 1998 with an idea that would become the second of three 
adverts for the brand’s Sta-Prest jeans, he left one crucial detail to the end 
of his pitch.

The co-founder of advertising firm BBH <http://www.bartleboglehegarty.com/> 
went through the script: two friends are in a car, reminiscent of Jack 
Kerouac’s novel On the Road. A traffic policeman pulls them over, searches the 
boot, finds a stash of unusually crease-free clothing and lets them go on their 
way.

Then he made his confession: “There’s just one thing I haven’t told you. One 
of the characters in this partnership is a yellow fluffy puppet.”

'I was basically told: you are never showing this' – how we made Cadbury's 
Gorilla ad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jan/07/how-we-made-cadburys-gorilla-ad>
The response to the pitch went from enthusiastic to muted. Hegarty had to make 
the case for it on two further occasions before he finally got his way.

The ads were inspired by a music video released by the French electronic 
musician and film-makerQuentin Dupieux <https://twitter.com/oizo3000> earlier 
that year. That video, for a track calledM Seq 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ieAJ4zn3K1I>, starred a glove puppet he had 
found at a flea market and fell in love with instantly. Dupieux, who also goes 
by the stage name Mr Oizo, had a friend make a body for the puppet and Stéphane 
was born.

The first concern, once the client and Dupieux were on board, was to avoid any 
potential copyright infringements by creating a new character for the ads.
Janet Knechtel <http://www.janetknechtel.com/>, freelancing for the Jim Henson 
Creature Shop <http://creatureshop.com/> in London at the time, was tasked with 
“making Stéphane, butnot Stéphane”.

“Quentin was very attached to him, so my job was to put a lot of ideas 
together and make a new character, Flat Eric,” says Knechtel. “I took Flat Eric 
and Stéphane to a copyright lawyer. She said: ‘If you change the shape of the 
nose, then I will be happy they are different.’ That’s why Flat Eric has a 
triangular nose.”

Just three weeks after her first meeting with BBH, Knechtel set off for Los 
Angeles for the three-day shoot – the newly finished puppet in her hand luggage 
(a spare packed safely away in the hold).

People wrote newspaper think pieces about Eric as the bridge between 
consumerism and popular culture

Dupieux, 24 at the time and with no experience of the world of advertising, 
directed the adverts. He couldn’t believe his good fortune. “It was my first 
time in LA and I managed to take some people from my crew – the director of 
photography, for example. He was a good friend who did the short film with 
Stéphane. It was like doing my short film again, with more money, a good fee 
and more excitement of course, because it was going to play on TV.”

Puppeteer Drew Massey, a Henson regular, was hired for the shoot. “There was 
this patio. The agency and client were there. He just walked out with Flat Eric 
on his hand and gave them a show,” remembers Knechtel. “It was magic because 
they hadn’t seen this puppet come to life.”

For Massey, Flat Eric represented a fun challenge thanks partly to the fact 
that he had no voice in the adverts. “Everything he did had to be physical,” he 
explains. “I like all the subtle movements and reactions between the lines of 
the other characters – and fortunately, Quentin loves all that stuff too. He’s 
really into the surrealism and subtlety.”

Levi’s commissioned some audience research prior to releasing the adverts, the 
results of which weren’t promising. It aired them anyway, in January 1999. 
“Once it got out there, it just exploded,” says Hegarty. “I thought it would be 
really good. I thought it would be daring. Nobody could have predicted the 
success.”

 People built fan-sites dedicated to the puppet, demanded Flat Eric 
merchandise (you can pick up one of the dolls on eBay for around £50 today) and 
wrote newspaper think pieces about the puppet as the bridge between consumerism 
and popular culture. They also bootlegged the adverts’ soundtrack, forcing 
Dupieux to release it as a single – something he hadn’t thought of doing until 
that point.

 “It was supposed to be 20 seconds for the commercial,” he recalls. “So I just 
did what I was doing back in the day: this rough house music thing. I did a 
draft in two hours the day before I went to LA to shoot the commercial.”

The single he released, Flat Beat <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qmsbP13xu6k>
, sold millions of copies and spent two weeks at number one in March 1999. “Of 
course I was happy, but it’s like when you’re at school and you don’t work, but 
get a good grade,” says Dupieux. “I still think Flat Beat was funny. It was a 
cool piece of music for the puppet, but I don’t get the success of it all. It 
was just a stupid loop.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqmsbP13xu6k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqmsbP13xu6k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqmsbP13xu6k&media=>
 Flat Beat, by Mr Oizo. 
The Flat Eric ads were intended to be a one-off campaign, but Levi’s 
commissioned another set that aired the following summer. It’s a source of 
regret for Hegarty that the brand didn’t use the character again after that. He 
thinks Levi’s should have kept hold of the character and kept developing it. 
“Their loss really, but the fact the character has endured is brilliant,” he 
says.


Flat Eric has indeed. Dupieux retained the copyright and has released a number 
of short films and music videos with him over the years, includingone 
<https://vimeo.com/8496873> with a cameo by Pharrell Williams in 2009 and one 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hCq7f2jcbxU> for Red Bull Music Academy in 
October 2015, which saw Massey reunited with Flat Eric for the first time since 
the original shoot. The musician also got a sizeable cut of the sales of Flat 
Eric merchandise, giving him the sort of financial independence he had never 
dreamed of.

“I used to hate that puppet because when I was putting out new music people 
were asking about it,” he says. “I’m super happy now when I look back, of 
course.

“When I do DJ gigs there’s always at least five people who bring the Flat Eric 
puppet. It’s so cute and funny; I created a character that will live forever.”


To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 