
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has condemned teachers planning to wear T-shirts with messages protesting 
offshore detention of refugees, labelling the plan “absolutely inappropriate”.

From next week a group called Teachers for Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> plans to wear shirts with messages 
including “close the camps, bring them here”, calling for an end to offshore 
detention on Manus Island and Nauru.

A spokeswoman for Teachers for Refugees, Lucy Honan, told Guardian Australia 
500 teachers in Victoria and more in New South Wales would take part.

Opening Hearts unwraps offshore detention: 'it's about letting yourself feel 
something'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/07/opening-hearts-unwraps-offshore-detention-its-about-letting-yourself-feel-something>
Asked about the protest on Melbourne’s 3AW Radio on Thursday, the prime 
minister said the protest was “absolutely inappropriate in classrooms” because 
“teachers should be focused on teaching”.

Turnbull linked the activism to recent poor results in science and maths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/australian-students-results-in-maths-and-science-falling-in-international-rankings>
 andthe three-yearly international Pisa standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/pisa-results-australian-students-science-maths-and-reading-in-long-term-decline>
, noting “our ranking has gone backwards” in the tests.

“There is a lot of work to be done in our schools, and it doesn’t involve 
political campaigning.”

Honan said it was not surprising that Turnbull and the federal government 
wanted to silence the protest, notingthe Border Force Act prohibited teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/21/teachers-social-workers-demand-right-to-talk-about-offshore-detention-centres>
 who worked in offshore detention from speaking out about conditions there.

Honan said the protest would still go ahead because teachers were “very good 
at standing up to bullying” and had strong support from the Australian 
Education Union and refugee advocacy groups.

The federal education minister, Simon Birmingham, has reportedly written to 
his Victorian and NSW counterparts 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria/teachers-for-refugee-activists-could-face-sack-over-tshirt-campaign/news-story/fc2e73925b4e251b808fd7658e1af1b0>
, urging them to ensure teachers were aware of their requirements under 
policies.

“Parents rightly expect teachers to have the education of their students as 
their priority and not a focus on ­advocating a political position,” he wrote.

A spokeswoman for the Victorian education department said that teachers in 
government schools “are free to support causes in their own time but they 
should not use their professional position to make political statements”.

“Principals can advise teachers about how they can take part in this type of 
activity and still comply with their obligations as teachers.”

Honan said the community expected teachers to stand up against the abuse of 
children and the treatment of children in Nauru constituted “mass scale abuse”.

She said teachers had a right to political opinions and protest. The group was 
not concerned about possible disciplinary consequences because they were 
confident in their numbers and the tide of public opinion, Honan said.

Over the past three years the remote immigration detention facilities have 
been plagued by reports of shocking conditions, poor management and 
deteriorating mental health of asylum seekers.

The Guardian’s publication of the Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
 showed the trauma and abuse inflicted on asylum seekers and refugees – 
particularly children – on Nauru.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fyou-wish-you-could-save-them-teachers-describe-anguish-of-children-held-on-nauru-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You%20wish%20you%20could%20save%20them'%3A%20teachers%20describe%20anguish%20of%20children%20held%20on%20Nauru%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fyou-wish-you-could-save-them-teachers-describe-anguish-of-children-held-on-nauru-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%20wish%20you%20could%20save%20them%27%3A%20teachers%20describe%20anguish%20of%20children%20held%20on%20Nauru%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fyou-wish-you-could-save-them-teachers-describe-anguish-of-children-held-on-nauru-video&media=>
‘You wish you could save them’: teachers describe anguish of children held on 
Nauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/aug/11/you-wish-you-could-save-them-teachers-describe-anguish-of-children-held-on-nauru-video>
An asylum seeker was beaten to death by guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/21/men-accused-of-reza-baratis-death-in-manus-detention-centre-stand-trial>
 in a wave of unrest on Manus Island in February 2014, and on Nauru in May 2016
an asylum seeker self-immolated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
 in front of staff from the UN high commissioner for refugees.

Turnbull also expressed confidence that Australia’s refugee resettlement deal 
with the United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/refugees-held-in-australian-offshore-detention-to-be-resettled-in-us>
 would go ahead, despite reports thatcongressional Republicans wanted greater 
scrutiny of the deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/us-republicans-secret-refugee-deal-australia>
, which could lead to the president elect, Donald Trump, tearing it up once in 
office.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-on-qa-refugees-coming-to-australia-not-an-option-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malcolm%20Turnbull%20on%20Q%26A%3A%20refugees%20coming%20to%20Australia%20'not%20an%20option%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-on-qa-refugees-coming-to-australia-not-an-option-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malcolm%20Turnbull%20on%20Q%26A%3A%20refugees%20coming%20to%20Australia%20%27not%20an%20option%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-on-qa-refugees-coming-to-australia-not-an-option-video&media=>
Malcolm Turnbull on Q&A: refugees coming to Australia ‘not an option’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jun/21/malcolm-turnbull-on-qa-refugees-coming-to-australia-not-an-option-video> 