
The former three-term governor of New York Mario Cuomo 
<http://nypost.com/tag/mario-cuomo/>’s legacy as a great liberal and gifted 
orator inspired a brand of politics that defied classification, championing 
progressive values with a pragmatic approach, his son, the recently re-elected 
governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, said in a eulogy for his father on Tuesday.

Andrew Cuomo <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> delivered the 
eulogy at a funeral service held at St Ignatius Loyola church on Manhattan’s 
Upper East Side. In it, Cuomo remembered his father as a politician and a 
family man shaped by his modest upbringing in Queens, New York.

“At his core, at his best, he was a philosopher and he was a poet, and he was 
an advocate, and he was a crusader. Mario Cuomo was the keynote speaker for our 
better angels,” Cuomo said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmario-cuomo-funeral-andrew-cuomo-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bace7dff30bb4071543006a575b28d9ff9acd8e%2F0_301_5052_3029%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Advocate%2C%20crusader'%20and%20family%20man%3A%20Mario%20Cuomo%20eulogised%20by%20son%20Andrew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmario-cuomo-funeral-andrew-cuomo-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Advocate%2C%20crusader%27%20and%20family%20man%3A%20Mario%20Cuomo%20eulogised%20by%20son%20Andrew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmario-cuomo-funeral-andrew-cuomo-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bace7dff30bb4071543006a575b28d9ff9acd8e%2F0_301_5052_3029%2F2000.jpg>
 State troopers salute as a casket containing the body of Mario Cuomo is 
carried from church. Photograph: Seth Wenig/AP 
The former governor died last week at age 82, just hours after his son was 
inaugurated for a second term as governor. Mario Cuomo had been ill for some 
time.


The son of Italian immigrants, Mario Cuomo was “always an outsider”, his son 
said. “That was his edge.”

He is perhaps best remembered for a speech he made at the 1984 Democratic 
national convention, in which he challenged Ronald Reagan’s vision of America 
as “a shining city on a hill”.

“A shining city is perhaps all the president sees from the portico of the 
White House and the veranda of his ranch, where everyone seems to be doing 
well,” he said to resounding applause from the crowd at the Moscone Center in 
San Francisco, California. “But there’s another city; there’s another part to 
the shining the city; the part where some people can’t pay their mortgages, and 
most young people can’t afford one; where students can’t afford the education 
they need, and middle-class parents watch the dreams they hold for their 
children evaporate.”


In that speech, Mario Cuomo said that America was divided “between the lucky 
and the left-out, the royalty and the rabble”. It was the left out and the 
rabble who Mario Cuomo fought the hardest for, his son said during his sweeping 
eulogy.

“Mario Cuomo’s birthmark from the outer boroughs was deep and he wore it with 
pride. He had a natural connection with the outsider looking in,” Cuomo said.

He thanked the hundreds of New Yorkers as well as dignitaries, politicians and 
celebrities who came to pay their respects at the wake on Monday at the funeral 
on Tuesday.

Among the mourners who filled the 800-seat church were Bill and Hillary Clinton
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, US attorney general 
nominee Loretta Lynch, New York’s Mayor Bill de Blasio, and his wife, Chirlane 
McCray, former New York mayors Michael Bloomberg and Rudy Giuliani, and 
legendary singer Tony Bennett.

A small handful of people stood in the freezing cold on Tuesday to glimpse the 
former governor’s casket, draped in aNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> State flag as it was carried up 
the church steps, and pay their final respects to a man whose politics they 
believe changed the state – and his own party – for the better.

Henry Singleton, an organizer with the SEIU, stood outside the church carrying 
a sign commemorating the late governor. He said Mario Cuomo instituted many 
positive changes for the city, but most memorable, he said, was his 
contribution to improving the state healthcare system.

“The way that he cared for New York state healthcare was major,” Singleton 
said. “He put health care on the map, and made sure that healthcare workers had 
healthcare. That was a major turn for us.”

On the opposite side of the street, two women braved the cold to watch the 
procession from an area cordoned off by police.

Remembering Cuomo, one of the women, Maria, said: “He was a compassionate man. 
And a brilliant man.” The woman next to her, Lisa, chimed in to agree: “Yes, 
brilliant.”

Maria said she believes politicians today are more focused on winning the next 
election than improving the lives of their constituents.

She said: “I don’t think they make liberals like Governor Mario Cuomo any 
more.”
 