
Someone told me that giving up my baby for adoption would be “like recovering 
from a nasty case of measles”. I was expected to just get on with it afterwards 
as if nothing had happened.

I was 21 and had got pregnant after my first sexual experience at university. 
My mother organised for me to go to a guesthouse in Devon for the birth, and 
immediately after my son was born he was taken away.

I was given a rock crystal necklace by the adoptive parents, and I remember 
thinking that it was no replacement for a baby, but they were being kind – it 
wasn’t their fault.

I had no choice but to pull myself together and never mention my baby again. I 
blocked it out and thought it was a well-kept secret but it turned out that 
most of my friends and fellow students knew.

Catholic church apologises for role in 'forced adoptions' over 30-year period
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/03/catholic-church-apologises-for-role-in-forced-adoptions-over-30-year-period>
One in particular reminded me recently that I had written her a letter saying 
I was having a baby and I should be happy and surrounded by flowers, but 
instead I had to give my baby away. I warned her: “Don’t let it happen to you.”

It wasn’t until 47 years later, when my son came to find me, that I realised 
what a weight of shame and guilt I had been carrying around.

It was a relief, a joy, to be able to tell my friends about my experience and 
know that in this day and age they would not judge me.

At the time, there was no real separation between social norms and what the 
church thought was right. My mother was working class, strong and domineering, 
and when I told her I was pregnant she did what they did then to terminate a 
pregnancy – she put me in a hot bath and gave me lots of gin.

It didn’t work. I remember saying “I want to keep my child”, but at that time 
it was unthinkable. I knew I had to do what I was told because being an 
unmarried mother was something you kept quiet.

Lots of women who this happened to were naive and very frightened. There was 
no counselling or support or help, so you just got on with it. The approach 
was: “Let’s do this as efficiently as possible and then pretend it never 
happened.” There was no question of any psychological impact.

But of course, you cannot experience something like that without it affecting 
you. It coloured many parts of my life. When my daughter was born I was 
terrified. I remember looking at her and thinking: “How am I going to keep you 
alive?” At some deep level I must have feared another child being taken away 
from me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fafter-a-lifetime-of-loss-church-apology-is-too-little-too-late%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F014111a03d9e315ddb220a4c2054675e8ac45bc9%2F0_363_5446_3268%2F5446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='After%20a%20lifetime%20of%20loss%2C%20church%20apology%20is%20too%20little%2C%20too%20late'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fafter-a-lifetime-of-loss-church-apology-is-too-little-too-late%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27After%20a%20lifetime%20of%20loss%2C%20church%20apology%20is%20too%20little%2C%20too%20late%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fafter-a-lifetime-of-loss-church-apology-is-too-little-too-late%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F014111a03d9e315ddb220a4c2054675e8ac45bc9%2F0_363_5446_3268%2F5446.jpg>
 Bynner was forced to give up her son when she was 21. Photograph: Alicia 
Canter for the Guardian 
When I first spoke to my son again I felt an incredible bubble of happiness 
surrounding me. I am so glad he looked for me because I felt too ashamed to 
look for him, as if I didn’t deserve to be in his life because I had let him go.

We met in a pub and he hugged me and sat next to me, joking: “I haven’t seen 
you for ages.” We talked for hours.

The following months were a mixture of joy and pain because I resented his 
adoptive mother who had seen him grow up. It was terribly unfair to her, but I 
didn’t know how I fitted in. This has got better over time and now I can 
appreciate how difficult my appearance on the scene must have been for her.

The church’s apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/03/catholic-church-apologises-for-role-in-forced-adoptions-over-30-year-period>
 is quite frankly too little, too late. I am not the only casualty of what 
happened. My son is too and although he was raised in a loving and comfortable 
family, he suffered – from lack of identity, from a feeling of abandonment.

What does an apology mean? It doesn’t take away the pain. For women to be told 
“I’m sorry” after a lifetime of loss doesn’t help much.
 