
Right now, walking across the remote east Pilbara in the Western Australian 
desert, is a wagon train of more than 100 artists, activists and traditional 
owners.

Along the way, stories are told about the land: where water is sourced, where 
the animals and the plants are, where traditional burial and hunting grounds 
may be, and why mining on this land must not go ahead.

The walk is being lead by the traditional owners, the Parnngurr people, who 
are protesting a uranium mine being put on their land.

Antony Hegarty, the Martu and the mine: land custodians fight corporate might
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2015/jun/19/antony-hegarty-the-martu-and-the-mine-land-custodians-fight-corporate-might>
The proposed uranium mine at Kintyre – a joint venture between Cameco and 
Mitsubishi – last yearreceived approval from the federal government  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/06/canadian-uranium-miner-gets-approval-to-develop-western-australia-site>
and poses a threat to the environment and the way of life of traditional 
owners, according to activists.

One of the trekkers is Anohni, the former Antony and the Johnsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/antonyandthejohnsons> singer, who has vowed 
to do whatever she can to promote opposition to the mine.

Anohni, who was in Sydney last week for a series of shows as part of the Vivid 
festival 
<http://www.vividsydney.com/event/music/anohni-antony-johnsons-oneohtrix-point-never-present-hopelessness>
, spoke to Guardian Australia as she was preparing to embark on the seven-day, 
100km walk.

“There are a lot of supporters from all over Australia walking – around 150 of 
us. It’s a new route that the elders haven’t traversed before. We are going to 
a few different sites to hear about their significance. It’s a slightly 
complicated route. But it will be a real adventure. I can’t wait,” she said.

The group will camp at night along the route and spend the day walking and 
talking.

“As a visitor, I feel very fortunate to tag along behind this group of 
people,” saidAnohni <https://www.theguardian.com/music/anohni>. “I am there as 
an act of solidarity but it’s inevitable that I will be inspired. You move in a 
blinkered way through the tunnels of your life but when I’ve been with the 
Martu [people of Parnngurr] I’ve seen things from a much bigger point of view. 
It’s a heart-opening experience for me… You go where it’s warm.”

Anohni first met members of the Martu community in 2013 when invited by Sydney 
media artist Lynette Wallworth to accompany her on a 10-day trip to the Pilbara.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fantony-jonsons-martu-australia-indigenous-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434413930143%2FAntony-and-the-Martu-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antony%20Hegarty%20with%20artist%20Parrngurr%20Yarrkalpa%20and%20the%20Martu%20women%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fantony-jonsons-martu-australia-indigenous-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antony%20Hegarty%20with%20artist%20Parrngurr%20Yarrkalpa%20and%20the%20Martu%20women%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fantony-jonsons-martu-australia-indigenous-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434413930143%2FAntony-and-the-Martu-001.jpg>
Anohni works with Martu artists in this short video, Lynette Wallworth’s Always 
Walking Country. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2015/jun/19/antony-jonsons-martu-australia-indigenous-video>
 Anohni visited Australia in late 2013, spending time with the Indigenous Martu 
people of the Western Desert. The artwork featured is Yarrkalpa 2013, by Martu 
artists 
“That was the first time I had been out with the them to the west Australian 
desert. It was a life-changing experience for me. To be with these women was 
deeply inspiring – and it left me with that sense that I would do what it would 
take to help them.”

That included going on the ABC’s Q&A program  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/23/former-terrorism-suspect-and-mp-steve-ciobo-trade-insults-on-rancorous-qa>
to raise awareness of the mine and doing two benefit concertsat Hobart’s Dark 
Mofo. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/17/antony-hegarty-condemns-genocide-of-indigenous-peoples-in-australia-and-us>

“People ask me – ‘why this mine? Why these people?’ A sequences of events lead 
me to this place,” said Anhoni.

Yet there was also something familiar about the women of Martu.

“There’s a tremendous sense of presence to this particular group of women that 
reminded me in some parts of my own country – women from the hills of Ireland, 
the west coast that I descend from. There’s a sense of inseparableness of body, 
spirit and landscape that I recognise from my own grandmothers. I went to them 
as a student in some way – as a vicarious kind of student – and someone who 
wanted to lend a hand. And so I was drawn here.”

The Parnngurr community is concerned about impacts to water. The Yantikutji 
creek runs either side of the mine, just 500m from the proposed open pit, while 
to the north is a permanent water hole. The community is not confident the 
company understands how the complex water networks are linked, and therefore 
how to manage them, according to the AustralianConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Foundation (ACF).

There are also concerns about the 28 threatened species that live in the area, 
including the critically endangerednight parrot 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-05/habitat-of-endangered-night-parrot-placed-under-exclusion-zone/7475674>
, the endangered northern quoll, marsupial mole, vulnerable greater bilby, 
crest-tailed mulgara and rock wallaby.

Anohni, the artist once known as Antony Hegarty, on life beyond the Johnsons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/09/trans-singer-anohni-new-album-hopelessness>
Dave Sweeney from the ACF, who is on the walk, told Guardian Australia the 
Martu are escalating their efforts to halt the Canadian/Japanese joint venture 
on their land.

“Kintyre is in one of the most unique and diverse ecosystems in the country 
and is directly connected to WA’s largest national park,” said Sweeney.

“The proposal to mine at Kintyre has been actively contested since the 1980s 
and will continue to be a priority issue for the environment movement given the 
high conservation values of the area and the unique risks of uranium mining.”

Walking across the land will also give activists a greater sense of connection 
with the place they are fighting to protect.

“It’s a huge landscape – it’s a really majestic place,” said Anohni, trying to 
put the scale of it into words. “It’s really hard to put a finger on it but 
there’s a sense of presence and integrity and patience, dignity and 
perseverance and intense intuitive wisdom that this particular community of 
people have. There is almost an unbroken connection to the land – they haven’t 
been radically disrupted. They are very impressive people – it’s humbling to be 
around these women.”
 