
Jihadis have welcomed Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s surprise victory in the 
American presidential race, saying his election would sow greater division and 
expose what they described as the hatred and racism of the west towards Muslims.

The endorsement of the election result by extreme Islamist figures highlighted 
fears that Trump’s divisive rhetoric and call to ban Muslims from entering the 
US could empower radicals who have argued that the west seeks Islam’s 
destruction and is at war with its adherents.

The mind of Islamic State: more coherent and consistent than Nazism | Robert 
Manne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/the-mind-of-islamic-state-more-coherent-and-consistent-than-nazism>
The idea has been central to Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> propaganda – at its height the terror 
group called on Muslims to abandon life abroad and flock to the territories it 
controls or risk indignity and oppression in western societies.

“Trump’s victory is an important step towards the victory of the Sunnis,” said 
Abdullah al-Muhaisny, a key authority among radical circles in Syria, who is 
believed by the US to be in league with al-Qaida.

“We have long tried to explain that the fight is not against terrorism, but 
against the Sunnis, and the mujahideen are just the frontline,” he added in a 
series of tweets on Thursday. “The American strategy will not change much, what 
has changed is that the war is open and not secret, and that is a good thing.”

Muhaisny said Trump’s victory will lay the groundwork for “bloody battles and 
great chaos,” saying he hoped the president-elect’s strategy of “exclusion and 
crushing opponents” will sow greater division in America.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi, a key intellectual figure in al-Qaida who once shared 
a cell with Isis founder Abu Mus’ab al-Zarqawi, said he hoped Trump’s election 
would herald America’s ruin.

“Trump reveals the real mentality of the Americans and their racism towards 
Muslims and Arabs and everything,” he said in a tweet. “He only reveals what 
his predecessors have kept hidden.”

Rita Katz, the director of Site Intelligence, an organisation that tracks 
jihadi chatter on social media and online forums, said militants were 
predicting that Trump’s election would unite the ranks of jihadis and expose 
latent hatred towards Muslims.

Katz tweeted: “Pro-#ISIS & #Jihadis say they “prefer” #Trump to #Clinton 
because he is “telling Muslims what half of America thinks of them.”

Hamza Caribi, who runs a Twitter account affiliated with Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, 
the former al-Qaida wing in Syria, said Trump proved the failure of democracy. 
“From this day forward we will no longer need videos explaining the west’s 
plots,” he said. “We will only need to retweet what Trump says.”
 