
As the #OscarsSoWhite protest reaches its climax in advance of Sunday’s 
Academy Awards, a wide-ranging academic study suggests that the problem in 
Hollywood goes further than one of ethnicity: exclusion extends just as 
severely to women and LGBT film-makers.

The Comprehensive Annenberg Report on Diversity, issued by the Annenberg 
School for Communication and Journalism at the University of Southern 
California, concludes that statistics on non-white participation in the film 
and TV industries remain terrible. “We have an inclusion crisis,” said Stacy L 
Smith, director of the Annenberg school’sMedia, Diversity, & Social Change 
Initiative <http://annenberg.usc.edu/pages/DrStacyLSmithMDSCI>, and the study’s 
lead author.

The figures make equally bad reading for all groups disadvantaged in 
Hollywood. Women make up only 3% of all film directors, while only 2% of 
speaking characters in all 414 film, TV and digital shows assessed were 
identified as lesbian, gay or bisexual. Over half of all films or shows fail to 
include a single non-white character (despite the fact that 37% of the US 
population is categorised as “non-white”). Only two black female directors 
could be identified –Selma <https://www.theguardian.com/film/selma>’s Ava 
DuVernay andBelle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/belle>’s Amma Asante – with 
only seven trans characters in total.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fhollywood-so-white-diversity-report-us-film-industry-ethnic-minorities-lgbt-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bdaab75c8d509adb8076dae0ddd675ea5a83d41%2F511_78_1574_2419%2F1574.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23HollywoodSoWhite%3A%20diversity%20report%20gives%20damning%20picture%20of%20US%20film%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fhollywood-so-white-diversity-report-us-film-industry-ethnic-minorities-lgbt-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23HollywoodSoWhite%3A%20diversity%20report%20gives%20damning%20picture%20of%20US%20film%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fhollywood-so-white-diversity-report-us-film-industry-ethnic-minorities-lgbt-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bdaab75c8d509adb8076dae0ddd675ea5a83d41%2F511_78_1574_2419%2F1574.jpg>
 British screenwriter/director Amma Asante. Photograph: Jonathan Hordle/Rex 
shutterstock 
The Annenberg report, known as CARD, analysed Hollywood feature films released 
in 2014 – including titles such as Birdman, Maleficent, and Ride Along – and 
major TV and digital shows broadcast between September 2014 and August 2015. 
Smith said: “It is clear that the ecosystem of entertainment is exclusionary 
... The results speak to the landscape of media and the erasure of different 
groups on screen and behind the camera.”

CARD’S headline figures showed that 33% of characters were female – but other 
analyses demonstrated that women made up 25% of characters over 40 years old, 
and that 33% of female characters were shown with “partial or full nudity” (as 
against 10% of male characters). In significant behind-the-camera roles, women 
accounted for 15% of directors and 28% of writers – dropping to a shocking 3% 
and 10% respectively when film is considered separately. (Along with DuVernay 
and Asante, the other women film directors in CARD’s figures for the year 
appear to be Angelina Jolie with Unbroken and Shana Feste with Endless Love.) 
The report also tallied up women in executive positions, with some 39% 
occupying senior corporate roles across the whole industry.

Figures were similarly depressing when it came to ethnic minorities, with the 
study’s authors suggesting “the hashtag #OscarsSoWhite should be changed to 
#HollywoodSoWhite, as our findings show that an epidemic of invisibility runs 
throughout popular storytelling”. Only 28% of characters were identified as 
belonging to an ethnic minority, and only 12% of films or TV shows reflecting 
the actual balance of ethnic minorities in US society. Ethnic minorities 
constituted only 12% of film directors – an area, amazingly, where film is 
doing better than either broadcast TV or streaming services (at 9% and 11% 
respectively).

The study found that LGB characters were also under-represented, with some 2% 
of speaking roles identified, compared to the 3.5% identified as LGB in the US 
population. Only seven trans characters were found in all of the films or TV 
shows examined – four of which came from the same digital show.

For Corrina Antrobus, director of the Bechdel Test Fest 
<http://bechdeltestfest.com/>, which promotes women film-makers, the report’s 
conclusions are “very shocking”, even if its Hollywood orientation doesn’t 
necessarily reflect the breadth of activity in the film world. “It’s not the 
full story but it’s necessary to cause change. [The report] is not talking just 
about directors and performers, but also about people who are working at the 
networks and studios. It’s identified the bigger picture, about hiring and 
firing – that’s what needs to change also. It’s offered a wider insight into 
the overall structure of the system.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmeryl-streep-addresses-diversity-row-all-africans-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F11%2F1455227181673%2FKP_1790360_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meryl%20Streep%20addresses%20diversity%20row%3A%20%E2%80%98we%E2%80%99re%20all%20Africans%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmeryl-streep-addresses-diversity-row-all-africans-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meryl%20Streep%20addresses%20diversity%20row%3A%20%E2%80%98we%E2%80%99re%20all%20Africans%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmeryl-streep-addresses-diversity-row-all-africans-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F11%2F1455227181673%2FKP_1790360_crop_640x480.jpg>
The report also makes clear throughout that TV and digital platforms are 
performing better than film, with the latter scoring worse in nearly all 
categories. Antrobus suggests that it may be “TV’s lower stakes” that have made 
the difference, and that “if it’s happening in TV there’s reason it can’t be 
happening in film”. “There’s a much different audience for TV: more diverse, 
much wider, and they have to study their audience more. In film, you suspect 
there’s much more of a director-ego thing, and a hangover from the old studio 
system: the old white boys’ club helping their old white boy mates make more 
movies about old white men.”


Antrobus suggests that the proposed change in Oscar voting rules shows that 
change is possible. “Creating conversations is vital – there are so many 
components to it. It’s vital that people are finding their voices so much more. 
The #OscarsSoWhite hashtag wouldn’t have been possible 20 years ago, and now we 
have this open forum to express dismay. If you don’t listen to your audience, 
you won’t thrive as a business, and I am hoping that the industry does listen.”
 