
This week’s dilemma

Dear NGO agony aunts,

I was sent to Sierra Leone to respond to the Ebola outbreak. After coming back 
I had anxiety, depression, stress, anger and suicidal thoughts. It took me a 
while to realise (1.5-2 months of not being able to sleep and panic attacks and 
getting angry at everything and everyone) that something was wrong. I contacted 
the headquarter’s health team to ask for help (ie could they pay for a 
psychologist) but was denied [this], because they would only cover medical 
bills within 30 days of end of deployment.

So now I need to pay for a psychologist (without any money, because I don’t 
have a contract). What can I do to make my ex-organisation pay for my 
work-related medical bills?


Aid workers speak out about mental health: 'I was afraid they would think I 
couldn't handle it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/aid-workers-stories-mental-health>
‘Checking the labour law in Sierra Leone is a good place to start’

Scott Anderson, human resources and programme delivery expert

It sounds like you did some great work in response to the Ebola outbreak, and 
I’m sorry to hear about your experiences following your work in Sierra Leone.

There are several possibilities you can take to address the situation. First, 
you should view for yourself the relevant organisational policies for your 
category of employment including associated benefits and entitlements, the 
duration of those benefits, and periods of applicability.

Second, determine what appeals processes your former organisation and the 
insurance company may have. Third, the labour laws in the country where your 
former employer is based may specify a standard of care and responsibility of 
the organisation towards its staff and former staff. Thelibrary of congress 
<http://www.loc.gov/law/help/guide/nations/sierraleone.php> has a digital copy 
of the labour law in Sierra Leone and is a good place to start. You could 
reference these to determine if the organisation is compliant with the law.

Use this information to continue the discussion with your former organisation. 
If no resolution is found, you may wish to consult a lawyer to understand legal 
options available to you to compel the organisation to assist you.

'I'm being bullied and pushed out of my NGO, what can I do?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/23/im-being-bullied-and-pushed-out-of-my-ngo-what-can-i-do>
You should also research alternative options for treatment while you are 
pursuing efforts with your former employer. Many organisations provide this 
assistance pro bono, allowing you to access treatment. One example isMHA 
<http://%20http//mhatriangle.org/news/pro-bono-counseling-services>. They 
provide free mental health counselling if you are based in the US and can help 
you identify an organisation that may assist you. I wish you all the best in 
your efforts and in finding appropriate treatment.

 * In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the 
crisis support service lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan 
be found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.

Do you have a problem you would like help with? Email us on 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com with NGO Agony Aunts in the subject line. All 
letters will be kept anonymous.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 