

Send us your questions on topics from mental health and wellbeing to 
employment rights and we’ll get answers from our expertpanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/23/ngo-agony-aunts-meet-the-panel>
.

This week’s dilemma

'I'm being bullied and pushed out of my NGO, what can I do?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/23/im-being-bullied-and-pushed-out-of-my-ngo-what-can-i-do>
Dear NGO agony aunts,

Two years into working in the aid sector, I’m already starting to lose hope 
and passion for my career. The main comments I hear from people are ‘Oh, you’re 
so lucky to be young and energetic and not cynical yet … enjoy it while it 
lasts’. It is upsetting and discouraging to see how negative so many people are 
about their line of work, and also how little interaction there is with actual 
communities, both in NGOs and the UN, particularly as non-national staff. I 
can’t spend my entire career solely behind a computer and becoming more and 
more negative. Am I being naïve about this career path or is there some other 
route I could approach?


‘Adopt a lifelong learning philosophy’

Maia Gedde, author of Working in International Development and Humanitarian 
Assistance: A career guide <https://www.routledge.com/products/9780415698351>

Starting out with a conviction that you can change the world and ending up 
disgruntled and cynical, but unwilling to leave a good lifestyle and a tax-free 
salary is not an uncommon pathway. The question is how to avoid becoming a 
cynic, disconnected from the communities that justify your existence, and keep 
the passion that brought you to the sector in the first place.

 * If you are working a project that you feel has a really shallow 
understanding of the contexts, don’t just keep going to satisfy donors and 
management. Instead suggest the necessary changes to make an impact. Similarly, 
don’t just do M&E (monitoring and evaluation) and produce the results your 
donors may want to see but you know don’t reflect the changes on the ground. 
Try to incorporate more rigorous impact evaluation at the start of the 
programme (the medical equivalent is a randomised control trial) to really 
understand the changes, if any. If there are none, you will know you need to 
adapt your intervention rather than invest in something that is useless. 
 * Working “in the field” is not as exciting as it sounds, and it does involve 
a significant amount of time glued to your desk and in meetings. You should 
have a chance to get out of the office, but the desk work still has to be done, 
so how hands-on you want to be is a personal decision. If you’re working 
overseas don’t isolate yourself in an ivory tower. Make an effort to integrate 
and make local friends as they will be your primary source of learning and 
understanding. 
 * Recognise that there are few quick fixes, and these results are often 
short-lived. Look for long-term change and take time to really understand the 
environment, rather than just see it from your own perspective. 
 * Adopt a lifelong-learning philosophy, and invest in your own training, as 
many organisations won’t have a budget for this. 
Make an effort to integrate and make local friends as they will be your 
primary source of learning and understanding

The bubble of idealism might quickly burst, but the quest to end poverty 
remains one of the big challenges for humanity. It needs level-headed, informed 
and knowledgeable professionals to address these challenges. Are you one of 
them?

‘Know yourself, find mentors, and play to your strengths’

Shana Montesol Johnson, certified career coach 
<http://developmentcrossroads.com/about-shana/>

It sounds as if hope and passion are critical to you, and you’re dismayed to 
see these flagging already. I applaud your level of self-awareness. Here are 
some things that might help you keep on track:

 * Be clear about your priorities; many jobs in development are office-based, 
so if interaction with communities and minimal time behind a computer are 
important to you, look for – or craft – roles that call for that.Knowing 
yourself 
<http://developmentcrossroads.com/2011/11/the-most-important-person-to-know-in-aid-and-development/>
 will help you find (or create) the job that will be the best fit for you.

 * Play to your strengths. People who use their strengths every day are six 
times more likely to be engaged in their work, and three times more likely to 
say they have an excellent quality of life, according to research by Gallup.
Identify your strengths 
<http://developmentcrossroads.com/2012/04/5-ways-to-identify-your-strengths/> 
and make sure your work allows you to use them on a daily basis. 
 * Seek out mentors and colleagues who are positive and supportive. Yes, there 
are some cynical people in this industry. There are also many people working in 
development who are satisfied, happy, and excited about their work. Find them, 
spend time with them, learn from them. 
 * Practice gratitude. Our brains are wired to pay more attention to negative 
events than positive ones. One way to counter that tendency is to cultivate a 
practice of gratitude – writing down five things you’re grateful for, on a 
weekly basis,can have measurable benefits 
<http://emmons.faculty.ucdavis.edu/gratitude-and-well-being/> in optimism, 
health, and progress towards goals. 
Writing down five things you’re grateful for, on a weekly basis, can have 
measurable benefits in optimism

‘Remember the progress that has been made over the last 20 years’

Kate Denman, training coordinator, RedR <http://www.redr.org.uk/>

It is important to understand the realities of humanitarian and development 
projects and learn from experiences, both positive and negative, so that we can 
improve and professionalise our work. Unfortunately, it is all too easy to 
simply focus on projects that have not met the needs of the people, or even had 
negative harm on communities. Unlike other lines of work, when this sector 
falls short, lives are lost and suffering increases. It is crucial for us to 
learn lessons but also to recognise how much the sector has improved and the 
progress that has been made over the last 20 years. This may help promote 
feelings of pride in your work and involvement in building more accountable and 
valuable programmes.

You need to learn how to manage motivations, both yours and colleagues. Not 
everyone working in the sector will be motivated by the same reasons and this 
can be a challenge if you are expecting everyone to share your enthusiasm and 
outlook.


NGO Agony Aunts: meet the panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/23/ngo-agony-aunts-meet-the-panel>
A lot of the hard work is done by working on a computer, writing proposals, 
budgets, emails etc. Understanding and negotiating how you can best contribute 
to a humanitarian project takes careful consideration. Gaining experience in 
different roles can help to navigate your path. Perhaps field work would mean 
more interaction with the beneficiary, but not always. You may also sit behind 
a desk in another country managing projects and find that this career is not 
for you. From my experience, teaching and capacity-building often means you 
have direct contact with local beneficiaries. I have also found smaller NGOs 
will have more opportunities to build a range of skills and work with less 
paperwork. As projects are also smaller, it is easier to monitor the progress 
and see the benefits.

Do you have a problem you would like help with? Email us on 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com with “NGO agony aunts” in the subject line. All 
letters will be kept anonymous.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 