
This week’s dilemma

Dear NGO agony aunts,

I’m currently studying a bachelor’s degree in journalism and I hope to work in 
communications within the NGO field. I have volunteer experience with NGOs 
abroad and with the Red Cross here in the UK but when I look at jobs they 
always ask for a master’s qualification. Is a master’s degree absolutely 
crucial? What could/would make me stand out when applying for an NGO? I’m 21 
years old, what are the chances of me actually getting a position within the 
NGO sector, as most ask for years’ worth of experience?

'I'm being bullied and pushed out of my NGO, what can I do?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/23/im-being-bullied-and-pushed-out-of-my-ngo-what-can-i-do>
‘There are many opportunities, but a master’s alone won’t open the doors to 
them’


Maia Gedde, author of Working in International Development and Humanitarian 
Assistance: a career guide 
<https://www.routledge.com/products/9780415698351?utm_source=www.routledge.com&utm_medium=cms&utm_campaign=sbu3_mbs_2pr_8cm_2dev_nba15_x_x>

A master’s is a tick-box criteria, but employers often look favourably on 
relevant experience instead. But how do you get that relevant experience? And, 
might a master’s be the solution? I explore many of these issues in chapter six 
of my book, which looks at whether you should do a master’s, what in, when and 
how to get the most out of it. My advice to you would be:

 * Don’t be too impatient in getting your ideal job. It’s good to have a clear 
goal, and gear your studies and work experience towards this. The 
competitiveness of the NGO sector, coupled with tight budgets – so little to 
invest in your professional development – mean that NGOs are not always the 
best employers for fresh graduates. In the long run, you might move faster in a 
corporate role, learning your trade and gaining skills that you can later 
market to the NGO sector. 
 * If you decide on a master’s, do it to gain relevant skills and knowledge, 
not just to tick the box. I would advise you break up your BA and your MA with 
a few years’ work to help you to focus. The person featured in the 
communications case study in my book studied global communications and 
specialised in development communications. If money is an issue, look into 
master’s courses in Scandinavian countries, which have some good MA programmes 
in international development, peace and conflict, etc, free of charge for EU 
nationals. 
 * Communications roles within NGOs are broad: from internal communications 
(enhancing organisational structures and the work of the team), to corporate 
communications (outwards facing, for PR and advocacy) to communications for 
development (C4D) which aims to bring about positive social change. Try them 
all, then specialise to help you stand out in these jobs. 
 * Many smaller NGOs can’t afford a dedicated communications person. This is a 
great opportunity for you, if you have some spare time, to approach a small 
organisation with a proposal on how a communications specialist could benefit 
their work. Depending on the strength of your sales pitch, they might agree on 
a fee for some freelance work: a win-win situation for both of you. 
There are many opportunities, but a master’s alone won’t open the doors to 
them. It will require dedication and entrepreneurialism.

NGO Agony Aunts: meet the panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/23/ngo-agony-aunts-meet-the-panel>
‘Try a volunteer or junior position in an NGO’

Kate Denman, training coordinator, RedR <http://www.redr.org.uk/>

To be honest it is extremely difficult to get into the humanitarian sector. 
The sector is becoming more accountable and professional which means that there 
are more systems and qualifications in place to make sure that the most 
appropriate and experienced people are responding to emergencies. There is much 
less room for people wanting to “do good” and there is a demand to hire people 
who have proven experience that they will be appropriate and have a relevant 
qualifications to back up their experience. Personally I think a bachelor or 
master’s degree are exactly that, extra support of on the ground experience, 
but the qualification alone will not interest an employer. This means you will 
need to work hard and be determined to enter the field. Which is exactly what 
it sounds like you are doing.

I would try a volunteer or junior position in an NGO here or elsewhere which 
will really help get your foot in the door. The volunteering can be just a day 
or two a week but will give you some insight to the work of NGOs. RedR courses 
such as “essentials in humanitarian practice” are also very practical and often 
offer simulation activities for emergency response, improving your CV and 
interviews.

‘Tap into your social and professional networks’

Shana Montesol Johnson, certified executive, leadership and career coach 
<http://developmentcrossroads.com/about-shana/>


Not having lots of academic degrees and decades worth of experience need not 
keep you from getting a job with an NGO.

Having a connection to someone in the organisation will make your application 
stand out. Instead of simply submitting your application to a generic HR email 
address, tap into your social and professional networks to find someone within 
the organisation who is willing to have an informal chat with you, and can tell 
the hiring manager about your interest in the position. If you don’t know 
anyone in the organisation, check your social media sites, global development 
discussion boards, and alumni groups to see if you have any second or third 
degree connections who could make an introduction.

Next, be sure you stand out in the application process by showing prospective 
employers what you have already accomplished. For example, since you’d like to 
work in communications, start a blog, if you don’t have one already. There are 
many reasons to do so – seehere 
<mailto:http://algoso.org/2011/05/13/im-an-international-development-blogger-and-you-can-be-too-or-why-development-students-and-professionals-should-blog/>
. Write guest posts on relevant websites in the development space – 
organisational blogs and individual bloggers alike are always looking for guest 
contributors.WhyDev <mailto:http://www.whydev.org/about-us/blog-submissions/> 
is a great place to start for young professionals.

Paid, local internships can be just as valuable as working at the UN
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/08/paid-local-internships-can-be-just-as-valuable-as-working-at-the-un>
Do you have a problem you would like help with? Email us on 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com with NGO Agony Aunts in the subject line. All 
letters will be kept anonymous.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 