
I recently sent my last kid off for her senior year of college. There are 
rituals to such moments, and because dad confessions are not among them, I just 
carried boxes and kept quiet. But what I really wanted to say to her – rather 
than see you later, call this weekend, do you need money? – was: I’m sorry.

Like all parents in these situations, I was thinking about her future. And 
like all of America, in that future she won’t be able to escape what is now 
encompassed by the word “terrorism”.

Everything is OK, but you should be terrified

Terrorism is a nearly nonexistent danger for Americans. You have a greater 
chance of being hit bylightning 
<http://www.globalresearch.ca/the-terrorism-statistics-every-american-needs-to-hear/5382818>
, but fear doesn’t work that way. There’s no 24/7 coverage of global lightning 
strikes or “if you see something, say something”signs 
<https://www.dhs.gov/see-something-say-something> that encourage you to report 
thunderstorms. So I felt no need to apologize for lightning.

But terrorism? I really wanted to tell my daughter just how sorry I was that 
she would have to live in what 9/11 transformed into the most frightened 
country on Earth.

Want the numbers? Some 40% 
<http://www.people-press.org/2016/09/07/15-years-after-911-a-sharp-partisan-divide-on-ability-of-terrorists-to-strike-u-s/?utm_source=adaptivemailer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=16-09-07%209/11&org=982&lvl=100&ite=254&lea=32754&ctr=0&par=1&trk=>
 of Americans believe the country is more vulnerable to terrorism than it was 
just after 9/11 – the highest percentage ever.

Want the apocalyptic jab in the gut? The army chief of staff, General Mark 
Milley,said 
<https://www.airforcetimes.com/articles/terrorist-threat-hasnt-abated-15-years-after-9-11-top-army-general-ays?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Military%20EBB%209-12-16&utm_term=Editorial%20-%20Military%20-%20Early%20Bird%20Brief>
 earlier this month that the threat remains just as grave: “Those people, those 
enemies, those members of that terrorist group, still intend – as they did on 
9/11 – to destroy your freedoms, to kill you, kill your families, they still 
intend to destroy the United States of America.”

All that fear turned us into an engine of chaos abroad, while consuming our 
freedoms at home. And it saddens me that there was a different world, pre-9/11, 
which my daughter’s generation and all those who follow her will never know.

There was a different world, pre-9/11, which my daughter’s generation and all 
those who follow her will never know

Growing up

My kids grew up overseas while, from 1988 to 2012, I served with the state 
department. For the first part of my career as a diplomat, wars were still 
discrete matters. For example, though Austria was a neighbor of Slovenia, few 
there were worried that the Balkan conflicts of the 1990s would spill across 
the border. Suicide bombers didn’t threaten Vienna when we visited as tourists 
in 1991. That a war could again consume large parts of the globe and involve 
multiple nations would have seemed as remote to us vacationers that year as the 
moon.


Even the big war of the era, Desert Storm in 1991, seemed remarkably far away. 
My family and I were assigned to Taiwan at the time and life there simply went 
on. There was no connection between us and what was happening in Kuwait and 
Iraq, and certainly we didn’t worry about a terror attack.

It’s easy to forget how long ago that was. Much of the Balkans is now a 
tourist destination, and a young soldier who fought in Desert Storm would be in 
his mid-40s today. Or think of it this way: either Hillary Clinton or Donald 
Trump on entering the Oval Office next January will be the fifth president in 
succession to bomb Iraq.

Whoever enters the Oval Office next January will be the fifth president in 
succession to bomb Iraq

When September 11, 2001, arrived, I was on assignment to Japan, and like 
everyone, as part of a collective trauma, I watched the terrible events on TV. 
Due to the time difference, it was late at night in Tokyo. As the second plane 
hit the World Trade Center, I made sandwiches, suspecting the phone would soon 
ring and I’d be called to the embassy for a long shift. I remember my wife 
saying: “Why would they call you in? We’re in Tokyo!” Then, of course, the 
phone did ring, and I ran to grab it – not out of national security urgency, 
but so it didn’t wake my kids.

My daughter’s birthday falls on the very day that George W Bush launched the 
invasion of Iraq. I missed her celebration in 2003 to stay at work preparing 
for the embassy to be overrun by al-Qaida. I missed her birthday again in 2005, 
having been sent on temporary duty to Thailand to assist the US navy in setting 
up a short-term base there. When the naval officers mentioned the location they 
wanted to use to the Thai military liaison accompanying us, he laughed. That’s 
taken, he said, but youdidn’t hear 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2014/12/19/371865080/thailand-says-it-was-unaware-of-cia-black-site-on-its-soil>
 it from me, better ask your own people about it.

Later, I would learn that the location was a CIA black site where the country 
I then represented was torturing human beings.

Looking back, it’s remarkable to realize that, in response to a single day of 
terror, Washington set the Middle East ablaze, turned air travel into a form of 
bondage play, and did away with the best of our democracy.

Nothing required the Patriot Act, Guantánamo, renditions 
<https://www.therenditionproject.org.uk/>, drone assassinations 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/175872/tomgram%3A_peter_van_buren,_undue_process_in_washington/>
, and the National Security Agency turning its spy tools inward. The White 
House kept many of the nastiest details from us, but made no secret of its 
broader intentions. Americans on the whole supported each step, and later 
Washingtonprotected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/09/dan-jones-cia-torture-cover-report-senate>
 the men and women who carried out each of the grim acts it had inspired. After 
all, they were just following orders.

Protocols now exist allowing the president to select American citizens without 
a whit of due process for dronekilling 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/175807/tomgram%3A_peter_van_buren,_the_divine_right_of_president_obama/>
. Only overseas, he says, but you can almost see the fingers crossed behind his 
back. Wouldn’t an awful lot of well-meaning Americans have supported a drone 
strike in San Bernardino or at the Pulse club in Orlando? Didn’t many support 
using a robot to blow up asuspect 
<http://wemeantwell.com/blog/2016/07/09/the-dallas-police-used-a-drone-for-the-first-time-to-kill-someone-in-america/>
 in Dallas?

Back in the homeland

The varieties of post-9/11 fear sneak up on us all. I spent a week this summer 
obsessively watching the news for any sign of trouble in Egypt while my 
daughter was there visiting some old embassy acquaintances. I worried that she 
was risking her life to see a high school friend in a country once overrun with 
tourists.

So I want to say sorry to my daughter and her friends for all the countries 
where we Americans, with our awkward shorts and sandals, were once at least 
tolerated, but that are now dangerous for us to visit. Sorry that you’ll never 
see the ruins of Babylon or the Great Mosque of Samarra in Iraq unless you join 
the military.

Arriving back in the US, my daughter called from the airport to say she’d be 
home in about an hour. I didn’t mention my worries that she’d be stopped at “
the border 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/175861/tomgram%3A_peter_van_buren,_what_we've_lost_since_9_11_(part_2)/>
”, a new name for baggage claim, or have her cellphone confiscated for daring 
to travel to the Middle East. An immigration agent did, in fact, ask her what 
her purpose was in going there, something even the Egyptians hadn’t bothered to 
question her about.

I also wanted to apologize to my daughter because, in our new surveillance 
world, she will never really know what privacy is. I needed to ask her 
forgiveness for how easily we let that happen, for all those who walk around 
muttering that they have nothing to hide, so what’s to worry about. I wanted to 
tell her how sorry I was that she’s now afraid of the police, not just for 
herself but especially for her friends of color. I wanted to tell her how badly 
I felt that she’d only know a version of law enforcement so militarized that, 
taking its cues from the national security state, it views us all as potential 
enemies and believes that a significant part of its job involves repressing our 
most basic rights.

I’m sorry, I want to say to her, that protesters can be confined in something 
called a “free speech zone 
<http://www.cleveland.com/rnc-2016/index.ssf/2016/06/aclu_sues_cleveland_over_repub.html>
” surrounded by those same police. I want to tell my daughter that the Founders 
would rise up in righteous anger at the idea of the police forcing citizens 
into such zones outside a political convention – and at the fact that most 
journalists don’t consider such a development to be a major story of our times.

As I sent her off to college, I wanted to say how sorry I was that we had 
messed up her world, sorry we not only didn’t defeat the terrorists the way 
Grandpa did the Nazis but, by our actions, gave their cause new life and 
endless new recruits. Al-Qaida set atrap 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176183/tomgram%3A_engelhardt%2C_a_9_11_retrospective%3A_washington%27s_15-year_air_war/>
 on 9/11 and we leaped into it. The prison American occupiers set up at Camp 
Bucca in Iraq became afactory 
<http://www.vox.com/2014/12/11/7377165/isis-us-prison> for making jihadis, and 
the torture chambers at Abu Ghraib remain, like Guantánamo, an infomercial 
inviting others to pick up a weapon.

The new normal

My daughter is not naive. Like many of her classmates, she’s aware of most of 
these things, but she has no point of comparison. What fish truly sees the 
water around it? And imagine how much harder it’ll be for her future kids. Her 
adult life has been marked by constant war, so much so that “defeating the 
terrorists” is little more than a set phrase she rolls her eyes at. It’s a 
generational thing that’s too damnnormal, like Depression-era kids still saving 
aluminum foil and paper bags in the basement after decades of prosperity.

I’m truly sorry that her generation copes with this by bouncing between 
cynicism and the suspension of disbelief. It was, in a way, that suspension of 
disbelief that allowed so many, including older people who should have known 
better, to accept the idea that invading Iraq was a reasonable response to an 
attack on America by a group of Saudisfunded by 
<https://28pages.org/2016/07/20/selected-revelations-from-the-declassified-28-pages-on-911/>
 Saudi “charity” donations. By now, “well, it wasn’t actually a crime” is 
little short of a campaign slogan for acts that couldn’t be more criminal. 
That’s a world on a path toaccepting 
<https://ca.answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20091115100113AAnlO4y> 2+2 can 
indeed equal five – if our leaders tell us it’s so.

We allow those leaders to claim that the thousands 
<https://www.armytimes.com/story/military/2016/07/11/iraq-us-troops-deploy/86938318/>
 of American troops now stationed in Iraq are somehow not “boots on the ground” 
or “ground troops”. Drone strikes, we’re told, aresurgical 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2012/09/calling-us-drone-strikes-surgical-is-orwellian-propaganda/262920/>
, killing only bad guys with magic missiles, and never purposely hitting
civilians 
<https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/category/projects/drones/drones-graphs/>,
hospitals 
<http://wemeantwell.com/blog/2015/10/22/americas-civilian-killings-are-no-accident/>
, children, orwedding parties 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/175787/tomgram:_engelhardt,_washingtons_wedding_album_from_hell/print>
. The deaths of human beings in such situations are always rare and accidental, 
the equivalent of those scratches on your car door from that errant shopping 
cart in the mall parking lot.

Cleaning up after dad

If anyone is going to fix this mess, I want to tell my daughter, it’s going to 
have to be you. And I want to add, you’ve got to do a better job than I did – 
if, that is, you really want to find a way to say thanks for the skating 
lessons, the puppy, and that night I didn’t get angry when you violated curfew 
to spend more time with that boy.

After the last cardboard boxes had been lugged up the stairs, I held back my 
tears until the very end. Hugging my daughter at that moment, I felt as if I 
wasn’t where I was standing but in a hundred other places. I wasn’t consoling a 
smart, proud, twentysomething woman, apprehensive about senior year, but an 
elementary school student going to bed on the night that would forever be known 
only as 9/11.

Back home, the house is empty and quiet. Outside, the leaves have just a hint 
of yellow. At lunch, I had some late-season strawberries nearly sweet enough to 
confirm the existence of a higher power. I’m gonna really miss this summer.

I know I’m not the first parent to grow reflective watching his last child 
walk out the door, but I have a sense of what’s ahead of her: an American world 
filled with misplaced fears. Fear is a terrible thing to be sorry for, and that 
in itself can be scary.

Peter Van Buren blew the whistle on state department waste and mismanagement 
during the “reconstruction” of Iraq inWe Meant Well: How I Helped Lose the 
Battle for the Hearts and Minds of the Iraqi People 
<http://www.amazon.com/dp/0805096817/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20>. A 
TomDispatch regular 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176140/tomgram%3A_peter_van_buren,_the_snapchat_version_of_american_victory/>
, he writes about current events atWe Meant Well <http://www.wemeantwell.com/>. 
His latest book isGhosts of Tom Joad: A Story of the #99Percent 
<http://www.amazon.com/dp/1935462911/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20>. His next 
work will beHooper’s War <http://wemeantwell.com/blog/hoopers-war/>, a novel of 
the second world war in Japan.

This piece originally appeared on TomDispatch <http://www.tomdispatch.com/>.


 <http://www.amazon.com/dp/0805096817/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20>
 