
When Danielle Dryke was flown back to the US after being raped while she was a 
Peace Corps volunteer in Mali in 2004, she had given little thought to the 
treatment she would receive. Still struggling to come to terms with what had 
happened, the 22-year-old’s thoughts were mostly focused on how she could 
return toMali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> as quickly as possible 
to complete her assignment in a community she had grown to love.

Just a few days into her counselling sessions provided by Peace Corps, she 
began to realise thather own behaviour on the night of the attack was coming 
under the spotlight 
<http://invokemagazine.com/dear-peace-corps-no-one-apologize-raped/>. “My 
counsellor asked me to explain every choice I had made before, during and after 
the attack,” she says. “I was asked what I had been wearing – even things like 
whether I’d considered if my footwear had been appropriate if I needed to make 
a hasty escape.” The counsellor discussed the fact that Dryke had been drinking 
on the night of the attack – something she had avoided almost completely during 
her assignment – and she was sent for a specialist alcohol assessment.

Having just been raped I was already blaming myself, but now I found that 
external forces were reinforcing that message
Danielle Dryke 
As the counselling progressed, Dryke says she realised there were certain 
rules. She was told that if she was still in counselling after 45 days her 
contract would be terminated, her emails to Peace Corps staff were read by her 
counsellor and discussed at the sessions, and she was reminded that the 
decision about whether she would return was not hers to make. “I had been open 
and honest at the beginning, but then very quickly I began to think twice in 
case what I was saying might mean I couldn’t go back,” says Dryke.

Despite Dryke knowing the name and address of her attacker, no attempt was 
made to report the rape to the police in Mali. Dryke’s counsellor discussed the 
possibility that cultural norms in westAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> probably meant that her attacker 
didn’t know he was doing anything wrong. “Having just been raped I was already 
to some extent blaming myself, but now I found that external forces were 
reinforcing that message. I was in such a vulnerable position I couldn’t see 
how wrong it was,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fi-was-raped-and-my-counsellor-asked-me-what-i-had-been-wearing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07804c89fb6f04678bcff1a4537c4f4d280dc775%2F0_0_835_1136%2F835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20was%20raped%20and%20my%20counsellor%20asked%20me%20what%20I%20had%20been%20wearing'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fi-was-raped-and-my-counsellor-asked-me-what-i-had-been-wearing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20was%20raped%20and%20my%20counsellor%20asked%20me%20what%20I%20had%20been%20wearing%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fi-was-raped-and-my-counsellor-asked-me-what-i-had-been-wearing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07804c89fb6f04678bcff1a4537c4f4d280dc775%2F0_0_835_1136%2F835.jpg>
 Statement signed by Danielle Dryke Photograph: Letter-of-intent/Danielle Dryke 
The therapy sessions moved on to asking Dryke to suggest ways she could make 
herself more “safe” if she was to return to Mali. Desperate to get back, she 
eventually agreed to write and sign aletter of intent 
<http://invokemagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/Letter-copy-page-001.jpg> 
sharing steps she would take, including never drinking again on her placement. 
The final draft of the letter that Dryke signed began with the statement: “I 
have learned many hard lessons through this experience, and recognise first and 
foremost that I have let myself down in a series of poor judgements.”

Dryke did eventually return to Mali to complete her placement working with 
women starting a mobile bank, but she now understands that she may have gone 
back too soon. For several years she could barely discuss the circumstances of 
the attack and had nagging feelings of self-blame. “It took until this year to 
walk out of the house with my glasses on and not worry about whether they would 
compromise my ability to respond if something were to happen to me,” she says. 
“Because of the degree to which I’d internalised the messages I’d received 
during treatment, it took me years not to judge other women for what they were 
wearing in terms of risk. I’m so sad to admit that.”

When the role of the Peace Corps victims’ advocate was created in 2011, Dryke 
thought that it was an important step forward because it had for the first time 
put someone “on the side” of the survivors. Dryke’s personal wish was that it 
might facilitate a review of the questionable policy of Peace Corps being 
simultaneously responsible for providing victims’ counselling and making the 
decision of whether they could return to their placements.

“Eleven years later I can see how completely inappropriate that was,” she 
says. “My counsellor honestly thought she was helping me but the power dynamics 
were completely wrong. I ended up not talking about my feelings because I was 
too afraid of saying the wrong thing and that they wouldn’t allow me to return 
to Mali.”

Aid worker: I was drugged and raped by another humanitarian in South Sudan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>
Dryke now works as a senior research analyst for non-profits. She was inspired 
to speak out about her treatment after hearing otherPeace Corps volunteers go 
public with their stories 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/11/us/11corps.html?_r=0>. The more she hears 
the more she feels that the attitudes she encountered at Peace Corps are 
embedded in society: “Victim-blaming attitudes are everywhere. I think you’d 
have a hard time finding any survivor who hasn’t been asked victim-blaming 
questions or had it implied to them by someone they’ve encountered in the 
aftermath.”

A spokesperson for Peace Corps said: “Due to privacy laws and considerations 
we cannot discuss specific cases. However, I can say that Peace Corps takes all 
allegations of sexual assault seriously, as well as any information we receive 
from a volunteer who feels mistreated in the response they received from our 
organisation. Our commitment to doing so is demonstrated in the more than 30 
policy reforms put in place beginning in 2013, including full implementation of 
theKate Puzey Peace Corps Volunteer Protection Act 
<http://www.peacecorps.gov/volunteer/learn/safety/support/puzey/>. These 
reforms are ongoing, and as a part of our reform process we also evaluate 
allegations such as the one mentioned here which occurred before we began 
implementing broad policy changes.”

• If you are have been affected by the story in this article, Rape Crisis 
England and Wales <http://rapecrisis.org.uk/> or Rape, Abuse, Incest National 
Network <https://www.rainn.org/> can provide support. If you are not in the UK 
or the US, Hot Peach Pages <http://www.hotpeachpages.net/index.html> provides a 
directory of gender-based violence organisations all over the world.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 