
The most talked about performance at the Edinburgh festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/edinburghfestival> fringe kicked off less 
with a bang and more with the clearing of a throat, the donning of some 
glasses, and the gripping recital of a contents page.

The Red Shed at Edinburgh festival review – Mark Thomas's love letter to his 
Labour club
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/08/red-shed-edinburgh-festival-review-mark-thomas-labour>
But then, Iraq Out and Loud <https://iraqoutloud.com/> – in which all 2.6m 
words of the Chilcot report on the Iraq war will be read aloud by comedians and 
volunteers from the public – was never really about theatrics.

The reading of all 12 tomes, 6,000 pages, will proceed non-stop 24 hours a day 
in a small shed in the heart of Edinburgh. The whole thing will take about a 
fortnight, making it by far the longest event at the fringe.

It was at 6pm on Monday that the first readers, comedians Arthur Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jan/24/arthur-smith-comedian>, Nish 
Kumar, Shappi Khorsandi and Mark Thomas, stepped up to the plate.

As he readied himself to read, Kumar said he was a little nervous but added: 
“It’s not my material, it’s someone else’s stuff, and that takes the pressure 
off. In a way, if I get laughs with this, I will have singularly failed at my 
job. It’s an unusual position for me to be in.

“I am just going to read it straight. This is not a place to start riffing and 
doing voice work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fcomedians-begin-edinburgh-recital-of-chilcot-report-iraq-out-and-loud%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F161a3625bd7182c7cdc1db699e6f5e612bc4780a%2F0_220_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='If%20I%20get%20laughs%2C%20I%20will%20have%20failed'%3A%20Chilcot%20report%20recital%20begins%20in%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fcomedians-begin-edinburgh-recital-of-chilcot-report-iraq-out-and-loud%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27If%20I%20get%20laughs%2C%20I%20will%20have%20failed%27%3A%20Chilcot%20report%20recital%20begins%20in%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fcomedians-begin-edinburgh-recital-of-chilcot-report-iraq-out-and-loud%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F161a3625bd7182c7cdc1db699e6f5e612bc4780a%2F0_220_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Shappi Khorsandi reads from the first volume. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for 
the Guardian 
Kumar said he hoped the project would reignite discussion and accountability 
around theIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> war, as well as making 
the Chilcot report less impenetrable for the public.

“It’s vital that we have an understanding of why we went to war in Iraq and 
why those decisions were made, both for transparency and to make sure those 
mistakes are not repeated,” he said.

“And this is exactly what the fringe is for. There’s no other place in the 
world you could get a bunch of comedians to read a government report about why 
we went to war in Iraq. It’s a uniquely Edinburgh experience.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nish%20Kumar%3A%20What%20can%20a%20satirist%20do%20with%20our%20post-truth%20politics%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nish%20Kumar%3A%20What%20can%20a%20satirist%20do%20with%20our%20post-truth%20politics%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video&media=>
Nish Kumar: What can a satirist do with our post-truth politics? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/jul/15/nish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video>
Every hour, six volunteers will go into the shed and take turns reading a 
section of the report. The reading will also be broadcast live for anyone who 
wants to watch online.


Currently over 1,000 people have signed up to recite the report 
<https://docs.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSc9nO2YiFux8nrWMRfih9wmnMGa0vpFdnuCrFa9y7gmgmUVTA/viewform?c=0&w=1&usp=send_form>
, although Bob Slayer, who coordinated the production and built the shed, said 
they still needed the same number again to sign up to get to the end of the two 
weeks.

Other comedians who have agreed to take part include Stewart Lee, Johnny 
Vegas, Reginald D Hunter and Simon Munnery. Slayer’s most recent recruit was 
Nina Conti.

Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> and Sir John 
Chilcot were among those invited to read; both have yet to respond.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fcomedians-begin-edinburgh-recital-of-chilcot-report-iraq-out-and-loud%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cf8ec1fbf80a72e24ede7da4d46ab5c4b469887%2F0_211_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='If%20I%20get%20laughs%2C%20I%20will%20have%20failed'%3A%20Chilcot%20report%20recital%20begins%20in%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fcomedians-begin-edinburgh-recital-of-chilcot-report-iraq-out-and-loud%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27If%20I%20get%20laughs%2C%20I%20will%20have%20failed%27%3A%20Chilcot%20report%20recital%20begins%20in%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fcomedians-begin-edinburgh-recital-of-chilcot-report-iraq-out-and-loud%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cf8ec1fbf80a72e24ede7da4d46ab5c4b469887%2F0_211_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Arthur Smith on the first night of the performance. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod 
for the Guardian 
Slayer said he had been heartened by the response to the idea.

“The point of this is to provoke discussions around Chilcot and it already 
has, which is great,” he said. “But will that make any difference? Well, I 
don’t know. Think about those enormous protests that tried to stop the war in 
the first place but were ignored. I don’t feel confident that that wouldn’t 
happen again.

“We are all liberal, left-leaning people here, patting each other on the back, 
but if we can all group together, get to know each other, then hopefully we 
have a better chance of stopping this happening again.”

An unexpected obstacle came in the form of trying to get a free physical copy 
of the report, which usually costs £767. They went through the SNP office, with 
the help of MP Tommy Shepherd, who has also volunteered to read, but got 
nowhere.

In the end Slayer sent a speculative email to the Ministry of Defence, asking 
for a free copy to read at the fringe. “They came back and said, yes, OK, as 
long as you give the money to charity – which is fine because this is all for 
charity,” said Slayer. “The upshot of that is that the Chilcot report is 
clearly not selling as well as they thought.”

Despite the dry content, as he emerged from the small shed after his stint 
reading the report, Thomas said he felt “bizarrely emotional”. “Yes, it’s dry 
but this report is talking about something that affected hundreds of thousands 
of lives.”

Chilcot's 6,000-page report becomes Edinburgh festival fringe event
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/21/chilcots-6000-page-report-an-edinburgh-festival-fringe-event>
He said: “Chilcot is like the Latin bible: this is a document you’re not 
really supposed to have full access to and that is not going to be read in its 
entirety by anyone. I don’t even think Sir John did – he falls into the 
category of Jeffrey Archer, who has written more than he’s read. So what is 
great about this is it’s making it publicly accessible.”

For Smith, the first person to read, it was “unlike any gig I’ve ever done, 
because obviously you’re not trying to get laughs or any reaction at all, other 
than just telling it straight”.

He was mainly responsible for reading the contents and the initial 
introduction but said he had “already grown attached to some of the people 
involved”. “I was beginning to love Sir John.” It was the footnotes, said 
Smith, that were the trickiest part to read.

“But I feel honoured to have been the first to read and I hope the Chilcot 
report is listened to and followed,” Smith said. “Maybe in 100 years, some 
historians will watch this to save themselves the trouble of having to read it 
themselves.”

 * Volunteers can sign up to be a part of Iraq Out and Loud here 
<https://docs.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSc9nO2YiFux8nrWMRfih9wmnMGa0vpFdnuCrFa9y7gmgmUVTA/viewform?c=0&w=1&usp=send_form>
. Tickets can be boughthere 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/iraq-out-loud-reading-the-chilcot-report-in-full-1>
.  