
Carlo Collodi’s voice is one of those special ones you hear or read as a child 
and you then carry with you all your life. His story of a wooden puppet that 
dreams of being a real boy – and has a reputation for telling a few fibs – is 
imprinted in the soul of every Italian. Thanks to the work of Walt Disney in 
bringing Collodi’s story to the big screen,Pinocchio 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pinocchio-35.html> is also known around the 
world, and has entered every child’s fairy-tale universe.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fcarlo-collodi-pinocchio-pipi-the-pink-monkey-alessandro-gallenzi-axel-scheffler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bdc4d8166bd14c5f943e550572ff48901ea9e6d%2F0_0_1272_1557%2F1272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Imprinted%20in%20the%20soul%20of%20every%20Italian'%3A%20Carlo%20Collodi's%20Pinocchio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fcarlo-collodi-pinocchio-pipi-the-pink-monkey-alessandro-gallenzi-axel-scheffler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Imprinted%20in%20the%20soul%20of%20every%20Italian%27%3A%20Carlo%20Collodi%27s%20Pinocchio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fcarlo-collodi-pinocchio-pipi-the-pink-monkey-alessandro-gallenzi-axel-scheffler%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bdc4d8166bd14c5f943e550572ff48901ea9e6d%2F0_0_1272_1557%2F1272.jpg>
 Everybody knows his name even if they don’t know how to spell it: Pinocchio. 
Illustration: Axel Scheffler 
I loved Collodi’s stories as a child, and I still love them now. Though he 
died in 1890, he is still Italy’s best and most popular children’s writer – 
even today. His style is unmistakable – a blend of everyday speech, 
inventiveness, playfulness and weirdness, with a lot of humour thrown in. It is 
very difficult to recreate that style in any other language – so much of what’s 
great about it gets lost in translation. That’s why rather than simply 
translating Collodi, I decided to reinvent and expand his delightful, 
lesser-known story of a mischievous pink monkey named Pipì.

What are the best books to help children feel connected to Europe?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jun/06/best-childrens-books-on-europe-katherine-rundell-ludwig-belman>
Collodi wasn’t the most cheerful of writers, and even after the success of 
Pinocchio he hated being considered a children’s author. He saw himself as an 
Italian Dickens or Shakespeare, and wanted to write grand, important works for 
adults. He felt his talent was wasted as a children’s writer, despite the very 
obvious fact that he was so good at it. His frustration can clearly be seen as 
he published Pinocchio in instalments in hisGiornale per i bambini  
<https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Giornale_per_i_bambini,_Pinocchio,_Collodi,_1882.jpg>
(newspaper for children), since he tried to kill off the character many times 
in the most extraordinary ways! But Pinocchio’s success meant that Collodi 
couldn’t let him go, and he and the wooden boy were tied together for life. He 
was forced to continue to write about him in the Giornale and to create 
children’s stories throughout his life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fcarlo-collodi-pinocchio-pipi-the-pink-monkey-alessandro-gallenzi-axel-scheffler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce537662745d3633f4b9e8531bfb02f34c62b748%2F0_0_1772_1780%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Imprinted%20in%20the%20soul%20of%20every%20Italian'%3A%20Carlo%20Collodi's%20Pinocchio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fcarlo-collodi-pinocchio-pipi-the-pink-monkey-alessandro-gallenzi-axel-scheffler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Imprinted%20in%20the%20soul%20of%20every%20Italian%27%3A%20Carlo%20Collodi%27s%20Pinocchio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fcarlo-collodi-pinocchio-pipi-the-pink-monkey-alessandro-gallenzi-axel-scheffler%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce537662745d3633f4b9e8531bfb02f34c62b748%2F0_0_1772_1780%2F1772.jpg>
 Pipì the pink monkey is in many ways very similar to Pinocchio, good at 
lying, disobedience and generally naughty. Which is what makes his adventures 
great fun! Illustration: Axel Scheffler 
Collodi had similar problems when writing Pipì’s adventures in the forest of 
Hullabaloo. He started to serialize the story but – much too the annoyance of 
his loyal readers – worked on it only in fits and starts, as it took his fancy. 
He published a few chapters in 1883, then there was a long break. He dragged on 
as he kept promising more, and concluded in a hasty, chaotic way only in 1885! 
The end result of all that struggle wasThe Adventures of Pipì the Pink Monkey 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/396982/>. Pipì’s 
tale, which was written straight after Pinocchio, shares many similarities with 
it. Incredibly, they also share some characters, including a 10-year-old boy 
named Alfred who was once a wooden puppet. Pipì himself is very similar to 
Pinocchio: both of them show a penchant for lying, disobedience and general 
naughtiness. Which is what makes their stories so fun.

Why you should record the stories of your parents or grandparents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/may/30/record-the-stories-of-your-parents-gr-gemin-sweet-pizza>
When translating and expanding Collodi’s original tale I’ve tried to 
rediscover its joyfulness and to find ways to replicate the original’s humour, 
which would otherwise have been lost in translation. I was delighted when I 
sent a draft to Axel Scheffler and he agreed to illustrate the book. Axel, who 
you may know as the illustrator of a certain scary monster named theGruffalo 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gruffalo-8.html>, brought Pipì vibrantly to 
life. He added even more joyfulness to what is undoubtedly a rediscovered gem 
of Italian literature – which shows that, despite himself, Carlo Collodi was 
one of the best children’s writers of all time.

The Adventures of Pipì the Pink Monkey 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/396982/>, written by 
Carlo Collodi, adapted and expanded by Alessandro Gallenzi and illustrated by 
Axel Scheffler (andpublished by Alma books <http://www.almabooks.com/>) is 
available to buy at the Guardian bookshop.Don’t forget to enter our prize 
giveaway to have the chance of winning a copy of the book most beautifully 
signed by Axel Scheffler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jun/07/the-adventures-of-pipi-the-pink-monkey-competition-axel-scheffler>
. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fcarlo-collodi-pinocchio-pipi-the-pink-monkey-alessandro-gallenzi-axel-scheffler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faacd0ead7bb005eb39e6c61c1b386365d7f541c0%2F0_0_1512_2377%2F1512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Imprinted%20in%20the%20soul%20of%20every%20Italian'%3A%20Carlo%20Collodi's%20Pinocchio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fcarlo-collodi-pinocchio-pipi-the-pink-monkey-alessandro-gallenzi-axel-scheffler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Imprinted%20in%20the%20soul%20of%20every%20Italian%27%3A%20Carlo%20Collodi%27s%20Pinocchio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fcarlo-collodi-pinocchio-pipi-the-pink-monkey-alessandro-gallenzi-axel-scheffler%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faacd0ead7bb005eb39e6c61c1b386365d7f541c0%2F0_0_1512_2377%2F1512.jpg> 