
There has been an outcry this week over minority A-levels that are being cut 
from the curriculum, with news thatarcheology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/17/scrapping-archeology-classics-a-levels-barbaric-tony-robinson>
 andhistory of art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/12/last-art-history-a-level-axed-after-michael-gove-cull-of-soft-subjects>
 will no longer be offered to sixth-form students.

Squeezed school budgets, a growing emphasis on the Stem (science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics) and English baccalaureate subjects (English, 
mathematics, history or geography, the sciences and a language), and government 
reforms of qualifications are reshaping what our teenagers study. This is what 
their teachers think.

World development

William Baldwin Headteacher at Brighton Hove and Sussex sixth-form college

William Baldwin is principal of one of the country’s most successful 
sixth-form colleges. He is also a fan of the world development A-level, which 
is being phased out.


The Welsh examining board, WJEC, was the only awarding organisation to offer 
the A-level. Final assessment will be in summer 2018, then it will be no more. 
The WJEC website describes it thus: “It is a popular course for a number of 
reasons. The specification content, which combines a range of perspectives on a 
number of contemporary development issues, addresses concepts, processes and 
issues in development, resources, poverty and inequality and global 
citizenship.”

Baldwin used to teach world development in his previous job and students loved 
it. “I would get comments at parents’ evening with people saying, ‘Your subject 
provides the most interesting discussion we have around the dinner table’,” he 
said.


“It’s getting students to think about international relations, sustainability, 
inequality – real, huge, global issues that students need to learn about.”

History of art

Sarah Phillips History of art teacher at Godalming college and St Catherine’s 
school, Bramley


“I refuse to admit it’s going to die as an A-level,” said Phillips. “I 
discovered it at sixth form where I studied it A-level. Had I not had that 
opportunity I would never have known to pick it up at university.”

In the past few days Phillips has had to explain to students, who are 
currently choosing their options and may have been planning to study art 
history A-level, that it is no longer on offer after being dropped by the AQA 
exam board last week.

“I’m still in disbelief,” said Phillips. “We need young people to know about 
their own culture and cultural heritage and that of others. It’s such a 
creative, constructive way for them to debate and engage and respect what other 
people have achieved. I can’t believe in our world we are taking that away from 
them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fits-a-crying-shame-teachers-on-scrapped-a-level-subjects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c1db3051a6b37b1b4db8cd6f375c59fe506da48%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20a%20crying%20shame'%3A%20teachers%20on%20scrapped%20A-level%20subjects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fits-a-crying-shame-teachers-on-scrapped-a-level-subjects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20a%20crying%20shame%27%3A%20teachers%20on%20scrapped%20A-level%20subjects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fits-a-crying-shame-teachers-on-scrapped-a-level-subjects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c1db3051a6b37b1b4db8cd6f375c59fe506da48%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 AS-level art history students at Godalming college, Surrey. Photograph: Graham 
Turner for the Guardian 
Music

Ian Gardner Head of music at Weald school, Billingshurst

Gardner has been making music since he was seven and teaching it for the last 
23 years. Just four students are studying his subject at A-level this year, 
with only two due to take it next year.

Numbers have never been big and they are dwindling, but his school remains 
committed, despite funding constraints.Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> everywhere are having to make 
difficult choices and some have already reluctantly decided to stop offering 
music as an option. The fear is that more will follow.

“Teaching people to be creative can only be a good thing,” says Gardner. But 
because of the pressure for students to study so-called Ebacc subjects as part 
of school performance measures, there are fears that subjects including music 
will slowly disappear from many GCSE and A-level curriculums.

“It’s heart-breaking really,” said Gardner. “You are working with students who 
are highly skilled performers and have an understanding of music. They are 
excited by their subject. There are lots of light bulb moment. It’s a 
wonderful, wonderful thing to do. It would be a crying shame if those 
opportunities were not available to students because it was not viable to run a 
course.”

Archeology

Dan Boatright Archeology and geology teacher

“We are quite lucky,” says Boatright. “We are a big sixth-form college. Our 
whole mantra is education for all. We don’t believe in selecting or limiting 
our curriculum.”

Last week, however, he discovered that the AQA examination board had decided 
to cut his subject from the A-level curriculum and Boatright has spent the last 
few days trying to save it.

Boatright fell in love with archeology while visiting museums and watching BBC 
Timewatch documentaries with his grandfather. “I can’t imagine this time next 
year and not teaching it,” he said. “These students come to us and they are 
inspired by the subject. They come here and love it.”

Modern languages

Suzanne O’Farrell Curriculum and assessment specialist for the Association of 
School and College Leaders


O’Farrell fell in love with languages at school. She studied French and German 
at A-level, then at degree level and went on to teach modern languages in 
schools for 28 years. This year her son started hisA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> but there was no longer an 
option to study either French or German. Now she’s trying to teach him herself.

Modern languages are dying a slow death. This summer fewer than 4,000 students 
sat German A-level, a 4.2% drop on last year. French entries were down 6.4% to 
fewer than 9,700. Schools and sixth forms with squeezed budgets are making 
difficult choices – which courses to keep and which to cut – and not enough 
modern teenagers want to study a language.

“Schools can’t afford to fund small groups,” said O’Farrell. “Years ago when I 
started I used to have two groups for French A-level. I used to say it’s more 
than just a qualification it’s a skill for life.

“I had lots of parents saying ‘I wish I’d done it at school’. But now it’s in 
such a fragile state in the curriculum.” She loved languages because it made 
her feel part of something bigger, a European, a global citizen. Post-Brexit 
the future looks even more bleak for languages. “It’s something much bigger 
than something a school can combat. It’s a whole societal thing.”
 