
After the news that art history A-level will be dropped as a subject 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/13/a-miserable-and-short-sighted-decision-readers-defend-axed-art-history-a-level>
, readers have been condemning the move toscrap archaeology A-level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/17/scrapping-archeology-classics-a-levels-barbaric-tony-robinson>
 completely, and classical civilisation from the examination board AQA.


Sir Tony Robinson, who fronted the hit television show Time Team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/mar/23/time-team-a-tv-gem>, has 
condemned the recent scrapping of archaeology A-level as “a barbaric act”. 
Almost 6,000 peoplehave signed a petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/aqa-save-a-level-archaeology> calling for the subject 
to be saved, and Robinson has voiced his support for the campaign.

Below are some of our readers’ comments on the news. You can click on the time 
stamps to view the whole conversation and add your thoughts.

‘Classical civilisation was by far the most interesting course’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16840342> rdakin  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16840342> 17 October 2016 8:35pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85643679> 
I recently completed my Classical Civilisation A-Level and I'm just glad I got 
to do it while it was an option as it was by far the most interesting course. I 
even volunteered for an open day at my college and spent the whole time 
convincing people to go up to Classics and check it out! I couldn't rate it 
enough. Sad to see it go, although I'm sure it won't be without a fight!

‘It enriched my life way beyond what I could have imagined’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11868616> quinlanmicheal  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11868616> 17 October 2016 10:18pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85648501> 
Studying classics was the greatest thing I ever did. It has impacted on 
everything I know in my life. I'm a science graduate too. It enriched my life 
way beyond what I could have imagined. Literally everything in the west links 
back to classical studies

‘I got into Imperial College with an A-level in classical civilisation’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4126622> aiusepsi  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4126622> 17 October 2016 8:47pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85644201> 
10 years ago I got into Imperial College to study Physics with a three A 
offer, which I satisfied with Physics, Maths, and Classical Civilisations.

‘It was a real gateway to classics for us state school kids’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3233146> bertrigby  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3233146> 17 October 2016 11:19pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85652322> 
Class Civ was an amazing A-Level to take. I studied Homer, Virgil, the 
tragedians and Aristophanes in addition to the development of Greek sculpture 
and the archaeology of Greek sanctuaries. Yes, we studied the texts in English, 
but when I arrived at Oxford to read Classics I had actually studied a far 
wider range of texts than my tute partners who'd taken Greek and Latin. It was 
a real gateway to the subject for us state school kids.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fit-was-a-real-gateway-readers-defend-a-level-classical-civilisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54ff7581d2bfa3bf16b723b753c47889c2984833%2F0_194_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20was%20a%20real%20gateway'%3A%20readers%20defend%20A-level%20classical%20civilisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fit-was-a-real-gateway-readers-defend-a-level-classical-civilisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20was%20a%20real%20gateway%27%3A%20readers%20defend%20A-level%20classical%20civilisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fit-was-a-real-gateway-readers-defend-a-level-classical-civilisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54ff7581d2bfa3bf16b723b753c47889c2984833%2F0_194_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A view of the Acropolis Hill and the Parthenon viewed from Lycabettus Hill in 
Athens, Greece. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
‘I used a lot of the work I did for A-level for my degree’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2902745> cannibaldave  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2902745> 17 October 2016 9:58pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85647334> 
I did classics at A-level, and enjoyed it. It was my best subject and I went 
on to do a degree in it. I looked back on my sixth form days as a time when I 
was really able to get stuck into a subject - my teachers were absolutely 
brilliant. I ended up using a lot of the work I did for A-level for my degree; 
indeed my work on Aristophanes, written as a sixteen year old new to the 
subject, became the backbone of a third year dissertation.

But...

I was constantly being asked what it was all for, and looking back as a thirty 
something, I do wonder just a little. It felt very niche, it hasn't given me a 
backdrop to a wider range of language or literature, and yes, whilst I did 
enjoy it I wonder whether the price, for both my parents and myself, was worth 
paying.

‘Ancient Greece and Rome were incredibly important eras in European history so 
binning them is a huge mistake’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15491551> Speech500  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15491551> 18 October 2016 12:36am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85656162> 
I did the Classics A Level last year and I personally hated it but I 
definitely think it has value as a subject. Ancient Greece and Rome were 
incredibly important eras in European history so binning them is a huge 
mistake. I mostly used it to help me get into a uni course in History, but 
multiple people in my class went onto study latin, archaeological or ancient 
history based degrees with them. I think if they've got to get rid of a 
subject, it would be more reasonable to combine archaeology and classics into a 
single 'ancient history' a level.

‘Classical civilisation was one of the most interesting and useful subjects I 
studied’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2844642> ID4659289  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2844642> 18 October 2016 5:42am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85663945> 
Classical history was on the most interesting and useful subjects I studied. 
As an English teacher, the books I read enthralled me more than anything else. 
How very sad! I'm sick of the exam boards being so narrow and money minded. 
Like the ENTIRE education system. Everything is about money and value added. 
Nothing is about the joy of leaning anymore. Continuing to make decisions like 
this will only lead to more teachers leaving the profession as I am. What a 
travesty.

‘It has likely made me a more balanced person’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14733561> kualabare  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14733561> 18 October 2016 3:59am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85661831> 
Although my work and brain are very much in engineering, while at school many 
years ago I studied Classical Civilisation. It has enriched my life in many 
areas and likely made me a more balanced person. Sad to see such subjects being 
abandoned.
 