
The first time I visited the Great Barrier Reef was in 1957 when I was on my 
way to New Guinea. In those days, television didn’t have a lot of money so, 
when you got to the other side of the world, you took advantage of it as you 
never knew when you were going to get back again, and so I took in the Barrier 
Reef on the way.

It was right at the beginning of the era of underwater swimming. There had 
been a Viennese pair, Han and Lotte Hass, who had a show underwater called 
Diving to Adventure. Those of us who had television sets – our jaws dropped! 
This wonderful girl in this white costume just knocking sharks on the head with 
the camera. Amazing!

I’m no sort of underwater swimmer, I didn’t know what I was doing! The idea 
that I was competing with people like the Hasses and Jacques Cousteau, who was 
amazing to me – I was just dead lucky to be there at the right time. Mike 
Davis, the director of my present film, Great Barrier Reef, discovered that the 
BBC had all this stuff I’d made in the archive – I hadn’t seen that sun-bronzed 
boy swimming with extraordinary grace for almost 60 years!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03f2bef82e33c331721121ee4fe1c48b1156dc29%2F296_369_2558_1774%2F2558.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20is%20fantastic%2C%20better%20than%20travelling%20to%20the%20moon'%20%E2%80%93%20David%20Attenborough%20returns%20to%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20is%20fantastic%2C%20better%20than%20travelling%20to%20the%20moon%27%20%E2%80%93%20David%20Attenborough%20returns%20to%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03f2bef82e33c331721121ee4fe1c48b1156dc29%2F296_369_2558_1774%2F2558.jpg>
 David Attenborough on the reef in 1957. Photograph: BBC 
From all my travels, the first time I put on scuba gear and dived on the coral 
reef is the moment I remember most vividly. Suddenly, this amazing world with a 
thousand things you didn’t know existed is revealed right in front of you, all 
wonderful colours and shapes. Just the very thing of going underwater itself is 
exciting, as suddenly you are released from the shackles of gravity and you can 
move anywhere - great shoals of fish, the reef is as rich as it comes, as 
varied and as beautiful as it gets. On land, the rainforest is comparable – but 
the difference is you can walk for a day and see absolutely nothing. Where are 
all these bloody monkeys they are always on about? But on a reef you see 
everything immediately.

It’s one of the great romances, being able to travel to the bottom of the sea, 
like in Jules Verne, and I was able to do that this time for the programme when 
I went down in the Triton submersible. It is fantastic, better than travelling 
to the moon because you can do it for two hours then come back up again! It is 
a big plastic bubble with a hole at the top and watertight seal, and you get in 
it, sit in a chair, put down the lid and off you go. So, unlike swimming, you 
aren’t troubled about breathing or getting hot, you just sit there, thinking 
this is fabulous. It’s just breathtaking, a dream.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc44c2af289bdc5728568fc0fb11a21e896c26723%2F0_0_2908_2181%2Fmaster%2F2908.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20is%20fantastic%2C%20better%20than%20travelling%20to%20the%20moon'%20%E2%80%93%20David%20Attenborough%20returns%20to%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20is%20fantastic%2C%20better%20than%20travelling%20to%20the%20moon%27%20%E2%80%93%20David%20Attenborough%20returns%20to%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc44c2af289bdc5728568fc0fb11a21e896c26723%2F0_0_2908_2181%2Fmaster%2F2908.jpg>
 Filming Great Barrier Reef in the Triton submersible. Photograph: BBC/Atlantic 
Productions 
Indigenous Australians’ memories are so much better than ours. They have a 
bank of information and literature and history in their minds which is 
transmitted with extraordinary fidelity from generation to generation. They 
tell the extraordinary story about how the sea started flooding the land, and 
every year it advanced and they had to move – they were nomadic anyway but they 
had to move back and back and back. Recent research showed, to everyone’s 
surprise, that this actually happened at the end of the last ice age, but the 
people of the area have always known it, which is extremely romantic.

The area has changed hugely in all sorts of ways since my visit in 1957. 
Islands that were uninhabited when we sailed past them are now big holiday 
resorts and scientific stations, and along the coast there are now a lot of 
human settlements. But the dangers the reef faces are not specifically from 
that, because it is almost independent of the human population – it is quite 
possible to sustain the large number of visitors and holiday makers on the reef 
if they behave in a proper way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a1628846fd8b9cabe4462db7ba170f7c562a199%2F0_0_4284_2573%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20is%20fantastic%2C%20better%20than%20travelling%20to%20the%20moon'%20%E2%80%93%20David%20Attenborough%20returns%20to%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20is%20fantastic%2C%20better%20than%20travelling%20to%20the%20moon%27%20%E2%80%93%20David%20Attenborough%20returns%20to%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a1628846fd8b9cabe4462db7ba170f7c562a199%2F0_0_4284_2573%2F4284.jpg>
 With Gudju Gudju, a Gimuy Walubara Yidinji elder. Photograph: Freddie 
Claire/BBC/Atlantic Productions 
The reef is only roughly 10,000 years old, so if it was slowly changed, the 
natural world would change but it wouldn’t be catastrophic because it would 
evolve. But if it changed in 50 years, from an increase of 2C in the sea 
temperature, which would kill the coral, that would be catastrophic. And we are 
heading for that – the next decade or two you could see real disaster.

I have been at this a long time, but almost ever year there is a new 
technological advance. Sometimes it’s big, sometimes it’s small - maybe a new 
lens that can suddenly hold in focus something within 6 inches of your eye and 
also the mountains 20 miles away. There is nowhere you can’t film now, in the 
pitch dark, the bottom of the sea – you couldn’t do that 10 years ago, and when 
you did it would cost you the earth – or it’s high speed, or drones. But still 
the biggest change has been moving to colour television.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10dd13b3bcee7cb0122c47052e472428ce65694c%2F0_68_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20is%20fantastic%2C%20better%20than%20travelling%20to%20the%20moon'%20%E2%80%93%20David%20Attenborough%20returns%20to%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20is%20fantastic%2C%20better%20than%20travelling%20to%20the%20moon%27%20%E2%80%93%20David%20Attenborough%20returns%20to%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10dd13b3bcee7cb0122c47052e472428ce65694c%2F0_68_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 A tortoise cam on an angulate tortoise used for Attenborough’s epic overview 
of life on Earth. Photograph: Ben Dilley/BBC 
I was carried along by the tide of these advances, bobbing about at the front, 
but I had very little to do with the tide. I didn’t innovate the programmes. 
Unromantically, it is the defence budget that has researched a great number of 
these things, the fact that you can put little tiny cameras here and there, bug 
things and film at night, detect a warm face at over 150 yards behind a tree … 
thermal cameras like that were developed by the military.


My four years as controller of BBC2, from 1965, were great. It was a new 
network, and there was still a lot to do in terms of programming. I was just 
sitting behind a desk saying “Why not do something about pop music, or 
history?” The head of comedy, Bill Cotton, comes up one day and says, “I have 
these blokes from university; I think if we put them together, we might get 
something interesting. They want to call it Monty Python’s Flying Circus.” I 
just had to say “Well, OK, let’s give it a try.”

It was terrific fun but after four years I was kicked upstairs and made 
responsible for both networks, which meant dealing with trade unions, 
politicians, finances, engineering, staffing problems, which is not much fun.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c47486d5fe75c8760f77a0e9a61fa076bbca5eb%2F0_0_2832_1850%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20is%20fantastic%2C%20better%20than%20travelling%20to%20the%20moon'%20%E2%80%93%20David%20Attenborough%20returns%20to%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20is%20fantastic%2C%20better%20than%20travelling%20to%20the%20moon%27%20%E2%80%93%20David%20Attenborough%20returns%20to%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fdavid-attenborough-great-barrier-reef-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c47486d5fe75c8760f77a0e9a61fa076bbca5eb%2F0_0_2832_1850%2F2832.jpg>
 Attenborough in Borneo, 1982. Photograph: Rex Features 
Borneo is the place I’ve visited most. Its rainforest is full of riches and 
secrets, but it doesn’t give them up easily. There is an awful lot there to be 
filmed, and there are fewer people filming there than in Africa and South 
America in my experience. Africa is full of very talented film-makers, you have 
to be very clever to go and make new films in Africa, the guys are living there 
all the time. But, actually, there aren’t a lot of people making films in 
Borneo. And I speak just enough of the language to order a cup of tea and to be 
able to ask “How are you?”, which is pleasant.

A plague is where one species suddenly starts to proliferate and produce 
enormous swarms. In the time that I have been making television programmes, 
which doesn’t seem to be all that long to me, the number of human beings on 
this planet has increased by three times. If you took an objective view out 
there in the universe and observed this planet, wouldn’t you define that as a 
plague?

If we can allow women to have political control of their bodies, and medical 
facilities and education and literacy … wherever that happens the birth rate 
falls. Of course, it’s happened in the west, but they’ve also achieved this in 
the state of Kerala in India, which is very poor.


I have just come back from Patagonia, where I have been filming digging up a 
dinosaur. And I’ve recently been to France, filming luminous earth worms. I 
don’t think there is anything else on my plate at the moment.


• Great Barrier Reef with David Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough> starts on BBC1 at 
9pm on 30 December
 