
Ariel Sharon, who died on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/11/ariel-sharon> after eight years 
in a coma, was one of Israel's most iconic and controversial figures. His long 
and chequered career as a soldier and politician largely revolved around one 
issue: the conflict between Israel and its Arab neighbours. As a soldier he was 
involved at the sharp end of this bitter conflict. As a politician he became 
known as "the Bulldozer" on account of his contempt for his critics and his 
ruthless drive to get things done. Sharon was a deeply flawed character, 
renowned for his brutality, mendacity, and corruption. Yetdespite these flaws 
he holds a special place in the annals of his country's history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/11/ariel-sharon-israel-warrior-death>
.

Sharon was an ardent Jewish nationalist, a dyed-in-the-wool hardliner, and a 
ferocious rightwing hawk. He also displayed a consistent preference for force 
over diplomacy in dealing with the Arabs. ReversingClausewitz 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_von_Clausewitz>'s famous dictum, he treated 
diplomacy as the extension of war by other means.

The title he chose for his biography aptly summed him up in one word – 
Warrior. Like Shakespeare'sCoriolanus <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolanus>
, Sharon was essentially a fighting machine. His critics denounced him as 
a practitioner of "gun Zionism", as a perversion of the Zionist idea of the 
strong, fair-minded, and fearless Jew. To the Palestinians Sharon represented 
the cold, cruel, militaristic face of the Zionist occupation.

In 1953 Major Sharon committed his first war crime: the massacre of 69 
civilians in the Jordanian village of Qibya 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qibya_massacre>. In 1982, as minister of defence, 
he ledIsrael's invasion of Lebanon 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/7381364.stm> in a war of 
deception that failed to achieve any of its grandiose geopolitical objectives. 
A commission of inquiry found Sharon responsible for failing to prevent the 
massacre by Christian Phalangists of Palestinian refugees in Beirut'sSabra and 
Shatila <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/panorama/1390979.stm> camps. 
This verdict was etched on his forehead like a mark of Cain. But who foresaw 
that the man who was declared unfit to be minister of defence would bounce back 
as prime minister?

During the 2001 elections campaign Sharon tried to reinvent himself as a man 
of peace. His spin doctors cultivated the notion that old age was accompanied 
by a personal transformation from a sanguinary soldier into a genuine 
peace-seeker. President George W Bush famously described Sharon as "a man of 
peace". For the last 40 years the Arab-Israeli conflict has been my main 
research interest, and I have not come across a scintilla of evidence to 
support this view. Sharon was a man of war through and through, an Arab-hater, 
and a pugnacious proponent of the doctrine of permanent conflict. Following his 
rise to power Sharon therefore remained what he had always been – the champion 
of violent solutions.

The dominant preoccupation of Sharon's premiership was the "war on terror" 
against militant Palestinian groups. No peace negotiations with the Palestinian 
Authority took place between 2001 and 2006, and Sharon regarded this as 
something to be proud of. To his way of thinking negotiations necessarily 
involve compromise, and he consequently avoided them like the plague.

For this reason he also rejected all international plans aimed at a two-state 
solution. One was the2002 Arab peace initiative 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/1844214.stm>, which offered 
Israel peace and normalisation with all 22 members of the Arab League in return 
for agreeing to an independent Palestinian state on the West Bank and Gaza, 
with a capital city in East Jerusalem. Another was the 2003 Quartetroad map 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/2989783.stm>, which envisaged the 
emergence of a Palestinian state alongside Israel by the end of 2005.

Sharon was the unilateralist par excellence. His ultimate aim was to redraw 
unilaterally Israel's borders, incorporating large swaths of occupied 
territory. Stage one was to build on the West Bank theso-called security barrier
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/27/israel-extends-border-fence-critics>
 which the Palestinians call the apartheid wall. The international court of 
justicecondemned this wall as illegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/jul/10/israel3>. It is three times as 
long as the pre-1967 border, and its primary purpose is not security but 
land-grabbing. Good fences may make good neighbours, but not when they are 
erected in the neighbour's garden.

Stage two consisted of the unilateral disengagement of Gaza in August 2005. 
This involved theuprooting of 8,000 Jews and the dismantling of many settlements
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/aug/17/israel4> − a shocking 
turnaround by a man who used to be called the godfather of the settlers. 
Withdrawal from Gaza was presented as a contribution to the Quartet's road map 
but it was nothing of the sort. The road map called for negotiations; Sharon 
refused to negotiate. His unilateral move was designed to freeze the political 
process, thereby preventing the establishment of a Palestinian state and 
maintaining the geopolitical status quo in the West Bank.

The legal term "depraved indifference 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depraved-heart_murder>" refers to conduct that 
is so wanton, so callous, so reckless, so deficient in a moral sense of 
concern, so lacking in regard for the lives of others, and so blameworthy as to 
warrant criminal liability. Sharon personified this kind of indifference in his 
approach to the Palestinians.

Towards the very end of his active life he bolted from the Likud 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likud> to create the centrist party Kadima 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/mar/29/israel1>, but Kadima did not 
survive his demise. Today it hasonly two seats 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kadima> in the 120-member Knesset. So Sharon's 
last-minute attempt to bring about a realignment in Israeli politics ended in 
failure.

His enduring legacy has been to empower and embolden some of the most racist, 
xenophobic, expansionist, and intransigent elements in Israel's dysfunctional 
political system.

• Comment on this article are set to remain open for 24 hours, but may be 
closed overnight
 