
Messages to voters including robocalls and texts should state who authorised 
them, a parliamentary committee has said, in a bid to prevent a repeat of 
Labor’sMedicare text fiasco  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/police-to-investigate-alp-text-messages-warning-coalition-to-privatise-medicare>
at the 2016 election.

An interim report on Friday by the joint standing committee on electoral 
matters (JSCEM) warned that electoral laws needed updating as some new media 
had no authorisation requirements.

It said the Electoral Act “has not kept pace with the rapid technological 
changes in methods of communication resulting in the emergence of loopholes”.

The act does not currently require authorisation of electoral advertising by 
telephone, text messaging or social media.

Liberal campaign director defends 'positive' election tactics and attacks 
Medicare 'lie'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/liberal-campaign-director-defends-positive-election-tactics-and-attacks-medicare-lie>
The committee said that the law should be amended to “specifically and 
explicitly address the matter of authorisation” to ensure parties are 
accountable for their political statements, those who authorise materials are 
“identifiable and traceable” and there is consistency in the application of 
rules.

The committee said that “overwhelming evidence” supported an amendment to help 
the law “evolve to deal with new, digital forms of communication”

“Robocalls and text messaging play an integral role in political campaigns and 
should be addressed in the electoral laws.”

The report noted concerns that at the 2016 election text messages were sent 
that were “alleged to be or [gave] the impression that they were” from Medicare.

The text messages, sent by the Queensland branch of the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party>, said: “Mr Turnbull’s 
plans to privatise Medicare will take us down the road of no return. Time is 
running out to save Medicare.”

In his election night speech, Malcolm Turnbull described Labor’s campaign on 
Medicare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/malcolm-turnbull-says-coalition-can-form-majority-despite-dramatic-losses-australian-election>
 as “some of the most systematic, well-funded lies ever peddled in Australia”. 
At the National Press Club, federal Liberal directorTony Nutt labelled the 
campaign a “coldblooded lie” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/liberal-campaign-director-defends-positive-election-tactics-and-attacks-medicare-lie>
 that targeted vulnerable people.

Uniform, format-neutral authorisation rules won general support, including 
from the Labor party, in the JSCEM review.

The “Mediscare” messages were referred to police but they decided not to 
prosecute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/police-drop-investigation-into-election-day-mediscare-text-messages>
, in part because there is no law against impersonating a commonwealth entity, 
only a commonwealth officer.

The report said that anonymous election material may suggest “someone who is 
unprepared to back their views”, weakening its message, but impersonating a 
commonwealth entity was a different problem.

“In the Medicare example ... the association with a commonwealth entity 
arguably strengthened the authority and legitimacy of the message.”

JSCEM said it would consider creation of such an offence in early 2017.

The committee also said that “unauthorised use of commonwealth logos and 
symbols should not occur in an election campaign”, and it will revisit the 
issue in 2017.

It follows a legal threat from the Department of Human Services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/23/health-campaigner-gets-legal-threat-from-government-over-medicare-logo>
 to a campaigner for the public health system accusing him of “misleading or 
deceptive” use of the Medicare logo and name on hissavemedicare.org website 
<http://savemedicare.org/>.

The Queensland Labor party has maintained the Medicare text message “was not 
intended to indicate that it was a message from Medicare, rather to identify 
the subject of the text”.

“The message was consistent with Labor’s message throughout the campaign. 
There should be no surprise that this was not a government message,”a spokesman 
said when the matter was referred to police in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/police-to-investigate-alp-text-messages-warning-coalition-to-privatise-medicare>
.
 