
The Vatican is strongly denying Turkish claims that Pope Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> has adopted a “mentality of 
the Crusades” by recognising the Ottoman-era slaughter of Armenians as genocide.

The Vatican spokesman, the Rev. Federico Lombardi, said nothing in Francis’ 
texts or words during his Armenian trip showed any hostility to Turkey and in 
fact were infused with calls forArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia> and Turkey to build bridges of 
peace and reconciliation.

“The pope is not doing Crusades,” he said Sunday. “He has said no words 
against the Turkish people.”

On Saturday Turkish deputy prime minister Nurettin Canikli called Francis’ 
comments “greatly unfortunate” and said they bore the hallmarks of the 
“mentality of the Crusades.”

He called the comments “greatly unfortunate” and said they bore the hallmarks 
of the “mentality of the Crusades”.


Pope Francis denounces Armenian 'genocide' during visit to Yerevan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/24/pope-francis-denounces-armenian-genocide-during-visit-to-yerevan>
Pope Francis is wrapping up his trip to Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/23/pope-francis-to-visit-genocide-memorial-in-armenia>
 with a Sunday liturgy in the Apostolic cathedral celebrated by his Orthodox 
hosts and a visit to Armenia’s closed border with Turkey.

Turkey rejects the use of the term genocide, saying the 1.5 million deaths 
cited by historians is an inflated figure and that people died on both sides as 
the Ottoman Empire collapsed amid the first world war. When Francis first used 
it last year,Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> withdrew its 
ambassador for 10 months and accused Francis of spreading lies.

Canikli said the term “does not comply with the truth”.


“Everyone knows that. We all know it, the whole world knows it, and so do the 
Armenians,” he added.

Francis made the remarks at the start of his three-day visit and followed up 
with a call for the world to never forget or minimise the “immense and 
senseless slaughter”.

On Sunday, he was turning his attention more toward religious affairs, 
participating in a liturgy in the Armenian Apostolic cathedral in Etchmiadzin, 
the seat of the Oriental Orthodox church here. The landlocked nation of three 
million was the first nation in the world to adoptChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> as a state religion in 301.

Pope Francis to visit genocide memorial in Armenia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/23/pope-francis-to-visit-genocide-memorial-in-armenia>
The Armenian Apostolic and Catholic churches split in a theological dispute 
over the divine and human natures of Jesus Christ, arising from the 
fifth-century Council of Chalcedon. While still divided over the primacy of the 
pope, the Armenian church has established friendly relations with the Vatican, 
and Francis’ visit here has been a visible testimony to their close ties.

After the liturgy, Francis was due to head west toward Armenia’s border with 
Turkey.

Turkey closed the frontier in support for its ally and ethnic kin, Azerbaijan, 
after the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict erupted into a full-scale war in 1992. The 
blockade has worsened Armenia’s economic problems.


Francis has said he would love to see the border reopened, given his 
longstanding call for countries to build bridges, not walls, at their frontiers.

Francis is due to release a dove of peace near the border at the Khor Virap 
monastary. The monastary is one of the most sacred sites in Armenia and lies in 
the shadow of Mount Ararat, where according to legend, Noah landed his Ark 
after the great floods.

Pope Francis rejects donation from Argentinian president with 666 in sum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/14/pope-francis-mauricio-macri-argentina-charity-donation-666>
On Saturday, Francis paid his respects at Armenia’s imposing genocide memorial 
and greeted descendants of survivors of the 1915 massacres.


“Here I pray with sorrow in my heart, so that a tragedy like this never again 
occurs, so that humanity will never forget and will know how to defeat evil 
with good,” Francis wrote in the memorial’s guest book. “May God protect the 
memory of the Armenian people. Memory should never be watered-down or 
forgotten. Memory is the source of peace and the future.”

Francis also greeted descendants of the 400 or so Armenian orphans taken in by 
Popes Benedict XV and Pius XI at the papal summer residence south of Rome in 
the 1920s.

“A blessing has come down on the land of Mount Ararat,” said Andzhela 
Adzhemyan, a 35-year old refugee from Syria who was a guest at the memorial. 
“He has given us the strength and confidence to keep our Christian faith no 
matter what.”

Francis raised the importance of memory at an evening prayer in Yerevan’s 
Republic Square, which drew the largest crowds of his visit, around 50,000 
according to Vatican estimates. With the patriarch of the Apostolic Church, 
Karekin II, by his side and President Serzh Sargsyan in the front row, Francis 
said even the greatest pain “can become a seed of peace for the future”.

“Memory, infused with love, becomes capable of setting out on new and 
unexpected paths, where designs of hatred become projects of reconciliation, 
where hope arises for a better future for everyone,” he said.

He specifically called for Armenia and Turkey to take up the “path of 
reconciliation” and said: “May peace also spring forth in Nagorno-Karabakh.”
 