
David Sylvester You always say that these narrow proportions, which you find 
too narrow, are involuntary. But you arrive at these results in your work. You 
say that you do not want these results, but you reduce to these proportions.

Alberto Giacometti During a certain period, I wanted to hold on to volume, and 
the proportions became so small that they disappeared. Then I wanted to hold on 
to a certain height, and the proportions became narrow. It all happened in 
spite of me, even when I fought against it. And I fought against it, I tried to 
make them broad. The more I wanted to make them broad, the narrower they 
became. But I don't know what the real explanation is. I still don't know. I 
will only know by doing the work I am going to do. But up till now, all I can 
say is that a head with proportions that are not the real ones seems more alive 
than a head with proportions that seem more real. And this has been giving me a 
lot of trouble...

DS I've heard you say, for example, while you were working on a standing 
figure: the more you take away, the fatter it becomes. Do you know why this 
happens?

AG What I know, more than ever, is that the more I take away, the fatter it 
becomes. But why, I don't know yet. With the bust I'm doing now, I do nothing 
but take away, and it's so fat that I feel it must be twice as thick as it is. 
So, I've got to take away, take away, take away... And that's where I really 
get lost. As if the material itself had become an illusion. You have a certain 
amount of clay, and at first you feel that you've given more or less the right 
volume. And then, to make it more real, you take away. You don't do anything 
but take away. It becomes fatter and fatter. But then, it's like the material 
itself, you could stretch it to infinity. If you work a little clump of clay, 
it seems to get bigger. The more you work it, the bigger it gets.

DS A possible explanation might be that when it's narrower, therefore more 
dense, it has more contained energy; then, if this energy, this contained 
violence, is increased, one gets the impression that the sculpture dominates 
more space. And if it dominates more space, it gives the impression of being 
fatter. What do you think?

AG That's probably part of it, anyway, but there's also something else. If I 
copy the surface of a head exactly in a sculpture, what's inside? Nothing but a 
great mass of dead clay. In the living head, the inside is just as organic as 
the surface, right? So, a head that seems real, say a head by Houdon, is like a 
bridge, a bridge with a surface that resembles a head; but you have the feeling 
that the inside is empty if it's made out of clay. If it's made out of stone, 
you feel that it's a mass of stone. And already, there's something false, 
whether it's empty or a mass of stone, because there's no resemblance, because 
in your skull there's not a millimetre that's not organic.

So, in a sense, in the narrow heads there's just enough clay for them to stand 
up and nothing more. The inside is something absolutely necessary. Necessarily, 
there's more resemblance with a living head than one that's just a copy of the 
exterior. And I think this is the reason why it might be possible to do a 
painting that resembles a head and less possible, or not possible, to do a 
sculpture.

This afternoon at the British Museum, looking at the Greeks, I found nothing 
but enormous rocks, enormous dead rocks. When I look at a person looking at 
them, the person who looks doesn't have any thickness, he's almost transparent. 
And very light. You can see that the weight of the mass is false. When someone 
is alive, even if he's very fat, he holds himself very lightly. So, if I make 
life-sized figures that become very thin, there must be a motive: one reason is 
that, for them to be true, they have to be light enough for me to take them 
with one hand and put them in a taxi beside me.

DS And the problem is even more difficult when one paints sculptures from 
nature because, on the surface, you have a very exact illusion and, on the 
inside, there's nothing but bronze, clay, whatever; so in this sense it's even 
more false.

AG Yes and no. For example, a sculpture seems narrow when it's not painted; 
painted, it seems almost as we see it. I don't know what would happen if I made 
it wider first and then painted it. In order to paint it, it's possible that 
the volume has to be more reduced than what you thought it should be. Because a 
light colour dilates, it dilates the volume (that's what you see on canvas, 
don't you think?). So probably, in order to be painted, the sculpture has to be 
narrower than you thought at first.

What I know is that I've really never been able to do an eye as I see it. I've 
never succeeded in sculpture, not in painting either, but even less in 
sculpture, because if you look at an eye straight on, it doesn't seem to bulge 
very much. If you look at it from the side, it seems almost sharp, doesn't it? 
So, it's two contradictory things: in reality it's quite wide and pointed at 
the same time. How can you do something that's round and pointed at the same 
time?

You would think that if you looked at it straight on in a good light that you 
would be able to do the curve of the eye, to model it as you saw it; but to me 
that seems just about the most impossible thing in the world. Not only 
impossible for me, but for everyone, everywhere, always. The only eyes that 
impress me at all are from the sculptures of the so-called "high style". 
Especially Egyptian sculpture, and the Byzantines, too.

DS In effect, you've painted your sculptures fairly often, but irregularly.

AG A little after I started to do sculpture, I painted some of them, and then 
I destroyed them all. I've begun again several times. In 1951, I painted a 
whole series of sculptures. But in painting them, you see what the form lacks. 
And it's useless to paint over something that you don't believe in. I tried 
again a month ago. In painting them, the deficiencies of form came through.

So I can't flatter myself with the illusion that I've accomplished something 
by painting them if there's nothing underneath. So I have to sacrifice the 
painting and try to work on the form. In the same way that I have to sacrifice 
the whole person in order to work on the head. In the same way that I have to 
sacrifice the whole landscape in order to work on a leaf, or all other objects 
in order to work on a glass.

Up till a year ago I thought it was much easier to draw a tablecloth on a 
round table and totally impossible to draw it as I saw it. The important thing 
is to let go of the tablecloth until you've understood it a little better, as 
much as you can, even if you can't. You've got to sacrifice painting, 
sculpture, heads and everything else, and limit yourself to staying in a room, 
in front of the same table, the same cloth, the same chair and do nothing but 
that. And I know in advance that the harder I try, the more difficult it 
becomes. Bit by bit my life is reduced to almost nothing. It's pretty upsetting 
to do this because you don't want to sacrifice everything. However, it's the 
only thing to do. Perhaps, I don't know.

But in any case, once I've become more sensitive to the foot-and-a-half 
distance between a table and chair, a room, any room, becomes infinitely larger 
than before. It becomes large enough for me to live in it. Little by little, it 
does away with all my walks.

That's why I don't walk any more. The walks I take are for going to a 
restaurant, a cafe, to go somewhere I have to go, and I'd rather go by car than 
on foot: it's no longer for the pleasure of taking a walk. The pleasure of 
taking a walk in the forest has disappeared for me because the first tree on a 
sidewalk in Paris is already enough. That's enough for me in the way of trees; 
to see two of them would make me afraid. I used to want to go on trips, but the 
problem now of going or not going leaves me completely cold. The curiosity to 
see something is reduced, because a glass on a table astonishes me much more 
than before.

If the glass there in front of me astonishes me more than all the glasses I've 
seen in paintings, and if I think that even the greatest marvel of architecture 
couldn't impress me more than this glass, there's really no need for me to go 
all the way to India to see this or that temple, when I have so many of them in 
front of me. But if this glass becomes the marvel of marvels, all the glasses 
on earth become marvels of marvels, too. And other objects, too. So, in 
limiting yourself to a single glass, you have a much better notion of all the 
other objects than if you had wanted to do everything.

In having a quarter of an inch of something, you have a better chance of 
holding on to a certain feeling of the universe than if you had pretended to be 
doing the whole sky. Against that, simply trying to draw a glass as you see it 
seems like a fairly modest undertaking. But because you know that even that is 
almost impossible, you can't say whether it's modesty or pride. So everything 
turns around in circles.

Interview Â© Estate of David Sylvester. A longer version of this article 
appears in the summer issue of Modern Painters.www.modernpainters.co.uk 
<http://www.modernpainters.co.uk>
 