
Would you dare to bare all in public? We’re not talking nudity here – nothing 
so crass, but the idea of sharing photos of yourself without the benefit of 
complexion-enhancing foundation, eye-framing mascara and a pop of colour on 
your lips and cheeks. Your face, in all its naked glory, staring out from your 
friends’ Facebook timelines and strangers’ Instagram feeds. Would you? I 
confess, I wouldn’t do it. There is a part of me that simply doesn’t relish the 
prospect of being publicly “exposed” without a little cosmetic enhancement.

But many, it seems, are more than happy to embrace bare-faced chic. Search the 
hashtag #nomakeup on Instagram and you’ll be greeted with more than 12.3 
million images of women of all ages, in various states of facial undress. Going 
without makeup is the latest social status symbol, inspired by an increasing 
number of high-profile celebrities prepared to discard their cosmetic facade.

Just last week, Adele, whose signature feline flick of eyeliner and pale 
porcelain complexion are a key component of her personal brand,shared a video 
on Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/p/BJOhkG-jCYB/?taken-by=adele&hl=en>to 
apologise to fans for cancelling a concert. Explaining her voice “was not in 
working order”, the singer attracted attention because she confidently and 
nonchalantly revealed the real Adele: the face she sees each morning before 
makeup artist Michael Ashton sets to work creating her public persona.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fmakeup-free-adele-alicia-keys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc13fecd1c057d18016e5eca99233ca963ffbd6ac%2F9_12_798_997%2F798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23nomakeup%3A%20would%20you%20go%20au%20naturel%20like%20Adele%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fmakeup-free-adele-alicia-keys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23nomakeup%3A%20would%20you%20go%20au%20naturel%20like%20Adele%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fmakeup-free-adele-alicia-keys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc13fecd1c057d18016e5eca99233ca963ffbd6ac%2F9_12_798_997%2F798.jpg>
 Adele apologised online, without make-up, to fans for cancelling a concert. 
Photograph: Adele Atkinson 
She’s not alone: Gwyneth Paltrow, Beyoncé, Cameron Diaz, Madonna, Holly 
Willoughby, Fearne Cotton, Davina McCall, Kelly Brook, Sharon Stone, Lily Allen 
and Lady Gaga are just some of the stars confidently offering their followers a 
glimpse of their makeup-free faces. The concept of a usually highly polished 
celebrity – who would have a retinue of stylists on hand to primp and preen – 
without her gloss is somewhat refreshing in an image-conscious world.

“There is a certain way that women on TV and in entertainment have to look as 
part of their jobs,” saysGuardian beauty columnist Sali Hughes. “I love the 
idea that they are demonstrating a different facet to their personality and 
their life, by letting us see how they look without makeup. I think the 
no-makeup selfie is great, because it demonstrates the level of artifice that 
goes in to creating celebrities’ public image, and it’s reassuring for many 
women to see the real person, away from the cameras.”

One such celebrity has taken the concept further, by shaking off the shackles 
of makeup completely. In a bid to simplify her life and find her “true self” 
amid the multitude of identities she created in the public eye, Alicia Keys 
penned a poignant song,When a Girl Can’t Be Herself 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/alicia-keys-going-makeup-free-898374>, 
that includes the words: “In the morning from the minute that I wake up / What 
if I don’t want to put on all that makeup / Who says I must conceal what I’m 
made of / Maybe all this Maybelline is covering my self-esteem.”

After much soul-searching, the singer has now pledged “to approach things 
differently (this time), regarding my image and allow my real self, as is, to 
come through”.

In a new trailer for the US edition of reality show The Voice, Keys appears 
with her complexion bereft of cosmetics, revealing the kind of bare-faced, raw 
beauty rarely seen in a world of highly contrived, over-styled personalities. 
She will be one of four judges on the show next month, and will spend the whole 
series makeup-free. Some might say it’s a brave stance against female 
submission to traditional stereotypes; others simply celebrate such a move away 
from mask-like makeup.

“I think this growing movement for no makeup is fantastic,” says celebrity 
makeup artist Mary Greenwell, renowned for her portfolio of glossy magazine 
covers and red-carpet makeovers. “In a world where some really influential 
women are over-contouring, with really heavily made-up eyes morning, noon and 
night, we have lost perspective on what makeup is for – to make you feel a bit 
better when you need it. When you wear too much makeup, it adds years to your 
face, and seeing women without it shows how gorgeous they can look: natural, 
healthy and 10 years younger.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fmakeup-free-adele-alicia-keys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7687bde481d77c338ee5a1a46b29ad6b453f97b%2F0_200_2128_1277%2F2128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23nomakeup%3A%20would%20you%20go%20au%20naturel%20like%20Adele%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fmakeup-free-adele-alicia-keys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23nomakeup%3A%20would%20you%20go%20au%20naturel%20like%20Adele%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fmakeup-free-adele-alicia-keys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7687bde481d77c338ee5a1a46b29ad6b453f97b%2F0_200_2128_1277%2F2128.jpg>
 Cameron Diaz is among those stars willing to let fans get a glimpse of them au 
naturel. Photograph: ddp USA/REX/Shutterstock 
“I hate to see young women addicted to makeup as a mask,” continues Greenwell, 
whose clientele has included the likes of Kate Moss, Cate Blanchett, Victoria 
Beckham, Gisele Bündchen and the late Diana, Princess of Wales. “I see 
14-year-old girls made up with layers of caked-on foundation, contouring 
shaders and highlighters, smokey eyes, the works – at three o’clock on a 
Saturday afternoon.

“It’s not about enhancing their own looks, but about striving to emulate 
celebrities whose lifestyles they admire and aspire to. Adopting the same 
makeup techniques brings them one step closer, but they are projecting someone 
else’s look on to themselves, and hiding from their true identity. So I love 
the idea of celebrities going makeup-free and inspiring us all to be confident 
in who we are, pushing the idea of a great skincare regime to get a healthy, 
glowing complexion.”

However, even in our enlightened age of female empowerment and supposed 
equality, the very thought of capturing ourselves on camera, free of 
face-flattering cosmetics, is enough to send the most confident of women over 
the edge.

My own reticence largely stems from my pre-teen and teenage years, when a trio 
of spiteful female classmates taunted me relentlessly about my acne-ridden 
skin. A 79p stick of Rimmel concealer was clumsily applied in a bid to cover 
the onslaught of hormonal blemishes, but almost certainly drew more unwanted 
attention to my pubescent, spotty skin.

Yet I felt reassured by the presence of makeup, and gradually sought further 
solace in its confidence-boosting powers. As I slowly learned the tricks of the 
cosmetics trade, my self-consciousness seeped away and my self-esteem grew. I 
associated the contents of my makeup bag with the ability to walk tall in 
public, to head off to fashion college brimming with confidence. As for so many 
women, cosmetics were as essential a part of my morning routine as cleaning my 
teeth and brushing my hair.

Later, I went on to work in television, where I’d have studio makeup applied 
by professional artists wielding an array of brushes, skilfully blending a mask 
of perfection on to my pitted, scarred skin, creating the illusion of a creamy, 
porcelain-smooth complexion. They’d shade my lids with smokey hues, creating 
sultry eyes, and artfully add radiance to my cheeks with rosy-pink blush.

It was empowering and addictive but, today, as a middle-aged, home-based 
freelance journalist and mum of one, I spend the majority of my days 
bare-faced, and largely liberated from the makeup mask I clung to in my youth. 
I’ll open the doorau naturel to couriers but I’m not about to pollute social 
media with my naked face – more a common courtesy to the wider public than 
vanity on my part. Yet, I still love being able to morph into a more glamorous 
being with considered application of corrector and concealer, a dewy foundation 
and a sweep of eyeliner and mascara.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fmakeup-free-adele-alicia-keys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F751296955f30d0aefc945a0b90cebc8b061d3fac%2F1174_139_3082_1849%2F3082.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23nomakeup%3A%20would%20you%20go%20au%20naturel%20like%20Adele%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fmakeup-free-adele-alicia-keys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23nomakeup%3A%20would%20you%20go%20au%20naturel%20like%20Adele%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fmakeup-free-adele-alicia-keys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F751296955f30d0aefc945a0b90cebc8b061d3fac%2F1174_139_3082_1849%2F3082.jpg>
 Young women have made up to emulate celebrity ‘perfection’ but now the trend 
is for bare faces. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
For years, I’ve witnessed firsthand the incredible effort that goes into 
making models and celebrities look the way they do, and am better versed than 
most in the “magic’” of the makeover. It’s encouraging to see many models and 
actresses sharing the “before” shots in their social media output, so other 
women can see the reality behind the artistry. Surely, that can only restore 
our own self-esteem, shattered by a proliferation of “perfection” portrayed by 
amateur Photoshoppers and over-enthusiastic photographic filter users?

Journalist and TV presenter Ginny Buckley says that social media has been very 
liberating, allowing her to have the ultimate say in the way she is portrayed 
in public. “The only time I felt my image was controlled was when I’ve been 
photographed for the press or been on television but, on Instagram, I show who 
I truly am, in all areas of my life. Of course, there are images I’m not 
comfortable sharing but, ultimately, I’m not so obsessed with my image that I 
won’t show the reality of life. If I’m filming and have some makeup on, that’s 
what I post, but if I’m camping in a field with my seven-year-old son, I’m 
equally confident to share that side of me. I love the positive messageAdele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> sent out with her makeup-free selfie: 
it can only be a good thing for young women to see the effort that goes into 
creating so-called “perfection” and that being true to yourself is just as 
beautiful.”
 