
Anne Frank <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-frank> didn’t get to see 
the liberation of the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp. The young Jewish Dutch 
girl died in that camp, aged 15, but left behind an indelible account of her 
life, The Diary of a Young Girl. The exact date of her death in 1945 is 
unknown, but today has been chosen to commemorate its 70th anniversary, 
coinciding with the date of the liberation of the camp.

The commemoration is taking a rather unusual shape. “Because her voice could 
not be silenced, we decided that one minute of silence wouldn’t be as 
appropriate” as a minute of people reading out her words, explains Gillian 
Walnes, co-founder and vice-president of theAnne Frank Trust UK 
<http://www.annefrank.org.uk/>, who have organised the campaign with Penguin 
Random House, the publishers ofthe diary 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-a-young-girl-14.html>.

Everyone, whether they’re at work, at home or on the street, alone or with 
friends, is encouraged to take one minute to film themselves reading her words, 
and upload the videos to social media using the hashtag#NotSilent 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23notsilent&src=tyah>. You can obviously choose 
a reading yourself, but the Anne Frank Trust has also putextracts on their site 
<http://www.annefrank.org.uk/what-we-do/notsilent>, and suggested people talk 
about their own lives and hopes if they prefer. Some celebrities have already 
joined the campaign:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnfJW-JlmvQk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnfJW-JlmvQk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnfJW-JlmvQk&media=>
 Michael Buerk and others read from Anne Frank’s diary. 
You can watch their one-minute videos by following these links: actor Naomie 
Harris <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qe9n2pA7R_Q>, choreographer and director
Arlene Philips <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7tz9V_LgsDk>, author Cathy 
Cassidy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UnvFsDCv-Sk>, journalist Michael Buerk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OwSltTfpEZI>, actor Jing Lusi 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tnpJq7qjJRY>, poet Roger McGough 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dCYrlbkaV1g>, author Malorie Blackman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G70rkPCrAzc>, author Jacqueline Wilson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vzuPoedB5Ic>, actor Russell Tovey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VMHE0I-z1zo>, actor Ceallach Spellman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7CXX7DrJrQQ>, author and journalist India 
Knight <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=snEVPpcisuU>, and former Labour 
politicianDavid Miliband <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Oos7YLDz3TE>. 

A timeless voice against prejudice: your videos reading Anne Frank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/apr/14/a-timeless-voice-against-prejudice-your-videos-reading-anne-frank>
A timeless voice for the young 

One of the reasons Frank still touches people is how well she captured the 
struggle of any young soul against the unjust world of adults, and the yearning 
to get out into the world and fight injustice. “Even though she lived 70 years 
ago, and teenagers’ experiences and the way they communicate have changed so 
dramatically, she was essentially a very modern girl,” says Walnes.

“She goes through things with her parents, changes in her body, injustices in 
a world where adults make a mess of things … And that is a springboard to talk 
about many issues,” adds Walnes, who also recently blogged about Frank’s 
writing and lifefor the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/gillian-walnes-/anne-frank-not-silent_b_7032552.html>
. “She saw herself as many things, but to her persecutors she was just one 
thing: a Jew.”

The Anne Frank Trust works with young people in schools, prisons and deprived 
communities around the UK to educate and help teenagers suffering all kinds of 
prejudice. Now, for instance, they’re getting funding from the Department of 
Education for a project tackling bullying against LGBT teens.


Bergen-Belsen survivor Freda Wineman: “We mustn’t forget”

The big concern now is that “we will soon see the end of first-hand accounts”, 
says Walnes, mindful of the responsibility to carry the story forward. Freda 
Wineman, one of those living witnesses, saw the Frank sisters, Anne and Margot, 
in both Auschwitz and Bergen-Belsen. In a telephone interview, she emphasised: 
“It’s very important that young people take an interest in history: they need 
to learn to have respect for other people. The world today is in big trouble. 
You have to learn, if you want to have a little bit of peace and to live in 
harmony, how to live with others.”

Wineman stressed the importance of Frank’s testimony: “At her age, she was 
absolutely brilliant: to speak the way she spoke about everything, and to keep 
her courage the way she did … she would have gone on to be a great fighter and 
a great human being.”

Take part: post your one-minute videos reading Anne Frank using the hashtag 
#NotSilent <https://twitter.com/search?src=typd&q=%23notsilent>. If you don’t 
have the Diary to hand,the Anne Frank Trust is offering extracts here 
<http://www.annefrank.org.uk/what-we-do/notsilent>. We will update this piece 
with some of your videos during the day.
 