
I first tasted Charlie Brigham soup when I was 19, during the first summer 
that I stayed at my aunt Tina’s house in northern California, just across the 
Golden Gate bridge from San Francisco. The house was small, with a red front 
door and hardwood floors that had settled into a gentle slant, so that a ball 
set down in my bedroom – which had been my cousin Sarah’s childhood bedroom – 
would roll effortlessly across the hall, past the bathroom, and bump against 
Tina’s bedskirt.

Tina was my mother’s identical twin sister. Almost no one but family could 
tell them apart. I grew up 1,400 miles away, in Oklahoma, but Tina’s house was 
my second home, where we spent at least one vacation a year – Christmas or 
summer or both. It’s because of Tina that I decided to go to college in 
California, at Stanford, and that I still live on the west coast.

During the summers of 1999 and 2000, after my sophomore and junior years, I 
lived at Tina’s, cleaning the bathroom once a week in lieu of rent. I worked at 
the cheese counter of a nearby Whole Foods store. Tina worked in the city. 
Tina’s younger daughter, Katie, lived in the bedroom next to mine, occasionally 
with a boyfriend. We were family, but mostly we were housemates. We kept our 
own schedules, and had our own shelves in the fridge. But one tired weeknight, 
as we all slumped against the kitchen counter, Tina made us her back-pocket 
meal: Charlie Brigham soup.

One batch of chicken stock, four delicious dishes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/09/chicken-stock-recipes-batch-cooking-get-ahead-regula-ysewijn>
Charlie Brigham soup dates back some 40 years. It came into our family via a 
neighbourhood woman who was Sarah’s nanny when, at eight weeks after giving 
birth, Tina went back to work. Charlie Brigham was – stick with me here – the 
nanny’s divorce attorney. As the story goes, Brigham once stopped by the 
nanny’s house around lunchtime with paperwork. The client and attorney were 
both hungry. The client pleaded no food in the house. The attorney, of course, 
objected. “No one ever has nothing,” he said: didn’t she have chicken broth, 
noodles, an egg, parmesan cheese? She did, and with those four ingredients, 
Brigham made soup for two. The nanny later made the soup for Sarah, and she 
also taught it to Tina.

“It’s comfort food, for sure,” Sarah says. “It’s also what you make when you 
can’t decide on dinner. We’ve all made it for as long as I can remember.”

The idea is simple: use what you keep around. There has never been a recipe 
per se, and what follows is my approximation. You can scale up or down, 
tweaking quantities as you go.

Charlie Brigham soup was one of the last foods Tina ate. She died four years 
ago, a youthful 65, of pancreatic cancer. She spent her last weeks at my 
mother’s house in Oklahoma. My cousins and I flew in for caregiving shifts. 
Tina couldn’t eat much, so Sarah made Charlie Brigham soup. At the end of her 
life, Tina liked it best with tiny star-shaped pasta, the kind I had loved as a 
kid. This soup was her home away from home, a comfort when almost nothing was 
comfortable. Today, on a cloudy Monday in Seattle, I’m making it for my 
daughter, who was born three months after we lost Tina. Charlie Brigham soup 
will probably outlive us all, and somehow, that seems right.

Charlie Brigham soup

Mr Brigham used Swanson <https://www.campbells.com/swanson/broths-and-stocks/> 
canned chicken broth,fideo 
<http://allrecipes.com/recipe/62212/fideo-mexican-spaghetti/> vermicelli, egg, 
andKraft parmesan cheese 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/larryolmsted/2012/11/19/the-dark-side-of-parmesan-cheese-what-you-dont-know-might-hurt-you/#74f1215f71be>
 – the green‑canister kind that keeps for a small eternity. Today, you might 
swap in organic chicken broth (homemade or not), capellini and freshly grated 
parmesan.

Serves 2
1 large egg
475ml chicken broth
65g capellini, fideo vermicelli, or other thin noodle or small pasta shape
Parmesan, grated, to taste
Black pepper, to taste

1 Crack the egg into a small bowl, and beat well.

2 In a small saucepan, bring the broth to a boil. Add the pasta, and cook 
according to package directions, until just tender. Drizzle in the beaten egg, 
stirring constantly with a fork so that the egg breaks into feather-like pieces 
rather than clumps. Divide the soup between two wide, shallow bowls. Top with 
grated cheese and black pepper. Serve with a fork, for twirling noodles, and a 
spoon.

 * Molly Wizenberg <http://orangette.net/> is a Seattle-based food writer and 
blogger;@mollyorangette <https://www.instagram.com/mollyorangette/?hl=en>
 