
Students are warning their peers that they are in danger of losing their votes 
because of changes the government has made to how voters are registered. An 
estimated 800,000 peoplehave dropped off the electoral register 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/31/electoral-register-loses-estimated-800000-people-since-changes-to-system>
 since the government introduced changes to the system – and students are at 
the biggest risk of being disenfranchised.


Under the new system, individual electoral registration (IER), universities 
cannot block register students in halls of residence. “The transition has 
resulted in a significant fall in the number of people on the electoral 
register in areas with a university,” says Gloria De Piero, the shadow minister 
for electoral registration.

We asked five students if they feel registration is important and how much 
voting really matters to them.


‘Now is the time for young people to step up; but first, get registered’


Taylor Donoughue-Smith, 17, has registered to vote. He says:


I registered to vote on my 16th birthday for two reasons. I wanted to be ready 
to have my say over the future of our country. And second, registering to vote 
at 16 shows that people as young as me are politically engaged.


Lets be honest, we don’t want our parents choosing our futures for us do we?
Bethanie Clarke 
Young people are the future decision makers of this country and it’s important 
that we take a more active role. We must challenge what we are told and have 
opinions. The Scottish referendum engaged many young people in politics and 
this momentum continued for many in the 2015 general election. However there is 
still much more to be done.

We are entering an exciting period in British politics. With the EU referendum 
on the way, and the election of Jeremy Corbyn providing a clear distinction 
between Labour and the Conservatives, now is the time for young people to step 
up.


But the first step is registering. If young people don’t register, we’re 
sending a message that we’re not interested. Politicians like to take advantage 
of that if they can. I am shocked to hear that students may be affected by 
changes to the electoral register. We are the future, but if we are not ready 
to become that future, we may find that the political landscape will change in 
ways unimaginable.

‘Students should use their vote as a weapon with which to threaten polititians’


Will Coles, 20, an ancient history student at Royal Holloway, University of 
London, says:
 Will Coles 
I’m registered to vote, and I always intend to use my vote. From voting in 
local elections, European elections, and last year’s general election, I have 
always ensured my ‘X’ is in somebody’s box.


Voting is important because without participation there is no-one to stop the 
government when MPs get a foolish idea.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> should feel that democracy is 
worse off without their involvement; they should see their vote as a weapon 
with which to threaten politicians if they make an unpopular move.


The problem is that we don’t do this, which is why governments aren’t obliged 
to give us the same level of support as they do to people of other ages, who do 
use their votes. We need to remember that our vote is worth the same as anybody 
else’s. Not voting means that injustices go unchecked.

‘An online voting system would encourage more young people and students to 
vote’


Julia Sargent, 24, studying sport, health and exercise science at Loughborough 
University, says:
 Julia Sargent 
Voting is extremely important for young people and especially students. I get 
frustrated when I hear that my friends are not aware of the processes for even 
registering to vote (you can find outmore here 
<http://www.aboutmyvote.co.uk/register-to-vote/how-to-register-to-vote>). Many 
think their vote doesn’t make any difference, but if you stay at home and don’t 
vote you become another statistic and are presumed to be disengaged.

People in my generation aren’t educated properly about voting – for example, 
many don’t realise that you can leave your ballot blank. Many students feel 
like they have no control over what happens to them and that they are brushed 
under the carpet with political policies.

If we had some form of online voting system then it would encourage more 
younger people and students to vote.

‘On election day my sense of hope deflated at a similar pace to my balloons’


Jessica Smith, 19, a law and sociology student at the University of Warwick, 
says:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fnow-is-the-time-to-step-up-students-urge-others-to-register-and-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa7e71e20b34b8c33fa4c15c8699b0af2f912d96%2F21_0_757_1136%2F757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Now%20is%20the%20time%20to%20step%20up'%3A%20students%20urge%20others%20to%20register%20and%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fnow-is-the-time-to-step-up-students-urge-others-to-register-and-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Now%20is%20the%20time%20to%20step%20up%27%3A%20students%20urge%20others%20to%20register%20and%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fnow-is-the-time-to-step-up-students-urge-others-to-register-and-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa7e71e20b34b8c33fa4c15c8699b0af2f912d96%2F21_0_757_1136%2F757.jpg>
 Jessica Smith 
I spent election day resembling a tomato, knocking on doors in a “Hell Yes I’m 
Voting Labour” T-shirt and a trail of red balloons. My sense of hope for the 
future of the country deflated at a similar pace to my balloons when Labour 
lost.

But it’s important not to give up altogether. The impact that this result has 
had on us as students has shown that it’s more important than ever to register 
to vote. We’ve lost our maintenance grants andfinancial help for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/02/government-to-cut-funding-disabled-university-students-jo-johnson>
 students with disabilities. If more students turned up to vote, this might not 
have happened.

It’s easy for students to lose hope, but the only way we can make a difference 
is to keep using our votes; not voting just makes it easier for politicians to 
ignore us.


 ‘As a young person it’s easy to become bamboozled by politics’


Bethanie Clarke, 19, is a first year law student at Southampton Solent 
University. She says:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fnow-is-the-time-to-step-up-students-urge-others-to-register-and-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76ddc01d51dac5db751806f50e63bde183c60872%2F0_0_796_796%2F796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Now%20is%20the%20time%20to%20step%20up'%3A%20students%20urge%20others%20to%20register%20and%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fnow-is-the-time-to-step-up-students-urge-others-to-register-and-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Now%20is%20the%20time%20to%20step%20up%27%3A%20students%20urge%20others%20to%20register%20and%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fnow-is-the-time-to-step-up-students-urge-others-to-register-and-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76ddc01d51dac5db751806f50e63bde183c60872%2F0_0_796_796%2F796.jpg>
 Bethanie Clarke 
 As a young person, it’s easy to become bamboozled by politics. It’s not 
really covered throughout the education system and by the time that you turn 
18, you’re left without much of a clue about how the whole system works. So 
it’s easy for young people to slip through the net, especially with the change 
to IER.


 Personally, not registering to vote was never an option for me. In the run up 
to the 2015 general election, I read every manifesto and watched every debate 
in order to become as informed as possible.

 It’s crucial for young people to vote, as politics affects both our present 
and our future – from the amount we pay in tuition fees, to changes to the 
maintenance grant system, to how easy it will be for us to find a job once we 
graduate. We need to become politically informed and vote.

Play fair with young people, George Osborne – let 16-year-olds vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/22/play-fair-with-young-people-george-osborne-let-16-year-olds-vote>
With the greatest of respect, the older generation aren’t particularly keyed 
up on our views and are not in a position to choose our futures for us. Plus 
let’s be honest, we don’t want our parents choosing our futures anyway do we?

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 