
Thirteen months ago, April Reign 
<https://twitter.com/ReignOfApril?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 was watching the Oscar nominations announcement on TV with her family. Struck 
by the lack of ethnic diversity among those whose names were called, Reign – a 
journalist in New York – took to Twitter to voice her disapproval. The hashtag 
she coined – #OscarsSoWhite – caught on immediately.

Before #OscarsSoWhite: five previous Academy Awards controversies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/25/before-oscarssowhite-five-previous-academy-awards-controversies>
What Reign didn’t anticipate was that hashtag resurfacing this year as, once 
again,not a single person of colour was named among the acting nominees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/al-sharpton-hollywood-fradulent-oscar-nominations-diversity-academy>
. The difference in 2016 is that the outrage has spread outside social media – 
in 2016, #OscarsSoWhite has been trending everywhere. Here is Reign’s manifesto 
for change.

1 Introduce the DuVernay test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/01/ava-duvernay-test-racial-diversity-hollywood-selma-director-oscars>

Films should be judged according to the criteria devised by New York Times 
film critic Manohla Dargis 
<http://www.nytimes.com/movies/critics/Manohla-Dargis>, with the blessing of 
Selma director Ava DuVernay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ava-duvernay>. It 
operates like theBechdel test <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bechdel_test>, 
which checks a film’s feminist credentials. But its benchmark is low, requiring 
simply that “African Americans and other minorities have fully realised lives 
rather than serve as scenery in white stories”.

2 Reach out to screenwriters from marginalised communities

Rather than simply waiting for progress to filter through, Hollywood needs to 
proactively hunt for unsung talent to bring broader perspectives to the screen.

3 Put people of colour on both sides of the camera

Diverse casts with fully developed storylines surrounding characters of colour 
are crucial, but people from marginalised communities must also be behind the 
camera for real change to happen. Directors and crew all bring a frame of 
reference – holistic inclusion would be a profound shift.

4 Get Hollywood’s major players to speak out


Support of household names such as Jada Pinkett Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/30/jada-pinkett-smith-oscars-whitewash-magic-mike-xxl>
 andSpike Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spikelee> is essential in 
securing visibility. Stars should seek to emulateMarlon Brando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/marlonbrando>, who used his 1973 Oscar win 
for The Godfather to highlight the misrepresentation of Native Americans on TV 
and in film 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/marlon-brando-rejected-godfather-oscar-2014-2?r=US&IR=T>
 – and, as well as their wider abuse in the US.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-10-point-plan-hashtag-academy-awards-april-reign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20aec4620df75218b0541a45e3e51cb09ece3aa9%2F0_0_3072_1842%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23OscarsSoWhite%3A%20a%2010-point%20plan%20for%20change%20by%20the%20hashtag%E2%80%99s%20creator&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-10-point-plan-hashtag-academy-awards-april-reign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23OscarsSoWhite%3A%20a%2010-point%20plan%20for%20change%20by%20the%20hashtag%E2%80%99s%20creator&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-10-point-plan-hashtag-academy-awards-april-reign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20aec4620df75218b0541a45e3e51cb09ece3aa9%2F0_0_3072_1842%2F3072.jpg>
 ‘Support of household names such as Spike Lee is essential in securing 
visibility.’ Photograph: Willi Schneider/REX/Shutterstock 
5 Diversify Academy membership

As anounced by president Cheryl Boone Isaacs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/30/oscars-diversity-academy-cheryl-boone-isaacs>
, the Oscars board is proposing todouble the number of women and diverse 
members of the Academy by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/22/oscars-diversity-race-minority-members-academy-awards>
 through a series of policy changes. But more must be done; the pressure won’t 
stop until it is.

6 Be conscious about the cinemas you frequent

Not only should we be mindful of which films benefit, but which cinemas, too. 
Seek out smaller, independent cinemas that may be showing films one might not 
see in a huge multiplex.

How to fix Hollywood's race problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/18/hollywoods-race-problem-film-industry-actors-of-colour>
7 Amend the Academy’s voting procedures

Currently, Academy members are not required to view a performance or film 
before they vote. But how can you know if one performance is better than 
another if you’re not watching the films? A system should be introduced to 
require members to indicate they had seen the films before they cast their 
votes.

8 Challenge yourself as a viewer

People should be mindful when they go to cinema – seek out films that 
represent a different perspective to your own.

9 Support film festivals

The Toronto black film festival <http://torontoblackfilm.com/>, Tribeca film 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tribeca-film-festival> and Sundance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundancefilmfestival> are all festivals where 
films from marginalised communities get a platform. Next year’s Oscars are set, 
at this stage at least, to be dominated byThe Birth of a Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/the-birth-of-a-nation-review-sundance-slavery-epic-as-brutal-as-braveheart>
, about Nat Turner’s slave liberation movement in 1831. After premiering at 
Sundance, Fox bought the film for $17.5m, a festival record.

10 Don’t watch the Oscars

Don’t boycott – counterprogramme. “Boycott” is the word that the media uses 
because it’s simplistic. But it’s not a word that I, Pinkett-Smith or Lee or 
anyone else who is not attending the awards is actually using. So, use the 
#OscarsSoWhite hashtag and watch the filmThe Wood 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0161100/> on Sunday night instead. Or do whatever 
you like; just don’t watch the Oscars.
 