
For a candidate whose fortunes hinge on one of the biggest nailbiters in 
Australian election contests, Cathy O’Toole has a useful day job to fall back 
into.

As counting in the seat of Herbert 
<http://vtr.aec.gov.au/HouseDivisionPage-20499-165.htm> moves to the end of its 
fourth week, O’Toole – at last tally 35 votes in front – is immersed in the 
running of a north Queensland mental health service.

“Working in mental health, one has to know how to take care of oneself before 
you can help someone else, so I’m fortunate in that space,” she says.

“I live with the premise: if I can’t control it, don’t waste my energy on it. 
It’s been topsy turvy, a ride of ups and downs. For me, it’s put a whole new 
spin on the term ‘down to the wire’. I don’t think anybody expected this sort 
of result here.

“I won’t say it hasn’t been stressful at times but I’m paid to work, not to 
look at the [Australian Electoral Commission] website. And I’ve got huge things 
happening at work, so there’s a lot to be done.”

So O’Toole, as chief executive of Solas <http://www.solas.org.au/> (Supported 
Options in Lifestyle and Access Services), is focused on bedding down new 
offices and the early launch in her region of thenational disability insurance 
scheme <https://myplace.ndis.gov.au/ndisstorefront/index.html>.

Periodically, the updates come in from her electoral scrutineers, who are 
fixed on what is shaping, in terms of the raw vote margin, as among the closest 
results in Australian political history.

Known victories on slimmer margins - which were not overturned by subsequent 
legal challenges - include by Nat Cook in South Australia’s Fisher in 2014 
(nine votes) and Fran Bailey in the federal seat of McEwen in 2007 (31 votes).

If O’Toole’s 35-vote lead stands, her north Townsville seat will easily be the 
most marginal in the country, taking over from Clive Palmer’s 53-vote grip in 
Fairfax in last election.

Last seat standing: Herbert down to the wire as Turnbull prepares for reshuffle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/16/last-seat-standing-herbert-race-down-to-the-wire-as-turnbull-reshuffles>
Her win would be the first for Labor in Herbert in 20 years and the first for 
a woman in the seat. It would also diminish the Coalition’s parliamentary 
majority to a single MP.

It’s a tough break for the Coalition incumbent Ewen Jones, who shed tears on 
national television while advocating for sacked workers at Palmer’sQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> Nickel factory months 
before the election.

Jones has said he is “forever hopeful” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/tasmanian-labor-senator-re-elected-despite-being-relegated-to-sixth-on-ticket>
 and that he might yet prevail in a full preference recount that could run into 
this weekend.

O’Toole stops short of claiming victory – something reports have already 
attributed to a message on her Facebook page on Tuesday – and says she is 
“quietly confident”.

“I’m not – nor is my campaign team or the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> – claiming anything 
except [that] we’ve won the first count, we’ve won the recount and probability 
would say, yes, it would hold,” she says. “But this is about going through due 
process.

“The full preference count is happening now and there could be some minor 
changes. We don’t know, of course, but bearing in mind these votes have been 
counted numerous times now.

“You would imagine if there are changes, they won’t be great changes large in 
numbers – but anything’s possible.”

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, strongly indicated on Thursday the 
Coalition would contest a loss in court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/malcolm-turnbull-signals-likely-challenge-in-herbert-after-labor-claims-victory>
. “There may well be a challenge to it, because there are allegations that 
people were not able to vote in the election,” he said.

Malcolm Turnbull signals likely challenge in Herbert after Labor claims victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/malcolm-turnbull-signals-likely-challenge-in-herbert-after-labor-claims-victory>
An Australian Electoral Commission spokesman has described as “speculation” 
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> concerns that 
628 defence force personnel on exercises in South Australia and voters at a 
Townsville hospital were unlawfully deprived of the chance to vote.

The University of Queensland professor Graeme Orr 
<https://law.uq.edu.au/profile/1257/graeme-orr>, an electoral law expert, says 
he’d be “very surprised if this didn’t end up in litigation” in the court of 
disputed returns.

“It’s quite possible the people of Herbert won’t have full certainty about who 
their member is until early next year,” he says. “But it sounds like Ms O’Toole 
is going to be representing them and voting for them in the interim.”

A legal dispute was likely because of the closeness of the result and “the 
status of a seat like Herbert” as a longstanding Coalition possession amid the 
strong presence of the military and the increasingly socially conservative 
nature of its Townsville suburbs.

“I call it the first law of electoral law: when you have really tight results, 
there is certainly a strong incentive for the losing party to look at it and 
scramble to find those few errors [that may have occurred],” Orr says.

“That doesn’t mean just because it’s a very close result it should be 
overturned. Elections can’t be perfect. This is a case of a very thorough count 
leading to a very close result.

“It’s really a question of, were there errors, administrative or breaches of 
law, that deprived people of a vote? Or the other thing that would be argued – 
and why [attorney general] George Brandis and others are up there is – were 
their votes that were, you know, squiggly numbers that went to one side rather 
than being counted as informal, for instance?”

Tasmanian Senate result an early indicator of eventual upper house
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/tasmanian-senate-result-an-early-indicator-of-eventual-upper-house>
If the court found decisive problems with the election, it would be much more 
likely to send Herbert voters back to the polls than declare a new result 
itself, Orr says.

He says lawyers are already likely to be on the ground, taking statements, 
because the losing party needs to be armed with a full statement of evidence 
when it files a challenge. This must come within 40 days of the seat’s 
declaration, which is likely to be next week.

Meanwhile, if O’Toole is declared the winner, she’ll have her pay as an MP 
backdated to the day of the election, go to Canberra, and vote for Herbert in 
parliament “until such time as the court says otherwise”, Orr says.

Jones did not returns call from Guardian Australia on Thursday.

O’Toole says the Coalition will “do whatever they decide to do and that will 
be entirely their business”.

Asked how Labor managed to win a relatively safe Coalition seat after two 
decades, battling a 6.2% margin, O’Toole says its policies on education, health 
and jobs resonated locally.

“Our policies were relevant, they could be contextualised to the local 
community, they were very easy to talk with people about, they were 
meaningful,” she says.

The Coalition’s signature pitch – “jobs and growth” – rang hollow, she says. 
“It was just a slogan. ‘Jobs and growth.’ Well, where? And how? They’re the 
questions, seriously,” she says.

O’Toole claims this was “the big difference” in a city where unemployment is 
almost 13.5% and youth joblessness at almost 20%.

Observers might also note the effect of preference flows against the Coalition 
from Pauline Hanson’s One Nation, whosecandidate, Geoff Virgo, came in third on 
the primary vote with 13.5% 
<http://vtr.aec.gov.au/HouseDivisionPage-20499-165.htm>.

O’Toole notes the final seat to be decided in a close federal election is 
“important from both [major] parties’ perspective” – from Labor’s to reduce the 
Coalition’s parliamentary buffer to a wafer.

 “But to localise it, a woman has never held this seat and it’s 20 years since 
Labor has held the seat of Herbert,” she says. “These were also the strong 
passions that drove us.”
 