
If there is a work of art that’s worth buying for Britain, it is surely 
Alberto Giacometti’s Femme (1928-29). Just a quick look at a photo of this 
modern masterpiece will tell you it is special. There’s a softness to it that 
sensually collides with its squared abstract form. This is dream art, of a 
radical and eerie kind. One circular scoop in the white plaster conjures an 
eye, a slit makes a mouth, and a bigger circular recession suggests … what?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fsaveing-art-nation-giacometti-femme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd615c64a547c85f09efce80d9e7bc07967a72fba%2F32_37_647_1049%2F647.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Saving%20art%20for%20the%20nation%E2%80%99%20merely%20disguises%20the%20poverty%20of%20our%20museums%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fsaveing-art-nation-giacometti-femme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Saving%20art%20for%20the%20nation%E2%80%99%20merely%20disguises%20the%20poverty%20of%20our%20museums%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fsaveing-art-nation-giacometti-femme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd615c64a547c85f09efce80d9e7bc07967a72fba%2F32_37_647_1049%2F647.jpg>
 Alberto Giacometti made Femme in 1928-29. Photograph: The Department for 
Culture, Media and Sport 
This is a startling, sexualised sculpture that has a lot in common with 
Giacometti’s similarly provocativeSpoon Woman 
<http://www.artic.edu/aic/collections/artwork/37761>, created a year or so 
earlier, not to mention with Picasso’s rollicking distortions of female form 
done in the same era.

It was the time of surrealism. Giacometti, a Swiss artist with a classical 
training and innate gift for sculpture, was a core member of the surrealist 
movement and Femme is a dangerous explosive manifestation of unruly desires and 
fantasies. While its plaster softness is alluring, its sharp angles intimate 
violence and threat, in a way reminiscent of Giacometti’s horrific 1932 
sculptureWoman with Her Throat Cut 
<http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/artwork/1424>.

All of which is to say that Femme probably has no chance of being “saved for 
the nation”. This marvellous (in the sense of the word used by the surrealist 
leader André Breton, meaning subversive and irrational) work of art is on sale 
by a British owner for £2,083,500.

The culture minister, Ed Vaizey, has put a temporary export ban on it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/25/alberto-giacometti-sculpture-barred-from-leaving-uk-femme>
 to give galleries a chance to raise the money. The form is that a museum or 
other institution has to get a campaign going, whip up support, and scrape 
together the cash to keep this masterpiece out of the hands of Johnny Foreigner

This way of keeping Britain’s public galleries stocked with art is a fig leaf 
to hide woefully inadequate funding and shabby lack of government interest in 
strengthening our collections. It also depends on fake, nationalistic arguments 
that rarely add much to anyone’s knowledge of art. To “sell” Femme to the 
public, for example, Vaizey has tried to put a patriotic spin on this European 
masterpiece.

Femme came to Britain when it was bought by the British artist Winifred 
Nicholson in the 1930s. It is therefore the kind of work that homegrown Brit 
modernists like Henry Moore and Barbara Hepworth saw and emulated. “This 
Giacometti sculpture is not only a stunning example of his work,” Vaizey 
therefore says, “but also heavily influenced some our greatest artists. It is 
important that Femme is kept in the country so we can better understand and 
enjoy this pivotal period in modern British art.”

Oh God, oh no – please. To say this work of art is important we shouldn’t have 
to embalm it in the dead air of St Ives and mummify it in Henry Moore’s flat 
cap.

Giacometti is not important because a few minor British modernists imitated 
him. Our parochial belief that Moore and his contemporaries were in the same 
league as the great European modern artists is embarrassing. Femme is not 
somehow “British”. It is a completely continental, hardcore surrealist 
masterpiece whose uncanny eroticism has nothing to do with Babs Hepworth’s 
boring seaside and everything to do with the flea markets, brothels, bars and 
mental hospitals of 1920s Paris.

Alberto Giacometti sculpture barred from leaving UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/25/alberto-giacometti-sculpture-barred-from-leaving-uk-femme>
But would that make it sound like something to be saved “for the nation”? The 
very phrase, and the worthy campaigns that use it, imply a narrow sense of 
national property that has nothing to do with great art.

Almost all the works that have been bought after such campaigns in recent 
years are European, and not British, masterpieces, from Titian’sDiana and 
Actaeon <http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/titian-diana-and-actaeon> 
to Manet’sPortrait of Mademoiselle Claus <http://www.ashmolean.org/manet/> – 
and they do not belong by some innate right to Britain. We just happened to 
have them and didn’t want to let them go.

So should we just abandon Giacometti’s Femme to the global art market? After 
all, we can all see online images of it, as you are doing now.

The question needs turning on its head. Instead of drumming up sentimental 
campaigns to cling on to artistic assets, why are we not buying art for the 
nation at auctions in New York? This whole culture of “saving” art is a way of 
disguising the poverty of our museums.

They are all sitting on collections created largely in the heyday of the 
British empire. In the 19th century we were the world’s Dubai, buying up art at 
eye-watering prices. In the 20th century the purse emptied and today’s worthy 
culture of poorly funded public collections grew up, with all its little 
hypocrisies.

The idea that by slapping a temporary export ban on a masterpiece the culture 
minister is doing anything for art is surely the worst of those hypocrisies. If 
a work of art really needs to be in this country, there should be a public fund 
to buy it outright. It should not be left to the enthusiasm of museums and the 
public.

Giacometti’s wicked surrealist woman really does need to stay in Britain 
because we don’t have enough first-rate pieces of modernist art. The government 
should buy it for Tate Modern. And if there isn’t enough money to do that, how 
about selling off some of our excess Henry Moores to create a proper national 
purchasing fund? You can flog the Nicholsons and Bloomsbury group paintings 
too. Sell them for the nation.
 