
Anyone who’s been to Uluru in the blazing red centre of Australia would 
recognise “the Rock” as a work of art. From dawn until dark, its colours are 
constantly changing as shadows and light move across its immense surface. 
Despite its size, there’s something of the shape-shifter about this natural 
formation – monolithic when seen from far away, curved and creviced up close. 
So it takes a brave artist to create a large-scale installation at its base.

How do you compete with nature? British artist Bruce Munro isn’t trying to. 
This week his artworkField of Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gallery/2016/mar/23/field-of-light-magical-installation-at-uluru-in-pictures>
 opens to the public at Uluru. From his farmhouse studio in Wiltshire, England, 
Munro has flown 60,000 lightbulbs, installing 50,000 of them in the sandy red 
dirt of central Australia (the extra 10,000 were in case of breakages – but 
Qantas managed not to damage a single one).

The bulbs – powered by solar energy – are constantly changing colour too. 
Although they look great from afar, like a multicoloured blanket spread over a 
field, they are designed to be viewed at ground level. Visitors are encouraged 
to make their own path through the lights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fartist-bruce-munro-field-of-light-uluru-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1df0140bf9ed77efc2fcc1f5504de8f11d4ccd53%2F0_42_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Seeing%20Uluru%E2%80%8B%20changed%20my%20life'%3A%20Bruce%20Munro's%20lightbulb%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fartist-bruce-munro-field-of-light-uluru-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Seeing%20Uluru%E2%80%8B%20changed%20my%20life%27%3A%20Bruce%20Munro%27s%20lightbulb%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fartist-bruce-munro-field-of-light-uluru-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1df0140bf9ed77efc2fcc1f5504de8f11d4ccd53%2F0_42_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Bruce Munro works on the installation Field of Light Uluru, Australia. March 
2016. Photograph: Ayers Rock Resort 
The work is strangely affecting, reminiscent of the view from a window of a 
plane at night as it flies low over a sprawling city, or neurons firing, or 
nebulae, or a vast, bright coral reef or an Indigenous Australian dot painting 
rendered in halogen. On the night of my visit, people were walking alone 
through the lit fields and weeping. This is art you feel, rather than art you 
view.

My Sydney friends kept on saying ‘go to Uluru’ ​– ​but of course none of them 
had actually been
Bruce Munro 
Of course, the location helps. Our preview was lit by a full moon, encircled 
by a thin line of cloud in that enormousNorthern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> desert sky. 
Uluru turned from rust red to dark brown to black. The lights of the 
installation were soft and in the background, so they didn’t compete with the 
moonlight, starlight or Uluru itself. The effect was complementary.

Bruce Munro, 56, who has lit up cities and landscapes from Arizona to 
Scotland, says the Field of Light in Uluru has been the culmination of decades 
of thinking. “I came out here 24 years ago. We were doing a road trip in an old 
Toyota, our swansong after eight years in Australia,” he tells me.

“My Sydney friends kept on saying ‘go to Uluru’, but of course none of them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/24/dont-wait-until-you-are-too-old-to-travel-australia-see-your-country-now>
 had actually been. When I got here, it changed my life. I jotted this idea 
down in my sketchbook and didn’t think it would see the light of day. The 
sketch became the Field of Light.” Back in England, and with a young family to 
support, Munro decided to become a painter, but eventually settled on the 
medium of light. He has worked with it ever since his first installation, in a 
field in Wiltshire, in 2004. “I did the installation after my father died. I 
thought, life is short, and I wanted to create something.”

Munro made further light works in Cornwall in 2008 and at Bath’s Holburne 
Museum in 2011, before taking his work to the US, with installations in public 
parks and gardens across America, in Philadelphia, Nashville and Columbus. His 
work has been treated with respect by the public, except for one occasion in 
Edinburgh where a boozer fell asleep in the installation after a big night out.

The work at Uluru is the culmination of “thousands of man-hours plus 40 people 
planting stems of light for six weeks,” he says. The installation itself is 
similar in scale to theBlood-swept Lands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/28/blood-swept-lands-story-behind-tower-of-london-poppies-first-world-war-memorial>
 poppies at the Tower of London, but Munro hopes it’s respectful to the sky and 
the land it inhabits. “That’s why it’s not bright – I purposefully toned it 
down. If you raise the light levels, you fight with the stars and moon.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fartist-bruce-munro-field-of-light-uluru-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4beae3afd679ee5aa656ccf650b24695f5f05570%2F0_42_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Seeing%20Uluru%E2%80%8B%20changed%20my%20life'%3A%20Bruce%20Munro's%20lightbulb%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fartist-bruce-munro-field-of-light-uluru-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Seeing%20Uluru%E2%80%8B%20changed%20my%20life%27%3A%20Bruce%20Munro%27s%20lightbulb%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fartist-bruce-munro-field-of-light-uluru-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4beae3afd679ee5aa656ccf650b24695f5f05570%2F0_42_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Field of Light. Photograph: Ayers Rock Resort 
Munro consulted extensively with the local Indigenous peoples, the Anangu, 
before going ahead with the project. The work itself is not in the national 
park, but in land adjacent to Uluru, owned by Voyages Indiginous Tourism 
Australia 
<https://www.voyages.com.au/news-and-media/news/date-for-the-diary-field-of-light-uluru-to-debut>
. “It had to be totally kosher with the Indigenous people – it’s not on for me 
to plant something on their home without their permission,” says Munro. “The 
work is an expression of my excitement and joy and nothing more than that.”

As it turns out, the Anangu have named the artwork in their own Pitjantjatjara 
language asTili Wiru Tjuta Nyakutjaku or “looking at lots of beautiful lights” 
– a seal of approval, then. Munro’s light installation can be viewed at dawn, 
but it is most startling at dusk and night.

You’ll never see colour as rich as here anywhere in the world
Bruce Munro 
“Australian light is incredible,” says Munro, who greatly admires the work of 
Australian modernist painters Sidney Nolan and Arthur Boyd. “Boyd made me see 
how the midday sun makes everything washed out. Early and late in the day, that 
is where the chroma is. It’s very visceral light here, but you’ll never see 
colour as rich as here anywhere in the world – and as washed out. Everything is 
about light.”

Asked where he fits into the UK arts scene, Munro says: “I don’t. I’ve got a 
load of work that nobody’s seen – that has to do with time and place. It’s not 
something I even worry about. I just want to make work.”Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> is not always an attractive 
industry, he says. “There’s too much ego and money. I’ve met some wonderful 
gallerists, but you meet some that are like secondhand car salespeople.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fartist-bruce-munro-field-of-light-uluru-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f0c9fb5fa36542c5f185b86d0806836efad2c3b%2F0_15_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Seeing%20Uluru%E2%80%8B%20changed%20my%20life'%3A%20Bruce%20Munro's%20lightbulb%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fartist-bruce-munro-field-of-light-uluru-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Seeing%20Uluru%E2%80%8B%20changed%20my%20life%27%3A%20Bruce%20Munro%27s%20lightbulb%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fartist-bruce-munro-field-of-light-uluru-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f0c9fb5fa36542c5f185b86d0806836efad2c3b%2F0_15_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Bruce Munro works on Field of Light. Photograph: Ayers Rock Resort 
As if to answer his critics, he asks: “Why can’t art be simple stuff as well 
as really intellectual stuff? There is a cynical side to the art world, which 
is really boring. We are here for a such short space of time, so to be a 
smart-arse is a sin and such a waste of time.”

Why did I wait so long to see the magic of Uluru? Australians, see your 
country now | Brigid Delaney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/24/dont-wait-until-you-are-too-old-to-travel-australia-see-your-country-now>
Time – and its fleeting nature – is as important to Munro’s work as place. The 
Field of Light exhibition will be dismantled after a year – a period chosen to 
allow people to see it in all Australia’s beautiful seasons – after which it 
will exist only in the memories of those who visited. Even Instagrammers will 
be disappointed, as the work doesn’t photograph that well. You have to be there.

“I like the idea that it’s not there forever, that it has to be experienced,” 
says Munro. “You might get some pictures, but its two dimensional flatness 
doesn’t reflect what it’s really like.” But will he mourn it when it’s gone, 
this work that was so long in the making? “Everything has its moment,” he says. 
“We’re just passing on our messages to each other. Death happens and things 
pass – and so it is with art.”



 * Field of Light 
<https://www.ayersrockresort.com.au/events/detail/field-of-light-uluru> is at 
Uluru, Northern Territory, Australia, until 31 March 2017.  