
As part of a series looking at ageing populations in cities, we asked you how 
cities could be be improved for older generations. Arecent report 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/mdag_good_growth_agenda_-_ageing_london_interactive.pdf>
 published by the mayor’s design advisory group in London advocated a more 
age-friendly city that improves the life of older people through better housing 
options, “lifetime neighbourhoods” and intergenerational support networks. 
There are initiatives and forums around the world dedicated to age-friendly 
cities – fromNew York <https://twitter.com/AgefriendlyNYC> to Leeds 
<https://twitter.com/AgeFriendlyLDS>. 

But we wanted to hear from you: whichever city you live in, how could it 
improve for older citizens? Many of you mentioned similar things: public 
benches, spacious and level pavements, efficient and affordable bus services, 
dropped kerbs, co-housing, public toilets and handrails. From Manchester to 
Dhaka, here are some of your experiences of the challenges and opportunities of 
growing older in your city and what could be done to improve daily life. Thanks 
to everyone who participated.

‘Create discreet aids in city infrastructure’

My main concern is not to be segregated by my age. I believe it’s important 
for all ages to interact on a day to day basis. It gives everyone a much richer 
and broader experience and hopefully removes the labelling of people as 
‘elderly’ or ‘past it’ and the self-fulfilling behaviours that are often 
generated by this.

We need to ensure there are discreet/stylish physical aids included in the 
city infrastructure which assist not just older but all less agile people, 
including those with disabilities, and those with babies and small children. 
This might include additional seating, entrances which are easy to get in and 
out of, accessible and reliable transport that people want to use, more public 
toilets that are clean and safe, smoothing or highlighting trip hazards on 
paths and roads so that overall, people of all ages can have as safe, active 
and socially connected lifestyle as possible.(61-year-old Canberra resident)

‘Respect a walker’s right of way’

We need security and respect for people who walk. Specifically ensuring that 
drivers and cyclists respect a walker’s right of way. Keep cyclists off the 
sidewalks. Seattle has no walking culture, and does absolutely nothing for 
people, old or young, who choose not to drive or bike. Traffic-related anxiety 
discourages older people from leaving their homes, and getting the many 
benefits that come from walking. This fosters both poor health, and social 
isolation. Tolerance, patience, and acceptance of people as they are are needed.
(66-year-old Seattle resident)

‘Good public transport is essential’

It is a question of mobility and isolation. My neighbourhood is purely 
residential: no convenient supermarkets and very poor public transport 
facilities. So transport is essential. I’m lucky enough to still drive, but 
without my own car I would almost be totally cut off. Here in Manchester there 
is an abundance of things to be involved with for all ages – but all this is 
dependent on the costs involved and the ability to get to the venue. So the 
city is inclusive if you have the money to pay for the facilities, and would be 
accessible if the transport arrangements were improved.(Alan, 70-year-old 
Manchester resident)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fteach-young-people-stories-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd77528889692080c3a114faf11184570cd17468a%2F0_131_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Teach%20young%20people%20we%20are%20not%20going%20to%20move%20over'%3A%20stories%20of%20ageing%20in%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fteach-young-people-stories-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Teach%20young%20people%20we%20are%20not%20going%20to%20move%20over%27%3A%20stories%20of%20ageing%20in%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fteach-young-people-stories-ageing-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd77528889692080c3a114faf11184570cd17468a%2F0_131_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
 ‘A city must provide activities and meetings in order to fight social 
isolation.’ Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
‘Neighbourhood schemes can tackle loneliness’

The challenges of city life as an older person include chronic health 
conditions exacerbated by poor air quality and poorly maintained public spaces. 
Also loneliness, if neighbours remain aloof because they view you to be old and 
not interested in the world. Cities need cross-generational activities and 
groupwork to break down barriers. People living alone of whatever age can 
become isolated, lonely and then mental health problems can develop. Good 
neighbourhood schemes would be an excellent start or re-inforcement of how 
communities can support and develop ‘good neighbourliness’ for everyone 
irrespective of age, background etc.(Leicester resident)

‘The city is better than the country’

I’d like to see reduced senior prices at restaurants, movies, museums, etc. as 
well as more public benches and buses which lower their entries for those who 
can’t manage higher steps. But overall, living in this city is soooooo much 
better than in the country or ‘burbs.(82-year-old New York City resident)

‘Teach young people we are not going to move over’

An age-friendly city makes it easy to move about by transit, or walking, 
without being hurried for fear of being run over by a car, or pushed over by a 
young person using a mobile. Reduce the number of cars. Slow them down. Give 
walking the first priority. Teach young people that we are not going to move 
over, nor do we have to.(77-year-old Toronto resident)

‘I consider myself more of a ‘recycled teenager’’

Manchester, in my opinion, is the best age-friendly city in the world. It 
offers access to a multitude of opportunities. I have not experienced any 
challenges as an older person in the city, only opportunities. There are so 
many interesting and exciting things to do. As an older person my life has 
changed beyond all recognition since I became involved with The Royal Exchange 
Theatre. I joined a group called The Elders Company there and I now consider 
myself more of a ‘recycled teenager’. I feel as though I am riding a merry go 
round which I don’t want to get off. (Brenda Hickey, 71-year-old Manchester 
resident)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fteach-young-people-stories-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93c7bb8856714caae398118f5c4466622475c818%2F0_40_906_544%2F906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Teach%20young%20people%20we%20are%20not%20going%20to%20move%20over'%3A%20stories%20of%20ageing%20in%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fteach-young-people-stories-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Teach%20young%20people%20we%20are%20not%20going%20to%20move%20over%27%3A%20stories%20of%20ageing%20in%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fteach-young-people-stories-ageing-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93c7bb8856714caae398118f5c4466622475c818%2F0_40_906_544%2F906.jpg>
 ‘New benches in the area mean that friends or neighbours can stop and natter 
for much longer now’: Barbara Laking in Doncaster. Photograph: Living Streets 
‘Cities need better footpaths and neighbourhood parks’

What makes an age-friendly city? Good footpaths, open space and parks, good 
air quality. My neighbourhood does nothing. As you get older in a city, life 
becomes lonely, everyone around you is busy. Getting outside of your home 
become more of a challenge. Cities need to make better footpaths and 
neighbourhood parks. Better public transportation systems as well.(64-year-old 
Dhaka resident)

‘Trams, toilets, policeman … and positivity’

I never think in terms of my age. I’ve tackled tough illnesses, but I’m lucky 
to have come through it all. Keeping active (if you can) is a responsibility we 
all have, so we are able to make full use of everything on offer (and there is 
a lot!).

The tram system here leaves a lot to be desired. Some faster trams from 
Rochdale would be good (it takes 55 minutes at least to Manchester, with no 
toilet and never enough seating). More public toilets too, for starters, and 
let’s have a few friendly policeman connecting with the public, making everyone 
feel a little safer. I grew up in Manchester and would like to think I will 
enjoy growing old in it too. I’m busier now than I’ve ever been, and it does 
take a supreme effort to put yourself out there, but we have a lot to say so 
let’s say it in a positive way not sit and moan about stuff between ourselves.
(62-year-old Manchester resident)

‘Provide activities and meetings in order to fight social isolation’

In my opinion, an age-friendly city must pay particular attention to its 
senior citizens and regularly meet with them in order to know their needs and 
build in adequate structures. A city must provide activities and meetings in 
order to fight social isolation. In Angers, we are kept informed of activities 
and leisure thanks to a free local paper ‘Bords de Maine’.

There’s always the risk of being anonymous in a town whereas in a countryside 
village everybody knows each other. In town, isolation can become a problem: in 
a building, you don’t always know your neighbours, especially if you don’t 
participate in activities. However, the town offers more facilities than the 
countryside in terms of transportation, leisure and shopping. In my 
neighbourhood, there is a market twice a week, a supermarket and a tramway 
station nearby. Those elements came first in choice when I moved in.

Angers is a charming city, a sort of mix between country and town. However, 
some of the places are not suited for people with diminished mobility: there 
are not enough benches and there are poorly paved roads which can be a major 
inconvenience to us. I walk around Angers and use public transport all the 
time, but the amount of public transport could be increased. I would like to 
see more respect between all road users: cyclists are using the pavement 
because cars are parked on cycling lanes and it can be very annoying. I no 
longer use a car and use exclusively public transport. I live alone as a 
widower. (Roland C, 90-year-old Angers resident)

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 