
The accused sits in the dock, a brooding black mass hunched stark against the 
arched windows of Bradford’s Victorian courtroom as the morning sun streams in. 
Even in silhouette, his profile is unmistakable: those prizefighter shoulders, 
that uppercut of a chin – who else could it be butRobbie Coltrane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/09/robbie-coltrane-interview-great-expectations>
?

We are on the set of National Treasure, Channel 4’s four-part drama inspired 
by Operation Yewtree, the police investigation into the sexual abuse 
perpetrated byJimmy Savile <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/jimmy-savile> 
and allegations against other media personalities. Coltrane, now 66, plays Paul 
Finchley, a beloved veteran comedian suspected of historical sex offences. 
Between takes, the actor puffs on a vape, fumes swirling in the sunbeams, 
giving him the look of a tired old dragon at bay.

The director Marc Munden puts an arm around the actor and leans in close to 
murmur in his ear before announcing another take. In the witness box, Kate 
Hardie, playing a woman testifying against Finchley, accuses him of raping her 
more than 20 years ago.

Throughout this long scene, the camera remains on Coltrane. As Hardie’s 
testimony comes to an end, tears roll down his cheeks. It is an extraordinary 
moment. All these people on set, all the lights and lenses and fakeness, and 
yet at the centre this stillness and emotional authenticity – the only sounds, 
his breathing and her sobbing. Here is an overdue reminder of why Coltrane won 
all those Baftas in the 1990s for his portrayal of the criminal psychologist 
Fitz in Cracker. There is a fragility about this performance, though, which we 
have not seen from him before; Cracker cracked.

“I didn’t have to act at all,” Coltrane says later, referring to his tears. 
“The evidence was so heartbreaking. I mean, if you’re not moved by that, you 
might as well hand in your human-being cards.”

Is Finchley guilty or innocent? It isn’t clear. Ambiguity is a watchword in 
National Treasure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffor-the-people-abused-robbie-coltrane-yewtree-inspired-national-treasure-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3cc7fbc5d7dccdb5ab8c0f0e0ecd91daeec4ce6%2F0_112_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98This%20is%20for%20all%20the%20people%20who%20were%20abused%E2%80%99%3A%20Robbie%20Coltrane%20on%20his%20Yewtree-inspired%20drama%20National%20Treasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffor-the-people-abused-robbie-coltrane-yewtree-inspired-national-treasure-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98This%20is%20for%20all%20the%20people%20who%20were%20abused%E2%80%99%3A%20Robbie%20Coltrane%20on%20his%20Yewtree-inspired%20drama%20National%20Treasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffor-the-people-abused-robbie-coltrane-yewtree-inspired-national-treasure-channel-4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3cc7fbc5d7dccdb5ab8c0f0e0ecd91daeec4ce6%2F0_112_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
 Robbie Coltrane: ‘I played it like Mount Rushmore.’ Photograph: Joss 
Barratt/Channel 4 Picture Publicity 
Coltrane believes that his playing this role will provoke tabloid scrutiny of 
his personal history. “Someone asked me: ‘Do you not think this is a dangerous 
thing to do?’” he recalls. “Well, it would be if I was (a) a paedophile, or (b) 
a rapist. Being as I am neither, I have nothing to fear at all.”

Was he aware of that risk when he agreed to star in a drama inspired by 
Yewtree? “Of course. But I don’t care. I think it’s important to do this on 
behalf of the women who were raped, on behalf of all the people who were 
abused.”

He anticipates criticism from those who believe that real-life tragedy should 
not be turned into an entertainment of sorts. “As if a drama has to be a 
Sunday-night thing you watch with your eyes half closed. No, no, no. Drama has 
always illuminated what’s actually going on in society, in a way that the news 
or the internet doesn’t … The writing is absolutely beautiful. There’s total 
respect for people who actually were attacked. That’s the important thing for 
me. If you were raped, what is your life like thereafter, and what would it be 
like to stand up in court and talk about it? The moral strength required to 
actually say: ‘He fucked me,’ while he’s there in the room, and so is the 
public and the press.” Coltrane shakes his head in admiration.

Tim McInnerny plays Karl, Finchley’s best friend and former partner, in a 
successful comedy double act. The actor has personal reasons for feeling close 
to the material. “I was on Jim’ll Fix It,” he says, “teaching a 12-year-old 
girl how to do a speech from Shakespeare.” He pauses, gives a small nervous 
laugh. “She wanted to be Cleopatra. So they put her in a costume, gave her a 
set, and I coached her in this speech.”

This was in the early 90s, when he was at the RSC and still hot from 
Blackadder. Savile himself made little impression. McInnerny was thrilled to be 
on the show, placing a medal around the girl’s neck, because he remembered 
watching it as a child himself. Does he now feel uneasy about having taken 
part? “Yeah, absolutely. Ever since I found out about Savile. It makes you feel 
dirty.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffor-the-people-abused-robbie-coltrane-yewtree-inspired-national-treasure-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95c9877bf5e8f1e82f7f854b8ff7900222aa3164%2F0_732_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98This%20is%20for%20all%20the%20people%20who%20were%20abused%E2%80%99%3A%20Robbie%20Coltrane%20on%20his%20Yewtree-inspired%20drama%20National%20Treasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffor-the-people-abused-robbie-coltrane-yewtree-inspired-national-treasure-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98This%20is%20for%20all%20the%20people%20who%20were%20abused%E2%80%99%3A%20Robbie%20Coltrane%20on%20his%20Yewtree-inspired%20drama%20National%20Treasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffor-the-people-abused-robbie-coltrane-yewtree-inspired-national-treasure-channel-4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95c9877bf5e8f1e82f7f854b8ff7900222aa3164%2F0_732_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 The police case against Paul Gambaccini was dropped. Photograph: David 
Levenson/Getty Images 
But, he says, the other side of the issue is when famous people are accused of 
these crimes and named in the media, yet no charges are made and the case is 
eventually dropped. “I mean, Paul Gambaccini is a friend of mine. His life was 
nearly destroyed. He was virtually under house arrest for a year and a half. He 
didn’t work, he couldn’t go abroad. And it’s a problem because it discredits 
the whole process, which you don’t want to happen because you want to find 
those guilty people. It’s a difficult area if the police take it too far with 
one particular celebrity.”

Paul Gambaccini: I became 'non-person' at BBC over Yewtree allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/30/paul-gambaccini-bbc-yewtree-itv> 
In other words, McInnerny is playing a role he inhabited in real life – the 
friend of a man accused of historical sex crime. What does one go through in a 
situation like that?

“It’s very hard. You want to support him.”

And did you?

“Yes, as much as possible. Absolutely.”

So you chose to believe in his innocence?

“I suppose I did, yes. It never occurred to me not to.”

National Treasure looks closely at the contentious issue of “fishing” – the 
practice of leaking the name of an accused celebrity to the media in the hope 
that others claiming to be victims will come forward and thus strengthen the 
police case. Gambaccini andCliff Richard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/cliff-richard>, both of whom had 
investigations against them dropped on the grounds of insufficient evidence, 
have called for sex abuse suspects to remain anonymous until charged.

The writer, Jack Thorne, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/21/jack-thorne-interview-mark-lawson>
 hopes that National Treasure will prompt a national conversation about these 
knotty issues. “You are potentially destroying someone by naming them in the 
media,” he says. “On the other hand, you are allowing people who may have been 
severely damaged to have the confidence and courage to come forward because 
that person is now in the spotlight. It’s so bloody complicated and difficult 
to know what the police and media should be doing, which is why talking about 
it seems important.”

While not a dramatisation of any specific investigation, National Treasure 
feels real and familiar in its exploration of the nexus of celebrity, sex and 
power. An illustration of its topicality: while filming was taking place in 
Bradford’s disused courtroom, five minutes away, in the present crown court, 
the footballer Adam Johnson was beingsentenced to six years in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/24/adam-johnson-should-be-jailed-for-up-to-10-years-court-told>
 for sexual activity with a 15-year-old girl.

Thorne’s research included interviews with police officers who had worked on 
investigations of celebrities suspected of historical sex abuse. He wrote the 
screenplayat the same time as the script for Harry Potter and the Cursed Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/11/jack-thorne-trusted-jk-rowling-theatre-scriptwriter-harry-potter-play>
, switching between Death Eaters and true-life bogeymen with apparent ease. 
“Examining an issue that has horrified this country felt like an important 
thing to do,” he says. “It’s horrifying that Jimmy Savile existed. It’s 
horrifying that so many people seemed aware of it and we seemingly let it 
happen. The more we uncover about how much people in public life were aware, 
the more important it becomes to examine how we deal with this issue and what 
our responsibility is.”

As well as exploring the explosive impact of an investigation on the famous 
man at its centre, the drama looks at what it is like for his wife and 
daughter, played byJulie Walters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/24/julie-walters-people-like-me-wouldnt-get-a-chance-today>
 andAndrea Riseborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jan/08/andrea-riseborough-interview-madonna-thatcher>
, caught in the blast radius.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffor-the-people-abused-robbie-coltrane-yewtree-inspired-national-treasure-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe68f64ca70a6c017afeb5dfb8963da7bf96bc385%2F0_495_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98This%20is%20for%20all%20the%20people%20who%20were%20abused%E2%80%99%3A%20Robbie%20Coltrane%20on%20his%20Yewtree-inspired%20drama%20National%20Treasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffor-the-people-abused-robbie-coltrane-yewtree-inspired-national-treasure-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98This%20is%20for%20all%20the%20people%20who%20were%20abused%E2%80%99%3A%20Robbie%20Coltrane%20on%20his%20Yewtree-inspired%20drama%20National%20Treasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffor-the-people-abused-robbie-coltrane-yewtree-inspired-national-treasure-channel-4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe68f64ca70a6c017afeb5dfb8963da7bf96bc385%2F0_495_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Julie Walters in National Treasure. Photograph: Aimee Spinks/Channel 4 Picture 
Publicity 
“Marie is the wind beneath Paul’s wings,” Walters says of her character. “Paul 
is a public entertainer, fragile in many ways, and Marie reminds me a bit of my 
husband, in that she is solid and there, and keeps things together, and 
supports him and looks after his fragile ego. She’s a Catholic and Paul isn’t, 
which I thought was interesting. I was brought up a Catholic; I’m lapsed. Paul 
has been unfaithful lots of times and she stays with him. I feel that the piece 
is about faith, and doubt and trust, and she makes that leap with both her 
religion and with him.”

In our voyeuristic gawping at a celebrity accused of such crimes, do we tend 
to forget how hellish it must be for their families? “Yes, but I think there’s 
also a curiosity. You do wonder about them and what they are going through. 
They are victims, in a sense, as well.”

Can she understand why wives so often stand by their husbands in these 
circumstances? “Yes, sort of. I think you have to believe in someone, otherwise 
what has 40 years of marriage been?”

National Treasure has been demanding for everyone involved. Unusually for 
television, there was a three-and-a-half week rehearsal period, almost as if 
preparing a play, to build the characters and their relationships. The actors 
speak with a fond shudder of exhausting 14-hour days filming this dark material.

“It’s been emotionally brutal,” says Riseborough, who portrays Paul and 
Marie’s daughter, Dee. “I’m playing somebody who suffers depression, and I’ve 
suffered depression pretty much my whole life. So that’s been difficult. 
Because I have been through it, I hope I might be able to tell the story. But 
it’s been really hard.”

Does she have to be careful not to trigger her illness by investing so much in 
the performance? “Yeah. I’m still learning.” She took the part because she 
trusts Munden, who had directed her inThe Devil’s Whore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/nov/20/2>. “I said to Marc that this 
wouldn’t be an easy thing, and sometimes I was going to need my hand held, 
metaphorically.”

Jack Thorne: go-to guy trusted by JK Rowling to magic up theatre gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/11/jack-thorne-trusted-jk-rowling-theatre-scriptwriter-harry-potter-play>
Much of the excitement around National Treasure is down to this being 
Coltrane’s first lead role in a television drama for seven years, and buzz that 
he is even better than in the glory days of Cracker. Certainly, his performance 
is entirely lacking in vanity – we see him walking with a cane, as he does in 
reality; we hear his laboured breathing; we see him half-naked. It feels 
exposing in every sense. At the same time, though, there’s a monumentality to 
his presence; the camera moves slowly around his face, exploring every crag. “I 
played it like Mount Rushmore,” he says.

Munden was keen to explore the tension between the “physical frailty” he 
detected in Coltrane and the actor’s supercharged aura. “What’s really 
interesting to me is the contrast between a man at this time of his life, like 
so many of the celebrities who have been prosecuted recently, and the potency 
and power and capacity to damage they must have had 20 years ago.”

Coltrane, at 66, remains an imposing figure despite having lost a great deal 
of weight in recent years in preparation for surgery on a bad knee. “I’ve got 
grooves in my cheeks that I haven’t seen since 1975,” he laughs.

What about the idea implied by the title that he himself is a national 
treasure? At this, the Rushmore brow descends so quickly that it seems we are 
in danger of rockfall. Does he not recognise himself in that phrase?

“Not yet,” he glowers. “That sounds kind of like being put on a shelf 
somewhere. Someone safe to be dragged out on national occasions and the Queen’s 
garden party. I’m not ready for that. No.”

He shakes his head. “I’m still fighting, boy. I’m still fighting.”

 * National Treasure will start on Channel 4 later this month
 