
Early and forced marriage is a global issue. In September the BBC reported the 
case of Jessie, a UK national being forced into an underage marriage in 
Bangladesh, but rescued by the Forced Marriage Unit. In 2007 the Forced 
Marriage Act was passed, forbidding families from taking people abroad for 
marriage, seizing passports or intimidating victims (some methods used to force 
marriages in the UK).

In 2010, the Forced Marriage Unit advised over 1,700 cases, 86% of whom were 
female. Jasvinder Sanghera was born in the UK and ran away at 15 to escape a 
marriage. She now heads Karma Nirvana, a UK charity supporting victims and 
survivors of forced marriage and "honour" based abuse.

Karma Nirvana receives more than 5,00 calls every month to its helpline. 
Jasvinder implores the UK to co-ordinate efforts to halt the practice with 
overseas governments by establishing closer links, and emphasises their role to 
"challenge other governments, when justice and human rights are being 
threatened". If accused of imposing western values on other cultures, Jasvinder 
is firm in her response. "Nobody is abusing somebody or oppressing somebody in 
the name of tradition. Tradition is not an excuse for abuse."

She maintains that speaking out against abuse is not the same as imposing 
moral judgments. Domestic violence was once given little recognition in the UK, 
yet awareness raising and enforcing legislation has changed this. In this way, 
Jasvinder believes early and forced marriage can be stopped, and everybody can 
play a part. "Talk to your friends about it. Tell people." she urges. "If you 
know anybody who might be at risk, tell them there is help available. Sign the 
petitions. Show your support, and we can advocate that."
 