
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> entered a 
bitter war of words with Senator Jeff Flake on Sunday as the Republican nominee 
reverted to his behavior in the primary where he constantly attacked elected 
GOP officials.

Trump used Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/772571293438840832> to attack 
Flake, a first-term senator from Arizona who has yet to commit to supporting 
Trump in November, as “very weak and ineffective” on the issue of immigration.




Trump also tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/772556213313765377>: “The 
Republican Party needs strong and committed leaders, not weak people such as 
@JeffFlake, if it is going to stop illegal immigration,” after Flake criticized 
Trump in an interview Sunday with CBS’s John Dickerson.

In the interview, Flake said Trump’s habit of changing his message on 
immigration was confusing for voters.

“It’s kind of a 360-degree pivot at times. That’s not clear at all. Some 
people said it was hardening, some said softening. I say it was just confusing.”

The result left Flake feeling that it was unlikely that he would be able to 
support the Republican nominee in the election. “It becomes increasingly 
difficult to see that he’s going to change, so I don’t expect that I’ll be able 
to support him in November,” said Flake.

Trump had spent the two weeks leading up to his major immigration speech on 
Wednesday hinting at support for a path to legal status for undocumented 
immigrants before reversing course. This culminated when Trump made a surprise 
visit to Mexico to meet with President Enrique Peña Nieto where he described 
illegal immigration as a “humanitarian crisis”. Only few hours later, while 
speaking to crowd of supporters in Phoenix,Trump announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/in-arizona-we-saw-the-real-donald-trump-the-one-we-already-knew>
 “there will be no amnesty” and insisted “anyone who enters the United States 
illegally is subject to deportation, otherwise we don’t have a country.”

Trump has tangled with Flake before. In July, the Arizona senator confronted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/donald-trump-meeting-congress-republicans-divided-responses>
 Trump in a closed door meeting with other Republican elected officials in 
Washington DC. Flake hassince called on 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/andrewkaczynski/sen-jeff-flake-gop-should-shift-resources-from-trump-to-sena?utm_term=.vhWzaZP2A#.oc483BgkR>
 the RNC to shift resources away from Trump and towards downballot races.

Trump’s war of words with Flake comes 64 days before the election and with 
polls in Flake’s home state of Arizona looking increasing close. Hillary 
Clinton has recently begun advertising in the once deep red state and recent 
polls show Arizona to bea toss-up in November 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/az/arizona_trump_vs_clinton-5832.html>
 as the state’s growing Hispanic population has been alienated by Trump’s 
immigration rhetoric.

In addition, the attack on Flake, who is one of the most prominent Mormon 
politicians in the United States, risks further alienating that traditionally 
conservative demographic. Mormons have long viewed the Republican nominee 
unfavorably and their discontent has contributed to Trump’s weak poll numbers 
in states likeArizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> as well as 
Utah.

Flake is not the only Republican senator who is not voting for the party’s 
nominee. At least half a dozen others are refusing to back Trump’s candidacy, 
ranging from arch-conservativeBen Sasse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/29/nebraska-republican-senator-ben-sasse-says-he-wont-vote-for-trump>
 of Nebraska to moderate Susan Collins of Maine.
 