
It was one of the most bizarre moments of the US street protests, in the wake 
of thedecision not to charge police officer Darren Wilson for killing 
18-year-old Michael Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/24/ferguson-police-darren-wilson-michael-brown-no-charges>
 in Ferguson, Missouri. It was something you saw but didn’t quite believe. Was 
that him? No way. What? Was that really the rapper Macklemore … on the 
frontline of the Seattle protest talking about solidarity with Brown’s family? 
But the star – who is better known for divisive wins at awards ceremonies and 
singing about the merits of charity shop bargains – was one of many hip-hop and 
urban artists who made their voices heard after the grand jury’s decision to 
not indict Wilson.

Beyoncé, Alicia Keys, Nas, Solange, Dev Hynes, Lil Durk, Macklemore and Q-Tip 
all either got involved in protests or posted their reactions on social media. 
Beyoncé posted the Brown family’s statement calling for “a positive change” on 
her Instagram account; her sister Solange wrote, “We are not Michael Brown’s 
family, but we are Michael Brown’s family. We don’t hurt like they do, but we 
do hurt”; while Keys posted a stark image of the words “Mike Brown” on her 
Instagram feed. Others including Talib Kweli, Tef Poe and Killer Mike have been 
involved in Ferguson for months, at times crossing the line between artist and 
activist – St Louis rapper Tef Poe was even part of the group thatwent to the 
UN with the Brown family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/nov/12/tef-poe-rapper-michael-brown-shooting-ferguson>
. Not everyone’s presence was welcomed: “You got options,” Nelly said when he 
visited Ferguson wearing a #MIKEBROWN T-shirt. “You got options – you’re rich,”
Richard Vantreece, 22, shouted back from the crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/20/ferguson-11-days-on-we-are-sitting-on-a-powder-keg>
.

That reaction to the verdict helped to expose one of the greatest lies told 
about modern hip-hop: that it’s not political. On one level, it’s easy to see 
why you’d think that. A cursory look at the oeuvre of your average radio rapper 
would revealreferences to gauche gunplay 
<http://rollingout.com/music/50-cent-doesnt-believe-his-music-and-violence-are-related/>
, artwork that featuresrappers’ faces made out of drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/11/snoop-dogg-wiz-khalifa-hip-hop-mixtape-artwork>
, and lyrics that are more likely toreference Enzo Ferrari and Donatella Versace
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/jun/12/hip-hop-fashion-astrid-andersen-asap-ferg-topman>
 than Missouri Governor Jay Nixon. It’s an attitude that was perhaps best 
summed up by Wu-Tang Clan rapper Ol’ Dirty Bastard. Appearing on MTV in 1998, 
he was asked by a teen mother what he intended to do for the community. He 
responded with a withering, brazen and almost incredulous retort: “Nothing. 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b3zAaq1CccI>”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMQs7CWKHM9w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMQs7CWKHM9w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMQs7CWKHM9w&media=>
There are, of course, rappers who do directly engage with politics and have 
made careers out of doing so. In the 80s and 90s, Public Enemy drew clear 
political battlelines; KRS-One, Ice-T and Ice Cube took aim at authority 
figures, notably the police. More recently, Talib Kweli, who has remained a 
figurehead of “conscious hip-hop” – a subgenre synonymous with backpacks and 
informed critiques of the political system – and Yasiin Bey (AKA Mos Def), who
took part in a forcefeeding experiment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2013/jul/09/yasiin-bey-force-fed-guantanomo-bay-mos-def>
 to show what Guantánamo Bay detainees go through, have directly addressed 
political issues. Groups such as Dead Prez took a militant stance in the 
noughties and managed to cram messages about the dangers of police brutality, 
rampant capitalism and exploitative record deals into their single Hip Hop –one 
of the biggest club hits of the decade 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4jNyr6BJZuI>. More recently, Jay Z put his 
head above the political parapet to criticise US foreign policy in Iraq.

But even those who opt for uncensored street tales rather than polemics aren’t 
necessarily turning their back on politics. In a country where, on average, a 
black man is killed by the police every 28 hours and the incarceration rate for 
African Americans is nearly six times higher than for whites, simply detailing 
present-day America through a black urban lens is a political statement.

As David Toop observed in his book Rap Attack, NWA were masters of it: “Here 
was a group, straight out of the Los Angeles neighbourhood of Compton, that 
understood that the Vietnam of the late 80s was being enacted on the streets of 
Los Angeles, then fed back to the rest of America via violent, atmospheric 
media coverage.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmichael-brown-rap-stars-responded-ferguson-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417090971146%2Fec98be35-132e-4eb5-9597-0a42e89c310a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20Michael%20Brown%E2%80%99s%20family%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20rap%20and%20R%26B%20stars%20responded%20to%20the%20Ferguson%20protest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmichael-brown-rap-stars-responded-ferguson-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20Michael%20Brown%E2%80%99s%20family%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20rap%20and%20R%26B%20stars%20responded%20to%20the%20Ferguson%20protest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmichael-brown-rap-stars-responded-ferguson-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417090971146%2Fec98be35-132e-4eb5-9597-0a42e89c310a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ice Cube in 1990, after he left NWA, who took aim at the police in the 1980s. 
Photograph: Al Pereira/Getty Images 
In the same way that NWA painted a horrific picture of late 80s and early 90s 
LA, artists such as Chief Keef or Lil Durk do the same thing from Chicago – a 
city that saw 412 Chicagoans killed violently in 2013, a tally that made it
America’s murder capital 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/01/01/the-year-in-murder-2013-marks-a-historic-low-for-many-cities.html>
 and earned it the nickname Chiraq.

But something has changed in hip-hop. The highly visible profile that rappers 
have taken in the wake of Ferguson follows a recent trend of hip-hop artists 
engaging with and becoming a part of mainstream political conversation. When 
Obama became president in 2008 there were celebratory odes such as Jay Z’s My 
President, which includes the lines: “Rosa Parks sat so Martin Luther could 
walk / Martin Luther walked so Barack Obama could run / Barack Obama ran so all 
the children could fly.”

There were similar displays of solidarity after the shooting of 
African-American teen Trayvon Martin in Florida in 2012, witha string of 
tribute songs 
<http://www.bet.com/music/photos/2013/07/rap-lyrics-inspired-by-trayvon-martin.html#!063013-shows-beta-bet-awards-performances-young-jeezy-1>
 from Pharoahe Monch, Young Jeezy and Ace Hood. At a time when some have 
questioned thestate of black leadership after Ferguson 
<http://www.foxnews.com/opinion/2014/11/25/ferguson-grand-jury-decision-brown-death-should-be-call-to-action-not-violence/>
, hip-hop artists have proved to be – on the whole – a reliable, informed and 
engaged alternative to traditional “community leaders”. Killer Mike and Talib 
Kweli both appearedon news channels such as CNN and Fox 
<http://www.stereogum.com/1702191/killer-mike-talks-ferguson-on-fox-news/news/> 
to offer measured words on the situation (Killer Mike: “We have essentially 
gone from being communities that were policed by people from the communities to 
being communities that are policed by strangers, and that’s no longer a 
community, that’s an area that’s under siege”), whileCommon interrupted the MTV 
Video Music Awards to deliver a considered monologue on Ferguson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ysj4GAWD8LI>, calling for a moment of silence 
“for Mike Brown and for peace in this country and in the world”. Yes, some of 
what hip-hop artists have to say is uncensored and unfiltered, but it’s a 
passionate alternative to what has been – on the whole – a muted and weary 
response from politicians.
 