 How do you make a play written 2,500 years ago communicate to a 21st-century 
audience? Using the latest technology is one way. Putting the characters in 
modern dress is another. But sometimes the key lies in a seemingly trivial or 
random detail - a line in the original text you could easily miss or be tempted 
to cut, but which eventually becomes central to your attempt to put the play 
back on the map.
Lysistrata, written by Aristophanes in 411BC, has never really been off the 
map. Peter Hall directed an acclaimed production at the Old Vic in 1993, in a 
translation by Ranjit Bolt, and it's rare for some version of the play not to 
appear each summer at the Edinburgh Fringe. The reason for its enduring appeal 
is simple: sex and politics. The eponymous heroine and her militant sisterhood 
take two actions to make their men stop fighting: first, they stage a sex 
strike - the withdrawal of sexual favours until peace is declared; second, they 
occupy the Acropolis, freezing the funds necessary to keep the war going.
Aristophanes <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aristophanes> knew that his 
audience would find both these strategies ludicrous and treat his play, with 
its slapstick and doubles entendres, as an extravagant fantasy - for women to 
assert themselves in a public arena at that time was pure Theatre of the Absurd.

These days, it seems less absurd. Women have staged sex strikes in recent 
years in Colombia, Turkey, Poland, New Zealand, the Netherlands and Sudan, 
seeking variously to stop drug wars, combat repressive legislation, conserve 
their environment and turn their carnivorous partners into vegans. As for women 
entering a male sanctum and seizing power, this too has a famous modern 
parallel: Greenham Common, in 1981, when a group of women took up residence 
around an American military base in protest against Cruise missiles. Since 
then, several other such demonstrations - against war, global capitalism and 
pollution - have been led by women.

When I first thought about adapting Lysistrata several years ago, I felt the 
play needed to do more than draw on such parallels. I had been reading The 
Common Chorus, Tony Harrison's version of Lysistrata written in the 1980s and 
relocated to Greenham Common - a ferocious and often brilliant text, but one 
that never made it to the stage because, while theatre managements dithered, 
the cold war ended, and the play's moment passed.

It was while I was struggling to work out what to do with the play that I 
noticed a line in one of the translations on my desk. It comes as the 
magistrate loses patience in his attempt to persuade Lysistrata and her friends 
to leave the Acropolis. Told to shut up, he snarls: "Silence for you, you 
wench, when you're wearing a snood? I'd rather die."

What on earth was a snood? "An ornamental hairnet or fabric bag worn over the 
hair at the back of a women's head", my dictionary told me. But there was no 
mention of a snood in other versions: Ranjit Bolt translated it simply as "a 
dress". More tellingly, some translations speak of a veil, and have the women 
sticking a veil on the magistrate's head in order to humiliate him. Recent 
research has established that the veil was indeed frequently worn by women in 
ancient Greece. Historian Bethany Hughes made this point last month in her 
Channel 4 series Athens - The Truth About Greek Democracy, and Lloyd 
Llewellyn-Jones's book Aphrodite's Tortoise shows that the veil was sometimes 
referred to as the "little roof" under which women could go out in public while 
preserving their status as homebodies.

With the veil currently the focus of intense public debate in Britain, this 
flashpoint in the play - a male authority figure refusing to converse with a 
woman because of her choice of headwear - seemed worth developing rather than 
suppressing: what if some of the characters were Muslim? The idea dovetailed 
with another aspect of the play that is often forgotten: the women who come 
together to stop their men from fighting are from different communities. 
Initially, before sisterly solidarity is established, the women are suspicious 
of each other, whispering snide comments and paying backhanded compliments 
about one another's physical appearance. As the late Kenneth McLeish has it, in 
his translation:

Kalonike: Puah! Where on Earth are they from?

Lysistrata: The swamps.

Kalonike: I think they brought them with them.

At one level, this is harmless small-town banter and rivalry, the kind I 
recognise from having grown up on the Lancashire-Yorkshire border. But there 
are racist overtones, too, and racism now afflicts some of those same northern 
towns I knew as a child - despite the best efforts of integrationists, 
suspicion and separatism prevail. Since the clashes and riots of the 1990s, 
unofficial no-go areas have developed. There have been stories, circulated by 
the BNP, of Asian men grooming white girls for prostitution. And Islamophobia 
has become ever more vociferous since 7/7 - the Egyptian footballer Mido was 
recently subjected to racist taunts when playing at Middlesborough. In 
Aristophanes, too, ugly insults fly back and forth, jokes about the immoral 
behaviour of Other People, whether they're women, lechers, drunkards, wimps or 
foreigners. The longer I worked on the play, the more the material from two 
different eras seemed to connect.

Even an archaic-seeming set-piece, in which Lysistrata compares running a city 
(or country) to weaving wool, acquired a new lease of life after I saw an 
exhibition of knitting at the Crafts Council in 2005. "By knitting, you are 
resisting capitalism and consumerism," one of the artists on display, Shane 
Waltener, was quoted as saying. "If more people knitted, the world would be a 
more peaceful place." That's pretty much the line Lysistrata takes when she 
describes how women can build a better world by adapting their knitting skills 
to untangle the knots and snarl-ups created by men.

Knitting, veils, hoodies, gun culture, Iraq, the sinister activities of the 
arms trade: it takes little effort to make a classic antiwar play resonate, 
when echoes are screaming from all sides. The only risk was that what 
Aristophanes intended as a farcical comedy would morph into an earnest piece of 
social realism. But as anyone familiar with the original will know, the second 
half of the play introduces giant erect phalluses, whose ridiculous appearance 
quickly removes any risk of pomposity.

Aristophanes wrote his play just a year after thousands of young men from 
Athens lost their lives in a disastrous attempt to defeat Sparta's allies in 
Sicily - a military catastrophe and civic trauma that some have likened to the 
American experience in Vietnam or, now, Iraq. It was a sensitive time to 
produce an antiwar play, let alone an antiwar play featuring big willies, 
uppity women and a coarseness of language unrivalled in the ancient world. Yet 
Aristophanes got away with it by pushing things beyond the bounds of the 
strictly credible. Lysistrata has a serious story to tell. But like all good 
comedies, it knows when to stop taking itself too seriously.

 Â· Lisa's Sex Strike, Blake Morrison's version of Lysistrata for Northern 
Broadsides, is at the OctagonTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>
, Bolton. Box office: 01204 520661.
 