
Luca Guadagnino simply cannot sit still. One moment his legs are sticking out 
frontwards, the next they are hooked over the arm of his chair. You can only 
conclude that his intense writhiness must be something to do with his 
revving-engine thought processes, as one pronouncement after another tumbles 
out of him.

You need to follow the agenda of the film, not a personal agenda, or that of 
the studio, or, worst of all, of the actors
Luca Gudagnino 
And Guadagnino certainly has a lot to say. The Italian film-maker behind 2009’s
I Am Love <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/08/i-am-love-review> is 
back with a new film, A Bigger Splash, a remake of the 1969 Alain Delon film La 
Piscine, a four-hander relocated to the Sicilian island of Pantelleria. The 
arid, subtropical landscape – within sight of the African mainland – is a 
striking feature of the film. His I Am Love starTilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton> is back – playing a 
Bowie-esque glam rocker resting her voice after a throat operation – and 
Guadagnino has castRalph Fiennes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ralphfiennes>
 as a fast-talking record producer, whose performance includes a berserk 
extended frug to the Rolling Stones’ Emotional Rescue.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453978965425%2FKP_1520713_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20featuring%20Ralph%20Fiennes%20and%20Tilda%20Swinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20featuring%20Ralph%20Fiennes%20and%20Tilda%20Swinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453978965425%2FKP_1520713_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Watch Ralph Fiennes and Tilda Swinton in a scene from A Bigger Splash. 
A Bigger Splash review - Tilda Swinton and Ralph Fiennes make waves in 
entertainingly oddball psychodrama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/07/a-bigger-splash-review-tilda-swinton-ralph-fiennes-luca-guadagnino-venice>
Even though Guadagnino says that La Piscine was not exactly his “cup of tea”, 
he found it “liberating” to use it as the basis for a new film. He says he has 
his own path, wanting to explore “the clash between people, led by desire”. It 
is important to “avoid drama … lead the storyline through behaviour”. Rather 
grandly, Guadagnino says he “agrees with Kubrick”, that “original ideas are not 
always best”. “Making movies is about control,” he says. “You need to control 
your narcissism in the first place, and you need to be disciplined enough to 
understand the reason for the film. You need to follow the agenda of the film, 
not a personal agenda, or that of the studio.” He thinks for a moment, and says 
with amusingly elaborate distaste: “Or, worst of all, of the actors.”

Guadagnino talks like this a lot: he’s clearly happy in the role of the 
auteur-director, with the sweeping – and occasionally gnomic – pronouncements 
that go with it. They are a rare breed these days, but after I Am Love, and the 
festival success ofA Bigger Splash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-bigger-splash>, Guadagnino would appear to 
have earned the right.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6-Y_6pnkN20&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6-Y_6pnkN20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6-Y_6pnkN20&media=>
 The trailer for Jacques Deray’s La Piscine, on which A Bigger Splash is based. 
In any case, he doesn’t seem to have any problems letting actors do their 
thing, at least as far as A Bigger Splash was concerned: “I cast people who are 
not going to ‘act’ but are going to ‘behave’.” Swinton, he says, got involved 
late, but brought with her the idea of making her character virtually mute. 
Fiennes spent months choreographing his Rolling Stones gyrations: “Ralph is so 
disciplined and prepared; like Tilda, he chisels things.”

Guadagnino accepts that dealing with the Stones – who are famous for not being 
especially forgivingin financial matters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/may/22/how-the-rolling-stones-became-musics-biggest-business>
 – might not be entirely in keeping with his aesthetic purity, but says that 
the band were not in the least bit obstructive; instead, they were “fantastic” 
and “embraced” the idea. Guadagnino even got script feedback, he says, for a 
scene in which Fiennes’s character rambles on about recording Moon Is Up on the 
band’s Voodoo Lounge album. “They said: ‘You can tweak this bit; we can give 
you a little detail you are missing,’ all that. They were so collaborative. I 
have total admiration for them.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dil9D_7SNf-4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dil9D_7SNf-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dil9D_7SNf-4&media=>
 The trailer for Guadagnino’s 1999 feature The Protagonists. 
The same admiration appears to extend to Swinton, whom he first met in 1995 
when trying to interest her in acting in a short film. “We never finished it, 
but we started a friendship that never dimmed.” Their collaboration goes way 
back: Swinton came onboard Guadagnino’s first feature, a meta detective story 
called The Protagonists, which he shot in London in 1998. “Tilda being the 
great film-maker she is, the contribution she can bring is so deep and 
extraordinary that it’s a joy to be working together.”

But he swiftly returns to his favourite theme: his dislike of conventional 
scripts. “I have read so many in the last few years, and they are all about the 
three-act structure, with the same character arc every time,” he says. “What I 
like is someone who is capable of giving up the toolbox, and really dig for the 
truth.” This, he says, is why he discusses ideas with his scriptwriter for 
months – in A Bigger Splash’s case, the American David Kajganich – “to give the 
writer confidence in really working out of the box”. During the location 
scouting and the shoot, he says that he must come to terms with “the defacing 
of reality”, when the director must “fight narcissism and fight 
self-indulgence”. “The more you cut, the better it is,” he believes; and then, 
in the edit, “you start again from scratch, for the third time”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fbigger-splash-director-luca-guadagnino-italian-cinema-is-mostly-a-bureau-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63a332b0f583437a9eaac63422715cdf94910331%2F155_61_3394_4374%2F3394.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Bigger%20Splash%20director%3A%20%E2%80%98Italian%20cinema%20is%20mostly%20a%20bureau%20for%20tourism%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fbigger-splash-director-luca-guadagnino-italian-cinema-is-mostly-a-bureau-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Bigger%20Splash%20director%3A%20%E2%80%98Italian%20cinema%20is%20mostly%20a%20bureau%20for%20tourism%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fbigger-splash-director-luca-guadagnino-italian-cinema-is-mostly-a-bureau-for-tourism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63a332b0f583437a9eaac63422715cdf94910331%2F155_61_3394_4374%2F3394.jpg>
 A Bigger Splash director Luca Guadagnino. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the 
Guardian 
You’d think that Guadagnino would be respected as a key figure in a resurgence 
of Italian cinema. After all, directors such as Paolo Sorrentino and Matteo 
Garrone are fixtures on the international circuit, as well as old stager Nanni 
Moretti. But, it turns out, you’d be wrong; the way he tells it, Guadagnino is 
ploughing a lonely furrow, in the face of disapproval and even outright 
hostility from the domestic Italian film industry. Maybe there’s something in 
that: A Bigger Splash was – somewhat unexpectedly – greeted witha smattering of 
boos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/tilda-swinton-a-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-venice-film-festival>
when it premiered at the Venice film festival.

I am more interested in revolutionary beauty than in the great beauty, to be 
honest
Luca Guadagnino 
Guadagnino, darkly, tells me how the actor Laura Betti – famous for her roles 
in Theorem for Pasolini and La Dolce Vita for Fellini – gave him a warning 
while they were making The Protagonists.

Ralph Fiennes: loosey-goosey? ‘I like that!’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/26/ralph-fiennes-spectre-interview> 
“She said to me: ‘They will try to kill you in the cradle.’ I did not 
understand then what she was saying to me. At the time I was kind of arrogant, 
but in fact the prophecy was right. Everything that goes outside the rules of 
Italian cinema, has always been cursed.”

Not playing by the rules, it seems, essentially means not having the right 
family connections. “My father is a teacher, my mother was a telecom employee,” 
he says. “I come from Palermo, I was raised in Ethiopia. I am homosexual. I 
didn’t go to film school. There are lots of reasons they are not keen on me.”

He takes the opportunity to have a go at Sorrentino and Garrone; both 
directors, he says, are produced by mainstream “players”. He says that 
Garrone’s films – Gomorrah and Reality – are “patronising”, and that he is 
“suspicious” of Sorrentino’s. He reserves particular scorn for The Great 
Beauty, Sorrentino’s best foreign-language Oscar winner: “It is indulging the 
idea we have lost something great in the past; I just don’t believe that.” And 
he’s actively rude about Moretti: “It’s so sad to see this once-youthful, 
anarchic director suddenly becoming what he used to accuse older directors of 
being: establishment.”

Establishment would appear to be Guadagnino’s ultimate insult (“an artist 
should always be uncomfortable”). And it’s the cue for him to launch one more 
pop at his contemporaries. “I am more interested in revolutionary beauty than 
in the great beauty, to be honest. Italian cinema is now mostly a bureau for 
tourism. We have given up that revolution of the contemporary.”

He shrugs: “I am resilient. I don’t give a shit, to be honest. I keep doing my 
own stuff, and I enjoy myself.” You can’t ask for much more than that.

A Bigger Splash is in UK cinemas from 12 Feb
 