
We knew from the longlist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jul/26/man-booker-prize-2011-longlist-debut>
 that this was a Booker keen on surprises, but with the shortlist omission of 
Alan Hollinghurst the judges have sprung their biggest surprise yet. I loved 
The Stranger's Child, and no one could deny that it's beautifully written, but 
compared with the broad political and social engagement of his Booker-winning
The Line of Beauty 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780330483216/the-line-of-beauty>
 this saga of 20th-century literary reputation can be seen as a minority – and 
rather elitist – interest. Tweeting this morning,Nicholas Blincoe 
<http://twitter.com/#!/NicholasBlincoe> compared reading it to sitting the 
Civil Service exam; elsewhere words like "tweedy" and "fusty" have been thrown 
around.

And this is a Booker that wants to be anything but tweedy. The two debuts on 
the shortlist,Pigeon English 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781408810637/pigeon-english>
 andSnowdrops 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781848874527/snowdrops>, 
look to survival struggles in contemporary urban battlegrounds. The first, 
narrated by an 11-year-old Ghanaian immigrant on a south London estate, brings 
a comic tone (and an ill-advised talking pigeon) to its child's-eye view of 
gang violence. The recent riots give it added bite. The second exposes the 
casual corruption that spread through post-communist Moscow in a boom that 
favours the ruthless. Both, in a sense, are crime fiction.

As is the strongest wild card on the list, Patrick deWitt's The Sisters 
Brothers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781847083180/the-sisters-brothers>
, a darkly comic wild west odyssey of two cowboy assassins. American novels 
are, controversially, excluded from the Booker – deWitt is Canadian – but 
juries have a weakness for their grand, sometimes lurid, horizons. (Remember
Vernon God Little 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780571215164/vernon-god-little>
, 2003's surprise winner about a Texas high school massacre.) I'm surprised to 
see the other Canadian on the shortlist, Esi Edugyan; our reviewer thoughtHalf 
Blood Blues 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781846687754/half-blood-blues>
, the story of a black jazz musician in Nazi Germany, fascinating material but 
a missed opportunity.

Of the remaining two, Barnes's The Sense of an Ending 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780224094153/the-sense-of-an-ending>
, looking back to philosophy-reading sixties schoolboys and forwards to the 
disappointments of middle-class middle age, is the only novel on the list that 
could fairly be called tweedy. Many are wondering if it could be his year at 
last, and this is a strange, powerful book, but it's also a very slim one. I'm 
still carrying my torch for Carol Birch'sJamrach's Menagerie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781847676566/jamrachs-menagerie>
; she's an underrated author with an impressive backlist, and this tale of 
19th-century naturalism and danger at sea is in some ways classic Booker 
material. She brings a freshness and vibrancy to the historical novel that is a 
pleasure to behold.

What's your prediction - and (often not the same thing) which is your 
favourite?
 