
Illamas-qué?

A relatively new British brand that has built up quite a following since its 
launch in November 2008. Illamasqua (a combination of 'Illusion' and 
'Masquerade') is the brainchild of Yorkshire marketing guru Julian Kynaston 
who, without any previous experience in the world of makeup, launched the brand 
to reflect his passion for all things subcultural.
Illamasqua was edgy from day one so it felt like a natural step for Joseph 
Corre to join in 2010. There aren't many people with as much punk heritage in 
their blood as this man. The son of Vivienne Westwood and Malcolm McLaren, 
Corre grew up in the middle of London's punk scene. After a number of years 
working for his mother, he co-founded lingerie company Agent Provocateur, where 
he worked for 16 years before leaving to join Kynaston. The pair have created a 
bold beauty brand that is expanding rapidly and will soon have 13 UK stockist 
sites, as well as a presence in the US, Australia and Dubai.

What makes it edgy?

Well, they don't shy away from unconventional looks and highly pigmented 
colour. The core collection is based on a range created by Arnold Langer, who 
learned his trade in prewar Berlin among the underground clubs and cabaret 
performers of the time. Illamasqua certainly maintains that theatrical feel and 
playfulness with adventurous seasonal collections. From their core range, I 
rather like the Cream Pigment (£17,illamasqua.com <http://www.illamasqua.com/>) 
that can be used on eyes, lips or cheeks, the colour able to be built up to be 
as intense, or not, as you like.

So what's new?
 Illamasqua's dramatic new lipstick in Kontrol 
Their present collection for A/W 2011, called Theatre of the Nameless, pretty 
much summarises Illamasqua in a nutshell – theatrical, decadent, over-the-top 
and dramatic. The lipstick Kontrol (£15.50) is a rich violet; the lip gloss in 
Violate (£13) is a sheer green; and the aubergine-coloured Precision Ink liner 
in Havoc (£17) is meant for use all over the face and body. Personally, I'll 
probably stick to using it on my eyes.
 