
What's the story?

American brand Benefit began life when identical twins Jean and Jane Ford 
opened a small beauty boutique in San Francisco back in 1976. Their whole 
approach was one of fun with kitsch packaging and quirkily named products that 
were an escape from other cosmetics brands of the time. Their ethos- 'who says 
make-up has to be serious to be good?'- proved to be popular with the public 
and the company grew and grew. Jean's daughters Maggie and Annie became 
involved and now the Benefit 'family company' has over 2000 counters in more 
than 30 countries.

Quirkily named products you say?

There's a primer called Stay Don't Stray; Ooh La Lift is an under-eye 
brightener; and Realness of Concealness is a camouflage kit. I said their 
approach was fun, I didn't necessarily say it was funny.

And are they as good as they sound?
 They're Real! mascara from Benefit 
I find some of the products are more style over substance but there are a few 
that do stand out. I've been enjoying the effect the They're Real! mascara 
(£18.50, benefitcosmetics.co.uk) has on my lashes. Launched this summer, the 
brush has a handy ball at the tip meaning reaching the little inner lashes is a 
great deal easier. I'm also experimenting with Watt's Up! (£24.50, as before), 
a highlighter for cheeks which is much subtler than their High Beam 
highlighter, which is just too fake-looking for my liking. Watt's Up! also 
comes with a user-friendly sponge attached rather than a nail-varnish type 
brush, which can encourage over-application. One of Benefit's top-sellers is 
the Benetint lip and cheek stain (£24.50, as before). It's another pot with a 
brush applicator and you have to work fast to avoid a warpaint look on cheeks. 
I find it a bit pink for my Celtic rosy cheeks but the Cha Cha Tint (also 
£24.50) is an apricot shade which looks scarily neon at first but gives a more 
natural looking flush once blended in.

In summary?

Maybe a little over-priced for the one-off item but a lot of Benefit products 
make fun presents for the young 'uns, especially the ridiculously named kits - 
POWda WOWza anyone? Ticket to Glossytown...?
 