
Who is she?
Provence-born Laura Mercier started training at art school in Paris before 
switching from painting canvasses to painting faces. After a stint at the 
Carita beauty school, she moved from Paris to New York in 1985 to establish 
herself in a more fashion-focused world. She worked on huge advertising 
campaigns and on fancy editorial spreads for the glossies, building up a roster 
of celebrity clients that included Madonna. In 1996, Mercier launched her own 
cosmetics range with the focus on creating a "flawless face". Despite being 
entrenched in the fast pace of high fashion, Mercier wanted her range to feel 
like it was always current rather than influenced by a particular season's 
faddish trends. As withBobbi Brown 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/fashion-blog/2011/sep/28/a-brief-history-of-bobbi-brown>
, Mercier's products are all about enhancing your natural colours.

She does that tinted moisturiser everyone bangs on about, right?
Correct! You may feel like you read about it every other week but it is jolly 
good. I use the oil-free version (£33,spacenk.co.uk 
<http://www.spacenk.co.uk/p2p/search/searchresults.do?method=view&search=basic&keyword=laura+mercier&sortby=bestSellers&page=1>
) and love it. Applied to the areas that need it, I find it gives a respectable 
amount of coverage and you're never in danger of looking too caked. Plus, it 
has an SPF of 20 which is a nice little Brucie bonus.
 Caviar Jungle Stick, £20.50 Photograph: Barry Fantich/Laura Mercier 
What else?
As well as being the Queen of the Tinted Moisturiser, Laura Mercier is also 
Empress of the Barely There Lip Gloss. There are 30 shades of theLip Glacé 
<http://www.spacenk.co.uk/product/shop+by+brand/laura+mercier/122721194+lip+glace.do>
 in varying shades of non-colour such as Discrete, Bare Naked and Blush (£18.50 
each, see photo at top of page). All very pretty if you like a natural yet 
shiny lip.

And recently?
In August, Laura Mercier launched the Caviar Stick Eye Colour (£20.50 each), a 
collection of long-wear crayons in eight dark and earthy shades. These are 
great smudged along lash lines for a smoky look, or you can colour in the whole 
lid for some proper high-impact colour.
 