
How did it all start?

Clinique came about in 1968 following an article in US Vogue which discussed 
whether great skin can actually be achieved through a proper skin care regime. 
Acting like some kind of beautifying magical trinity, US Vogue editor Carol 
Phillips, Evelyn Lauder (daughter-in-law of Estée), and dermatologist Norman 
Orentreich MD worked together to develop a brand that brought dermatological 
thinking to cosmetics. Clinique was launched and is now one of the biggest skin 
care and cosmetics brands on the market, with stores in 135 different 
countries. And yes, it's yet another cog in the giant Estée Lauder machine.

What's their thing?

The idea at the core of Clinique is their 3-step skin care system: cleanse, 
exfoliate and moisturise. Not exactly rocket science but not always an easy 
rule to follow. Cleanse, yes. Moisturise, always. But exfoliate? When I 
remember. Having said that, I have started to use Clinique's 7 Day Scrub Cream 
(£17 for 100ml, clinique.co.uk) in the shower some mornings and I'm really 
noticing the difference it's making. Skin is much smoother and I feel my 
make-up goes on easier. Ultimately, like all good exfoliators, it renews skin 
by getting rid of dead cells and dirt to leave it all shiny and new. Clinique 
offer a whole range of gentle exfoliators depending on your skin type, from 
very dry to very oily. As for moisturiser, the Clinique Dramatically Different 
Moisturising Lotion (£16.50 for 50ml) is easily their best-seller, with one 
selling somewhere in the world every 3.7 seconds.

What else is good?
 Clinique moisturising lip colours (£15 each ) 
Clinique may be well known for their 3-step thing but they're also a dab-hand 
at colour. I love their Airbrush Concealer (£16, as before) to tackle dark 
circles under the eyes. It's a very light-weight formula that works well on 
blemishes too. The only downside is that it's available in just three pale 
shades. Another popular product is the chubby stick moisturising lip colour 
(£15, as before) which launched earlier this year. It's got a great crayon 
application, a subtle sheen of colour and the balm is a treat for the lips 
making it a jolly little multi-tasker.
 