
What's the story?

Launched in 1960 with a perfume-free, colour-free soap, UK skincare brand 
Simple has to this day continued in the manner it started. The idea is, well, 
simple – don't add any unnecessary nasty stuff and you won't upset sensitive 
skin. This has always been the message, right back to the first TV ads in the 
80s. You may rememberthe lily being spray-painted and squirted with perfume 
<http://youtu.be/AzZ4c1S5IqY>, but far more entertaining is this gem from 1983.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHIkn-PWDoME%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHIkn-PWDoME%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHIkn-PWDoME%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Is it any good?

For the price, I would argue that, yes, it is. During the years I spent as a 
student and waitress, I didn't have much of a skincare budget (neither, as a 
relatively fresh-faced 19-year-old, was it much of a priority), so Simple was 
my brand of choice. And I think the real indicator of a decent product is that, 
even though I have a little more pocket money now, I still return to Simple for 
the basics. Therefreshing facial wash gel (£3.25, from the Guardian Fashion 
store 
<http://www.guardianfashionstore.co.uk/search.php?keywords=simple+refreshing+facial+wash+gel&Submit=Search>
) is a great cleanser that doesn't leave my skin tight, while friends with 
sensitive skin say they use thekind to skin hydrating light moisturiser (£3.79, 
Guardian Fashion store 
<http://www.guardianfashionstore.co.uk/search.php?keywords=simple+kind+to+skin+hydrating+light+moisturiser&Submit=Search>
) as a reliable staple.

What's new?

Last year, Simple launched a kind to eyes eye makeup corrector pen (£4.99, 
Guardian Fashion Store 
<http://www.guardianfashionstore.co.uk/search.php?keywords=simple+kind+to+eyes+eye+make-up+corrector+pen&Submit=Search>
) which could come in handy on those mornings when it's nigh-on impossible to 
get your eyeliner right and time is running out. Or, you could just save 
yourself some cash and carry on using cotton buds and moisturiser.

Buy of the day

More packs of Simple's kind to skin cleansing facial wipes are sold in the UK 
than any other skincare product. I guess it just shows that no matter how much 
we're advised to follow a proper cleansing routine, there are still plenty of 
times (possibly after a glass of wine or two) when we all reach for the wet 
wipe.
 