
Let's have a bit of the history then...

As far as cosmetics companies go, Revlon is beyond the reach of anti-wrinkle 
cream. Founded in the US during the Great Depression, the chaps behind the 
brand are said to be the creators of coloured nail enamel in its modern form. 
The story goes that Charles and Joseph Revson were inspired to create a nail 
polish by the scarlet-lipped, cigarette-smoking Hollywood actresses of their 
day (although how this story played out in black and white puzzles me 
slightly). What these women clearly needed, they thought, were red nails to 
match their red lips. And soCherries in the Snow 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Revlon-Nail-Enamel_33582/> was born - and it is still 
going strong today.

So it's all about the nails?

It was to start with. Then they introduced lipstick to the collection to match 
the nails. And now they cover pretty much everything you could think of 
cosmetics-wise.

Any recommendations for me?
 Revlon's Facets of Fuchsia Nail colour Photograph: User 2/Revlon 
Last year the beauty press couldn't get enough of the PhotoReady foundation 
(currently £9.99 fromboots.com 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Revlon-PhotoReady-Makeup-30ml_1042568/>). It's a 
delightfully light foundation which works wonders for the complexion without 
making the skin look caked. Revlon does colour well too, and as the products 
are penny-friendly (the lipsticks and nail colours are all around the £7 mark) 
it's a good brand to go to when you fancy experimenting with the latest trends. 
My pick of their new A/W range is a fun nail colour called Facets of Fuchsia 
(left, £6.49, atboots.com <http://www.boots.com> from October) - a glittery 
number channelling the 70s disco vibe which I've a feeling will be big on nails 
next season.

How's about an interesting Revlon-based fact?

Well, Christian Louboutin - he of red-soled shoe fame - apparently applied a 
Revlon red nail enamel to the soles of his early designs. It was a huge success 
and, obviously, became a permanent fixture (but I'm pretty sure they don't use 
nail enamel any more).

- Email us on fashion.desk@guardian.co.uk with requests for A Brief History of 
your favourite cosmetic brand
 