
What's the story?

Sixty years old this year, Olay started life in a South African lab by an 
ex-Unilever employee called Graham Wulff. Oil of Olay was originally a thick 
pink liquid which was marketed as an anti-ageing 'beauty fluid'. In the 1970s 
the range expanded to include all manner of skincare products, and the company 
was bought by Procter & Gamble in the mid-80s. In 1999 what was called Oil of 
Ulay in the UK, Oil of Olaz in other European countries and Oil of Ulan in 
Australia, became known as just Olay the world over. It is now sold in 80 
countries worldwide to an estimated 60 million women.

Why are we talking about it now?

Mother's Day always makes me think of Olay/Ulay. Back in the 90s, it was very 
much a brand that was aimed at ladies of a certain age who were keen to achieve 
younger-looking skin. But I also remember there being a strong mother/daughter 
focus, too. Rememberthis 'Nick thought we were sisters' advert 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YO8K5lESAd0> from 1990? However, with the name 
change there has also come a change in its target audience, especially in more 
recent years. In fact, January this year saw the launch ofOlay Essentials – a 
collection of cleansers and moisturisers at lower prices (cleansers are £2.49 
and moisturisers £4.59) and aimed at younger women. Think of them as 
entry-level Olay products.

So what's good?
 Total Effects Touch of Foundation, £18.99 from the Guardian Fashion Store 
<http://www.guardianfashionstore.co.uk/search.php?keywords=olay+total+effects+touch+of+foundation&Submit=Search>
. Photograph: Clive Strange 
One of Olay's bestsellers comes from their Total Effects range – the Total 
Effects Touch of Foundation (£18.99, available from the Guardian Fashion Store 
<http://www.guardianfashionstore.co.uk/search.php?keywords=olay+total+effects+touch+of+foundation&Submit=Search>
) – one of which sells somewhere in the world every two minutes. It's a light 
day moisturiser with SPF15 with, as the name suggests, a hint of foundation. 
Others might call it a tinted moisturiser but there is a significant 
difference. On discussing the highly important matter with a friend who uses it 
most days, we declared it better than a tinted moisturiser as it actually did 
moisturise the skin.
 