
What's the story?

Keeping quiffs neatly in place since 1928, Brylcreem is an iconic product of 
men's hair styling. Founded in Birmingham by County Chemicals, it was created 
as hair cream that was originally only sold to barbers. Men flocked to 
Brylcreem in droves to recreate that clean, smart hairstyle that was the 
fashion at the time. And that not-a-hair-out-of-place look remained the fashion 
for another couple of decades - rather handy for Brylcreem. In fact, a brief 
history of Brylcreem is like a brief history of men's haircuts. During World 
War II, members of the RAF were known asBrylcreem Boys thanks to their tidily 
done dos. The 1950s saw an even further increase with Brylcreem becoming the 
most dominant product in men's hairstyling. Brylcreem must have been thanking 
their lucky stars that the super-styled Teddy Boy look was so popular. Slick 
hairstyles, as sported inMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>, lasted until the 
early 60s when Brylcreem's luck began to run out.

Uh oh. What happened?

Well it's down in part to The Beatles and other such popular music groups of 
the time who wore their hair much longer and much less-perfectly styled. With 
this, the demand for styling creams fell and so did Brylcreem's profits. 
Despite efforts to convince the masses that Brylcreem could still be used on 
these styles, sales declined and continued to do so into the 70s. Big hair 
equalled big problems for Brylcreem. The 80s and 90s saw a slight renaissance 
when the brand tried to reinvent itself for the youth market. In 1997, David 
Beckham became the face of Brylcreem and showed that it wasn't just for those 
neat hairstyles of a different era.

And now?
 The original Brylcreem cream, £3.29, brylcreem.com <http://www.brylcreem.com/>
The original cream is still available in the same packaging it's been in since 
the 60s (£3.29,brylcreem.com <http://www.brylcreem.com/>) plus a few other 
waxes and gels too. People may still think of it as a product of a certain time 
but it has truly embraced the 21st century with social media campaigns and 
sharp adverts to appeal to the 16-30 market. A good example of this would be 
their 2007Effortless campaign where the public were invited to send in clips of 
effortless little tricks around the house, and the accompanying musician 
recruited from MySpace.The result <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LOYTQKoJ1N8> 
is well worth a watch.
 