
What's the story?

Originally a fragrance house, Lancôme was founded by a French chap named 
Armand Petitjean back in 1935. His five perfumes were an immediate success and 
he soon moved on to skincare. The first product, a multi-tasking repair cream 
calledNutrix, was launched in 1936 and is still available today (£51 for 125ml, 
available from theGuardian Fashion Store 
<http://www.guardianfashionstore.co.uk/product_detail.php?prodID=73484153&pID=8143&sc=Products%20-%20skin%20treatments&supercat=Health%20and%20Beauty>
). Two years later he expanded into cosmetics with a pinky-red lipstick scented 
with roses that remained a bestseller for the following 30 years. L'Oréal 
acquired Lancôme in 1964, and it is now known as one of the largest luxury 
skincare companies in the world.

It makes me think of Harry Potter ...

You've clearly been paying attention to the adverts. Despite Armand 
Petitjean's declaration that Lancôme would never advertise (and judging by the 
speed with which his company grew from word of mouth in the 30s, who could 
blame him?), Lancôme later became one of the trendsetters using famous faces in 
big ads - from Isabella Rossellini in the 80s to Kate Winslet, Penélope Cruz 
and Harry Potter'sEmma Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-watson> 
today.

So what's new?
 The Rouge In Love range (£21 each, selfridges.com <http://www.selfridges.com/>
) 
Well, speaking of Emma Watson, she's the face of Lancôme's new lipstick range 
Rouge in Love (£21 each, available now in Selfridges 
<http://www.selfridges.com/> and nationwide from 1 April). It's a collection of 
24 shades split into three categories inspired by times of the day. There's
Jolis Matins - natural nude tones; Boudoir Time - brighter and bolder shades 
with more of a shine; andTonight is My Night - darker and deeper reds and 
browns. I'm forever on the lookout for subtle daytime lip colour. As a brunette 
with rosy Celtic cheeks (thanks Mum), I went forRose Rendez-Vous to give the 
natural colour of my lips a bit of a boost and sheen. If, like me, you're a 
magpie when it comes to shiny things, the little silver bullets that the 
lipsticks come in will be very pleasing indeed.

Bit pricey for a lipstick ...

If Lancôme is a bit too much on the spenny 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=spenny> side, try Boots No7 
Sheer Temptation Lipstick (£10, boots.com <http://www.boots.com/>) for a 
similar hint of colour and shine.
 