
Is this one about computers?

Erm, no. Make-up Art Cosmetics, or M.A.C as it's more commonly known, was 
founded in 1984 by two Canadian chaps named Frank - make-up artist and 
photographer Frank Toskan and beauty salon owner Frank Angelo. Born from a 
desire to create make-up which held its own under the glare and heat of 
photography studio lights, it was originally created for professionals but soon 
gained such a popularity that it was launched to the general public soon after. 
In 1995, Estée Lauder Companies purchased 51% of the company and then in 1998, 
after the death of one of the founding Franks, they bought the remaining share. 
Estée Lauder, being the massive global beauty company it is, helped M.A.C grow 
even further and there are now a whopping 1500 locations selling the brand in 
78 different countries worldwide.

That's rather a lot. What makes them so successful?
 Viva Glam poster featuring RuPaul 
It's probably their attitude as much as anything. M.A.C's motto is 'All ages. 
All races. All sexes' and so their make-up is designed to be accessible for 
all. I'd argue that the majority of their seasonal launches are a little, well, 
'out there'. But they're fun and often full of colour giving M.A.C an edgy yet 
playful feel appealing to a younger crowd. M.A.C also pay a lot of attention to 
the whole spectrum of skin shades making them a hugely popular brand for women 
(and men - see 'all sexes') with darker skin. On top of this, they are big on 
charity – particularly their Viva Glam campaigns which have helped raise $224 
million for the M.A.C AIDS Fund.

Any top tips?

As a serious proponent of black eyeliner, I have spent years on the hunt for 
the perfect eyeliner. Having tried umpteen pencils, pens and liquids I can now 
proudly announce that the search is over. For me, the M.A.C fluidline (£13.50, 
maccosmetics.co.uk) is the perfect product. It's a gel eyeliner in a little pot 
that may seem a tad daunting at first but applying a smooth line along the lids 
with a brush is surprisingly easy. It even passed the 
applying-it-to-a-friend-on-a-moving-train test last weekend. Brilliant.
 