
What's the story?

Around for a somewhat surprising 77 years, No7 was originally a skincare brand 
launched by Boots with the charming slogan, "The modern way to loveliness". A 
cosmetics line followed, but production pretty much stopped altogether during 
the second world war. It was reintroduced in 1942 and then fully relaunched 10 
years later with a new tagline: "Better and lovelier than before". The brand 
has gone through umpteen redesigns and relaunches over the decades to keep up 
with the changing trends, most recently in 2005 to mark its 70th birthday. It 
seems, from people I've spoken to, that No7 is a trusted and well-priced brand. 
I guess that's the benefit of being associated with the nation's favourite 
chemist.

So what's good?

In 2007, No7 hit the skincare jackpot with their Protect & Perfect Serum 
(£19.50 for 30ml,boots.com <http://www.boots.com/>). A BBC Horizon documentary 
declared it the only product on the market to have proven anti-ageing effects. 
It caused a storm in the aisles of Boots with a year's supply of stock selling 
out in just two weeks. No7 built on this success in 2009 with the launch of
Protect & Perfect Intense Beauty Serum (£21 for 30ml, boots.com 
<http://www.boots.com/>). The University of Manchester carried out a year-long 
independent study of this one and its anti-ageing benefits, but probably more 
importantly my mum loves it and you can't argue with her (well, I definitely 
can't).

And what's new?
 An early advert for No7 
On 18 April, No7 will be launching a brand new clinically proven super-serum, 
which they expect to become another huge hit. It's calledLift & Luminate Day & 
Night Serum (£24.95, boots.com <http://www.boots.com/>, pictured above) and is 
aimed at the over-45s. Obviously, No7 have cottoned on to the impact scientific 
proof can have in persuading consumers how wonderful a product is, and this 
launch comes drenched in quotes from studies and scientists. But as cynical as 
we may be of percentages and statistics used in the beauty world, the results 
do show significant reductions in age spots after just eight weeks. And after 
all, this is Boots we're talking about, and we trust them, don't we?
 