
What's the story?

Possibly the most recognisable name in the shampoo aisle, Head & Shoulders has 
been celebrating its 50th anniversary this year. Launched in 1961 amidst the 
chignons and beehives of the day, Head & Shoulders has outlived many a 
hairstyle and remains the world's number one selling shampoo, shifting a 
gigantic 29 million units a year. It came about after Proctor & Gamble 
scientists spent ten years looking for the magic ingredient to solve the 
problem of dandruff. The answer - zinc pyrithione - is still the key component 
in their range of anti-dandruff shampoos and conditioners today.

I never knew you had dandruff.
 An original bottle of Head & Shoulders 
I don't. But over 50% of the population have some sort of scalp problem so 
it's no wonder Head & Shoulders sells as well as it does. Over the years, the 
brand has tried to disassociate it with the more medicinal shampoo it once may 
have been. Plenty of advertising campaigns have worked hard to remove the 
stigma attached to the shampoo being synonymous with having snowy shoulders. 
Efforts to make the brand cool may not have worked but as they make the world's 
best selling shampoo I doubt very much Proctor & Gamble care.

So is it any good?

I'd be inclined to say yes. I'm a newcomer to Head & Shoulders and will admit 
that my views were stuck in a time where I'm sure it would crop up in a 
playground insult. Daft as it may sound I was expecting it to smell a bit, 
well, medicinal, but it doesn't, and it gives a nice wash and clean feeling. I 
have cropped hair so can hardly go around making grand claims about hair care 
(unless it's hair wax, a field in which I consider myself a national expert) 
but I was impressed. What do you reckon?
 