
Remedies? Isn't this supposed to be about beauty?

Yes, and it is. Neal's Yard Remedies (NYR) may be more commonly known as 
suppliers of alternative medicines and therapies (and getting into a spot of 
botherback in 2009 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neal%27s_Yard_Remedies#Criticisms>) but they also 
do a fine line in organic beauty products. Celebrating their 30th anniversary 
this year, NYR was born when former teacher Romy Fraser opened a shop in the 
eponymous little square in London's Covent Garden back in 1981. In 2005, Fraser 
returned to teaching and sold NYR to Peter Kindersley, formerly of publishers 
Dorling Kindersley. The company emphasises a strong interest in sustainability 
and environmental issues, and now has 35 stores dotted around the UK. It's also 
big in Japan.

Organic, you say?

Very much so. NYR boasts a long list of strong green credentials. They were 
the first skincare company in the UK to be certified by the Soil Association; 
they use Fairtrade Foundation ingredients (and also grow a lot on their own 
farm at their 'ecofactory' in Dorset); they were the first high street retailer 
to be rewarded the CarbonNeutral mark and surely it goes without saying that 
they don't test on animals.

What's good?
 Neal's Yard Remedies Frankincense Nourishing Cream, £15.95 
By far and away their most successful product is the Frankincense Nourishing 
Cream (£15.95 from their online store <>), selling an impressive 12,000 per 
month worldwide. It regularly wins industry awards and rightly so. I tend to 
flit around moisturisers without any particular loyalty but this is one that I 
do return to. It's a simple and deeply hydrating cream with a delightfully 
subtle scent. Also on my like list from NYR is their geranium and orange range. 
A beautifully floral scent which lingers on the skin without being too 
overpowering. Makes a perfect hand wash to keep in the loo.
 