
What's the story?

Launched in 1996 by dapper LA brothers Dean and Davis Factor (who also happen 
to be great-grandsons of makeup legend Max), theSmashbox Cosmetics 
<http://www.smashbox.com/> line focuses on long-lasting products designed to 
give a flawless look befitting of Hollywood stars - Drew Barrymore and Charlize 
Theron are among the big-name fans.

Smashbox Cosmetics was part of a wider business empire for the Factor 
brothers, Smashbox Studios, which includes a modelling agency, a photo studio 
and a clothing line. The cosmetics arm of the business was sold to Estee Lauder 
in the summer of 2010, but the brothers remain at the helm.

They don't seem to be very big over here ...

Smashbox had something of a bumpy start to life in the UK. On the night of 
their launch in 1998, a Smashbox PR was allegedly drugged and raped by someone 
thought to be a friend of the Factors. No one was charged, however, in the 
ensuing furore, many beauty editors sidestepped Smashbox and gave it very 
little coverage. With the beauty industry turning its back on the brand, it 
struggled to make its mark.

Perhaps with Lauder acquiring Smashbox the industry will move on - the brand 
certainly seems to have got more coverage over the last year or so. Our own 
beauty columnist Sali Hughes, for one, is a big fan of the primers,mentioning 
two from the range in a recent column on the subject 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/nov/04/primers-sali-hughes-beauty>.

So what's good?
 Smashbox O-Glow cheek colour 
Aside from the primers, of which there is a massive choice suiting pretty much 
every skin type, the O-Glow (£25.50,Guardian Fashion Store 
<http://www.guardianfashionstore.co.uk/product_detail.php?prodID=73139863&pID=3301&sc=Products%20-%20blushers%20and%20bronzers&supercat=Health%20and%20Beauty>
) is a nifty little number. It's a cheek tint that actually reacts with your 
skin to turn it a naturally blushed colour. The gel is clear on application but 
gradually develops a soft, natural shade.

The same kind of wizardry is also used in the O-Gloss for lips (£30 for a glow 
and gloss set,Guardian Fashion Store 
<http://www.guardianfashionstore.co.uk/product_detail.php?prodID=55404643&pID=3686&sc=Products%20-%20gift%20sets&supercat=Health%20and%20Beauty>
). Rather clever really.
 