
What's the story?

What is Lynx to us is Axe to the French, where it began life in 1983. Two 
years later the brand that was to become the smell of teenage boys' changing 
rooms arrived in the UK. In the twenty-five or so years since, Lynx has 
expanded to include new scents and shower gels and is now the UK's number one 
male grooming brand. You thought it was just adolescent boys using the stuff to 
mark their territory? Think again. More than 8 million men in the UK use Lynx 
every day, and almost half of all shower gel sold in this country is a Lynx 
shower gel. Lynx sells itself on the dubious idea that it makes its wearer 
immediately irresistible to women and every marketing campaign for as long as I 
can remember has used pretty girls falling helplessly at the feet of a slightly 
skinny, geeky young man. They call it the Lynx Effect, we might call it a bit 
sad, but something must have struck a chord with a rather startling amount of 
British men.

Ah, the sweet smell of masculinity…

Everyone seems to have a personal history when it comes to Lynx. The olfactory 
memory works in a funny ways and I find it amazing how a quick sniff of a scent 
can transport you right back to a certain time of your life. A smell of Lynx 
Africa and I'm in a classoom circa 1996 where a mischevious young chap is 
enthusiastically spraying the stuff whilst holding a strategically placed 
lighter. Ah, the memories.

So what's new?
 Lynx Attract for women (£3.25, available nationwide) 
What's new is that Lynx have just launched a body spray for women. It's called 
Attract (£3.25, available nationwide) and accompanies a men's fragrance of the 
same name. If the adverts are to be believed, it'll be causing chaos across the 
country as beautiful young things stop what they're doing so they can all have 
a bit of a snog. A little blind sniff test with friends resulted in an 
approximate 70% thumbs up but the general consensus is that it's probably one 
for the teens. It actually reminds me of thatExclamation perfume 
<http://youtu.be/jwISIwBvCyc>. Remember that? Now that brings back all sorts of 
memories...
 