
What's the story?

A graduate of the Carita Make-up School in Paris (see also Laura Mercier 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/fashion-blog/2011/oct/10/brief-history-laura-mercier>
), dapper Frenchman François Nars is another in the line of frustrated makeup 
artists turned cosmetics giants. Having spent much of his youth preferring 
French Vogue to comics, Nars became enchanted by the fashion, models and design 
of its pages. He pursued a career in makeup artistry and hit the big time. 
Moving to New York in 1984 after encouragement from industry heavyweights, he 
went on to work with huge publications and fashion designers. Like others 
before him, Nars wasn't satisfied with the tools of his trade so, in 1994 he 
launched a collection of 12 lipsticks in Barneys, New York. Demand for these 
soon led Nars to create his full eponymous line, NARS. In 2000 Shiseido 
Cosmetics acquired NARS and used their skincare know-how to launch NARSskin in 
2002.

What's special about this guy then?
 The NARS Mandchourie (top) and Outremer (bottom) eyeshadows 
It's the usual stuff really: "Makeup is not a mask"; "The woman must shine 
through"; "Skin is 50% of the makeup' etc etc. But the NARS core collection is 
a pretty fantastic, fully comprehensive range covering all bases. There's the 
whole spectrum of neutral shades but then also the occasional shot of daring 
colour, such as the electric blue Outnemer single eyeshadow (£16.50,
narscosmetics.co.uk <http://www.narscosmetics.co.uk/>) from their autumn 
collection. A favourite of mine is the new Mandchourie eye shadow duo (£23.50, 
as before). The charcoal grey and dark denim blue make the perfect combo to 
create a smoky eye.

Any particular highlights?

In a way, the highlighters are the highlights. The Orgasm Blush (£20.50, as 
before) launched in 1999 as a suit-all blush-highlighter hybrid and has since 
become something of a cult-classic. Since the first Orgasm there have been 
plenty more (no sniggering, please). The range now consists of nine products 
including a lipgloss, a nail colour, and in the NARS trademark, a Multiple 
stick. Yes, NARS really can give you a Multiple Orgasm.

How's about a bizarre fact to finish on?

Did you know that the annual bulk weight of Orgasm sold is equivalent to that 
of a Lamborghini? Amazing.
 