
What's the story?

Founded in 1976 by the late British environmental and human rights campaigner 
Dame Anita Roddick <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/anita-roddick>, The Body 
Shop started life as a small outfit in Brighton selling just 25 products. 
Customers were encouraged to recycle packaging (partly because Roddick didn't 
have enough bottles at first) and there was a real emphasis on natural 
ingredients that were ethically sourced and cruelty-free. Now the range 
consists of over 300 products and there are more than 2500 stores worldwide.

That all sounds very wholesome.

Well yes and no. The Body Shop boasts of being one the first cosmetics brands 
to prohibit testing on animals, and also the first company to introduce Fair 
Trade to the beauty industry, which is all very well. But in 2006, Roddick 
rather controversially sold The Body Shop to cosmetics giant L'Oréal for the 
princely sum of £652m. The same L'Oréal that is part-owned by Nestlé and the 
same L'Oréal that continues to test new ingredients on animals (it is, 
regrettably, still required by law in some countries). Further to this, Roddick 
had never been your stereotypical beauty entrepreneur. She had strong opinions 
on the world she was part of, once famously saying that she hated the beauty 
industry, calling it "a monster selling unattainable dreams". When questioned 
about the seemingly hypocritical decision to sell to L'Oréal, Roddick reasoned 
that The Body Shop would act like a "Trojan horse" that could influence the 
huge business from the inside. Unfortunately, Roddick died in 2007, so what 
influence she may have had we will never know.

So do we like or dislike The Body Shop?
 A selection of body butters from The Body Shop 
I'd wager that The Body Shop still raises a feeling of nostalgia amongst many 
women of a certain age. For me, being a teenager in Hull in the mid-90s, 
visiting The Body Shop was a standard part of most Saturday afternoons (not 
sure if this says more about me or Hull...). Mine was a generation defined by 
whether they were a Dewberry or a White Musk girl (I was the former). But how 
many of us go there now? The body butters (£12.50 each,thebodyshop.co.uk <>) 
are nicely scented and good at their job and I do keep a pot of the Mango lip 
butter (£4, as before) on my desk but I think this is more to transport me back 
15 years than anything else.
 