
What's the story?

This is the tale of a real family business: five generations of Guerlains 
<http://www.guerlain.com/int/en/base.html#/en/home-en/> have led the company 
over the years. The brand dates back to 1828, when it started life as a small 
perfume business in Paris under Pierre-François Pascal Guerlain. Guerlain was a 
master perfumer, creating fragrances for the rich and famous - Napoléon III and 
Queen Victoria to name but two.

Pierre-François Pascal passed his skills on to his son Aimé, who in turn 
taught his nephew Jacques (the latter being responsible for Guerlain's 
signature Shalimar scent). Years later, Jacques handed down the family secrets 
to his grandson Jean-Paul, which is where the buck stopped. In 1994, Jean-Paul 
sold the company to the multinational LMVH.

In the 184 years since its inception, Guerlain has created more than 325 
different fragrances and still holds its own in the luxury perfume market.

So it's just perfume?

Au contraire! Pierre-François Pascal Guerlain created all sorts of lotions and 
potions, including a lip balm (Baume de la Ferté) that is still available 
today. Their makeup range has a five-star feel to it - lots of gold, 
reassuringly weighty and sleekly designed palettes, bottles and bullets (I may 
have mentioned previously that I'm a sucker for a bit of shiny packaging). I 
particularly like theRouge G lipsticks (£29.50, available from the Guardian 
Fashion Store 
<http://www.guardianfashionstore.co.uk/search.php?keywords=guerlain+rouge+g+de+guerlain&Submit=Search>
) as the bullet actually has its own flip-out mirror. How very clever!

What else?
 The new Terracotta Light Sheer Bronzing Powder from Guerlain Photograph: 
Fabien SARAZIN 
Probably most well-known (and bestselling) of the Guerlain makeup is their 
Terracotta range - a collection of summery bits and bobs with new launches 
every year. This year's offering is called Sun In The City and includes two new 
shades of the existingTerracotta Light sheer bronzing powder (£33.50, 
debenhams.com <http://www.debenhams.com/>), made with darker skin in mind. It's 
a splendid all-rounder with a super-light texture and pinky or coral hues, 
meaning it can be used either as a blush on cheeks or a full-on bronzer for the 
parts of your face that the sun naturally hits. Also, it's scented which is 
rather nice.

If that's a bit out of your price range then try NYC Color Wheel Face Mosaic 
in Rose Glow (£3.99, superdrug.com <http://www.superdrug.com/>). Not quite as 
light, and not perfumed, but a tenth of the price and you can't argue with that.
 