
Isn't that a place in France?

That would be Saint-Tropez, a little town on the south coast of France where 
rich and beautiful jet-setters hang out. I'm referring to St Tropez, the range 
of tanning products with the intention to make us look like we're rich and 
beautiful jet-setters when really we've been standing in the bathroom, wearing 
our old pants, worrying about whether our knees and elbows are going to give 
the game away.

So what's the story?

Starting life in sun-kissed California in 1993, St Tropez was launched in the 
UK three years later and soon became the market leader in the world of self-tan 
with a whopping 40% of the market share. For years, self-tan had a less than 
desirable image. There was an all or nothing approach, which often resulted in 
a strange orange colour complete with dodgy patches and a peculiar smell. But 
the science behind these products has come on leaps and bounds and a safe 
subtle tan or glow is now both fashionable and attainable.

What if I don't want a tan?
 St Tropez Self Tan Dark Bronzing Mousse, £33 from st-tropez.com <>. 
Photograph: Martin Eidemak 
In that case, self-tan products may not be for you and you can carry on as you 
were. Those of us who are apprehensive of revealing our legs after their winter 
hibernation appreciate a little help to take the edge off. But fake tanning 
doesn't just have to be for those with luminous white legs. It can be used to 
even out any skin tone and give a hint of holiday to legs of any colour. Last 
month, St Tropez launchedSelf Tan Dark (from £26, st-tropez.com <>), which 
contains special sciency things that reacts to your own skin tone, whatever it 
may be. Use it in moderation in a way that suits your skin. When the time 
comes, I like to use a littleGradual Tan Everyday Body (£14.30 for 200ml, as 
before) mixed in with my normal body moisturiser. It just gives me a subtle 
glow but without in any way looking like you've hit the fake tan.

• For a cheaper gradual tanning lotion, you could do a lot worse than 
Johnson's Holiday Skin (£5.10 for 250ml, boots.com <>). Use it on its own or 
mixed with your own body moisturiser for a lighter look.
 