
This name has cropped up before.

Correct! It would be tricky to write these brief histories each week without 
including Mrs Lauder in there somewhere. She is the eponymous leader of the 
pack, the captain of the mothership. But of course, it wasn't always like that. 
Everyone had to start somewhere.

Go on then. Give us the history bit...

Josephine Esther Mentzer was born at the beginning of the 20th century in New 
York City. The name Estée came from a variant spelling of her nickname, Esty, 
and Lauder from Joseph Lauder whom she married in 1930 and later went into 
business with. Estée Lauder the brand was launched in 1946 with just four 
skincare products that were sold round the local salons and hotels. Just two 
years later, she secured her first counter at Saks Fifth Avenue department 
store in New York. Estée Lauder the brand grew and grew, as did the business, 
Estée Lauder Companies, now a huge empire of beauty, owning 25 major brands and 
reaching 150 countries. Big names coming under the Estée Lauder Co. wing include
Bobbi Brown 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/fashion-blog/2011/sep/28/a-brief-history-of-bobbi-brown>
,MAC 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/fashion-blog/2011/oct/24/brief-history-of-mac>
, Jo Malone,Clinique 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/fashion-blog/2011/oct/31/brief-history-of-clinique>
, Creme de la Mer, Tom Ford andOrigins 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/fashion-blog/2011/oct/04/a-brief-history-of-origins>
. Mrs Estée Lauder passed away in 2004 at the handsome age of 97 and the 
company still very much has the Lauder blood running through it: her son, 
Leonard, took over at the helm, grandson William is the executive chairman and 
two granddaughters also hold senior positions.

So what's good?
 Three of the Pure Color Five Color eye palettes 
It's difficult to know where to start as they have such a mammoth range of 
products. Of recent launches, I've enjoyed the Pure Color Five Color eyeshadow 
palettes created by creative director Tom Pecheaux (£35,esteelauder.co.uk 
<http://www.esteelauder.co.uk>). They may seem a little on the pricey side but 
that's £7 each for colours that can be worn on their own or combined in 
numerous differnt ways (I like to think if I calculated a cost-per-look in a 
similar vein to the cost-per-wear idea for clothes then this would actually 
work out to be rather reasonable). And I can't write a little post about Estée 
Lauder without mentioning their most recent fragrance, Sensuous Nude (£34 for 
30ml,Guardian Fashion Store 
<http://www.guardianfashionstore.co.uk/search.php?keywords=estee+lauder+sensuous+nude&Submit=Search>
) which has fast become my daily perfume. It's musky but in a very pretty and 
subtle way and if I had a pound for every time I got that "Oooh, you smell 
nice" comment then I could afford another bottle in a matter of weeks.
 