
What's the story?

Jurlique started life in 1985 out of a farm in southern Australia. The 
brainchild of bio-chemist Dr Jurgen Klein and his wife Ulrike, it was 
originally created as a niche natural skincare range. Dr Klein had worked in 
his native Germany in herbalism, aromatherapy, nutrition and skincare, spending 
four years as a researcher and developer for popular natural cosmetics brand Dr 
Hauschka. In 1984, he and his family move to south Australia, chosen for its 
climate, and a year later Jurlique was launched. It is is now Australia's 
leading skincare brand.

So the air miles aren't great for us Brits then?

Well, no, not exactly, but Jurlique does try its best to be environmentally 
friendly. It grows a bunch of the herbs and flowers used in its products on its 
own 153-acre farm (which, for those of you who like to think of areas in 
relation to the size of Wales, that's 1/33,556ths) and sources others from 
around Australia. The target is for all products to be made up of 95% natural 
ingredients.

What's good then?

Jurlique's bestseller is the Herbal Recovery Gel (£45, jurlique.co.uk 
<http://www.jurlique.co.uk/>). Launched in 1994, it's packed with antioxidants 
to help hydrate and revitalise the skin. A kind of multitasking rescue product, 
if you will.

Any other news?
 Herbal Recovery Gel, £45, jurlique.co.uk 
Jurlique has just launched a treatment menu at the fancy agua Spa at Sanderson 
in London. I bimbled down there recently for a herbal revitalise facial (£75 
for 60 minutes)sandersonlondon.com 
<http://www.sandersonlondon.com/en-us/#/explore/?id=/sanderson-london-agua-spa/>
 and can report back that it was delightful. The scents were gorgeous – 
lavender, rose – and the whole treatment was delivered while I was lying on a 
hyrdothermal mat (like a giant hot water bottle). And at the risk of sounding 
as if I've made this up, the day after the treatment a friend actually 
commented on the "glowing" appearance of my skin. I kid you not. It's certainly 
a one-off treat but there's nothing quite like the confidence you get from 
someone telling you your face looks nice.
 