
Pakistan's <https://www.theguardian.com/pakistan/0,,180809,00.html> current 
political crisis is linked to many recent world events and domestic sticking 
points: high up on the list are thewar in Afghanistan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_war_in_Afghanistan> in the 1980s, the 
so-called war on terror today and the pressures of an entrenched military 
regime. Some would say it's a copout to blame history for Pakistan's woes. But 
on the other hand it's worth remembering the legacies of the end of theBritish 
Raj <http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/modern/independence1947_01.shtml> for 
Pakistan in 1947 and the extremely problematic situation that the new nation 
faced from the moment of its inception. In some ways, Pakistan has never 
resolved problems inherent in the moment of its foundation.

After independence 
<http://century.theguardian.com/1940-1949/Story/0,,127969,00.html>, Pakistan 
was comprised of two wings, East and West Pakistan, over a thousand miles 
apart, and the country included a conglomeration of differentMuslim 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/islam/ataglance/glance.shtml> peoples 
- speaking languages including Punjabi, Sindhi and Urdu - with little gluing 
them together apart from their "Muslimness" (and even what this meant was 
contested from day one). Partition caused epic violence and dislocation which 
meant that perhaps one in five people inWest Pakistan 
<http://www.storyofpakistan.com/articletext.asp?artid=A137> was a refugee at 
the time that the new state came into existence. Many more had lost loved ones, 
succumbed to injury or suffered loss of property or business during the rioting.

Mix in a massive economic deficit, a weak party political base (Jinnah's 
Muslim League <http://www.pakistanmuslimleague.info/history.php> had only 
really found a footing among the population a couple of years before 
independence), ridiculously long and complex borders and a rotten industrial 
and monetary infrastructure (Pakistan didn't even have its own currency until 
almost a year after independence) and the problems that the country faced seem 
alarming.

There were added troubles: no one had thought through how the old princely 
states were going to fit into the new political matrix.Kashmir 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/world/kashmir/front.html> is the most 
obvious legacy of this but there were difficulties absorbing others such asKalat
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kalat_(princely_state)> which still leave a 
political scar today: many Baluchi-speaking people of this former princely 
state clamour for their independence and have never had much truck with the 
sovereignty of the Pakistani state.

It's also worth considering the way in which Pakistan came into being at a 
time when nation states were only just beginning to win independence from 
empire: many people still believed in the idea ofCommonwealth citizenship 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commonwealth_citizen> in 1947 and for others the 
belief was that India and Pakistan would maintain a joint military command with 
links to the British army. The firstwar 
<http://www.onwar.com/aced/data/kilo/kashmir1947.htm> between the two 
neighbours over Kashmir shortly after independence came as a shock to everyone 
involved.

I'm not excusing it, but it seems little wonder to me that the reaction over 
the past 60 years has been one of extreme nationalism from many Pakistanis and 
an attempt to promote the nation state at every turn. Alternatively, some have 
looked to religion to provide a uniformity of purpose. It has been a 
straightforward reaction of post-colonial peoples to deeply felt fears of 
national disintegration - which have not, as yet, come about.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 