
Q I own a ground floor flat which has another flat above. Recently there was 
an overflow in the bathroom in the upstairs flat that caused damage to my 
property. This is the second time it has happened. The first time the landlord 
of the upstairs flat sent his agent round to assess the damage and organise 
repairs. This time he says it is nothing to do with his flat and will not even 
come round to assess the damage. I am an owner-occupier and we have the 
freehold between us. Please advise.
AA

A The landlord upstairs owes you a duty of care to take reasonable steps to 
prevent damage being caused to your flat. If you want to get the landlord to 
carry out the repairs caused by the overflow at his expense you would have to 
take him to court on the basis of his negligence. You would then have to prove 
he was aware of the problems and the likely damage to your property and did 
nothing about it.

But there is no point in seeking a remedy through the courts in an instance 
like an overflow of water. This is better dealt with by an insurance claim on 
your house contents policy. Even though the overflow came from upstairs, your 
own insurance should pay under the escape of water section.

Your insurer would either then subrogate on the landlord's insurer to get 
their money back, because he caused the damage, or, provided he was actually 
liable at law, if he has liability insurance then that would pay. Obviously, 
you cannot claim on the landlord's policy, but you can ask him to pass the 
matter to his insurers, though from what you say it seems unlikely he will 
cooperate.
 