
So now I know. To one stranger in Adelaide, I'm tired and under pressure, a 
bit nervous and not someone who lets in other people easily. So far, pretty 
spot on. But the same stranger, who's watched me closely, even though I only 
know her through her disembodied voice, is way off-beam in other respects. My 
name is not Dave, and nor am I – contrary to her assertion – a hitman.

A Game of You is the third of three experimental theatre pieces brought to the 
Adelaide festival by Belgian company Ontroerend Goed. I didn't catch The Smile 
Off Your Face, but my colleague Claire Armistead wasimpressed by the intimacy 
of the experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/mar/04/smile-off-your-face-ontroerend-goed-review>
; nor Internal, which I've been told is more akin to a group therapy session, 
even if it is for over-18s only and contains nudity. Such a lack of critical 
perspective might be a problem, but actually, I think, it's probably best to 
come to a show like this armed with as little information and as few 
preconceptions as possible.

Even then – and at this point you should stop reading if you're in Adelaide 
and hope to grab a ticket before the festival closes – I was sufficiently 
familiar with theatre of this ilk to figure immediately that the huge mirror 
confronting me in the cramped space into which I was first taken was a two-way 
number. Knowledgeable enough or just generally paranoid enough? The stranger 
that followed me didn't figure that bit out.

From there, you're led through a succession of rooms and interrogated about 
your own life and your own appearance before the tables are switched, at which 
point it becomes your turn to pass judgment on the next punter along. AsLyn 
Gardner has written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/jul/18/a-game-of-you-review> of a 
production of the show in London, "this is a game in which the rules are bent 
and that only become apparent as you play".

I hope I wasn't too rude about the person whose encounters with the 
actors-cum-cod psychologists I got to watch. The idea, I suppose, is that 
you're really holding up a mirror to yourself throughout the process, and now I 
know I'm neither a natural voyeur nor someone who'd take great pleasure in 
being mean about someone they've never met and likely never will. I like to 
think those aren't huge revelations, and I suspect that this piece ismuch 
gentler than the other two Ontroerend Goed shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/11/ontroerend-goed-adelaide-festival>
; but no doubt some members of the audience who've entrusted themselves to the 
experience have come out with a different impression of themselves.

On the other hand, I did take away a sense of how others see me that radically 
conflicts with my own self-image. Perhaps I ought to keep the details fuzzy, 
but everyone who plays A Game of You is given something by which to remember 
what they're been through, and so I heard what that other stranger thought of 
me. "And do you think he'ssexy?" she was asked. "No!" came the most emphatic of 
answers.

• A Game of You <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/theatre/a_game_of_you>
 runs until 17 March
 