
Arvo Pärt <http://www.arvopart.ee/> is one of those composers you might think 
you know: a reclusive, extravagantlybearded Estonian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2011/jan/06/arvo-part-interview>
 who's ensconced in a world of so-called "holy minimalism" – a reverie of 
simplicity that luxuriates in the pure sounds of "tintinnabulatory" tonality, 
which sounds a corrective (for some) and sentimental (for others) note of 
archaism in a world of chaotic modernity. (Don't worry; I'll come back to the 
whole "tintinnabulation" thing.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFukUz9z9HkY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFukUz9z9HkY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFukUz9z9HkY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view 
<http://www.youtube.com/embed/FukUz9z9HkY>

The problem with Pärt is that his music has become, in a sense, a victim of 
its own success. It's no wonder that music likeFratres 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FukUz9z9HkY> or Spiegel im Spiegel 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TJ6Mzvh3XCc> or Tabula Rasa 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X29DteDUwYE>, are so beloved of documentary 
makers and film producers for moments of heightened emotion: the sudden 
atmosphere of stillness and meditation that Pärt's music instantly communicates 
is one of its most appealing qualities. But there's more to the man and his 
work than that immediate sensory reaction. In fact, the style and technique of 
Pärt's music – at least, his most familiar music, the pieces he's composed 
since the late 1970s, which the turning point of his musical language – has a 
surprising pre-history.

Growing up in communist Estonia, Pärt found himself at odds with the regime on 
pretty well every aesthetic and spiritual level. He wrote Estonia's first ever 
serial piece,Nekrolog <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LqeOyvJP_ZY>, in 1960, 
whose dissonance and expressionist intensity that will shock you if you know 
Pärt only from his later music! At that time, he experimented with collage, 
with neo-classicism, and with aggressive dissonance, in ways that were bound to 
alienate him from the Soviet authorities but which began to bring him respect 
in the west. Pärt's modernist credentials were cemented in hisFirst 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rQ460yRnBKo> and Second 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lwCNIcrQx8s> symphonies, but a crisis came in 
1968 with hisCredo <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yYWpfNi9h4c>, a work in 
which at least three worlds collide. Credo was an attempt to symbolise his 
frustration with what had become, for him, the dry, desiccated, "children's 
games" of the avant garde, a world of purity represented by tonality and a 
quotation from Bach, and a setting of a religious text. The piece only avoided 
censure by the communists because its conductor, Neeme Järvi, didn't show the 
score to the Estonian composers' union before its premiere. And at its first 
performance, the piece was a lightning rod for protest against the regime, both 
because of its musical extremity and its religious conviction.

But what happened next was something that the censors, and Pärt himself, could 
hardly have predicted. He went into a self-imposed creative exile for the next 
eight years, trying to find a way to resolve the creative conflict that he had 
opened up in Credo. HisThird Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wojU_ExRFFo>, from 1971, is the only piece that 
dates from this transitional period, an attempt to fuse elements of the 
traditions Pärt was drawn to: Gregorian chant, harmonic simplicity, and the 
spiritual explorations into his Russian Orthodox faith he undertook at the same 
time.

In 1976 he succeded in his quest, and the result sounds as if it had existed 
all along, music of the "little bells", the so-called "tintinnabuli", which you 
hear for the first time in this two-and-a-half minute piano miniature,Für Alina 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88zxugR_0w0&feature=results_video&playnext=1&list=PLED8193CA609EBBDD>
. This little piece is the seed from which the rest of Pärt's musical life has 
grown: in the space of just a couple of years, Pärt composed the pieces that 
are still among his most popular today, including Fratres, the concerto for two 
violins, Tabula Rasa,Summa <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PzSlmWQuHFw>, and the
Cantus in Memoriam Benjamin Britten <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YUcazplAc58>
.

And here's where it's easy to be fooled by preconceptions about Pärt's work. 
To dismiss it as cliched and sentimental holy minimalism is simply wrong. The 
power of the "tintinnabulation" he discovered comes from its combination of 
ascetic rigour and the apparent simplicity of its materials. And there are 
mysteries here. Pärt designed strict rules to control how the harmonic voices 
move with the melodic lines in his music, diktats which are as strict as 
serialism; ironically, given his rejection of his previous avant garde 
obsessions, the success of his new musical language is dependent on precisely 
the objectivity of thinking that serial composition demands. That austerity of 
process makes Pärt's tintinnabulation a new use of tonality, even a new kind of 
tonality, and it explains why his music sounds simultaneously ancient and 
modern, and why it embodies a genuine expressivity rather than a rehearsal of 
second-hand conventions.

The success of Pärt's work – the repertory of choral works 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ogkFEb7rnWk> he has composed over the last four 
decades, the instrumental works, even the new symphony he composed in 2008 – 
is, I think, much more than simple popular acclaim for a composer who uses some 
familiar chords. Pärt told me that what he wants his music to express is "love 
for every note", and in turn, communicate the spiritual power that he sees as 
music's essential purpose. Pärt is too modest to say that he has achieved that, 
but for the listeners who love his music, it's an irrefutable truth.

Five key links 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2pDjT1UNT3s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2pDjT1UNT3s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2pDjT1UNT3s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view 
<http://www.youtube.com/embed/2pDjT1UNT3s>

Arvo Pärt interviewed by Björk <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2pDjT1UNT3s>

Fratres <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7vdgZAJVnes>

Für Alina <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88zxugR_0w0>

Berliner Messe <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JHzlXIVfa8E>

Symphony No 3 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wojU_ExRFFo>
 