
21 The crossbar at Free State Stadium


"Nobody can tell me Germany were a lot better than us," moaned a deluded Frank 
Lampard after England's humiliating World Cup exit, so we must point our Big 
Finger of Blame at the woodwork. Specifically, the crossbar that denied Lamps 
when England were only 2-1 down.

22 A curry in Southall


Zulqarnain Haider, the Pakistan wicketkeeper, fled Dubai in November before 
Pakistan's fourth and fifth ODIs against South Africa and ended up in London, 
claiming asylum and threats by match-fixers. He chose Chaudhry's TKC restaurant 
on Southall's Broadway for a chaotic press conference to explain his actions 
before the bhajis.

23 Diego Maradona's lavatory


Before arriving for the World Cup in South Africa, Diego Maradona's advance 
reconnaissance scouts found the lavatories provided for the Argentina manager 
in his Pretoria hotel to be substandard. They were replaced with deluxe 
versions featuring a heated seat, a warm air blow-dryer and front and rear 
bidet wands at a cost of £1,400.

24 Drew Brees's Super Bowl ring


For years, the New Orleans Saints had been a running joke in the NFL, and a 
pretty unfunny one for their fans. But this year under the guidance of their 
gunslinging quarterback, Drew Brees, they beat Indianapolis Colts at the Super 
Bowl. It was a victory for perennial underdogs and, more importantly, a city 
that has suffered terribly in recent years.

25 Dustin Johnson's club


Johnson took a one-shot lead on to the 18th tee of the final round of the 
USPGA Championship at Whistling Straits but bogeyed the hole and was set for a 
three-man play‑off. Eagle-eyed officials, however, had other plans, penalising 
him two strokes for grounding his club in a bunker that had about as much sand 
in it as a six-inch square of glasspaper. Johnson had not realised he was in a 
sand trap but his descent to fifth meant he would not risk grounding his club 
within a mile of a cat litter box in future.

26 Dutch fans' orange dresses


Looking this foxy shouldn't be a crime, unless Fifa are in town and you've 
been arrested and incarcerated for the heinous crime of wearing an orange 
mini-dress deemed to be – shock, horror – advertising a non-designated 
Fifa-unfriendly lager. These Dutch models had their knockers, Sepp Blatter, 
unsurprisingly, chief among them.

27 Fabio Capello's cap


The "Wally with the Brolly" headlines put paid to covering one's thatch in the 
manner of Steve McClaren. For England's defeat by France in November, Fabio 
Capello opted for an England baseball cap to keep his specs dry and woke to 
"Prat in a Hat" derision instead.

28 A Father's Day card


When Graeme McDowell teed off at this year's US Open the last time a player 
from the UK had won a major was a distant memory. A few days later he had given 
his dad, Kenny, the ideal father's day gift: victory at Pebble Beach. It beats 
a Top Gear DVD anyway.

29 Felipe Massa's car radio


"Fernando is faster than you." Those words, uttered in Teesside tones by his 
engineer Rob Smedley, must make Massa sit bolt upright in bed in a cold sweat. 
In the old days you could "not see" a pit board but now the message comes 
straight to your earphones. Massa can twiddle all the knobs he likes but he 
won't find one on his Ferrari that drowns out Smedley in favour of Smooth FM.

30 A fire extinguisher


When the Cosworth engine in Heikki Kovalainen's Lotus let go three laps from 
the end of the Singapore grand prix flames soon enveloped the rear of the car. 
Despite the temptation to abandon ship asap he stopped at a safe place on the 
start-finish straight where a Williams mechanic could pass him a fire 
extinguisher. Kovalainen doused the flames himself and created one of the most 
iconic images of F1 2010.

31 Gary Neville's socks


In one of his tedious demands for "respect", Carlos Tevez branded Neville a 
"sock-sucker" and "a moron" after the Manchester United substitute had flipped 
his former team-mate the bird during a derby. Carlos Tevez is 26. Gary Neville 
is 35.

32 Gérard Houllier's FFF contract 


When is an Aston Villa manager not an Aston Villa manager? When he's still 
working for the French Football Federation apparently. "Unfortunately I won't 
be at the Stoke game because I'm employed by the French FA," Houllier announced 
on his unveiling in September, perhaps the least convincing leap into a new 
managerial era in Premier League history.

33 The Georgian flag


Nodar Kumaritashvili, a 21-year‑old luger from Georgia, was killed in practice 
hours before the Winter Olympics was due to start. The remaining seven members 
of the Georgian Olympic delegation marched into BC Place Stadium in Vancouver 
later that day for the opening ceremony, behind a flag draped with a black 
ribbon, and spectators, officials and competitors stood as one and applauded.

34 The goalpost in Guangzhou


Fifa's decision to stage the 2022 World Cup in Qatar was the source of much 
global mirth, but not as much as that prompted by the Qatari teenager Khalfan 
Fahad's decision to hit this upright from a yard out with the goal gaping in an 
Asian Games quarter-final. Never mind, at least he isn't gay or drunk in public.

35 A golf buggy


The morning after Wales had beaten Scotland in the Six Nations, Andy Powell 
failed a breath test at 6.30am at Cardiff West service station on the M4 having 
had the bright idea of taking a team hotel golf buggy up the motorway in 
pursuit of a hot breakfast. The player, nicknamed "Brain Dead", was dropped, 
fined and banned from driving.

36 A Jabulani


The official match ball for South Africa 2010, the Jabulani was subjected to 
almost universal criticism from those forced to play with it, the surprise 
exceptions being footballers on lucrative sponsorship deals with its 
manufacturer.

37 Jessica Ennis's javelin


The reigning heptathlon world champion was under pressure at the European 
Championships and needed a good performance in one of her weaker events. She 
produced 46.71m, a personal best and went on to secure gold. A fantastic throw 
and around 6m further than Kelly Sotherton's PB.

38 Joe Worsley's piano


Worsley endured a poor start to the Premiership season. More striking was the 
Wasps forward's excuse. "It's been heartbreaking having my piano in storage. It 
helps me perform better ... I know people will say, 'Oh cry me a river', but 
it's true." Sounds like he's taking requests.

39 John Henry's cigar


Liverpool were transformed this year when hated co-owners Tom Hicks and George 
Gillett were ousted by their own illiquidity, the Royal Bank of Scotland and 
the notorious cigar-wielding trading supremo John W Henry. The Boston Red Sox 
owner's giant WC Fields stogie became an icon as the club's saviour wandered 
the Anfield corridors, tickling Jamie Carragher under the chin and calling him 
"my chickadee".

40 Kevin Davies's toaster


Feeling peckish at home but repeatedly incinerating his Pop Tarts, the Bolton 
skipper made national headlines by proving too much of a Luddite to be able to 
use his toaster, but technically savvy enough to upload a photo of it on 
Twitter seeking advice. "How do you reduce the heat?" he pleaded. You don't, 
Kevin. You reduce the time.

Tomorrow: No41-60
 