
41 A kitchen bin


Two days before he was due to fly out for the Ashes, Graeme Swann troubled his 
78,000-strong Twitter family with an alarming question. "Are passports still 
absolutely required to travel overseas," he tweeted. "If so then I fear today 
may be one of frantic searching." A Home Office official contacted the England 
and Wales Cricket Board offering to rush through a replacement but epic 
queue‑jumping was not required as Swannyg66 confirmed five hours later. "My 
passport turned up in my 'safe' place, down the back of my kitchen bin," Swann 
wrote. At least it wasn't with his cat under the floorboards.

42 LeBron James's contract


In the NBA he is known simply as "King James". When he became a free agent 
this year his team, the Cleveland Cavaliers, wanted to re‑sign him, but in an 
understated move James announced his new team in a one-hour live television 
show called The Decision. He now plays for the Miami Heat and is widely reviled 
in Cleveland.

43 Lindsey Vonn's skis


Vonn emerged as the photogenic face of the Winter Olympics after winning gold 
in the downhill, the first American woman to do so. She then went on to win a 
bronze in the super‑G, fighting off bruised shins to become a star of the Games.

44 Liz Hurley's coat


The most unlikely Anglo-Aussie sporting/actress crossover since Matt 
Le Tissier got engaged to Marilyn from Home and Away. The first signs came when 
Shane Warne and Hurley were seen in a steamy clinch while they waited for their 
coats outside a restaurant. The Perth Test aside, the most surprising Aussie 
conquest of the Ashes winter.

45 A loo in Delhi


The build‑up to the Commonwealth Games was marred by the collapse of a 
footbridge, but it was a picture of a dirty toilet in the athletes' village 
that really caught the imagination. The Games passed without major incident 
beyond the standard outbreak of Delhi belly. Opportunity, at least, to inspect 
the facilities even further.

46 Louis Oosthuizen's glove


After winning The Open, Oosthuizen gave away the secret of his success. The 
South African seemed transfixed by his glove. In fact he was gazing at a red 
dot, put there by his "mind factor coach", Karl Morris. "The red dot," said 
Morris, "became his trigger point to go into a deep zen‑like, almost hypnotic 
state." And everyone else thought he had suffered a ketchup accident at 
breakfast.

47 Luis Suárez's teeth


Having become a household name for preventing a Ghana goal with a fisted 
goalline clearance, the Uruguay and Ajax striker needed something special for 
his encore. He delivered in November, biting Otman Bakkal in a Dutch Eredivisie 
match. "No, I do not regret what happened," he declared, citing fatigue rather 
than hunger ...

48 Mark Lewis-Francis's starting blocks


With the look of a man with a preference for the odd kebab or nine, 
Lewis-Francis appears to enjoy imposing his own handicaps. He was at it again 
at the Commonwealth Games, failing to set his starting blocks properly so they 
slipped as he drove off. He still won silver.

49 Mark Webber's front wing


"Not bad for a No2 driver," said the Red Bull driver defiantly after winning 
the British grand prix. The day before his car's front wing had been given to 
his team-mate Sebastian Vettel, whose own had fallen off in qualifying. The 
Australian seethed at the implication of the switch, though by the end of the 
season his words sounded pretty prophetic. Vettel was world champion.

50 A Melbourne traffic offence notice


The traffic cops got two English celebrity scalps in Melbourne, booking Lewis 
Hamilton for an illegal burnout in his Mercedes AMG C63 and bagging Kevin 
Pietersen for speeding in Shane Warne's yellow Lamborghini. Hamilton stumped up 
a £288 fine, and the England batsman paid £149.

51 A microphone


"One-two ... one-two." A description of a Spanish sortie into an opposition 
penalty area and what touchline reporter and girlfriend of Iker Casillas, Sara 
Carbonero, says to sound-check her microphone. Her Sky Sports counterpart Geoff 
Shreeves is yet to be silenced by a post-match kiss from a player. And for that 
we should all be grateful.

52 Miguel Angel Jiménez's cigar


There are approximately 383 things about Jiménez that scream "millionaire 
golfer", including his sports cars, contented pot belly and the confidence to 
pull off a haircut 20 years out of date. But it's the cigars that are the 
Spaniard's trademark and he puffed them happily as he helped Europe to victory 
at the Ryder Cup.

53 A milk bottle


"White liquid in a bottle has to be milk," said the former Internazionale 
manager Rafa Benítez in one of his cryptic criticisms of the former Liverpool 
owners Tom Hicks and George Gillett. It made more sense in context, but we'll 
still pass if he ever offers to make us a brew in the sperm bank canteen.

54 A mobile phone


The Australian rugby league star Joel Monaghan was photographed simulating a 
sex act with a team-mate's labrador in November and the picture from a mobile 
phone ended up on Twitter. "Alcohol is no excuse," he said at a tearful press 
conference. "I'd love more than anything to take it back but I can't." He 
signed for Warrington this month.

55 Nelson Mandela's buggy


Having emotionally blackmailed a frail Mandela into appearing at the World Cup 
final despite the tragic death of his granddaughter the night before the 
opening match, at least Fifa had the common decency to lay on transport. Well 
done Fifa! Well done!

56 Nobby Stiles's World Cup medals


In the middle of the Wayne Rooney contract saga it emerged that Stiles, who 
performed rather better than Rooney in World Cups, was selling his medal 
collection by auction. United did the decent thing, buying his World Cup medal 
for a record £188,000.

57 The Nolans' settee


When he wasn't rushing out to the driveway with a fire extinguisher in hand, 
Andy Carroll spent much of the latter part of 2010 slumped on Kevin Nolan's 
settee, much to the annoyance of Mrs Nolan, who quickly tired of pleas for 
bedtime stories.

58 Orange peel 


Four minutes into ITV1 HD's coverage of England's World Cup opener against the 
USA the channel cut to a Hyundai advert featuring a man throwing orange peel 
out of his car window. Viewers missed England's opening goal of the tournament 
– and what would turn out to be the high point of a grim campaign.

59 A packet of fags costing £200


One of the strangest aspects of Wayne Rooney's News of the World kiss‑and-tell 
story was the amount of smoking England's No1 striker appears to get up to. The 
low point of which was Rooney paying £200 for a packet of room service 
Marlboro. Proof, finally, that it definitely doesn't make you look cool.

60 A pile of banknotes


The News of the World's Fake Sheikh's largesse was again in evidence when 
Mazhar Majeed, the "confidant" of members of the Pakistan cricket team, was 
stung when bragging about his ability to influence the bowling of no‑balls. 
After accepting £150,000, the charming Majeed proved his connection to Mohammad 
Amir by waking the teenage bowler by telephone with the greeting: "Are you 
sleeping fucker?"

Tomorrow: No61-80
 