
81 The Sports Personality trophy

Divisive as ever, but awarded in an uninspiring year to a genuine champion. 
After a campaign involving cardboard cutouts and signed photos, 293,152 people 
(42%) voted for the winner. AP McCoy may not be a household name, but he knows 
how to win horse races.

82 A sprinkler

The dance craze that gripped England's Ashes party. Paul Collingwood is 
credited with inventing the sprinkler (place hand behind head, gyrate hips, 
rotate outstretched arm in manner – possibly – of a sprinkler) and Graeme Swann 
popularised it in his ECB video diary. Cue a mass sprinkle at the MCG.

83 The St Andrews hooters

At 2.40pm on the Friday of the Open the hooter called wind-stricken players 
back into the clubhouse to contemplate the damage 40mph gales had visited on 
their second-round scores. It took 65 minutes for play to resume, though the 
breeze was still strong enough to flatten Rory McIlroy's hair and obliterate 
his first-round lead, adding an 80 to Thursday's nine-under 63.

84 The Steadicam at England v Algeria

"Nice to see yer own fans boo ya! That's what loyal support is!" sneered Wayne 
Rooney down the barrel of the Steadicam after England's World Cup horror draw 
with Algeria. Subsequent tabloid revelations and a contract wrangle with 
Manchester United proved Wayne remains well qualified to lecture on the value 
of loyalty.

85 A super injunction

Donald Rumsfeld would love these little beauties: the unknown knowns of the 
legal world. Injunctions so sensitive, newspapers aren't even allowed to say 
who has taken them out. You know the formula: industrial secrets, matters of 
national security or, in John Terry's case, rumours he'd been friendly with his 
mate's former girlfriend. As we say, matters of grave national security.

86 A tank at Oberhausen Sea Life centre

So farewell then, Paul the Octopus, soothsaying cephalopod mollusc. You 
achieved global renown for correctly predicting the outcome of World Cup 
matches from a German aquarium, before death gripped you in its tentacles. Bet 
you didn't see that coming.

87 The tattooed arm of a rioter

Serbia's hardcore stepped up dismally during an October international in 
Genoa, Italy, throwing flares, threatening their own players and getting the 
game abandoned. Top idiocy.

88 A telephone

After a six-year international retirement Paul Scholes answered his phone in 
May to find Franco Baldini on the line with a plea for a comeback. Scholes said 
it was too late, he didn't wish to steal someone else's England place and in 
any case he was washing his hair. He later admitted regret that he hadn't ended 
his exile.

89 A toilet at Cape Town's stadium

Pavlos Joseph, an accountant from South Norwood, was fined £65 for trespassing 
in England's dressing room after their goalless draw with Algeria. He 
approached the team's cheerleader David Beckham and said: "David, we've spent a 
lot of money getting here. This is a disgrace. What are you going to do about 
it?" When Beckham asked who he was, he replied: "I'm Pavlos and I actually need 
the toilet."

90 A turquoise hat

After 33 years' absence the Queen returned to SW19 in a turquoise hat and 
coat, waved a white glove and watched Andy Murray thrash Jarkko Nieminen. She 
looked as uninterested as she usually does at sporting events that do not 
involve horses, killing or Scotsmen throwing lumps of wood around.

91 The TV camera at Ponte Vedra Beach

Eighty-one days after crashing his car and sparking a bevy of lurid 
kiss-and-tell tales, Tiger Woods broke his silence to an invited audience at 
the PGA Tour's HQ in Florida. Nine minutes into his act of contrition the main 
TV camera broke, leaving Woods shown only in profile as he haltingly accepted 
responsibility for letting the world, himself, and, most importantly, his 
sponsors down.

92 Valentino Rossi's x-rays

After a run of 230 successive grands prix starts over 14 years, Valentino 
Rossi was forced to sit out four MotoGP races after suffering a compound 
fracture of his right tibia during practice for his home GP at Mugello in June. 
"It was a bad fall, a bad injury, but I'm doing well because I've found I have 
a great relationship with morphine," Rossi joked.

93 A Vancouver haulage truck

An unusually temperate January was not welcome at Cypress Mountain days before 
the Winter Olympics. With sparse snow for the freestyle and snowboarding, 
organisers had to engage teams to push it down the mountain from higher 
elevations and import it by the truckload from more wintry locations. Such was 
the cost, locals dubbed the cargoes "white gold".

94 A Venky's chicken

In November the Indian poultry producer Venky's completed a £46m takeover of 
Blackburn Rovers. Within three weeks Venky's had given Sam Allardyce the chop, 
his fate apparently sealed the day the new owner arranged a VIP screening of 
its new acquisition in action; only to witness Rovers being thrashed 7-1 by 
Manchester United.

95 A video from the Hot Spot machine

Ricky Ponting was fined 40% of his match fee for his "Ricky rage" during the 
second day of the fourth Ashes Test. He railed at the umpires when Hot Spot 
failed to show a mark in the appropriate place on Kevin Pietersen's bat after 
Australia referred a caught-behind appeal. Ponting later accepted that he had 
set a bad example but refused to believe the technology developed for 
jet-fighter tracking was more correct than his own hunch.

96 A vuvuzela

The instrument of choice for the discerning South African football fan 
provided the soundtrack for the 2010 World Cup finals. Its loud droning noise 
quickly became tedious, as did the loud droning noise of players, commentators, 
pundits, journalists and TV viewers endlessly complaining about it.

97 A set of waterproofs

As a torrent hit Celtic Manor on the opening day of the Ryder Cup, the USA's 
inferior rain gear left them wet and miffed. The PGA of America said that its 
clothing, made by the Sun Mountain company, "did not repel the water to the 
players' liking", so team officials were dispatched to the course shop to buy 
the ProQuip togs used by the European team. At £170 per outfit and with 23 team 
members and staff to drape, someone's credit card ended up being whacked for 
around £4,000.

98 Wayne Bridge's hand

News of the John Terry/Wayne Bridge/Vanessa Perroncel 
love-triangle-that-apparently-never-was broke in February. Shortly afterwards 
Chelsea hosted Manchester City. Would the two players shake hands pre-match? 
No, they wouldn't. Given that Bridge has barely played since, there is little 
chance of having to go through all that again.

99 A weightlifter's scales

Zoe Smith, 16, a Commonwealth Games bronze-winning weightlifter, had her 
funding suspended after tipping the scales at a tad over 58kg. The sport's 
governing body said it "could not continue to support an athlete who was not 
committed to following a structured training programme or ensure they 
stabilised their body weight". Smith said she was "gutted".

100 The World Twenty20 trophy

After 35 years and 18 failures in ICC one-day competitions, England broke 
their duck by winning the World Twenty20 in Barbados. Paul Collingwood 
captained a side of specialist biffers and run-misers astutely to lift the 
trophy in May. Seven months later Andrew Strauss would be handed a broken 
replica urn at the MCG to celebrate the retention of the Ashes and cap a 
brilliant year for England.

Series compiled by Rob Bagchi, Barry Glendenning, Tom Lutz, Oliver Owen and 
Barney Ronay
 