
61 A pizza takeaway in SW19

With John Isner's first-round match against Nicolas Mahut tied at 59-59 in the 
fifth set and suspended for the night, Isner was in dire need of sustenance and 
chowed down on Andy Roddick's largesse by demolishing three boxes of pizza. He 
said he could have eaten 12 Big Macs that night but after four hours sleep and 
the fast food feast he was suitably revived to close out the clinching set 
70-68 the next day.

62 A players' statement

Upon boycotting a World Cup training session in protest at Nicolas Anelka's 
expulsion from their ranks for effing and jeffing at Raymond Domenech during a 
half-time bust-up, the France squad needed to find a suitably gullible and 
willing stooge to read out their suicide note to the cameras. Cue Domenech, who 
had in his hand a piece of paper.

63 The podium at Rod Laver Arena

Having lost only one set en route to the men's single final at the Australian 
Open and roared on by his mum and scores of Saltire waving supporters, Andy 
Murray was thrashed by Roger Federer in a straight-sets defeat and promptly 
burst into tears on the podium. "I can cry like Roger," said the Scot . "It's 
just a shame I can't play like him."

64 Red Bull's RB6

Adrian Newey's Red Bull RB6 was a good car from bow to stern, from its front 
wing that took flexibility rules to the limit, but passed every rigidity test 
imposed on it, to the exhaust-blown diffuser at the back that every other team 
battled to replicate. The Renault engine might have been down on power compared 
to its rivals but these days aerodynamics are the key to unlocking speed and no 
one understands these black arts like Newey.

65 A (silenced) referee's whistle

A crisis bubbled up after Dougie McDonald failed to award Celtic a penalty at 
Dundee United in October. After much criticism the mouse finally roared as 
Scottish refs announced a downing of whistles. Four games did go ahead after 
strike-breaking refs from Israel and Luxembourg were parachuted in.

66 Rio Ferdinand's crutches

A day after arriving at England's World Cup training base in Rustenburg, Rio 
Ferdinand suffered knee ligament damage inflicted upon him by Emile Heskey. 
Neither player would go on to help the English cause, although Heskey did play 
in all four of their matches.

67 Robbie Earle's World Cup tickets

If somebody had told ITV pundit Robbie Earle before the tournament that he was 
going to lose his cushy job after getting embroiled in a scandal involving a 
bevy of gorgeous, scantily clad Dutch models, he would probably have hoped it 
would involve something more salacious and racy than ticket-scalping.

68 Robert Green's toy-brick double

When England drew 1-1 with USA at the World Cup the Guardian recreated key 
moments of the game using toy bricks. An internet sensation was born and it was 
easy to see why: Robert Green's howler seemed rather cute when executed by an 
expressionless plastic model. The imitations went viral, but the 4-1 defeat by 
Germany was less cute.

69 Roberto Mancini's scarf

Not content with eclipsing their local rivals in the wealth and transfer 
spending stakes, Manchester City stole Manchester United fans' thunder by 
installing an urbane Italian manager whose choice of official club neckwear 
tied the Old Trafford anti-Glazer green-and-gold scarf campaigners up in knots.

70 Ronaldo's armband

One moment you're wrapped snugly around a well-toned biceps, a comically 
spectacular Elton John-esque hissy-fit at what would have been one of the great 
goals being disallowed for a team-mate's incompetence later, you've been ripped 
off and flung to the ground. It's not easy being the Portugal captain Cristiano 
Ronaldo's armband.

71 The roof at the Vikings' stadium

Winter in Minnesota consists of piles of snow, arctic winds, some snow, ice 
and a bit more snow. So you'd think the roof on the Minnesota Vikings arena 
would be able to support a bit of … snow. But severe storms this month meant 
the white stuff couldn't be cleared and the roof collapsed quicker than the 
Vikings' miserable season.

72 Sepp Blatter's first envelope

It was no surprise that Sepp Blatter pulled a card confirming Russia would 
stage the 2018 World Cup from his official envelope. If the England 2018 bid 
team had spent more time stuffing brown ones, the name on that card might have 
been different.

73 Sepp Blatter's second envelope

"With their proud football tradition, ideal temperate climate, the high esteem 
in which they hold women, migrant workers and homosexuals, and globally 
renowned tolerance of public displays of drunkenness, it is with great pleasure 
that I can reveal the Fifa 2022 World Cup will be hosted by … Qatar?"

74 A sequinned waistcoat

The most notable thing about Gavin Henson's sparkly togs on Strictly Come 
Dancing was how often they were discarded, possibly to distract the audience 
from realising Henson, all rictus grin and clomping feet, can't really dance. 
It worked though, Henson made it to the semi-finals. His best line: "I can say 
I've danced at Blackpool – it's on my CV now."

75 A set of screwdrivers

Graeme Swann's Francis of Assisi act in April was interrupted when police 
officers pulled over his Porsche at 3am on his way home from Asda. Having drunk 
five glasses of wine the England spinner says he realised his cat Max was 
trapped under the floorboards and in urgent need of screwdrivers to rescue him. 
His samples showed him to be over the drink-driving limit but the court case 
has been adjourned until February.

76 Shaun White's snowboard

Shaun White, aka "The Flying Tomato", won back-to-back Olympic golds in the 
halfpipe. His first-run score actually won him the medal so he unveiled his 
party-piece for his second go, the Double McTwist 1260 – a dynamic forward 
rotation three and a half twists with a front flip he dubbed "The Tomahawk".

77 A sheepskin coat

Global reserves of the word "flamboyant" were depleted in October, as 
obituaries were penned for Malcolm Allison. "John Bond has blackened my name 
with his insinuations about the private lives of football managers," said 
Allison of his successor at Manchester City. "Both my wives are upset," he 
added.

78 A sled called Arthur

A first Winter Olympics gold for Great Britain since Torvill and Dean in 1984 
finally came in Vancouver thanks to another double act. Amy Williams sped to 
glory lying on top of a 33kg contraption she calls Arthur. While Williams got 
gold and fame, Arthur was rewarded with a couple of pats.

79 A snood

Enjoying a comeback since it's halcyon days warming the vocal chords of 
pint-sized 80s popster Nik Kershaw, neckwear for big girl's blouses has been 
catapulted back into the limelight by the today's softer footballers.

80 The Spidercam

In February Points of View, the BBC's venerable feedback show, was inundated 
with objections about the overhead camera shots captured by the Spidercam 
during England's 30-17 Six Nations victory over Wales. The corporation received 
169 complaints, viewers claiming it left them "sickly" and "dizzy". To no avail 
– the wire-crawler was used again at the football World Cup adding motion 
sickness to the grievances of armchair fans.

Tomorrow: No81-100
 