


1 Andy Schleck's bike chain


Leading the defending Tour de France champion Alberto Contador by 31 seconds 
before the 15th stage, Schleck ended it eight seconds behind having popped his 
chain when forging ahead 24km from home. Taking advantage of such a misfortune 
is cycling's equivalent of eating peas with a knife but Contador won the race 
on the Champs Elysées by exactly the 39 seconds he gained thanks to Schleck's 
chain pain.

2 An anthracite rugby jersey


Having tried imperial purple last year England went for an anthracite kit for 
the autumn international against Australia to "open up new revenue streams" 
according to the candid marketing men or, as one insider had it, to see if they 
conceded fewer breakdown penalties in a "less visible" strip. Either way 
England ended up glad to be grey, demolishing Australia 35-18.

3 AP McCoy's whip


McCoy made it 15th time lucky by winning the Grand National on Don't Push It, 
drawing every ounce of speed and stamina out of the horse to cross the line. At 
the moment of victory he brandished the whip at the crowd, with the sort of 
expression last seen when his compatriot Dennis Taylor won the World Snooker 
Championship and waggled his cue above his head.

4 Ashley Cole's mobile


Cole proved spectacularly unlucky even by his own standards when saucy photos 
he'd taken of himself somehow ended up being sent to a topless model of his 
acquaintance by "a friend of a friend". Pull the other one, Ashley. It plays 
Jingle Bells.

5 Audley Harrison's unused left glove


Ten years on from his Olympic gold, Harrison got his last chance to grab his 
"destiny" in both fists and become world heavyweight champion, an absurd match 
that came about because of the charity of his former sparring partner David 
Haye and the champion's keen eye for quick profit. Harrison landed one punch 
with his right in the 7min and 53sec the cakewalk lasted and left his left as 
unblemished as the roll call of great British prizefighters is by his existence.

6 The away dug-out in Port Elizabeth


Cunning plans were conspicuous by their absence, but playing Blackadder to his 
coach Stuart Pearce's Baldrick in their dug-out at Nelson Mandela Bay Stadium 
during England's nervy World Cup win over Slovenia, Fabio Capello humiliated 
his minion with a series of contradictory instructions, before finally elbowing 
him off the bench.

7 A bag containing chicken and lager


With Northumbria police force in a tense stand-off with murderer Raoul Moat, 
the fugitive was threatening suicide. Cue: concerned citizen and former England 
international Paul Gascoigne, who helpfully pitched up at the scene with a 
fishing rod, a can of lager, a dressing gown and some fried chicken. But still 
Gazza was denied access to "Moaty".

8 A Berlusconi face mask


Upon donning a not-quite-as-rubbery-as-the-real-thing Silvio Berlusconi mask 
at the San Siro to celebrate his side's win in a Milan derby, Inter defender 
Marco Materazzi had some explaining to do. "It was just a derby prank, nothing 
more," chuckled the Matrix, putting paid to rumours he'd worn the mask in the 
hope of attracting sexier, younger girls.

9 The black ball at the World Open


Ronnie O'Sullivan confidently potted the pink to take his break to 140 at 
snooker's World Open in September but instead of sinking the black, asked the 
referee how much the bonus for scoring the maximum break would be. On being 
told it was a mere £4,000, £161,000 less than he had earned for one in 1997, 
there was a substantial delay before O'Sullivan potted it for "the fans".

10 A bottle of vodka


It was appropriate that a grubby scene – John Higgins was in May alleged to 
have been caught on camera arranging to throw a match – was toasted with vodka 
rather than champagne. Higgins was later cleared of conspiring to fix matches 
and, after a six-month suspension, won the UK Championship this month.

11 The Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium bridge


To add to the sanitary problems putting athletes off attending the Delhi 
Commonwealth Games, a series of DIY SOS bodged building jobs also put the 
willies up competitors. Twelve days before the Games began, a pedestrian 
footbridge collapsed, injuring 23, and brought Delhi's chief minister Sheila 
Dikshit to prominence and scatalogical japing about her name from Australia 
threatened a diplomatic incident.

12 A burning Range Rover


When a Hexham judge ordered Newcastle striker Andy Carroll to live with club 
captain Kevin Nolan, everyone wondered what could possibly go wrong. One 
late-night arson attack on his brand new chrome-plated Range Rover later, they 
wondered no more…

13 The cards in Howard Webb's pocket


With Dutch cloggers Mark van Bommel and Nigel de Jong somehow still on the 
pitch at the end of the World Cup final, referee Webb was criticised for not 
dispensing enough justice. He'd found time to book nine Dutchmen and five 
Spaniards, mind.

14 A case of beer


Presumably in an attempt to convince redneck America that he's just an 
ordinary regular guy Barack Obama bet the Canadian prime minister, Stephen 
Harper, a crate of brewskis the US would win the Olympic final against Canada. 
Canada took the gold and Obama had to shell out for 24 Molson Canadian.

15 A casino betting chip


Alan Pardew was in the wilderness until Mike Ashley gave Chris Hughton the 
chop. Pardew was his replacement, partly because of a friendship he had forged 
with Newcastle's managing director, Derek Llambias, during visits to a casino. 
Pardew may want to get used to gambling with Ashley as a boss.

16 A Celtic Manor mop


The Gwent rain came in deluges on the Friday and Sunday of the 38th Ryder Cup 
pushing the competition into a Monday finish and had it not been for the 
soaking greenkeepers, drowned rats with über mop devices they would be playing 
still.

17 Cheryl Cole's wedding ring


In an attempt to end speculation that she wasn't wearing her wedding ring to 
send a message to philandering husband Ashley, Cheryl Cole said "this has been 
going on for too long and is getting boring". If only all her observations on 
The X-Factor were that astute.

18 A chicken burger


Despite panicked calls for a comeback, Shane Warne has made just one onfield 
contribution in the Ashes, at Adelaide, where beaming from a sightscreen about 
to sink his neon teeth into a McDonald's Legend Chicken burger, he became the 
only Australian bowler to stop Kevin Pietersen in his tracks during his 
withering seven-hour double hundred.

19 A cow


Alex Ferguson was talking about Wayne Rooney and the allure of Manchester 
City's new riches when he mused in October: "Sometimes you look in a field and 
you see a cow and you think it's a better cow than the one you've got in your 
own field." Nice to see him staying off the horses.

20 The ball bitten by Shahid Afridi


By accepting the Test captaincy later in the year Afridi bit off more than he 
could chew and retired from the format after one game. At the Waca in January a 
less metaphorical dental indignity saw him gnaw the ball in the manner of a 
squirrel deshelling a nut. It cost him 3m rupees and a two-match ban.

Tomorrow: No21-40
 