
Last week, sixth form students across the country celebrated the end of school 
after receiving their A-level results and on Thursday it will be the turn of 
GCSE pupils. While many will have plans to go on to further study – university 
places are at arecord high this year 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-37107004> – others will be keen to say 
farewell to exams and head straight out to work.

And it’s a good choice: for school leavers, there’s now more job options than 
ever before. The biggest graduate recruiters such asEY 
<http://www.ey.com/UK/en/Careers/Students/Schools---EY-School-Leaver-programme>,
Deloitte <http://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/careers/school-leavers.html> – and 
even sometop law firms <http://www.gordonsllp.com/careers/apprenticeships/> – 
haveopened schemes <http://careers.fieldfisher.com/school_leavers.html> for 
school leavers, and there are signs that the pay gap between graduates and 
non-graduates is shrinking, according to theInstitute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/>.

Of course apprenticeships, entry-level jobs and roles with training are also 
offered across almost all industries – but the first thing to do is work out 
what type of role you would most enjoy.

If you’re uncertain about the type of industry you want to go into, Denise 
Taylor, psychologist with Amazing People, says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/aug/18/five-things-to-remember-if-you-didnt-get-on-a-graduate-scheme>
 “you should write out a list of your abilities, strengths and interests – and 
use this to create a career plan”.

Once you’ve decided the industry you want to work in, you then need to find 
companies that are involved in that area,adds Lis McGuire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/aug/18/five-things-to-remember-if-you-didnt-get-on-a-graduate-scheme>
, founder of Giraffe CVs. “Once you’ve completed your detective work, send in a 
targeted CV and cover letter that expresses your motivation to work with them.”

But sometimes it can be difficult to know where to start. If you are looking 
for advice on how to get your first job after finishing school, join us on
Wednesday 24 August from 1-2.30pm BSTfor a live chat with our expert panel. 
We’ll be discussing:

 * Job options for school leavers.

 * Tips on choosing the right career for you. 
 * CV, cover letter and job interview advice. 
The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever:create a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link> or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profile to comment. Alternatively, you can tweet 
us@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your 
questions tocharlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
 who can post them for you.

Panel

Emma Finamore is editor at AllAboutSchoolLeavers.co.uk 
<http://allaboutschoolleavers.co.uk/> – a website for school and college 
students, with jobs and information on apprenticeships, school leaver 
programmes and sponsored degrees. She writes news, features and advice about 
apprenticeships and puts together careers advice material for schools and 
colleges.

Hattie Wrixon is co-founder of Unisnotforme.com <http://unisnotforme.com/> and 
an advocate of apprenticeships. Wrixon launched the website Uni’s Not For Me, a 
resource for young people exploring their career options, when she was 17.

Harriet Jones is a student recruitment advisor at EY 
<http://www.ey.com/UK/en/Home>. With over four years’ experience within the 
recruitment sector, she focuses on educating students about the options 
available to them when they leave school – whether that’s university or an 
apprenticeship.

Mathieu Pinto Cardoso is the recruitment advisor for law firm Fieldfisher 
<http://www.fieldfisher.com/>. He is heavily involved in graduate recruitment, 
diversity initiatives, and manages the whole recruitment process for 
Fieldfisher legal school leavers programme.

Dan Simmons is head of partnerships at Creative Skillset 
<https://creativeskillset.org/>, an organisation that works with the creative 
industries to develop skills and talent, supporting productivity and 
employability. Simmons specialises in creative apprenticeship options for 
school leavers.

Lynette Daly is the content manager for Walpole Media Group and publisher of 
Moving On magazine <http://movingonmagazine.co.uk/>, a publication about 
careers and qualifications, supported by careers advisers, teachers and 
parents. She also publishes theNot Going to Uni Apprenticeships Guides 
<http://www.notgoingtouni.co.uk/advice/apprenticeship-guide-2016-561>, Results 
Day Guides 
<http://www.notgoingtouni.co.uk/advice/not-going-to-uni-results-day-guide-2015-537>
 andHE in FE supplements 
<http://www.notgoingtouni.co.uk/advice/not-going-to-unis-guide-to-higher-education-in-further-education-2015-530>
. Daly worked in education for 15 years before moving into publishing.

Tiana Locker is the youth engagement executive for the City & Guilds Group 
<https://www.cityandguildsgroup.com/>. She also works as City & Guilds 
apprentice connect ambassador and is one of their former apprentices. During 
her apprenticeship, she created a programme to enable apprentices to talk to 
students about university alternatives.

John Parkes is a co-founder of Getmyfirstjob.co.uk 
<http://www.getmyfirstjob.co.uk/> a website that supports employers in 
identifying emerging talent and young people in finding their first step on the 
career ladder. John has worked in further education for over 20 years 
supporting employers in the development of Apprenticeships and Graduate 
programmes in the UK and overseas.

Jon Gregory is a job search, application and interview specialist. He’s the 
author of Winning That Job, editor ofwin-that-job.com 
<http://www.win-that-job.com/> and has spent many years providing career 
development advice to students.

Tom Laws is a careers adviser working with the National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>. He offers young 
people information and advice about education, employment, training and 
careers. He also represents the National Careers Service at school and college 
events, such as the Birmingham Skills Show.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 