
Noah Charney reported on the vital work of art historians and conservators in 
protecting and elucidating the Ghent Altarpiece, one of the most glorious 
paintings in Europe (The miracle of Ghent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/12/ghent-altarpiece-restoration>
, G2, 13 October). Days before, the Duchess of Cambridge was seen admiring the 
equally remarkable works of Vermeer. But last week the Guardian reported the 
disturbing news that in future young people will be denied the possibility of 
studying art history at A-level: AQA, the sole exam board for this subject, is 
to drop it – apparently the delivery and assessment of the subject is 
considered to be riddled with “risk” (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/12/last-art-history-a-level-axed-after-michael-gove-cull-of-soft-subjects>
, 13 October).

However small the number of candidates may be, its demise is a tragedy for a 
noble academic discipline with a centuries-old pedigree, which feeds into so 
many cultural and economic endeavours, enriching and strengthening our nation. 
I have taught history of art in schools for three decades and have seen year 
after year the transforming effect that it has on the minds and – dare I say? – 
souls of young people.

Not all interested in it may wish to pursue it at university or as a career, 
but there can be hardly anyone who, having studied it at age 16 to 18, does not 
later rejoice in the experience or find that it does not shape their 
perceptions and attitudes in unexpected and remarkable ways. The Duchess of 
Cambridge is one such person; the conservators in Ghent are others. The 
Department for Education needs to step in immediately and consult with teachers 
and the exam awarding bodies to protect and nurture this endangered and quite 
unique educational experience.
Dr Jeremy Gray
Bampton, Oxfordshire

Restored and ravishing: the magnificent Ghent Altarpiece gives up its 
centuries-old mysteries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/12/ghent-altarpiece-restoration>
• The definition of art history as a “soft subject” seriously misunderstands a 
subject that is enormously important to the economy, culture and wellbeing of 
this country.History of art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/history-of-art> is a rigorous 
interdisciplinary subject that gives students the critical skills to deal with 
a world that is increasingly saturated with images. It brings together visual 
analysis with history, languages, literature, chemistry, and art and design to 
name but a few inter-related areas of study and research. Those studying it at 
university level have a significant impact across the cultural sector, 
especially in public museums and galleries

Art history as a subject needs to be much better known and not denigrated. The 
Courtauld Institute of Art, the oldest higher education institution in this 
country dedicated to its study, is deeply committed to increasing understanding 
and enjoyment of the study of the history of art and to working with others to 
ensure that it is embedded across the school curriculum and is accessible to 
all our school students.
Professor Deborah Swallow
Director, Courtauld Institute of Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, London

• The decision to abandon art history is lazy, defeatist and a tragedy for our 
education system. The current A-level syllabus offers teachers the option to 
“develop courses that reflect their own interests, strengths and available 
resources”, meaning they can focus on almost any artwork from the “western 
world” from a 2,500-year period (including sculpture and architecture); the 
revised A-level proposed to extend the scope even further by adopting a more 
global approach towards the discipline. This is simply not practicable. Imagine 
equipping examiners to mark an English literature A-level where schools were 
given free rein to select texts from any period without a single work or 
practitioner being identified in the syllabus.

Rather than axing art history A-level altogether, a revised syllabus should be 
considered, focusing on a limited range of core material and identifying 
specific practitioners and works. This approach would give candidates a solid 
foundation in the discipline and enable the board to formulate clear mark 
schemes to guide examiners.
Juliet Learmouth
Slough

• I wonder whether Cambridge University, which offers history of art degrees, 
would consider it soft? We have been offering it as an A-level at Benenden for 
many years, and every year a number of students go on to study it at 
prestigious universities including Cambridge, St Andrews and Glasgow. These 
students progress to esteemed careers in museums, the art world, business, 
marketing and advertising. The A-level itself has rigorous and complex content 
and allows students the chance to evaluate, analyse, synthesise and understand 
the changing Renaissance, Victorian and modern world through the eyes of 
some of the greatest cultural icons of western civilisation.

We think it is very sad that the A-level has been abandoned at the 11th hour 
when schools will already have included it in their offering to current Year 11 
students. We, like many schools, will now be looking to the [Cambridge] Pre-U 
as an alternative syllabus, but not all schools will have students able to 
commit to this as a two-year course, or run two exam systems, and again, it 
will probably be students in the maintained sector who will lose out. What a 
shame that what is regarded as an acceptable education has become so narrow and 
in its focus and loses both its vocational and artistic elements through an 
anachronistic and erroneously subjective view of what is a “soft” subject.
Lesley Tyler
Deputy head academic, Benenden School, Cranbrook, Kent

• If art history is soft so is English literature. Undermining visual analysis 
in a world where young people are attacked by visual propaganda every day is 
terribly short sighted. More of our population will spend their days dealing 
with visual information rather than literary. If anything, the tools of visual 
criticism should be offered sooner to all.
Izzy Renton
London

Goodbye art history A-level, you served the elite well | Jonathan Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/art-history-a-level-subject-private-schools-kenneth-clark>
• In my first post as a history teacher, my head of department told me that I 
was to include the art as well as the politics for every historical period I 
taught. And what a wise instruction that was.Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/artanddesign> illuminates so much of the 
spirit of every age, and, properly taught, is civilising and life-enhancing. 
For over 60 years I have taught the subject at school and now at the University 
of the Third Age in London. Several of my students have written to me years 
after they had left school to say what a difference to their lives these 
classes have made, and my classes at the University of the Third Age have had 
attendances of up to 160 people. So I think it is a tragedy that the history of 
art A-level is about to disappear. It is of course disappointing that so few 
schools are offering it and that, as a result, only 839 students sat the exam 
this summer; but the emphasis should be on encouraging more schools to offer 
art history, not to close the subject down.
Ralph Blumenau
London

• It is a strange argument that says because posh people drink wine, wine must 
be a posh drink. But that seems to be the basis of Jonathan Jones’s objection 
to A-level art history (Goodbye art history A-level, you served the elite well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/art-history-a-level-subject-private-schools-kenneth-clark>
, 13 October). All I can say is that my memory of studying A-level art history 
at a local technical college, after leaving a secondary modern school in the 
1980s, doesn’t tally with his characterisation of the subject.
Dr Michael Paraskos
London

• The suggestion that art history graduates do not share their knowledge and 
expertise with the general public is frankly ridiculous. Consider the art 
historians who influence millions of museum visitors, and the engagement 
programmes those institutions patronise despite their dwindling budgets. Jones 
must have missed the memo that we’re not trying to tell “the story of art” any 
more. We prize our interdisciplinary range, diversity of research objects, and 
multifarious stories. These stories are what makes it possible for art history 
to be relevant to all, not just to those included in Gombrich’s story. Proper 
art historians are not elitist and not irrelevant.
Nathan Stazicker
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 