
Old lags cross off the days of their prison sentence with marks on the wall. 
TS Eliot’s J Alfred Prufrock 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/173476> measured out his 
life in coffee spoons.Jonathan Monk 
<http://www.lissongallery.com/artists/jonathan-monk> uses cute kittens, 
Austrian pastoral scenes and Australian birds: every day, week and month is 
recorded in his growing collection of souvenir calendar tea towels. There are 
46 tea towels, one for every year of his life. They hang from a wall of the 
Lisson gallery, a miserable account of a life.

Unlike On Kawara <http:// 
http://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jul/24/on-kawara>’s daily 
telegrams, postcards and tweets that announced he was still alive (until he 
died last July), or thediaries of Hanne Darboven 
<http://www.diaart.org/exhibs/darboven/project/>, which counted her days in a 
maddening arithmetic, Monk’s My Life Within the Lives of Others II, is 
unrelievedly prosaic.

There are other ways of seizing the passing moment. In a series of collages, 
archive gallery invitations are paired with family photos featuring Monk as a 
child. One twins an announcement forBruce Nauman’s 1975 Consummate Mask of Rock 
<http://refusetobeacoward.com/2012/12/08/the-consummate-mask-of-rock/> with a 
photograph of Monk’s own family, including young Jonathan, held aloft in his 
mother’s arms. The whole family, faces painted as clowns, grins for the camera, 
undoubtedly ignorant of Nauman and his fascination with clowns, let alone the 
text of Consummate Mask of Rock that begins “This is my mask of fidelity to 
truth and life … this is to cover the mask of pain and desire”. Other pairings 
have the younger Jonathan twinned with invites to shows by On Kawara, Lawrence 
Weiner and Sol Lewitt, somehow inserting his favourite artists into his own 
backstory.

It may be a bit arch, but these collisions of the art historical and the 
personal can be poignant. I like it when Monk complicates what would otherwise 
be art-about-art gags with his personal life. Pish to the work-life balance, I 
say, and the distinction between the public and the private. It is all the same 
on life’s soiled tea towel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjonathan-monk-art-and-language-lisson-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416324719938%2Ff2cd8b1a-57a6-4a4a-8f6d-559e719c98a6-1607x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Monk%20and%20the%20art%20that%20freezes%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjonathan-monk-art-and-language-lisson-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Monk%20and%20the%20art%20that%20freezes%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjonathan-monk-art-and-language-lisson-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416324719938%2Ff2cd8b1a-57a6-4a4a-8f6d-559e719c98a6-1607x2040.jpeg>
 Blow Up IV, by Jonathan Monk Photograph: Ken Adlard/PR 
Monk also gags about Bernd and Hilla Becher’s flat, calculated and indexical 
black-and-white photographs 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/bernd-becher-and-hilla-becher-718> of 
cooling towers, industrial furnaces and chimneys and the like, redoing them 
with dramatic found internet images of similar subjects at the moment of their 
demolition. Chimneys collapse, cooling towers fall in on themselves in clouds 
of dust. In these irreverent images Monk points out the impermanence of the 
Becher’s dour subjects, perhaps in a nod to Roland Barthes’s observation that 
photography is always about death.

Monk has also got some of the surviving arte povera 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/theme.php?theme_id=10454> artists, including 
Jannis Kounellis and Gilberto Zorio, to deface classical-looking busts of his 
own head, knocking off the noses. These are exercises in iconoclasm. Other 
works play games with the works of Robert Smithson and Jeff Koons. Not every 
one is a winner.

Everything comes from somewhere else. Most art reflects, consciously or not, 
on its own condition and on the art that came before it. It can be a friendly 
nod, or a calculated insult. That’s part of culture’s conversation and its 
cumulative richness, whatever the medium. Monk worries perhaps too much about 
originality and its apparent impossibility. Originality, and saying something 
new, is more a matter of the right sort of luck, and following your nose. Maybe 
Monk is telling us he has lost his.

The complexity and game-playing found in Monk’s work are redoubled in Art & 
Language’s show Nobody Spoke 
<http://www.lissongallery.com/exhibitions/nobody-spoke>, across the street in 
the Lisson’s other space. A series of new paintings, Sea Ghosts, rework an 
earlier 1980s group called Hostages. Just as the titles are an anagram, so too 
is their subject. Art & Language are forever shuffling the same deck.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjonathan-monk-art-and-language-lisson-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416324893748%2Fa2d9adb8-a050-4f1f-a243-8d1579d9117a-1734x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Monk%20and%20the%20art%20that%20freezes%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjonathan-monk-art-and-language-lisson-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Monk%20and%20the%20art%20that%20freezes%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjonathan-monk-art-and-language-lisson-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416324893748%2Fa2d9adb8-a050-4f1f-a243-8d1579d9117a-1734x2040.jpeg>
 Sea Ghost III by Art & Language Photograph: Ken Adlard/PR 
The paintings look like abstract landscapes, or dirtied palettes, laden with 
multi-coloured scuffs and lumps of dried-up paint. These are interrupted by 
painted inlays and strips that quote earlier works. Seen through the 
picture-window on the street, they look rich and meaty. Up close, they are 
somehow undernourished. All texture is gone. All the shadows of the raised 
whorls and nubs of dried paint have been drawn on, in ink. The paintings must 
have been laborious to complete.Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> & Language paint as if they 
don’t like it. I mean this as a compliment.

I imagine Michael Baldwin and Mel Ramsden 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/art-language-michael-baldwin-born-1945-mel-ramsden-born-1944-2202>
 cackling and arguing in their Banbury studio, where the two remaining members 
of Art & Language work. It is the last redoubt of British conceptualism. Over 
the years others have come and gone, died or been excommunicated. As wilfully 
obtuse and recalcitrant as they are intellectually acute, as playful as they 
are deadly serious, Art & Language is as much as anything a conversation from 
which work arises and goes off on its own tangent, referencing itself, dragging 
Art & Language’s compendious history with it as it goes. Theirs is an art that 
makes and unmakes itself, eats and regurgitates itself.

All of which is a way for me to avoid the toil of describing what they do, a 
difficulty the artists themselves are only too happy to compound. At the 
Lisson, they even employed a German theatre group, The Jackson Pollock Bar, to 
act out a sort of play in which they did all the describing for us, 
ventriloquising a script written by Baldwin and Ramsden, which explained a new 
work based on a lengthy series of drawings that the artists had made, and 
transferred to a large number of canvasses that were then bolted together to 
make a number of unusable chairs that fill one gallery. There are jokes about 
minimalism and modernism, Courbet (an obsession for decades), a kettle from a 
hotel room in Lille, an upside-down kangaroo and much besides.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjonathan-monk-art-and-language-lisson-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416325041871%2F993ffddb-c15d-4fb9-86eb-e43d6b180485-1377x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Monk%20and%20the%20art%20that%20freezes%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjonathan-monk-art-and-language-lisson-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Monk%20and%20the%20art%20that%20freezes%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjonathan-monk-art-and-language-lisson-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416325041871%2F993ffddb-c15d-4fb9-86eb-e43d6b180485-1377x2040.jpeg>
 Drawings from the Winter, by Art & Language Photograph: PR 
Right now, Art & Language have a major retrospective at MACBA in Barcelona 
<http://www.macba.cat/en/exhibition-art-language-uncompleted/1/exhibitions/expo>
. I can only hope that the spirit of their work translates, because their stuff 
can be heroically opaque. My favourite work here is a series of descriptions of 
16 portraits of world leaders and public figures. We never get to see the 
portraits themselves, which stay hidden beneath the sheets printed with the 
texts. If they actually exist at all, that is. I have my doubts. Each text 
portrait occupies its own vitrine in an upstairs space. The subjects include 
Hillary Clinton, Tony Blair, Rupert Murdoch, Angela Merkel, Vladimir Putin and 
Bashar al Assad. The descriptions, which go on for hundreds of words, are all 
surface, no depth, every one of them a single sentence with multiple clauses. 
Without the name, you would be hard put to identify them. They seem 
interchangable. “The top of the head tilted slightly forward, brightly lit, 
with streaks of thinning hair; a lightly shaded patch above the forehead, 
coloured light green …” begins the portrait of Putin.

This is a kind of mechanical literary scanning, pure description without 
adjectives. In its way it is brilliantly done. Poring over the vitrines, your 
eye jumps around the dense and repetitive texts, and you end up with nothing, 
or rather no one. This is portraiture as Chinese whisper, an impossible 
guessing game. There’s no end to it.
 