
I first heard Alfred Brendel <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alfred-brendel>
 perform in the late 1960s, in a tiny room in the Austrian Institute in London. 
I was 19. He played Schubert and Chopin, and was sensational. I marched up to 
him afterwards and said: "I must work with you or I'll die." He invited me to 
Vienna the following spring. So off I went, for six weeks.

He was a wonderful teacher. He is extremely articulate and very demanding. He 
made no concessions to my age. In my first lesson, I was playing a Schubert 
piano sonata, and the first chord took 20 minutes. I played it again and again, 
and Brendel wandered around the room saying: "No, balance of sound wrong ... 
Too much bass ... Not quite the right colour." I started hearing from inside 
his head. Eventually, I played the chord and he turned around and said, "Thank 
you," and I knew it was right. But then, so help me God, I had to play the next 
chord.

On the platform, Brendel can come across as an austere figure. He is somebody 
for whom playing the piano hasn't come as easily as it has for other great 
names. He has to practise a lot - at least, he believes he has to practise a 
lot. He would be the first to say that he doesn't have a phenomenal memory, so 
when he walks on to the platform it is probably as much of a challenge for him 
as it is for the rest of us. He has always had a tremendous sense of vocation, 
a mission to transmit what he knows and what he feels.

To call Brendel cerebral would imply too much coldness. He has always been 
very thoughtful: he is a fully rounded musician, not just a pianist. Listening 
to him play Schubert, Mozart, Beethoven, Liszt, you have a sense of his deep 
understanding of the idiom of these composers. He is aware of every marking, 
and understands what that marking means - what Schubert marks as a dot and what 
Mozart marks as a dot isn't always the same thing.

Brendel's programmes are very organic. For him, it's a question of making 
connections: he is a brilliant programmer. I remember, in November 1973, a 
concert at the Royal Festival Hall where he played Haydn sonatas interspersed 
with Bart√≥k's first concerto and Schoenberg's piano concerto, which he played 
an important role in bringing to the mainstream repertoire. To hear him play 
Haydn is to hear him at his most cheeky. Quite often, when he finishes a piece, 
he turns to the audience with a wicked grin on his face and they erupt into 
laughter - as they should.

When he is stressed and tense, Brendel can be closed and caught up in his own 
world, but when he is relaxed and happy, his humour is very much to the fore. 
He enjoys opening up to whatever is around him. We were in Minneapolis together 
earlier this year, and we went to the Institute of Arts. I couldn't keep up 
with him. He was running from room to room, telling me about every painting, 
what it reminded him of, what school it came from, what painting it was paired 
with. He was just throwing out this information, and there was this tremendous 
energy and lightness.

We've only once performed a duet together in public. It was several years ago, 
in Paris - the Schubert F minor Fantasy. Playing four hands can present an 
actual physical problem: we're both very tall and generally one partner gets 
massacred by the other. No prizes for guessing who that was.
 