Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKniKvVxaM1o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKniKvVxaM1o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKniKvVxaM1o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Seth MacFarlane's follow-up to Ted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148370/ted> is on its way – in fact, 
it's been coming sincewell before his starmaking turn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/31/charlize-theron-seth-macfarlane-western>
 at the 2013 Oscars.

Finally the trailer is here – and it's tagged a "red band", which means it's 
aimed at restricted audiences, so be warned. The spray of gore at the start, 
when a giant chunk of ice crushes someone's head, is ample justification.

Now, A Million Ways to Die in the West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/million-ways-to-die-in-the-west> has been 
billed as MacFarlane's homage to Blazing Saddles – and if by refusing to adjust 
at any point to the suggestion your film might be set in the 19th century, the 
trailer certainly lives up to that. In fact, MacFarlane's acting would appear 
indistinguishable from his onstage presence: perky, sardonic, and aimed at the 
people hovering the other side of the footlights.

Still, you get the idea: MacFarlane is some sort of western outpost denizen, 
who asks the sultryCharlize Theron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlize-theron> to pretend to be his 
girlfriend to impress former squeeze Amanda Seyfried. But that means having to 
take on murderous black hat Liam Neeson in a gunfight, for which there's the 
requisite comedy training.

In all conscience, this does loook pretty funny – but that is the 
trailer-maker's art. What do you think - will you be riding with a posse to 
track down a ticket for A Million Ways to Die in the West, or putting a bullet 
between its eyes at 100 paces?

• Seth MacFarlane: I'm definitely not presenting the 2014 Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/may/21/seth-macfarlane-definitely-not-2014-oscars>
 