
Choosing to live a life with less in an eco-friendly way goes far beyond what 
you consume, what you drive or whether you use plastic bags. It can also be 
drastically affected by what you choose to eat – or avoid eating, for that 
matter. Yep, you guessed it: I’m talking about meat.

In addition to being an unapologetic hippie, a toy denier and one step away 
from joining a commune and singing Kumbaya, I am also vegetarian – just like 4 
million others in theUK 
<https://www.google.ca/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiZ8K3GkN3JAhWsjIMKHf2_D-YQFggkMAI&url=https%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FVegetarianism_by_country&usg=AFQjCNHFqVWHQIpdsAToYofcQPBe1hxPpQ>
, 7.3 million in theUS 
<https://www.google.ca/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjdvZ_6j93JAhWluYMKHW2wD9kQFggdMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.vegetariantimes.com%2Farticle%2Fvegetarianism-in-america%2F&usg=AFQjCNF1JhMT1KjcGVIZDjVC81354lyiww>
, and 1.3 million in my home and native land ofCanada 
<https://www.google.ca/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjy67zkkN3JAhXTjIMKHXM5A_UQFggdMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FVegetarianism_by_country&usg=AFQjCNHFqVWHQIpdsAToYofcQPBe1hxPpQ>
.

As the rush of the Christmas season fades away and New Year’s Day rapidly 
looms, consider avoiding resolutions you won’t keep (are youreally going to the 
gym five times a week?) and try a meatless (or even meat-reduced) diet instead. 
You may find that the benefits work for you, just like they work for millions 
of others around the globe.

Why? A meatless diet boasts improved overall health, reduces grocery bills and 
provides a helpful boost to our struggling ecosystem. I’ll readily admit, 
however, that turning my back on hot dogs and chicken breasts wasn’t initially 
an environmental choice for me, but an ethical one. As a curious 18-year-old, I 
researched how a pig becomes a pork chop and it turned my stomach. I couldn’t 
face the true cost of my diet – the unimaginable cruelty, suffering and loss of 
life simply so I could enjoy a hamburger.

The horrifying conditions endured by the animals we eat is still the biggest 
motivating factor in my choice to be a vegetarian, but in the past few years 
the effects of a meatless diet have been shown to benefit far more than the 
collective consciences of bleeding hearts like me.

It turns out that raising animals for slaughter isn’t just bad for the unlucky 
cows, pigs, chickens and lambs;studies 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/meat-and-environment/> are 
increasingly shown that it takes a drastic toll on the environment too. As a 
result, someone who eats a diet high in meat accounts for almost double the 
climate-killing carbon dioxide emissions of a typical vegetarian.

When you break it down further into environmental cost per calorie, the impact 
of beef, for example, is monstrous. Raising beef cattle requires160 times more 
land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/21/giving-up-beef-reduce-carbon-footprint-more-than-cars>
 and causes 11 times more greenhouse gas emissions when compared to crops like 
wheat, rice or potatoes (finally – a reason to ditch the carb-free diet!).

The environmental benefits of eliminating or even reducing meat from your diet 
are compelling, but don’t think you have to ditch the bacon for purely 
altruistic motives – the benefits will quickly kick back to you too.

Numerous studies demonstrate that vegetarians have lower incidences of heart 
disease, lower BMI and lower blood pressure than their meat-eating 
counterparts. And according to the World Cancer Research Fund eating too much 
meat can increase your risk of bowel cancer. They recommend that you should eat 
no more than 500g (cooked weight) per week of red meat to reduce this risk. 
Being overweight, drinking alcohol and eating processed meat can also increase 
your risk of bowel cancer.

Of course, I can sit here spouting statistics all day demonstrating the 
benefits of a vegetarian diet to the environment and to you – they certainly 
exist in spades – but is that really likely to change your mind? Are numbers 
and percentage points enough to change how your dinner table looks after 30, 40 
or 50 years?

Change can be terrifying, even when (or perhaps especially when) you know it’s 
good for you. For many, the idea of a table without meat simply looks like a 
whole lot of side dishes. Vegetables have long been relegated to boring 
lead-ups to the main event, middling sidekicks to beefy superheros – delicious, 
maybe, but just not quiteenough. And for men especially, giving up meat and 
labelling themselves a capital-V vegetarian feels sodrastic, like adopting a 
whole new persona, or wearing a wild new wardrobe that doesn’t quite fit.

If the thought of giving up meat whole-hog overwhelms you, don’t feel like you 
need to go all-in right from the start. Try just dipping your toe in at first. 
As with all environmental endeavors, it pays to start small and keep it 
sustainable. The online world is rich with hearty, filling and scrumptious 
recipes with nary an ounce of meat required, so try just one or two meatless 
meals a week to start. A few of my favourites areblack bean and spinach 
enchiladas 
<http://www.thegardengrazer.com/2012/03/black-bean-spinach-enchiladas.html?spref=pi>
,spaghetti squash chow mein 
<http://littlebitsof.com/2014/10/spaghetti-squash-chow-mein/>, and an Asian 
quinoa slaw <http://www.gimmesomeoven.com/easy-asian-quinoa-slaw-recipe/> dish 
that is easily 10 times as good as the name makes it sound.

All of your tiny choices add up – even decreasing your meat intake by just one 
less burger a week can result in the same environmental benefit as taking your 
car off the road for320 miles 
<http://www.ewg.org/meateatersguide/a-meat-eaters-guide-to-climate-change-health-what-you-eat-matters/reducing-your-footprint/>
.

You don’t need to make drastic change in your life in order to create change 
in the world around you, and lady magazines be damned, youdon’t need a whole 
new you as we enter the new year.

Let’s throw that nonsense out the window and settle for a few new traditions 
instead. A little less shopping here, a few more reusable bags there, a 
meatless meal on the table a few times a week – and the knowledge that youare 
making a difference.

• This article was amended on 16 December 2015 An earlier version 
said”according to the World Cancer Research Fund, if you stop eating red meat, 
you’ll also be avoiding the only convincing dietary association withcolon cancer
 <http://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/becoming-a-vegetarian>.” This 
has been corrected.

 