
As my mother was a Jehovah’s Witness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/moment-changed-me-quitting-jehovahs-witnesses>
, my childhood was devoid of all the usual opportunities for merrymaking. 
Celebrations were considered pagan, so we had nothing to look forward to all 
year – no presents, cards, tinsel or sparklers, no Christmas, birthdays, Easter,
Bonfire night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/13/inconvenient-truth-about-bonfire-night-pollution-pollutionwatch>
, Mother’s Day, Halloween,Valentine’s Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/15/10-underwhelming-things-you-got-for-valentines-day>
, solstices orPancake Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/feb/20/pancake-day-recipes-experts>
. But somehow, on New Year’s Eve, under my father’s influence, we were allowed 
a thimbleful of cherry brandy and arm’s-length participation in the 
heart-thumping Big Ben countdown, when the old year made way for the new and we 
were all born again.

A new year that changed me: my partner said I would publish a book – so I had 
to | Annie Freud
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/new-year-publish-book> 
I left home in 1976 at 16 and moved from bedsit to bedsit in the cool 
student-land of Birmingham, where I brushed up against music and drugs, art and 
protest and debate. Although I never quite got around to a Christmas tree, I 
did learn how to celebrate my birthday – three days and nights with some sticky 
Lebanese hash and a bottle of Thunderbird.

I would temp for a few months or pose at the local art college as a life 
model, get some money together and spend the rest of the year on the dole, 
going to gigs and parties and festivals, stoned, half-smashed or both. I 
wouldn’t have admitted it then, but a lifetime of indoctrination had done its 
job and I believed that Armageddon was all but nigh. At any minute, the 
vengeful Jehovah would destroy the drug-taking fornicators with foul mouths and 
morals to suit. If there was a sin I hadn’t committed, I had to get on and 
sample it. Might as well be hanged for a sheep …

Hence, by New Year’s Eve 1980, I’d been going at it pretty hard. I was at a 
party in a Victorian mansion inMoseley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/nov/29/lets-move-moseley-birmingham-property>
. The house was full of bedsits with damp armchairs and splintered floorboards. 
Every door was open, every wall had people slouched against it two-deep, 
weed-fog wafting from room to room, music rattling our bones and the sash 
windows. I found a perch at the top of the stairs to smoke my four-paper 
trumpet spliff and wait for midnight.

I don’t remember the name of the girl who sat next to me, but she was wearing 
the shiny red lipstick of the brave and beautiful. She had a sort of Cleopatra 
hairstyle and a black jumper that had slipped from one shoulder. I offered her 
my joint and we smoked together, talking about a mutual friend who had killed 
himself under the influence ofmagic mushrooms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2012/jan/25/1> and another 
who had been sectioned after repeated psychotic episodes. After my own 
terrifying bouts of near madness and paranoia, I suspected it might be time to 
go easy on the ganja.

“I should give this up,” I said, taking a hard drag and breathing as little as 
possible to keep the vital smoke inside for as long as possible.

She looked at me for a long time. “You? Never.”

“Could if I wanted to,” I replied.

“No,” she said.

“Tell you what,” I said. “Bet you I don’t have another thing after the stroke 
of midnight.” She shook her head, passed me the spliff back and I sucked 
it down.

Partly it was her disbelief. Partly it was my stubbornness. Partly it was just 
the right time. At midnight, at the last gong, I stopped taking drugs.

I took a job in a solicitor’s office, but that only used up the daytime; there 
were long nights to get through and I needed an alternative form of recreation. 
I don’t know why I turned to reading: maybe it was the woman next to me on the 
bus who was so engrossed in her book that she missed her stop; maybe it was 
memories of Bible stories and the poetic beauty of the Song of Solomon. But one 
day I asked my boss for a list of the 10 best books he’d ever read.

Gifts and misses: publishers pick their books of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/09/gifts-and-misses-publishers-pick-their-books-of-2016>
I picked the first two off the shelf at Dillons and devoured them like 
spliffs. I finished his list in a few weeks and then worked my way through 
Dickens andThackeray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/23/william-thackeray-vanity-fair-100-best-novels>
, George Eliot, theBrontës 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/27/bronte-sisters-enduring-love-affair>
 and all the usual suspects at the rate of about two each week, sometimes more. 
Addicted by then, I continued through the centuries toEvelyn Waugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/10/100-best-novels-scoop-evelyn-waugh-robert-mccrum>
, Somerset Maugham,Graham Greene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/sep/18/classics.grahamgreene> and on 
and on into France and America, Germany and Ireland.

I’ve never regretted the wild years, but I’m glad I stopped when I did that 
New Year’s Eve. My immersion in reading has been an education of sorts. 
Certainly I absorbed notions of the craft of good writing, found seams of 
literature that spoke to me and which I’ve since mined again and again, 
discovering along the way my own voice and the world I want to write about.
 