
The Keystone XL pipeline was vetoed 
<http://qz.com/543526/obama-admits-his-rejection-of-keystone-is-symbolic-but-argues-it-is-also-crucial/>
 by President Obama last year as being antithetical to the nation’s climate 
goals. Yet fights against pipelines continue to rage across the country – 
including 400 feet from my home in New York state, where a proposed pipeline 
next to the troubled Indian Point nuclear plant hasspurred fears 
<https://www.rt.com/usa/332566-indian-point-chernobyl-hudson/> of a 
Fukushima-like scenario 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/21/nyregion/21towns.html?_r=0>, with New York 
City lying squarely in an evacuation zone.


Spectra Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>, a Texas-based 
gas company, owns a 9,000-plus-mile pipeline network that stretches from Texas 
across the midwest and through the north-east, all the way to Canada and the 
coast. The company is in the process of expanding the north-east section from a 
26in pipeline to a 42in high-pressure pipeline in a project called the 
Algonquin Incremental Market (Aim) Expansion.

The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Ferc) has approved 
<http://www.ecori.org/renewable-energy/2015/3/4/controversial-pipeline-expansion-project-gets-key-approval>
 this pipeline project – andall other ones 
<https://stateimpact.npr.org/pennsylvania/2016/03/03/delaware-riverkeeper-sues-ferc-alleging-bias-and-corruption-in-pipeline-cases/>
 that have come before them since 1986.

Commissioners even allowed Spectra to segment its massive expansion project 
into three sections, with Aim being only the first of three phases that will 
stretch from New York to Boston. This practice of segmentation, which allowed 
Ferc to green-light parts of projects without assessing overall environmental 
impact, has been the source ofsuccessful lawsuits 
<http://www.nj.com/news/index.ssf/2014/06/federal_appeals_court_rules_with_enviros_against_tennessee_gas_pipeline_regulator.html>
 against the agency in the past.


As a cancer researcher with a PhD in molecular biology raising a family beside 
the pipeline route, I am deeply concerned about the threats it poses to health 
and safety. Expanded compressor stations, needed to repressurize and vent gas 
along the route, will emit more benzene, volatile organic compounds and methane,
all linked to health problems, from cancer to asthma and heart disease 
<http://concernedhealthny.org/compendium/>. New York state banned high-volume 
hydraulic fracturing because of the health risks it poses, but it can’t ban 
infrastructure that will carry fracked gas through the state. Westchester 
County alreadyhas an F 
<http://www.lohud.com/story/news/health/healthy-living/2014/04/30/westchester-rockland-get-f-air-quality/8533697/>
 in air quality from the American Lung Association; we don’t need even more 
pollution in our backyards.

The Aim proposal is even more dangerous than the average carcinogen-spewing 
pipeline, though – it’s being built within 105ft of critical safety 
infrastructure at Indian Point nuclear power plant, less than 35 miles north of
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City. A pipeline 
accident there that damaged plant infrastructure could, in a worst-case 
scenario, cause a full-scale meltdown akin to Fukushima.

Ferc and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) agree with plant operator, 
Entergy, that thenew 42in pipeline poses no increased risk 
<http://www.lohud.com/story/news/local/2015/03/03/pipeline-approved/24336527/>. 
But nuclear and pipeline safety experts, as well as elected officials, cite 
evidence to the contrary. Congresswoman Nita Loweyquestioned 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=umWpVZTqoJE> the NRC chairman at a House 
appropriations subcommittee hearing last month about the analysis, and 
documents obtained by aFreedom of Information Act request 
<https://sape2016.org/2015/07/16/nuclear-regulatory-commission-withheld-and-misrepresented-critical-information-used-to-evaluate-and-approve-the-siting-of-the-spectra-aim-pipeline-alongside-indian-point/>
 show the entire safety assessment was based on an unsupported assertion by 
Spectra Energy that they could shut off the flow of gas in the pipeline within 
three minutes in an emergency. It’s an estimate that neither Entergy nor the NRC
bothered to verify 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/multimedia/2015/12/ny-pipeline-near-nuclear-reactor-sparks-new-fears.html>
, and which pipeline expert Richard Kuprewiczsays 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/multimedia/2015/12/ny-pipeline-near-nuclear-reactor-sparks-new-fears.html>
 is unrealistic.

Indian Point is already plagued with safety problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/06/new-york-city-groundwater-radioactivity-investigation-indian-point-nuclear-power>
, including anongoing radioactive leak 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/indian-point-power-plant-radioactive-leak-worse-article-1.2526779>
 into the surrounding groundwater, a recentfire 
<http://www.onearth.org/earthwire/accident-indian-point> and subsequent oil 
spill into the Hudson river. A disaster at this plant could necessitate the 
evacuation of New York City. The problem is that there is no evacuation plan 
for New York City; it’s impossible. We are tempting fate.


This isn’t excessive alarmism. There were 318 significant pipeline incidents 
<https://hip.phmsa.dot.gov/analyticsSOAP/saw.dll?Portalpages&NQUser=PDM_WEB_USER&NQPassword=Public_Web_User1&PortalPath=%2Fshared%2FPDM%20Public%20Website%2F_portal%2FSC%20Incident%20Trend&Page=Significant&Action=Navigate&col1=%22PHP%20-%20Geo%20Location%22.%22State%20Name%22&val1=%22%22>
 in 2015 alone; that averages out to six incidents a week.

Two former safety inspectors for the Aim pipeline have come forward to blow 
the whistle <http://www.rifuture.org/spectra-safety-allegations.html> on 
Spectra’s safety practices. They say that pipe parts and welds that were 
supposed to be x-rayed before installation were buried before required safety 
checks were completed. That means America’s largest city lies in the evacuation 
zone of a nuclear plant next to a gas pipeline for which installation safety 
protocols may have been neglected. (A Spectra spokesperson told Al Jazeera 
America that the company follows all laws and regulations in addition to having 
strict internal standards.)

Many concerned citizens along the pipeline expansion route – and our elected 
politicians – have raised the lack of safety precautions with national 
oversight bodies. Last summer, New York state assembly members David Buchwald 
and Sandy Galeftold 
<https://sape2016.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/galef-buchwald-send-letters-to-ferc-nrc-to-stop-pipeline-construction-near-ipec-pr-2-2.pdf>
 Ferc that regulators had approved the pipeline without properly assessing the 
risks. The Union of Concerned Scientistsasked 
<http://www.lohud.com/story/news/2015/09/02/scientists-seek-pipeline-review/71536340/>
 the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to permit them to conduct an assessment and 
was ignored.

The US just signed an international agreement to limit global climate change, 
yet we are continuing to build pipelines that spew methane, a gas far more 
dangerous than carbon dioxide.

We need energy efficiency. We need clean, renewable energy that is safe and 
affordable. And we need federal checks and balances that actually work to 
prevent unsafe and toxic infrastructure from being built. The health and safety 
of my – and everyone else’s – family is on the line.

 