
Jack Straw is probably the greatest political survivor of his generation. A 
career that began as the first political special adviser in history in the 
mid-1970s has been capped with 12 years in cabinet. He has been home secretary, 
foreign secretary, leader of the Commons and now he's in charge of
constitutional reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/aug/26/jack-straw-lords-reform>.

At a Guardian/Unlock Democracy seminar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/aug/26/house-lords-reform-jack-straw>
 this morning, he showed why he has lasted so well. Dogged, fluent and 
unblushing, he blithely admitted he had given no serious consideration to 
constitutional reform at first. It was hardly news: his appointment gave the 
lie to the enthusiasm Gordon Brown announced for it when he became prime 
minister in 2007.

Labour has done more to change the way Britain is governed than any government 
since 1911. It has delivered devolution to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
and introduced PR for European elections. And of course italmost abolished 
hereditary peers <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/nov/08/uk.lords> 
from the House of Lords.

But at heart, Tony Blair and Brown never believed the issue mattered enough to 
the wider electorate to fight for it. There was never, it seems, the gut belief 
that how we are governed actually shapes what governments do, never the energy 
to enthuse voters with an appetite for change.

Reforming the House of Lords – abolishing it, in truth, since it can no longer 
be aHouse of Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> when there are 
no Lords in it – is one of the great pieces of unfinished business. And as 
Straw made plain first in an interview for the Guardian today, and then at the 
seminar, it is going to stay unfinished.

There is no chance, in the six months of parliamentary time remaining, that a 
bill to establish a new second chamber – a senate, perhaps? – will come to the 
Commons.

All is not quite lost. All the main parties have been persuaded to sign up to 
reform that would result in a mainly elected second chamber. But that now looks 
like the easy bit.

The Tories want it elected on first past the post. Labour has not decided 
whether to use regional lists, and if so, whether voters would be allowed to 
choose candidates in order or merely vote for a party.

There's no agreement on how to move on the current peers, nor how fast. Even 
more critically, the question of whether there should be 80% or 100% of elected 
members is still open.

So what's left for those of us for whom the summer's catastrophic display of 
MPs' cupidity makesthe case for reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/politics-and-reform> even 
more compelling?

It is essential that a set of principles for reform is laid out before the 
election next year. Ideally, it should have at least Labour and Liberal 
Democrat support. It would include the commitment to maintain the existing 
powers of the Lords to amend and delay (the government has lost 450 votes since 
the reforms of 1999) and of no single party having overall control.Meg Russell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/megrussell>, now of the Constitution Unit 
but the late Robin Cook's adviser when he was Leader of the Commons, argued at 
the seminar today that they should be the keystones of a new upper house.

The system of election has to be shaped by the need to preserve the balance 
between the parties, while at the same time allowing scope for independents and 
small parties (yes, even the BNP if that's how the voters want it) to win 
seats. Then voters can have a blueprint on which to challenge candidates – and 
maybe a chance of making the redrawing Westminster on truly democratic 
principles as significant a priority to an incoming Tory government as 
devolution was to Labour.

Well, you can always dream.
 