
Chuck Morgan is back where he began. Almost.


“There used to be an old building, like a barn, up on the hill there. We lived 
there and we had no water, no electricity, no bathroom. We had an outhouse. We 
had to live by lamps. Wood stoves. Trucked our own water in by wagon,” he said. 
“We had just two big old rooms. A living room and a bedroom together. The whole 
family there. The other room was a little kitchen.”

Morgan is 64 now. In his time he’s been a logger in California, fought in 
Vietnam and sought release in drugs and alcohol, before being drawn back to the 
small town of Blackwater on the sprawling Gila River Indian reservation in 
southernArizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> – “the res”, as 
it’s known to those who live there.

When he left half a century ago in search of a path out of deprivation, the 
reservation was best known outside its borders as the home of Ira Hayes, one of
six US marines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/may/24/michaelellison> 
immortalised in the photograph of soldiers raising an American flag over the 
Japanese island of Iwo Jima in the second world war. Hayes was hailed by 
presidents and feted across the country. But his decline into alcoholism – he 
was arrested dozens of times for drunken behaviour – and drink-related death at 
the age of 32 was often portrayed as a consequence of life on the reservation, 
although the toll of war and fame may have had more to do with it.

Gila River Indian Community, known on the reservation as the GRIC, is defined 
to the outside world by something else these days: the highest rate ofobesity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/23/new-report-obese-americans-overweight>
 and diabetes in the United States. Its people have probably been subjected to 
more medical studies of the disease than any other on the planet.
factbox 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/factbox_blackwater/giv-31114giD2yqGLyPcM/>
But even that development is being eclipsed by another change. “This place is 
different. So different from when I left,” said Morgan. “They give you a house 
now. A free house. My brother got one. They give you it without paying a penny, 
and free water. Everything started getting different when these casinos came 
up.”

For 20 years, the GRIC has tapped into the wellspring that has reversed the 
fortunes of Native American communities close to a city big enough to provide a 
steady stream of punters for slot machines and blackjack tables. Gila River has 
Phoenix’s 4 million residents a few minutes’ drive away.

The flow of hundreds of millions of dollars each year into Gila River’s 
casinos helps fund the outlines of a welfare state in a country where the very 
idea is widely regarded as un-American. Free land and free houses. Its own 
healthcare system. Regular cash payments to all residents as their slice of the 
gambling revenues. Even the first Indian reservation television station.

While most young Americans rack up debts getting a university education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2014/oct/07/colleges-ceos-cooper-union-ivory-tower-tuition-student-loan-debt>
, Gila River reservation helps pay the bills. For elderly people there are free 
meals and organised trips to the cinema.

For all that, Blackwater has been, by one measure, the poorest – or at least 
the lowest income – town in the country. According to the US census bureau’s 
American community survey 2008-2012 of communities of more than 1,000 people – 
the latest statistics available at the time of reporting – the median household 
income in Blackwater was just $9,491 a year. Nationally it was $53,915 in 2012. 
It has improved more recently to $12,723, but is still less than a quarter of 
the national average. It is the final stop in a series of Guardian dispatches 
about the lives of people trying to make a life in places that seem the most 
remote from the American Dream.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef5d3149645aafae9cb4aef59bb55e6a472eb4bb%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef5d3149645aafae9cb4aef59bb55e6a472eb4bb%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
 Lidya helps prepare food for elderly people. Photograph: Sean Smith for the 
Guardian 
“I was picking cotton in the fields at five years old,” said Lidya, who would 
only give her first name. She was one of the women working at a centre in 
Blackwater that provides free lunches for elderly people. “You had this long 
sack and you had to fill it with cotton. This wasn’t 1868, it was 1968. The 
casinos changed a lot of things. We’re dependent on them now but there is still 
that poverty out there. The majority of people here struggle to get by.”

Blackwater sits at the southern end of the 580 square miles designated by the 
US Congress in 1859 as a home for two tribes - the Akimel O’odham tribe (also 
known as the Pima) and the Pee Posh (also known as the Maricopa).

The area around the town of little more than 1,000 people – 94% Native 
American – is mostly farmland and desert. The dried-up bed of the Gila river, 
which was once the tribes’ lifeblood, is at the town’s eastern flank with the 
San Tan mountains as backdrop.


Facilities in Blackwater are few beyond tribal offices. No cafes, bars or 
restaurants. The new houses paid for by the casino revenues, clustered together 
in their own neighbourhoods, stand out from the crumpled homes that have 
endured decades of desert winds.

There is a stillness about the place during the day. Those who work are at the 
casinos, in the fields or have commuted to one of the towns off the 
reservation. Those who don’t work are kept indoors by the heat.
income map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/archive-zip/giv-31114A0cRR0wRrPzI/>
The road north runs the length of Gila River reservation, passing one largely 
indistinguishable community after another until the skyscrapers of Arizona’s 
capital, Phoenix, rise up against the mountains.

The reservation’s northern tip reaches almost to the city limits. It is the 
geography of this small corner that has delivered the promise of a different 
future. The tribal council has taken advantage of a 1987 US supreme court 
ruling that recognised a degree of sovereignty for Native American reservations 
as “domestic dependent nations”. Gila River joined the band of Indian 
communities that got into the casino businesses after the justices said state 
governments had no authority to stop or regulate them.

The reservation spent $200m building the Wild Horse Pass casino and hotel 
<http://www.wingilariver.com/wild-horse-pass>, the largest in the state when it 
was completed. The luxury resort now includes a concert venue, golf course and 
a motorsports race track. The tribal council, as on other reservations, won’t 
reveal how much it makes from the Wild Horse and two other casinos on Gila 
River but estimates put it at around $250m a year.

The high-priced cocktails and luxury cars – and the wads of cash lost on the 
turn of a card – reflect a lifestyle those who live in Blackwater only glimpse 
if they trouble to venture to the other end of the reservation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F673b29bb4777c78ec6ca0bc384130e0e32be2193%2F0_0_5952_3968%2F5952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F673b29bb4777c78ec6ca0bc384130e0e32be2193%2F0_0_5952_3968%2F5952.jpg>
 The Wild Horse Pass casino, which brings in millions for the reservation every 
year. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
More than half of Blackwater’s residents live below the poverty line. Half of 
those have an income that is less than half the level set as the poverty line. 
About one-third of the working-age population is unemployed. Yet the numbers 
are only part of the story.

Gila River reservation has had its fleeting moments of fame – and infamy. It 
was the site of an internment camp for thousands of Japanese Americans during 
the second world war, over the objections of the tribes.


Towards the war’s end, Ira Hayes’s return from Japan brought a more welcome 
kind of attention. He is in the far left of the photograph as the American flag 
is lifted over Iwo Jima during the battle with the Japanese for the island. 
Within days, three of the six soldiers in the picture were dead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cbeb2809c9e8daafbdb3ca6e6d67e0b0e0e260d%2F0_0_2000_1555%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cbeb2809c9e8daafbdb3ca6e6d67e0b0e0e260d%2F0_0_2000_1555%2F2000.jpg>
 Ira Hayes and other US marines raise the American flag on Mount Suribachi, on 
the Pacific island of Iwo Jima in 1945. Photograph: Joe Rosenthal/AP 
Years later, his life story was told in a film, The Outsider, where a white 
man, Tony Curtis, played the Native American hero. It also inspired a Johnny 
Cash hit, The Ballad of Ira Hayes, with lyrics touching on a bitter legacy that 
is the source of many of the reservation’s problems to this day:

The water grew Ira’s people’s crops

’Til the white man stole the water rights 

And the sparklin’ water stopped.

The sparkling waters of the Gila river made the tribes who lived around it 
successful farmers. The river irrigated beans, corn and cotton. The Spanish 
brought new crops, wheat and watermelon, and cattle in the 17th century. By the 
1850s, the tribes were prospering selling food and cotton to white settlers and 
miners.

The US government encouraged whites to trek west and populate Arizona 
territory by promising free land on condition it was cultivated. That required 
the settlers to irrigate from the Gila river. As their numbers grew, so more of 
the river was diverted, until it was reduced to a near trickle by the late 19th 
century.

Drought was the final blow. The tribes were forced to rely on food from the US 
government. It sent lard, white flour and canned meats, changing the eating 
habits of theNative Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/native-americans>. Today, bread fried in 
lard is not only popular but regarded as traditional. The small game and birds 
their ancestors hunted gave way to fatty beef.

Photographs of the reservation’s beauty queens line a wall at the tribal 
headquarters in Sacaton. They are radiant and smiling. They are also what 
clothing manufacturers would describe as on the plus size.

Size matters because it represents fears for the future of the reservation’s 
young, even if it is a highly sensitive subject after Gila River’s residents 
werelabelled the fattest people in America 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/why-is-america-so-fat/> by the media.

Half of all working-age adults within the GRIC have type 2 diabetes. Among 
teenagers 15 to 19, the rate is more than 10 times that of the Native American 
population as a whole in the US. Close to nine out of 10 residents will be 
diagnosed with the disease by the age of 55.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5292c57f79fc0e11acfc88a082cc754ae470895%2F20_10_956_840%2F956.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5292c57f79fc0e11acfc88a082cc754ae470895%2F20_10_956_840%2F956.jpg>
 An ad from the reservation’s health department. Photograph: Handout 
Two years ago, Blackwater community school warned the federal government in a 
grant application 
<http://www.bie.edu/cs/groups/xbie/documents/text/idc1-024293.pdf> (pdf) that 
it had a high number of children with “unhealthy” weight levels on the 
reservation. “Unfortunately, many of the children at Blackwater community 
school are at risk to develop type 2 diabetes as children,” it added.

Diabetes increases the risk of heart attacks and kidney failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/dec/10/diabetics-heart-attack>. At 
the elderly centre in Blackwater, Lidya said that of the 100 people she served 
lunch to every day, a dozen were on dialysis.

That it wasn’t always this way is clear from Pima people living in Mexico, 
where diabetes rates are considerably lower and about the same as in the rest 
of that country. Not only do Mexican Pima eat more healthily but they do more 
physical activity as farmers.

People on the reservation sometimes feel as if they are part of one large 
clinical study. TheNational Institutes of Health <http://www.nih.gov/> arrived 
five decades ago to try to account for the levels of obesity and diabetes. 
Almost all of the population is now involved in the research.

America's poorest white town: abandoned by coal, swallowed by drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/12/beattyville-kentucky-and-americas-poorest-towns>
An extraordinary number of academic papers have been written. Theories have 
come and gone, including of a gene that developed in the Pima to store body fat 
to cope with periods of famine, which has made it hard to shed excess weight.

The tribal authorities have responded with relentless health campaigns. 
Billboards promote “health and wellness fairs” and mass exercise drives in the 
parks. Stark warnings about diet spring from the community newspaper. The 
reservation’s health department placed an advert picturing sugar pouring from a 
can of Coca-Cola. There is no caption. Everyone understands.

The soft drinks and sugar industries would probably have pounced on such a 
graphic warning by any other public authority, but the same political rules do 
not apply on the reservation.

Casino revenues have paid for a well-equipped gym in Blackwater, and there’s 
an indoor basketball court next door that would be the envy of many American 
high schools. But the gym looks as though it is rarely visited and Alan 
Blackwater, chairman for the district that covers the town and surrounding 
area, laments that young people don’t use the basketball court much either.

“They barely come here except for community meetings,” he said. “We’ve got all 
kinds programmes. Walks. Prevention. That kind of stuff. It makes a difference 
for some people. Not everyone.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feae537dd599231a5d3be82d1d46967941029df6d%2F0_0_5952_3968%2F5952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feae537dd599231a5d3be82d1d46967941029df6d%2F0_0_5952_3968%2F5952.jpg>
 Like many people in Blackwater, Alan Blackwater has diabetes. Photograph: Sean 
Smith for the Guardian 
Blackwater was diagnosed with the disease in the 1990s. “I have diabetes. 
Practically everybody does. Eating the wrong kind of food, I guess. It took 
years and years and years before I changed my lifestyle,” he said. “I don’t 
take no medication. I eat the right kind of food now. I changed that. I 
exercise but not right now because I’ve got a bum knee.”

For all of the campaigns, diabetes rates continue to rise among young people. 

Something else has been linked by the GRIC’s health department to the 
development of the disease: the stresses of reservation life, particularly 
“poverty, unemployment, crime, gang activity”.

Blackwater has lived within the Gila River community his whole life. He said 
it had always been beset by problems common to other reservations. When he was 
young, it was routine for men to leave to look for work.


“They had a relocation programme way back where they would move them off to 
try and get a trade,” he said. “Move them to the cities like Chicago, 
California. There was nothing for them here. Some of them never came back.”

Morgan remembers the hardship. “I had a kerosene lamp to do my homework. Maybe 
that’s why I wear glasses now,” he said. “My grandparents lived across the 
river the same way. We kind of grew up there too because my dad drank a lot. I 
guess it was rough but it didn’t seem like it then. My dad got hold of someone 
who had a vacant house. We moved there. It was a little better. Had 
electricity, lights.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642a887d348403e749f9fe2c6591df23ac8e5388%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642a887d348403e749f9fe2c6591df23ac8e5388%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 A stop sign covered in graffiti in Blackwater. Photograph: Steve Craft for the 
Guardian 
When Morgan was 14 he persuaded his parents to send him to a boarding school 
in California. The tribal government paid. “Right after I graduated from 
school, I enlisted in the marine corps. Boot camp in San Diego. Went to combat 
infantry school and then, whoosh, Vietnam,” he said.

A red US marines flag flies over Morgan’s house. It represents a complex past. 
On the one hand there’s Ira Hayes. On the other,Vietnam veterans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/13/vietnam-veterans-not-thanked-for-military-service>
 were for a long time regarded as akin to war criminals by many Americans.

“The guys fighting in Afghanistan and Iraq, they’re way up here,” said Morgan, 
lifting his hand above his grey hair. “Vietnam veterans were way down here,” he 
added, lowering his hand to his knee.

Then there is Native American history at the hands of the US army.

The military has long been a path off reservations for young men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/06/native-americans-fighting-us-military>
 and, more recently, women, who have limited choices if they remain at home. A 
disproportionately high number of Native Americans sign up.

But it is not forgotten by some that they are fighting for the same military 
that defeated their tribes, stole their land and broke treaty after treaty. 
Morgan said it used to bother him, but not any more.

“When I was younger I felt stronger about it. Wounded Knee 
<http://www.history.com/topics/native-american-history/wounded-knee> [massacre] 
and all that,” he said. “I don’t really think about that any more. We’ve got 
our little land here. I go party with the white boys or the blacks, or the 
Mexicans sometimes. I’m not one of those who says, I’m Indian and you effers 
put us on this land.”

Still, there are limits. “We don’t celebrate Columbus Day. We celebrate 
Thanksgiving just to eat,” he said.

After Vietnam, Morgan went to find his high school sweetheart, who was living 
on another Indian reservation in California. He moved there for 15 years and 
they had four boys and a girl together.

Morgan took up logging and then became a firefighter. For a while he was a 
construction worker too. But the relationship fell apart and he returned to 
Gila River in 1984. A few years later, three of his sons were killed in a car 
crash along with their girlfriends and Morgan’s grandchildren.

Through it all he battled with issues well documented in reservation life. “I 
did a lot of drugs but I quit. I don’t bother with that any more. But I still 
drink,” he said.

Blackwater echoed his experience. “The alcohol and drugs, I thought I was old 
when I started. Fourteen or 15. People started younger than that,” he said. “We 
had a little meth. It wasn’t as strong as the stuff nowadays but it was strong 
enough for me. Mostly I did marijuana coming up from Mexico. There was some of 
that LSD but that was back in the 60s.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9ab7959d397da39cb77b6cad48fbdcd79d3f709%2F61_260_5861_3515%2F5861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9ab7959d397da39cb77b6cad48fbdcd79d3f709%2F61_260_5861_3515%2F5861.jpg>
 Chuck Morgan outside his house in Blackwater. Photograph: Sean Smith for the 
Guardian 
Morgan and Blackwater were not alone in saying that drug use fell away with 
age, but that dependence on alcohol remains an issue for many on the 
reservation. The single largest cause of death for working-age people within 
the Gila River community is alcoholic liver disease. The health authorities say 
85% of the reservation’s residents suffer a premature death compared with 52% 
for the rest of Arizona.

The reservation has a number of prevention programmes such as the Gila River 
Prevention Coalition to promote “cultural pride, strength and wellness”, sober 
challenge week and “community block parties” with lectures on the dangers of 
methamphetamine.

It remains a struggle for the authorities. A young man working in a cafe in 
the reservation’s main town, Sacaton, frankly admitted his attachment to drugs 
and alcohol. He cheerfully pulled up a video on his phone of what he planned to 
try next – “smoking alcohol”.

“There’s nothing to do here. Most kids just leave,” he said.

Blackwater said his three adult children remained on the reservation but 
struggled to find work. “My sons work on and off. Contract work. Labour. No 
full-time employment. One of my sons has five or six children. I help them out 
sometimes. My daughter-in-law is the only one working full time. Used to be 
security at casino. Now custodian at hospital,” he said. “You can get a job if 
you don’t have a problem with the drugs or alcohol. You have to be clean.”

He did not say if that was factor in his own sons’ struggles to find full-time 
work.

Blackwater regards drug and alcohol excesses as a rite of passage. What does 
bother him is a new phenomenon: the gangs that seem woven into the fabric of 
life for young people on the reservation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41872d0ecd8c9475ed41fba019920479be996657%2F0_0_5642_3761%2F5642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41872d0ecd8c9475ed41fba019920479be996657%2F0_0_5642_3761%2F5642.jpg>
 A farm worker ploughing a field in Blackwater. Photograph: Steve Craft for the 
Guardian 
In 2013, Blackwater community school applied for a grant to fund programmes to 
combat high rates of academic failure. It blamed a dropout rate of about 40% on 
drugs and gangs. “Gila River Indian Community has among the highest levels of 
gang, juvenile delinquency and substance abuse activities of any tribal 
community in the United States,” the school said in the application. “Phoenix 
gang members have been actively recruiting GRIC youth to join their gangs. 
There are an estimated 20 locally and nationally affiliated gangs established 
on GRIC.”

Gang members have armed themselves with semi automatic weapons and responsible 
for drive-by shootings. They are also deeply involved in the drug trade.

“Man, those people don’t work,” said Morgan. “I think it’s related to those 
social ills.”

Those social ills are documented in a series of US government reports about 
Indian reservations. A 2014 USJustice Department document on violence against 
Native American children 
<http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/defendingchildhood/pages/attachments/2014/11/24/aian_executive_summary.pdf>
 (pdf) makes for shocking reading.

“Today, a vast majority of American Indian and Alaska Native children live in 
communities with alarmingly high rates of poverty, homelessness, drug abuse, 
alcoholism, suicide and victimization. Domestic violence, sexual assault and 
child abuse are widespread,” it said.

The report cast the abuse in the context of “historical trauma caused by loss 
of home, land, culture and language and the subsequent abuse of generations of 
Native children in American boarding schools”.

“Every single day, a majority of American Indian and Alaska Native children 
are exposed to violence within the walls of their own homes,” the report said. 
“Sadly, [American Indian] children experience post-traumatic stress disorder at 
the same rate as veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan and triple the 
rate of the general population.”

Physical abuse has been a factor in an epidemic of young people taking their 
own lives on Indian reservations. According to theCentres for Disease Control 
and Prevention <http://www.cdc.gov/>, suicide is the second most common cause 
of death for American Indians aged 10 to 34. It is two and a half times the 
national average for the age group.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F170e3273c4a48fb8f464a6a9926f82e1034b2f1c%2F0_254_5632_3381%2F5632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F170e3273c4a48fb8f464a6a9926f82e1034b2f1c%2F0_254_5632_3381%2F5632.jpg>
 An abandoned house in the desert in Blackwater. Photograph: Steve Craft for 
the Guardian 
Alan Blackwater lamented the death of a 16-year-old who took his own life in 
the town. “He was a good athlete. I don’t know if it was related to drugs,” he 
said. “We had a session where everybody came in and we talked about it.”

An 18-year-old student at Blackwater high school, Darius Jackson, was chosen 
as the reservation’s representative to a White House summit on American Indian 
youth last December.

“Youth suicide is an upcoming issue in my tribal community,” he told Arizona 
public broadcasting 
<http://cronkitenewsonline.com/2014/12/gila-river-teen-joins-hundreds-at-white-houses-tribal-nations-conference/>
. “Young people are taking their lives at a young age, and we’re trying to get 
that to decrease.”

The Obama administration launched a Hope for Life day 
<http://www.ncai.org/resources/resolutions/creating-an-annual-national-american-indian-and-alaska-native-hope-for-life-day-suicide-prevention-awareness-day>
 in September to “raise awareness in Indian country about suicide prevention”.

 “Native communities suffer from a suicide rate that is more than twice the 
national average,” said the administration’s assistant secretary for Indian 
affairs, Kevin Washburn, in launching the initiative. “There is no greater 
tragedy in Indian country.”

The White House report also linked the high number of young suicides to 
alcohol and drug abuse.

The reservation’s political leaders shy away from public discussion of such 
sensitive issues, preferring to regard them as an internal matter for the 
tribes. Gila River’s president and several of its politicians declined to speak 
or did not reply to interview requests.


Zuzette Kisto, then public affairs director at the Gila River reservation, 
went so far as to try to prevent reservation residents from talking on the 
grounds of “sovereignty”. She said questions had to be approved by the tribal 
council “because of the nature of the information”.

Asked if this was not in conflict with the first amendment of the US 
constitution, assuring free speech and a free press, Kisto replied: “Not 
according to our community guidelines.”

“Anything you do have can be confiscated by the tribal police and you can be 
arrested for criminal trespass,” she added.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11e51aefe8070135509504c512577cd2437fafa9%2F0_0_1440_812%2F1440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11e51aefe8070135509504c512577cd2437fafa9%2F0_0_1440_812%2F1440.jpg>
 Mikhail Sundust, left, and Paul Molina in In Circles. Photograph: PR 
Other members of the community are more open. Roberto and Claude Jackson wrote 
and directed a film set around its gang culture, calledIn Circles 
<http://www.incirclesfilm.com/>. Its protagonist, a young artist called Isaac, 
returns from “living it up in Phoenix” to be drawn in to confrontation with one 
of the reservation’s gangs. The film, made for only about $2,000, is at times a 
bleak portrait of life within the Gila River Indian community, touching on 
drugs, violence and despair for young people, though the story is ultimately 
one of redemption.

The Jackson brothers were out to reflect reality while not succumbing to 
despair. But they were concerned at the reaction the film might receive from 
the community.

“I didn’t want to tell a story that felt a Native American exploitation film 
or anything to that effect. We also had in mind about how our community is and 
how tribal nations are perceived,” said Claude. “Robert and I did latch on to a 
story that had these gangster movie elements but also knew that because our 
protagonist was an artist, we show everyone that in the end he’s victorious.

“He makes the right decision. He doesn’t resort to violence. He wins out and 
that’s the best thing we can ask for in the story.

“People have come up to us and expressed their gratification. One gentleman 
who was paralysed from the waist down, he saw the movie and he was telling me 
that a lot of the aspects of the movie were very realistic to him. He said it 
in a way where he said he was that era and situation. The gangs and violence. 
He said, look at how I am right now. He was really taken with it.”

The brothers grew up just off the reservation in south Phoenix, although both 
have worked on the reservation for years. “We’re pretty much urban Indian, as 
they say,” said Claude, who is a successful criminal and civil lawyer after 
being sworn in at the Arizona bar.

“There are opportunities we have now that weren’t around a few generations 
ago. Those are being taken advantage of with a lot of community members getting 
their degrees and becoming professionals. We recently had someone graduate and 
get a medical degree. They’re getting into the education field as well,” he 
said.

Federal funding and casino revenues offer young people the chance to pursue an 
advanced education. Grants pay for university fees and some colleges offer 
scholarships to Native American students to encourage diversity.

Still, all of that is a reminder of the obstacles many young Native Americans 
face.

Blackwater community school said in its report to the federal government that 
dropout rates on the reservation, ranging from 34% to 42% depending on the 
school, are about four times the Arizona state average of 9%. This in turn 
contributes to high unemployment and low wages, the submission said. According 
to the census, no resident of Blackwater has a university degree.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F826e09c0aa6f07db5b8e44f422eca36135a716cf%2F0_185_5642_3386%2F5642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F826e09c0aa6f07db5b8e44f422eca36135a716cf%2F0_185_5642_3386%2F5642.jpg>
 Blackwater Baptist church sign in Blackwater. Photograph: Steve Craft for the 
Guardian 
The tribes spent decades trying to revive the Gila river. The reservation’s 
leaders sent Ira Hayes to plead with leaders of Congress in Washington to pass 
a law restoring the water supply. It happened – but not until 2004.


The resulting settlement provided the reservation with enough water to supply 
a city the size of Washington DC and $680m to build aqueducts and irrigation 
systems.

After he returned to the reservation, Chuck Morgan got a job on construction 
of the waterways. “I started working on one end of it. Never thought I’d see it 
finished in my lifetime. They talked about it for a long time. Now I see it and 
it’s ‘wow’,” he said.

The reservation does not need anything like the amount of water it is now 
entitled to. In a desert region constantly battling drought and needing to 
provide for ever-growing cities, that puts the GRIC in a powerful and 
potentially profitable position.

Some on the reservation see the renewed flow of water as representing a 
revival that points the way back to traditional ways of life, including farming 
and foods, and a reversal of the diabetes epidemic.

But mostly hopes for the future are invested in the one-armed bandits and 
poker tables. Fifteen Indian tribes run casinos in Arizona, pulling in a total 
of nearly $2bn a year. They keep secret how much they make but, based on the 
number of gambling tables and machines, and revenue payments, the GRIC probably 
earns close to $250m a year.

Under agreements with the state, a slice helps to fund schools, hospitals, 
wildlife conservation and to promote tourism. The reservations give millions of 
dollars to causes of their own choice, such as food for the homeless and 
healthcare for poorer children.

In a reflection of the reversal of fortunes the tribes have enjoyed, Gila 
River reservation’s government has made individual donations running from a few 
thousand dollars to more than $100,000 to groups fighting child abuse, to 
research into diabetes, to a historical society, and to pay for body cameras 
for a police force of a town just beyond the reservation’s borders. It also 
donated $500,000 to a Phoenix homeless shelter.

This largesse, albeit as part of a politically forged agreement between the 
tribes and the state, prompted some on the Gila River reservation to ask why 
they weren’t getting their share.

The charge was led by Philbert Soroquisara 
<http://cronkitezine.asu.edu/spring2007/Gila%20River/Site/petition2.html>, who 
questioned why casino revenues were being used to sponsor professional baseball 
and American football teams in Phoenix. He also accused the tribal government 
of becoming greedy with gaming revenues and of paying itself bonuses while most 
residents got nothing.

“Everyone deserves a piece of that pie,” said Soroquisara, who died in 2009, 
during a campaign for direct cash payments to members of the tribes from the 
casino revenues. The tribal council was strongly opposed and for a while 
stalled the demand by warning that it could cause people to lose federal 
benefits such as food stamps. But eventually a referendum settled the matter as 
voters approved cash payments, known as revenue allocation, by two votes to 
one. Most members of the reservation receive about $1,200 a year, paid 
quarterly.

That community spirit does not extend to the reservation’s neighbours. Gila 
River’s tribal council is spending millions of dollars in legal fees and 
political donations to persuade the US Congress to block theTohono O’odham 
Nation <http://www.tonation-nsn.gov/> from building a casino closer to Phoenix 
than its own gambling palaces, and so potentially bleeding off a lot of 
business.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35504b204670e3d86ae6705956d731f2d117fe41%2F0_0_3761_5642%2F3761.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reservation%20town%20fighting%20alcoholism%2C%20obesity%20and%20ghosts%20from%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-arizona-native-americans-us-poorest-towns-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35504b204670e3d86ae6705956d731f2d117fe41%2F0_0_3761_5642%2F3761.jpg>
 A bullet hole in a stop sign in Blackwater. Photograph: Steve Craft for the 
Guardian 
The GRIC has enlisted political support with well-placed donations to John 
McCain, the former presidential candidate and one of Arizona’s senators. It has 
also hired a Washington DC lobby firm.

The issue has become increasingly bitter. The Tohono O’odham accuse McCain and 
other politicians of intruding on the sovereignty of the reservations, and the 
Gila River reservation of wanting to keep the spoils of gambling to itself.

The differences hinge on a patch of land the Tohono O’odham bought near 
Phoenix as compensation for a large area of agricultural land it lost to the 
construction of a dam by the US government. Because it is not contiguous to the 
main reservation, opponents of the casino argued it should not be recognised as 
tribal land. The courts did not agree and construction of the casino is under 
way.

For now the money is still flowing. 

Alan Blackwater is not sure all of this has been good for the community. He 
worries about overreliance.

“Maybe we were better off way back then. We had to pay our own bills and so 
forth. We had our own water company. We collected payments from each household 
and we had a responsibility to repair the water lines,” he said. “Now, we don’t 
take care of that. We don’t even pay for water. I think it cost too much to 
collect the payments. People used to get by in the old days too. There was more 
self-sufficiency, self-reliance.”

That’s not how Morgan sees it. “When I think back about it, from there we used 
to live with nothing and now we’ve got something. I’ve put in one of the new 
houses that’s coming up. My brother got a new house, and he waited 10 years. 
I’ve been on the list about five years,” he said.

“Some white people think we’re rich because we don’t have to pay for too much 
for anything. And we get money. But I wouldn’t call us rich.”
 