Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRL1I21zy3pw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRL1I21zy3pw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRL1I21zy3pw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 The Coen brothers give good trailer. From the strikingly stylish and 
suspensefulpromo for their debut, Blood Simple 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vI0ov8zzfQA>, to the intoxicatingly scattershot 
ragbag of images used to promote The Big Lebowski 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r_GCRFRcWxA&NR=1&feature=fvwp>, and the ominous 
spaces and desert-dry wit of theNo Country for Old Men ad 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1YLfpDBzhFI>, their trailers are finely-turned 
shorts that faithfully sample the flavour of the feature in question while 
offering a hand-rubbingly delicious trip of their own. As well as arresting 
images, they are particularly notable for a strongly developed sense of aural 
momentum – a tendency to employ pounding tunes and driving sound effects to 
pull the viewer through the often bizarre-seeming action on screen.

The trailer for A Serious Man <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RL1I21zy3pw&NR=1>
 is a masterpiece of accretive, accelerating sound design. It marks the first 
time that the Coens have used the sound of a head striking a blackboard as the 
base rhythm for a promo – not to mention the imaginative, in-tempo deployment 
of a hacking cough and a dismissive wheeze. But then there is plenty about A 
Serious Man that smacks of departure. Set in 1960s Minnesota and focusing on a 
Jewish academic couple and their young adolescent sons, it constitutes another 
stop in the film-makers' ongoing tour of recent American history and locations.

This time, however, the approach appears to be relatively toned down: the 
costumes and production design on show in the trailer seem to offer neither the 
cartoonish grotesquery of Raising Arizona orBurn After Reading 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125563/burn.after.reading> nor the 
handsome austerity of Miller's Crossing or No Country. Period-wise, they seem 
to be playing it straight. Plot-wise too. The challenges presented here take 
the decidedly quotidian form of a marriage in crisis, an unsatisfactory work 
review and the mild temptations of the girl next door – a far cry from the bags 
of cash or murderous animus that more usually drive a Coen screenplay. In terms 
of casting, too, you'll struggle to find a face you recognise, let alone the 
high-wattage A-listers who have populated the directors' most recent work.

This low-key conception might have something to do with the unmistakable 
overlap between the film's setting and the milieu of Joel and Ethan Coen's own 
childhood, even if they maintain that the central story – about the personal 
and professional travails of Professor Larry Gopnik (Michael Stuhlbarg) – is 
not based on their father's life. One aspect of the film's world with which 
they are familiar, though, is the strong emphasis on Jewishness, something that 
has been laced throughout many of the Coens' films but only comes to the fore 
here, with an attempted audience with a rabbi – a graver example of the 
grand-old-man type that peppers their movies – and what seems to be a synagogue 
scene offering a glimpse of the film-makers' young proxies.

All of which said, there is plenty about this new trailer that suggests fans 
of the Coens' previous output will be on comfortable ground. The way the 
rabbi's secretary makes Larry wait, and wait, for a belittling response to a 
humble but needy request is a painfully familiar dynamic of humiliation. The 
use of Jefferson Airplane's Somebody to Love harks back to such smart music 
choices as Blood Simple's It's the Same Old Song or Lebowski's Just Dropped In. 
And that head-on-the-blackboard opening is a pretty strong signal that, yes, 
even in suburban Minnesota (as in Fargo's Brainerd, part of the same state), 
there will be room for absurd violence. No sign so far of such perennial Coen 
trademarks as vomiting, bellowing and wigs – but then no serious picture gives 
everything away in the trailer.
 