
It does art a disservice to say it must work as a metaphor. Yet much Iranian 
cinema functions as such, for it has had to negotiate with censorship 
throughout its existence and develop a rich culture that relies on symbolism. 
Saying one thing and meaning another is an old tradition in the Persian arts. 
So when the deservedly celebrated Iranian filmA Separation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/jun/30/a-separation-review> is reviewed by 
predominently western critics, the symbolism at work in this drama will barely 
be glimpsed.

In Asghar Farhadi's film a middle-class family is being thrown into tumult. 
Nadar and Simin are evidently still in love, but they argue bitterly about the 
state of their country and are torn between their loyalty to their daughter, 
Termah, and Nadar's ageing father, who is suffering from Alzheimer's and must 
stay inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>. Simin is prepared to 
divorce Nadar. Anything to get Termah away from her home country.

The personal has never been so politicised as in contemporary Iran. State 
interference in the daily lives of Iranians is noted and commented on by many 
artists, but Farhadi's commentary is particularly authentic and incisive. Simin 
and Nadar represent the maternal feeling of flight and the paternal need to 
stay and fight for the cause: the Yin and Yang of the movement for reform. It's 
the same dilemma that has besieged and disabled generations of Iranians since 
the constitutional revolution almost 100 years ago: stay and suffocate or leave 
and be irrelevant.

The couple are young, professional and ambitious. What measure of meritocracy 
remains in Iran's version of crony capitalism favours them. They have the 
sophistication and the hustle you need to survive the rigours of Iranian 
society today. And their fictional struggle echoes the political struggle that 
we see in Iran today. Nadar's demand that Termah stand up for herself when she 
is short-changed by a garage worker, echoes the Green movement's question after 
the disputed presidential election: "Where is my change (vote)?"

On the other side of the class divide are Razieh (a woman Nadar hires to help 
care for his father) and her husband. They are the Iranian "wretched of the 
Earth" â€“ the bottom of the heap. They provided the targets for the Shah's army 
and the cannon fodder that put a halt to Saddam's invasion. It's them that 
supportKhamenei 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/may/06/iran-supreme-leader-ahmadinejad-minister>
, and they are part of the bloc who voted forAhmadinejad 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/mahmoud-ahmadinejad>. Their life choices are 
limited to say the least. Their opportunity for flight is nil. In their world, 
democracy is a suspect, unaffordable luxury item.

For them the investment in the revolution is an investment against the worst 
excesses of unbridled capitalism. This is the couple that "has little to lose 
and [is] therefore able to gamble all", as the husband cries out in one scene. 
They are the couple whose agency for change is and will always be the critical 
weight in Iranian politics, whether in the ballot box or in the fight on the 
streets.

In the real world the Green movement is stalling because it brought too many 
from Farhadi's couple A and not enough from couple B on to its side. Not simply 
because there are way more Bs than As, but because couple A have stuff to fall 
back on (potential for emigration, material wealth to cash in moment of crisis) 
and couple B have only faith and an apparently endless ability for suffering.

Khamenei and Ahmadinejad both overestimate the reliability of this power base. 
This couple and this class are also capable of unravelling under pressure. The 
husband's propensity for violence is self-defeating. The religious devotion of 
the wife is a knife that will cut both ways. Each couple is made of two 
tendencies within each archetype and political tendency: fight or flee and 
religious devotion v class antagonism. But in the end fruits of ill-gotten gain 
are inedible for the devout.

The milestone around everyone's neck is Iran. That beloved country ennobled 
and imprisoned by history, exactly like Nadar's suffering father. The state 
power, represented by the judicial examiner who oversees Nadar and Simin's 
divorce case, presides over an opera of lies. He's unconcerned about the truth 
of the matter, but is hypersensitive when his credentials are called into 
question. The state apparatus is the fig leaf of efficiency, rationality and 
even, modernity in a system that is an ideological construct of the most absurd 
kind.

Farhadi is a great world film-maker and a giant of Iranian cinema. The age of 
esoteric films like those of Abbas Kiarostami and Mohsen Makhmalbaf (whose 
beautiful, enigmatic films win festival prizes abroad but remain unwatched at 
home) is ending. The time of dialectic Iranian cinema is beginning. Farhadi 
talks to arthouse critics abroad and large audiences at home. This work's role 
in contributing to the wider public dialogue that is determining the future of 
Iran should not be underestimated.
 