
Q We recently moved house, and had a full building survey carried out, 
organised through our bank, First Direct. They instructed Independent 
Valuations Ltd (IVL), who in turn instructed a local surveyor. We paid IVL, who 
deducted the money directly from our bank account. We did not have any form of 
signed agreement with the surveyor.

Soon after we moved in we discovered extensive woodworm in the garage. This 
was not pointed out in the survey, even though the surveyor did go into the 
garage and even commented on areas where the woodworm is located. We wrote to 
the surveyor who eventually wrote back denying responsibility, without even 
revisiting the house.

We then contacted IVL, since we considered our contract was with them as they 
took our money. They denied responsibility and said we should deal with the 
surveyor and would have to follow their complaints procedure. We did this, and 
after numerous delays the surveyor wrote back again saying their insurance 
company denied responsibility.

We wrote back to IVL again, asking them several times to confirm that we had a 
contract directly with them since they took payment from us, and stating it was 
their responsibility to sort this out. They keep insisting we have to deal 
directly with the surveyor, but will not explicitly confirm or deny we have a 
contract with them. They ignored our references to the Supply of Goods and 
Services Act 1982.

How can a major bank deal with a company that appears to deny its legal 
responsibility? How can IVL simple ignore our requests for them to confirm 
whether or not we have a contract with them? How can they insist we deal with a 
third party with whom we do not have a contract?

We have a lot of correspondence sent by IVL and the general impression is that 
they are not taking their legal responsibilities seriously and are trying to 
fob us off. We think IVL has not followed the law and by failing to point out 
the woodworm did not perform its duty.

All we want to do is get the woodworm sorted out, but IVL keep insisting we 
have to deal directly with the surveyor. We think it is IVL's duty to resolve 
the problem, since we paid them more than Â£1,000. First Direct have tried but 
not helped very much - do they also have a legal responsibility?
RK

A It is unlikely your contract for the survey is with the bank - they rarely 
deal directly with surveyors unless you request a valuation that is carried out 
for the benefit of the lender. Moreover, IVL appears to be operating as a 
broker whose responsibilities extend to finding you a reputable surveyor with 
appropriate professional indemnity insurance.

You should certainly keep IVL informed, but the best way forward is to pursue 
your complaint directly with the surveyor who must report on defect in the 
property. Since you opted for a full building survey your surveyor owes you a 
high degree of care - so the failure to spot woodworm would appear to give you 
a cast-iron case against them. You are entitled to claim the difference between 
the price you paid for the property and the price you would have paid had you 
known about the defects.

If your surveyor continues to deny responsibility, ask for details of the 
firm's complaints handling procedure. If they don't have such a procedure in 
place you should contact the professional conduct team at theRoyal Institution 
of Chartered Surveyors <http://www.rics.org/>, who will ensure your complaint 
is handled correctly.
 