
Scientists have been baffled by the mass die-off of honeybees that has 
destroyed around10m beehives 
<http://www.usda.gov/documents/ReportHoneyBeeHealth.pdf> since 2007. The causes 
of this so-called “Colony Collapse Disorder <http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/in720>” 
are still unknown, although pesticides, fungicides, stress, poor nutrition and 
parasites are some of the possible causes being discussed. The collapse has 
sometimes taken on an almost sci-fi quality. For example, honeybees 
mysteriously disappear from their hives. Stranger still, their bodies are 
seldom found.

The crisis among these creatures has scientists worried. Bees are a crucial 
part of the crop cycle, the pollination of several species of flowers and, of 
course, a vital source of breakfast honey. Now, a new initiative from Syngenta, 
a Swiss agribusiness and the world’s largest manufacturer of crop chemicals, 
aims to boost the number of pollinating insects, especially bees, on commercial 
farms in the US. The project, called Operation Pollinator, will grow flowers 
and plants on what’s known as “marginal ground”, the thin strips and edges that 
border large plots of commercial farmland. These areas usually total about one 
or two acres per plot.

“We focus on ground that might not be as productive as other areas on the 
farm,” says Caydee Savinelli, entomologist and Pollinator Stewardship lead for 
the project. Savinelli explains that the plan is to let nature take its own 
course, filling the plots with wildflowers. Ultimately, this results in areas 
that resemble undeveloped meadows.

The initiative to attract pollinating insects originated in the UK over a 
decade ago. It has since expanded to more than 16 countries in Europe, with 
more than 3,000 farmers and other agriculturalists are participating in it 
today.

Bringing bees to the US 

Operation Pollinator began its research phase in the US in 2010. Syngenta, 
working with the University of California at Davis, Michigan State and the 
University of Florida, is currently assessing the scope of the project. They 
still need to determine which flowers are best suited to attract native 
insects, what the ideal seed mixtures are, how much the program will cost and 
what the maintenance schedule should be.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fa-swiss-pesticide-companys-plan-to-bring-back-the-bees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406915778807%2F79554561-7b7a-412d-88c2-a01d40db5533-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Swiss%20pesticide%20company's%20plan%20to%20bring%20back%20the%20bees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fa-swiss-pesticide-companys-plan-to-bring-back-the-bees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Swiss%20pesticide%20company%27s%20plan%20to%20bring%20back%20the%20bees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fa-swiss-pesticide-companys-plan-to-bring-back-the-bees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406915778807%2F79554561-7b7a-412d-88c2-a01d40db5533-2060x1236.jpeg>
 This field, located near a golf course, is one of Operation Pollinator’s first 
artificial meadows. It hopes that these open spaces will encourage bee colony 
growth. Photograph: Syngenta 
“The research and data collection is fairly intense,” says Savinelli, noting 
that the program is attempting to match the native insects to their ideal food 
sources. “We’re looking at which insects are there at which time of the year 
and which flowers attract them.”


Operation Pollinator already has been implemented on the marginal ground of 
more than 50 golf courses across 20 states. Now, Syngenta is turning its 
attention to commercial farms. It will launch five plots this year in northwest 
Mississippi, in partnership with the Delta Farmers Advocating Resource 
Management (Delta FARM), an association that aims to conserve and restore the 
environment.

A solution to multiple problems 

It isn’t hard to see why these farms and golf courses are willing to partner 
with Operation Pollinator. In addition to its work with insect populations and 
plant pollination, the program may also help combat other worrisome 
agricultural trends, including erosion and water pollution.

Generally, erosion occurs when farmers break up and turn the soil on a field. 
This process, known in the industry as “tillage”, can help with weed control 
and is necessary for growing crops. Unfortunately, it can also weaken the soil, 
causing it to wash away during heavy rains.

Plants grown on the perimeter of a field – such as the artificial meadows 
<http://www.xerces.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/06/2012_AGEE_lr_sec.pdf> that 
Operation Pollinator is creating – can help to prevent this erosion, and may 
also improve water quality. The water used on the crops may be tainted with 
pesticides and fungicides, and these border plants can help prevent the water 
from running off the land into nearby drains and streams.

“We’re shooting for the triple win – improve biodiversity, mitigate soil 
erosion and improve water quality,” says Jeff Peters, Syngenta’s digital 
farming lead.

Ultimately, the farmers will take over the individual plots. The goal in all 
these initiatives is to train the farmers so that they can maintain the 
pollinating meadows on their own. Syngenta says the program is a good way to 
build community, by attracting anyone with an interest or expertise in insects 
or gardening, including master gardeners and students from local schools.

“You get tired of planting grass and now they can plant flowers,” Savinelli 
said. “[Golf club] members love it because they see from when they first 
planted to when it starts flowering.”

Difficulties – and benefits 

There are, of course, challenges, including the availability of seed, the 
knowledge of local producers – which will depend on their engagement with the 
project – and cost.

Experts tend to agree that pollinator projects like Syngenta’s can be one of 
the most effective ways to re-populate declining bee numbers. “The bottom line 
is that as far as pollination ecologists know at present, restoring flowers has 
stronger positive effects on wild bees than do other possible interventions,” 
says Rachael Winfree, associate professor in the ecology, evolution and natural 
resources department at Rutgers University.

Winfree’s own studies have compared wild bee populations in different habitats 
and found that so-called “floral restorations” have produced 1.7 times as many 
bee species and three times as many bee individuals than nearby semi-natural 
areas. But she cautions that it’s still unknown whether the floral strips are 
simply attracting bees from elsewhere or generating more on their own.

A mixed history 

While Syngenta appears eager to contribute positively to restoring bee 
populations, the company has also recently come under fierce criticism for its 
role in manufacturing a key pesticide that has been linked to the bee decline.

According to a Harvard study published in May, pesticides known as 
neonicotinoids might lead to “impairment of honey bee neurological functions, 
specifically memory, cognition, or behavior”. The chemicals were given a 
three-year ban by the European Union in 2013, but last month Syngenta sought an
emergency exemption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/25/syngenta-exemption-neonicotinoid-insecticide-ban-oilseed-rape>
 to use the seed treatment on its UK crop. Earlier this month, the company
withdrew its application 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/04/syngneta-banned-pesticide-bees>
 after failing to get government approval to use the pesticide on 180,000 
hectares of crops.

Despite the studies and the on-going ban in Europe, Syngenta claims 
neonicotinoids don’t do any lasting harm to crops or bees. “The scientific 
evidence clearly shows that bees and other pollinators can coexist safely with 
neonicotinoid insecticides, when product labels are followed,” says Ann Bryan, 
a Syngenta spokesperson.

Bryan adds that in the US, where the pesticide hasn’t yet been banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/04/bees-buzzfeeds-pesticides-ban-congress>
, neonicotinoid products are used on more than 90% of all corn seed planted and 
“play a vital role in modern agriculture”. However, arecent report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/28/bee-research-funding-pesticides-mps>
 from the British government cast doubt on bee research that is sponsored by 
pesticide producers like Syngenta and called for more independent studies.


There is no direct link between Operation Pollinator and Syngenta’s pesticide 
problems: Operation Pollinator has been in effect for a decade, while the 
company’s pesticide problems are a far more recent development. But, taken as a 
whole, the two projects demonstrate the high stakes – and high costs – 
underlying the relationship between bees and agriculture.

Alison Moodie is a multimedia journalist based in Los Angeles. She is an 
editor and reporter at The Daily Mail and also covers technology, higher 
education andsustainability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional/sustainability> stories for 
GreenBiz, University World News and Agence France-Presse.

The values-led business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/values-led-business> hub is 
funded by SC Johnson. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 