
Like clothes pegs on a washing line the swallows are still, perching on the 
electricity cables. For once, since they arrived in spring, they have to stop, 
even in daylight. What they are pegging on the line between them is an 
invisible sheet, a map of their endless journey, north and south.

They pause. Seconds ago they were skimming at breakneck speed inches above the 
grass, the slightest error likely to be their last. Yet the excitement seems to 
embolden them, to give them heart.

Now they need direction too. Being less frenetic for a moment, the compasses 
in their heads have time to swivel. I wonder if their cardinal points come to 
rest here along the axis ofWenlock Edge 
<http://www.visitshropshirehills.co.uk/shropshire-hills/the-wrekin-and-wenlock-edge/>
. The Edge is like a spinal column and the birds flying along it are neurons, 
until it’s time to fling themselves off the end and away.

Bird 'backpacks' help scientists discover the longest oversea migration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/01/bird-backpacks-help-scientists-discover-the-longest-oversea-migration>
In the meantime, some preen, tweaking feathers into prime position. Some gaze 
facing into the distance together, backs straight, heads high, settling the 
route that spreads out across the sheet of sky like lines of a magnetic field. 
They will go soon.

I think I remember the week when the swifts pushed off, the day when I became 
aware there were nospotted flycatchers 
<http://www.garden-birds.co.uk/birds/spotted_flycatcher.htm> flitting between 
fenceposts. I forget when I lastheard a chiffchaff 
<http://www.british-birdsongs.uk/chiffchaff/>.


Leavings here are less noticeable than arrivals; they have more of a sense of 
the inevitable. They must occur following a decision, a day when the clan 
commits itself to its journey, an impulse as irresistible as a river entering 
the sea. What determines that moment when they can stay no longer, when, come 
hell or high water, it’s time to go?

Those swallows born this year, fledged only weeks ago, were flying hell for 
leather until they joined veterans of great migrations on the wires to settle 
something in their minds. Is there a story, a kind of shared mental map that 
works for them even if they’re separated and have no idea where they’re going? 
I feel the tide turning for the swallows.Migration 
<http://www.njaudubon.org/SectionOases/Howdoesmigrationwork.aspx> still has 
mysteries.



 