
Low-income black and Asian women are paying the highest price for austerity. 
By 2020 they will have lost nearly double the amount of money poor white men 
have. You wouldn’t know any of this from the current discourse around 
austerity, poverty andBrexit Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>: women of colour are 
consistently written out of the picture.

Women, people of colour and in particular women of colour are suffering the 
most. And they will continue to suffer disproportionately until 2020, according 
to research from theWomen’s Budget Group and the Runnymede Trust 
<http://wbg.org.uk/news/new-research-shows-poverty-ethnicity-gender-magnify-impact-austerity-bme-women/>
. If you dig down into their findings you see lone mothers are hit the hardest 
– and in this group it is once again women of colour who stand to lose out the 
most financially. This magnifies a trend that existed before austerity gripped 
the UK: even before the 2008 financial crash the poverty rates among minority 
ethnic communities were significantly higher than for the white population.

'Sexist' government cuts ignore equality laws, says women's group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/21/sexist-government-cuts-ignore-equality-laws-says-womens-group>
One of the most significant reasons why black and Asian women are 
disproportionately affected is that they’remore likely to be employed in the 
public sector 
<https://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/law/research/centres/chrp/publications/layers_of_inequality_executive_summary.pdf>
; working tirelessly as nurses in the NHS, or as teaching assistants and 
teachers in our state schools. As these frontline services are cut to the bone, 
so too are the bank accounts of the people that staff them.

A significant number of women of colour are also in low-paid jobs and insecure 
work – and they experience higher levels of unemployment than other groups. 
Since the 1980sunemployment rates among women of colour 
<http://www.runnymedetrust.org/uploads/publications/pdfs/APPGfemaleunemploymentReport-2012.pdf>
 have remained consistently higher than for white women. But state support, 
which is essential to top up criminally low pay or help people survive while 
they look for work, has been slashed.

Yet poverty isn’t produced in a vacuum – women of colour are in these 
positions because a combination of racism and sexism makes it difficult for 
them to find work.A report in 2012 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-20608039> 
found minority ethnic women face discrimination “at every stage of the 
recruitment process”. And importantly, this new research shows that when the 
effects of tax and benefit changes are analysed, black and Asian women at all 
levels of the economy are paying the highest price. This is the product of
institutional racism 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/britains-hidden-racism-workplace-inequality-has-grown-in-the-last-decade-9898930.html>
 and sexism that lurks under the surface of UK society.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fa-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20Day%20of%20the%20Girl%3A%20how%20inequality%20starts%20before%20birth%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fa-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20Day%20of%20the%20Girl%3A%20how%20inequality%20starts%20before%20birth%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fa-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl&media=>
International Day of the Girl: how inequality starts before birth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/oct/11/a-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl>
As well as intersecting with class, the economy is gendered and it is 
racialised. But this has been ignored for too long. Never has this been more 
apparent than in recent months. The left characterised Brexit as “a 
working-class revolt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/17/britain-working-class-revolt-eu-referendum>
”. Putting aside the large numbers of middle-class people who voted leave – 
people of colour make up a disproportionate number of the working class and 
they were far less likely to vote for Brexit. They were not significantly 
factored into the left’s analysis. As the left rushed to reduce everything down 
to economics, it failed to realise, as University of London researcher David 
Wearing has found, thatsocial attitudes, not social class 
<http://classonline.org.uk/blog/item/immigration-and-brexit-and-trump-its-more-about-social-attitudes-than-socia>
, played a large part in explaining the result.

This was done with relative ease because poverty among people of colour has 
longbeen normalised <https://twitter.com/stephenkb/status/798280165704880130> 
and working-class authenticityassumed to be synonymous with whiteness 
<http://www.versobooks.com/blogs/2934-the-centre-of-a-whirlwind-watching-whiteness-work>
. According to academicsDr Akwugo Emejulu and Dr Leah Bassel 
<http://www.minoritywomenandausterity.com/>, policy makers tend to engage with 
women of colour when they can be cast as passive victims – in relation to 
issues such asforced marriage or female genital mutilation 
<https://lra.le.ac.uk/bitstream/2381/36055/2/Emejulu%20and%20Bassel%20Minority%20Women%20RaceClass%20FINAL%2020Apr15.pdf>
 – or as “enterprising actors” in social enterprises. This can simplify the 
problems women of colour face; asking them to work in and with a system that 
discriminates against them.

'Theresa May's silence on women's issues is deafening'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/27/theresa-may-silence-womens-issues-sophie-walker-equality-party->
The near-erasure of women of colour from the austerity debate can be explained 
through what critical race scholar ProfessorKimberlé Crenshaw 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kimberl%C3%A9_Williams_Crenshaw> calls 
intersectionality 
<http://socialdifference.columbia.edu/files/socialdiff/projects/Article__Mapping_the_Margins_by_Kimblere_Crenshaw.pdf>
. This term, dismissed as too complex by some, explains the overlapping forms 
of discrimination people face because of their gender, race, class, sexuality, 
religion or disability. Crenshaw shows how women of colour are routinely 
treated as an afterthought, if they’re thought about at all.

Indeed, Emejulu and Bassel found that when women of colour take part in broad 
leftwing anti-austerity movements they’reoften stifled or ignored 
<http://www.versobooks.com/blogs/2303-from-blacklivesmatter-to-anti-austerity-women-of-colour-and-the-politics-of-solidarity>
. In a world that ranks white people above people of colour, and men above 
women, women of colour – in particular black women – are consistently 
disadvantaged and their experiences cast to one side. This is a reality that 
organisations such asBlack Activists Rising against Cuts 
<http://blackactivistsrisingagainstcuts.blogspot.co.uk/> (BARAC) and Sisters 
Uncut <http://www.sistersuncut.org/feministo/> have known for a long time.

Working-class women of colour experience triple discrimination along the lines 
of class, race and gender. Thanks to a toxic concoction of institutional racism 
and sexism, under austerity they are suffering the most. It is time for people 
to acknowledge that the system is broken in multiple, damaging ways.
 