
George Orwell may have claimed that international sport is "war by other 
means" but in the context of the special bitterness of an India-Pakistan 
cricket match, sport is simply another front in an ongoing battle of wills since
partition <https://www.theguardian.com/flash/page/0,,2144256,00.html>.

Easy as it is to descend into hyperbole on matters of national sport, the 
rivalry of south Asia's two dominant countries is sometimes actually 
understated, brushed off as a by-product of the hot-tempered mob mentality of 
Indians and Pakistanis caught up in moments of mass national hysteria. The 
truth is, the suffocating rivalry between the two states is a legacy of 
hundreds of years of divide-and-rule tactics employed by successive conquering 
powers, the last being the British. And the tactics worked so well, the enmity 
still burns fierce three or four generations deep in countries thousands of 
miles away from the sub-continent.

This week marks 60 years of independence for India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/india/g2/0,,2148380,00.html> and Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/pakistan/Story/0,,2148452,00.html>, 60 years since 
partition <https://www.theguardian.com/flash/page/0,,2144256,00.html> and all 
the bloodshed it produced, and 60 years of an already-disparate nation divided 
further by religion, politics, geography and culture. The countries have gone 
to war three times since then, diplomatic relations between the two have stayed 
consistently hostile, both are now nuclear powers and large chunks of the 
respective people so entrenched in their respective animosity, the reasons 
behind the bad blood in the first place have become so muddled and subjective 
it is difficult to distinguish truth from propaganda.

But in everyday life, nowhere does this animosity manifest itself more than in 
the most quintessentially English of games. Having appropriated the game of 
cricket from their colonial masters, Indians and Pakistanis took it to their 
hearts in a way never imagined by the stiff-upper-lipped officers that 
introduced it to the region. Riots, flag-burning, sectarian banners, angry 
crowds, machine gun-toting police with dogs and wire-fencing are a common sight 
when India andPakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> take to the 
field in grounds from Calcutta to Karachi. And in a region where the bat or 
ball creates sporting heroes or villains that dwarf their European or South 
American counterparts in terms of visibility, there is much more than athletic 
honour at stake.

India was granted Test status in 1932, a move widely believed to have 
galvanised support for Gandhi'sindependence movement 
<http://www.time.com/time/time100/leaders/profile/gandhi.html> as the country 
united behind the team. It was to be 20 years before the team won its first 
Test match, beating the former colonial masters, England, at Madras in 1952. 
While the country stood together behind the India team as long as the common 
enemy was the foreign occupying force, partition meant the team lost many of 
its best players to a newly created state. The violence between Hindus, Muslims 
and Sikhs as millions migrated across the newly-drawn borders to be with their 
religious kin saw the India side now become a symbol of the enemy to 
Pakistanis, and in a precursor to the Tebbit test, a litmus test of loyalty for 
the Muslims that stayed in India.

While Pakistan would not gain Test status until 1952, it was the partition of 
August 1947 that gave the rivalry its emotional centre; the death toll of that 
brutal, bloody period would hang heavily over any subsequent meetings between 
the two teams. And no strangers to opportunism, politicians in both states were 
keen to score political runs from the festering sores of partition and secular 
violence.

On October 16 1952, India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> and 
Pakistan played their first Test match at the Feroz Shah Kotla Ground in New 
Delhi and the heated rivalry was born. Towns and cities in both countries came 
to a standstill as people huddled round their radios to keep track of the score.

India won by an innings and 70 runs but Pakistan rallied to win the second 
Test of the series at Lucknow. Cricket fans across the world took notice, the 
stakes may have been high for the two protagonists but the pressure-cooker 
environment produced some superb cricket from the Indians, captained byLala 
Amarnath <http://content-usa.cricinfo.com/india/content/player/26223.html>, and 
the Pakistanis, led byAbdul Hafeez Kardar 
<http://content-usa.cricinfo.com/pakistan/content/player/41030.html>. The 
series was deemed a success, the rivalry passionate but tempered, and India 
journeyed to Pakistan in 1954 for a return series as the two nations basked in 
what they believed would be the uniting glow of cricket. And then the old 
divisions returned with a vengeance.

One of the first things either government does in times of diplomatic crisis 
is to suspend cricketing ties, and it is no hollow rhetoric. As Islamabad and 
New Delhi ratcheted up their sabre-rattling over the disputed Kashmir region in 
1960, cricketing ties were suspended. And they did not resume for another 18 
years. This routine was to continue into the 1980s and 1990s, not only robbing 
the sports world of one of its most intense contests but also leaving the 
cricket boards of both countries picking at their seams over all that lost 
revenue.

The two countries do not share the accolade of a sporting contest actually 
leading to a war, that distinction belongs toEl Salvador and Honduras 
<http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/war/elsalvador.htm>, but they 
have played during times of conflict in neutral venues. The 1999 World Cup in 
England saw the two face off at Old Trafford in Manchester, while the Kargil 
conflict raged in Kashmir. The volatile atmosphere was not helped by Indian and 
Pakistani newspapers quoting an Indian general who threatened to "rain fire" on 
the Pakistani line for every six hit by the batting maestro,Sachin Tendulkar 
<http://content-www.cricinfo.com/india/content/player/35320.html>. Similar 
pronouncements echoed from Pakistani paramilitaries, claiming they would fire 
rockets at the Indians for every wicket taken by the bowling supremo,Wasim Akram
 <http://content-usa.cricinfo.com/pakistan/content/player/43547.html>. So for 
some, the match turned into a cauldron of festering jingoism, albeit 
ameliorated by some lighthearted signs, including "Inzamam ate my paratha" and 
"Shoaib Akhtar: product of Pakistan nuclear testing". However, with much of the 
support running at volcanic levels for both sides, predominantly from second 
generation British-Asians,clashes ensued 
<http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4158/is_19990609/ai_n14231564> between 
opposing fans at the end.

However, it was the motherlands that really showed the diaspora how to do it, 
earlier that same year. In January, zealots from the Hindu fundamentalist 
party, Shiv Sena,vandalised 
<http://www.hinduonnet.com/fline/fl1602/16020280.htm> the pitch at New Delhi, 
before Pakistan were due to play. They had form for this kind of stunt, digging 
up the pitch at Mumbai's Wankhede stadium in 1991, again when the Pakistan side 
was touring.

In February 1999, a pitch invasion by angry Indian fans at Eden Gardens, 
Calcutta, held up play for nearly an hour after a bizarre run-out saw 
Tendulkar's wicket fall. The invasion itself followed a vicious shower of 
stones and bottles that forced both sides off the pitch, only to re-emerge and 
finish the game in an empty stadium three hours later, once the crowds had been 
cleared by stick-wielding riot police. Pakistan's captain, Akram, summed up the 
feelings of both sets of players and the watching world: "Hopefully, what 
happened, will never happen again in cricket history."

Sadly, crowd violence has been a part of cricket in the sub-continent for a 
long time, and not just between India and Pakistan. The 1996 World Cupsemi-final
 <http://www.indianexpress.com/res/web/pIe/ie/daily/19990221/ige21004.html> 
between India and Sri Lanka, again at Eden Gardens, was abandoned after fans 
began setting fire to the stands after an Indian collapse. Indian batsmanRavi 
Shastri <http://content-usa.cricinfo.com/india/content/player/33975.html>'s 
house was stoned after a poor performance in the 1992 World Cup. Images of 
Pakistani skipperInzamam Ul-Haq 
<http://content-usa.cricinfo.com/pakistan/content/player/40570.html> were 
burned in the streets after they lost to Ireland earlier this year. Indians and 
Pakistanis have a fever for the cricket, a fever that breaks the mercury when 
they play each other.

The rivalry undoubtedly has distasteful elements, but so do all the fiercest 
ones - England versus Germany or Argentina in football, the old USSR and the US 
in the Olympics, Croatia and Serbia in anything - but it defines each set of 
fans by their will to win against the other. And with the global TV audience 
for any competitive contest between the two usually topping 1 billion, 
nationalism is big business in south Asia.

And how can anyone forget how enjoyable it is, too? Millions are able to 
subscribe to the animosity for purely sporting rather than political reasons. 
After all, high tension often provides high drama, such as Pakistan's batting 
powerhouseJaved Miandad 
<http://content-usa.cricinfo.com/pakistan/content/player/40879.html> goading 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JBv5DNxCoBc> Indian wicket keeper Kiran More 
<http://content-usa.cricinfo.com/india/content/player/31038.html> for his 
frequent appeals in the 1992 World Cup. Or Inzamamwading into a Toronto crowd 
<http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=2202243578254447315&q=inzamam+aloo&total=1&start=0&num=10&so=0&type=search&plindex=0>
 in 1997 on a search-and-destroy mission after a plucky Indian fan called him a 
"mota aloo" (fat potato).

Partition may have freed the sub-continent from the clutches of a foreign 
power but it also generated an implosive clash of ideologies. Most Indian and 
Pakistani cricket fans have no problem with English ones, in fact both sets 
will usually support the former empire over their closest rivals. They embrace 
the good nature of cricket except when it impinges on their rights to dislike 
whom they please - especially their neighbours. The message to the British has 
always been clear: they may have ruled but it was only a temporary, 400-year 
distraction from the real enemies going eyeball to eyeball. To paraphrase Oscar 
Wilde, the birth of two countries divided by a common sport.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 