
Although it was those with a gratuitous reliance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qpgTC9MDx1o> on flesh and fornication who took 
up column space in 2014, the music video industry is currently experiencing a 
boom in ingenuity. Both ends of the musical spectrum have been flexing their 
visionary muscles too – the commercial artists have had the incentive toboost 
streams for Billboard chart placement 
<http://www.billboard.com/biz/articles/news/chart-alert/1549398/billboard-nielsen-add-youtube-video-streaming-to-its-platforms>
, while the influx of product placement in videos has prompted many to be a 
little more creative with their flogging. Smaller, less financially secure 
artists meanwhile have a renewed interest in making some form of visual viral 
art that will travel across the internet and into corners that would previously 
be untouched.

As Lady Gaga knows all too well, a big blockbuster music 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EVBsypHzF3U> video can kickstart your career 
quicker than any artistic merit – so when the absurdly ostentatious G.U.Y. film 
was released to very little acclaim (and even got her in a spot of trouble with 
localenvironmentalists 
<http://nypost.com/2014/04/15/lady-gaga-wastes-a-massive-amount-of-water-during-drought-for-video-sources/>
), it was the first of many signs that the art obsessive’s career might be in 
trouble. The same can’t be said forCharli XCX or Iggy Azalea’s Fancy 
<http://www.muzu.tv/iggy-azalea/fancy-music-video/2179019/>, however: their 
video, directed by Director X, was the impetus behind their ascent on both 
sides of the Atlantic. The attention to detail in this recreation of 90s cult 
film Clueless helped both artists, with their portrayal as Cher Horowitz and 
Tai Frasier, to crack open the teen market.

Those with less of a budget to play with dabbled in the digital revolution 
using inventive methods, often inspired by an obsession with the online world – 
such asHolly Herndon’s video for Chorus, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nHujh3yA3BE 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nHujh3yA3BE> created by Akihiko Taniguchi, 
which explores the “physicality of the computer and internet”, or Ramona Lisa’s 
lyric video, which offered a dose ofSecond Life 
<http://secondlife.com/?sourceid=0909-sergoog-3d-wicr8&gclid=CNufs-mIp8ICFXQatAod6mIAsQ>
 styled surrealism for her Backwards and Upwards promo. The deliberately naff 
powerpoint animation forRustie’s Attak 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_mO2VcJAkOw> was a smart backdrop to Danny 
Brown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_mO2VcJAkOw>’s enigmatic studio 
performance, whileArca’s hypnotic video for Thievery 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XQXKelbB9wk> by Jesse Kanda (artist and Chris 
Cunningham admirer also behindFKA Twigs’ Water Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kFtMl-uipA8>) was possibly one of the year’s 
most definitive in terms of technological trickery, described byStereogum 
<http://www.stereogum.com/1708611/arca-thievery-video-nsfw/video/> as doing 
“for twerking what Aphex Twin’sWindowlicker 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MBaEEODzU0> did for late-90s rap-video 
excess”.

Whether Arca’s video was a commentary on the objectification of the female 
form or a celebration of it, sexuality in all of its gory details has been 
documented thoroughly this year – even if David Cameron attempted to censor it 
with his futileage verification scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/oct/02/music-video-nasties-david-cameron-age-ratings-scheme-maroon-5>
. As opposed to Nicki Minaj’s cartoonish sexuality onAnaconda 
<http://www.muzu.tv/iggy-azalea/booty-music-video/2300433/> or Jennifer Lopez’s 
boring Booty <http://www.muzu.tv/iggy-azalea/booty-music-video/2300433/>, the 
indie world experimented with intimacy in a more subtle way, such asGlass 
Animals’ Gooey <http://www.muzu.tv/glass-animals/gooey-music-video/2318311/> 
video, which stuck its lenses up against human touch and moisture, or Alt-J’s 
unconventional innuendo onEvery Other Freckle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-mhgfXgwdls> and Shura’s hipster liplocking 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x2AOjb9HW2E> on the slinky single Touch. No 
mention of sexuality would be complete without FKA Twigs however, and her 
entomological movements provided a regular source of skewered sexiness:Video 
Girl <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2jhTiLuGezI> and Two Weeks were po-faced 
and lavish visions that ensured that news of an FKA Twigs video is now an event 
in the music world. The latter, Two Weeks, was of course directed by Nabil – 
whose monochrome masterpiece forNicki Minaj’s Lookin’ Ass 
<http://www.muzu.tv/young-money/lookin-ass-music-video/2174404/> left the most 
lasting impression – and possibly one of the most memorable of the rap genre 
itself; it’s a stark, visceral attack that unfurls its fury with sinister style 
and control.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXQXKelbB9wk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXQXKelbB9wk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXQXKelbB9wk&media=>
Ariel Pink’s press officer 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/10133-ariel-pink-beta-male-misogyny> might have 
had a tough year, but his videos ramped up his outsider image brilliantly – 
Grant Singer’sPicture Me Gone <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YS87mPfD_yI> 
tackles identity and loneliness withTexas Chainsaw Massacre 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vs3981DoINw> masks, while Put Your Number in 
My Phone reinforcedPink’s <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YS87mPfD_yI> 
obsession with those on the margins of society by setting it in a shopping mall 
– the anti-Fancy <http://www.muzu.tv/iggy-azalea/fancy-music-video/2179019/>, 
if you will. The return ofDie Antwoord also 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uMK0prafzw0> prompted the usual viral 
onslaught, with Ugly Boy enlisting the help of Dita von Teese, Cara Delevingne 
and Marilyn Manson. Elsewhere, a less nightmarish vision arrived in the form of 
Michel Gondry’s meta dreamscape for Metronomy’s Love Letters andSt Vincent’s 
factory line Cos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mVAxUMuhz98> advert for 
Digital Witness was a vision in peculiarity and pastel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuMK0prafzw0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuMK0prafzw0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuMK0prafzw0&media=>
Aside from technological advances and serious social messages, there was a bit 
of old-fashioned dancing to brighten up the year – most recently withBruno Mars 
and Mark Ronson’s excellently slick Uptight Funk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OPf0YbXqDm0>. Although Taylor Swift’s Shake It 
Off <http://www.muzu.tv/taylor-swift/shake-it-off-music-video/2286394/>was a 
whistle-stop tour of contemporary styles, it was the least inventive of the lot 
when it came to choreography: from the “carefully cultivated candour” of
Beyonce’s 7/11 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OSAOsm1u-OE> video to 
Babymetal’s 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WIKqgE4BwAY&list=PL58vd_CKU-NkdhjOb4J0vOKGigTeoQzR3&index=1>
 breakthrough bonanza – there were plenty of ridiculous new moves to marvel at, 
while Sia’sChandelier video  
<http://www.vevo.com/watch/sia/Chandelier-%28Official-Video%29/USRV81400135>
helped her step up from songwriter du jour to artist within her own right (even 
if she channelled her inner superstar viaMaddie Ziegler 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maddie_Ziegler>). Kindness’ This is Not About Us 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7GBDwFDtmLo> took a trip Back to Life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TB54dZkzZOY> with his sophisticated 80s and 
early 90s-inspired silhouettes, and if Beyoncé’s Blow and Jungle’s The Heat 
reintroduced rollerskates back into the realm of acceptability in 2013,William 
Onyeabor 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LBZltuHcpVo&list=PL58vd_CKU-NkdhjOb4J0vOKGigTeoQzR3&index=17>
’s Fantastic Man tipped off the trend in gloriously unglamorous form.

Other artists have a less complicated approach to promoting their message 
however – we watchedTove Lo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SYM-RJwSGQ8> 
slowly cultivate a week-long hangover, and Elliphant and MØ behaved
disgracefully in the back of a cab <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sx1mHSo7ug4>
 – proving that all you really need to score a hit video these days is a bottle 
of sambuca and a cabbie willing to let you chuff a fag on the back seat. Maybe 
someone should let Gaga in on the secret.

• Which are your favourite music videos of 2014? Let us know in the comments 
below.
 