
A David-and-Goliath battle between a low budget film set in Laos and an 
extravagant Hollywood production ofThe Great Gatsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/150967/great-gatsby> ended with the 
giant victorious at Australia's Academy Awards,the Aactas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/30/aacta-awards-2014-live>

Baz Luhrmann's blockbuster, filmed entirely in Sydney studios with computer 
graphics helping to create theF Scott Fitzgerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fscottfitzgerald> story's Long Island and 
New York backdrops, took six of the top prizes on 30 January, including best 
film, director, and adapted screenplay for Luhrmann and long-time collaborator 
Craig Pearce. This brought its tally to 13 following its sweep of the craft 
awards announced two days earlier at the country's top annual film and TV 
awards.

In the television categories, Jane Campion's quirky crime series Top of the 
Lake <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-of-the-lake>, a four nation 
co-production set in rural New Zealand, emerged triumphant as best telefeature 
or miniseries. Nine Network's story of the clash of media titansFrank and Kerry 
Packer and Rupert Murdoch, Power Games: The Packer-Murdoch Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2013/sep/08/power-games-packer-murdoch-review>
, collected three TV drama prizes (for best direction and actors Lachy Hulme 
and Luke Ford as Packer father and son); and the second season of the ABC's 
Redfern Now, a groundbreaking series set in and around Sydney's biggest 
indigenous community, held its head aloft as best TV drama series.

Claudia Karvan brought more kudos to the ABC as best TV drama lead actress in 
thirty-and-fortysomething seriesThe Time of Our Lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/australia-culture-blog/2013/jun/23/time-of-our-lives-review>
, and Kat Stewart reeled in a best lead actress prize for Network Ten's popular 
comedy-dramaOffspring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2013/aug/15/television>
, with screenwriter Debra Oswald picking up the writing prize for one of its 
episodes. In a decision likely to produce sobbing in the Seven Network's 
corridors, Ten's Masterchef: the Professionals shoved aside its rival, My 
Kitchen Rules, for top reality show.

Luhrmann's exuberantly stylised adaptation of one of America's favourite 
novels scooped three of the top film acting prizes, with absent Hollywood star
Leonardo DiCaprio <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio> anointed 
for his role as party-throwing 1920s tycoon Jay Gatsby, while Joel Edgerton's 
portrayal of macho millionaire Tom Buchanan won him best supporting actor. 
Newcomer Elizabeth Debicki's supporting actress trophy for her role as 
glamorous society girl Jordan Baker arrived early during the ceremony, giving a 
good idea as to where the night was headed.

However, the big-earning but critically divisive Gatsby was beaten in one 
major category, with Britain's Carey Mulligan pipped to the best lead actress 
trophy by Australian Rose Byrne. Byrne played a domestic violence victim who 
discovers Jesus in The Turning,a three-hour compendium of short films adapted 
from a story collection by author Tim Winton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2013/aug/05/the-turning-tim-winton-review>
. Byrne appeared in only one of the 18 segments.

The Rocket, about a cursed boy who competes in a village rocket competition, 
was the second most nominated film with 12 nods to Gatsby's 14. But the smaller 
film – set and filmed in Laos using a Laotian cast and boasting prizes from 
international festivals Tribeca and Berlin – only came away with best original 
screenplay for its writer-director Kim Mordaunt, a category in which Gatsby 
wasn't eligible. Mordaunt said he was surprised that the film, which features 
villagers displaced by a dam project, had been banned in Laos, but added that 
hydroelectricity was "very political" there at the moment.

Despite their huge differences in style and budget, Gatsby and The Rocket 
exemplified a trend in Australian cinema, as it moves away from the desert 
epics and gaudy suburban comedies for which it was once renowned in favour of 
international or foreign stories that few would guess were Australian. Foreign 
locations even extended to the best documentary, Red Obsession, a film about 
China's effect on the French fine wine industry narrated by Russell Crowe. 
Luhrmann told reporters the diversity of Australian films was a sign of the 
industry's maturity and showed "how nimble we are as a creative hub".

Jacki Weaver received the Raymond Longford Award in recognition of her long 
career while the Byron Kennedy award was given to an organisation for the first 
time, the Australian Cinematographers Society. Best TV comedy went to Please 
Like Me, and the ABC's Shaun Micallef took best comedy performance for Mad As 
Hell.

Gallery: Cate Blanchett and Geoffrey Rush on the red carpet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2014/jan/30/aacta-awards-2014-cate-blanchett-geoffrey-rush-pictures>

• This article was amended on 3 February 2014. An earlier version said best TV 
comedy went to Mad as Hell
 