
The annual Aacta awards got at least one thing absolutely right. National 
treasure David Gulpilil was awarded best leading actor for his exquisitely 
soulful performance in director Rolf de Heer’s poignant character drama 
Charlie’s Country. A great Australian performance in a greatAustralian film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia>, accepted by a great Australian 
actor.

And it was certainly an improvement on last year. Announcing the same award in 
2014, the Aacta president, Geoffrey Rush, opened the envelope and the name that 
emanated from his lips, in that beautifully varnished voice of his, wasn’t even 
Australian.

It was Leonardo DiCaprio. The five-time Oscar nominee won it for The Great 
Gatsby, Baz Luhrmann’s glittery blockbuster. Financed mostly by Hollywood big 
brass, the Australia-born director’s adaptation of F Scott Fitzgerald’s great 
American novel took a record-equal haul of 13 Aactas including best film, best 
direction, best adapted screenplay and best cinematography.

The ceremony’s fanboy fawning over Baz bordered on fetishistic. Delta Goodrem 
and co sang tributes in front of a montages from his movies. A showering of 
balloons fell on to a bemused audience. Baz gave himself a standing ovation.

“That Baz tribute started to get a bit embarrassing,” wrote the Guardian’s 
Vicky Frost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/30/aacta-awards-2014-live>
. Triple J reviewer Marc Fennell went further, saying it was nothing less than a
“public felating” <https://twitter.com/marcfennell/status/428845052316491776> 
(sic).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Faactas-awards-2015-red-carpet-highlights-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422569245468%2FGeoffrey-Rush-2015-Aactas-013.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aacta%20awards%202015%3A%20red%20carpet%20highlights%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Faactas-awards-2015-red-carpet-highlights-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aacta%20awards%202015%3A%20red%20carpet%20highlights%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Faactas-awards-2015-red-carpet-highlights-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422569245468%2FGeoffrey-Rush-2015-Aactas-013.jpg>
The 2015 Aactas were given a chance to redeem themselves. Or at least to 
remind audiences that Australian cinema is about more than tax concessions to 
large-scale overseas productions. There was a plethora ofexcellent Australian 
films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/17/australian-film-in-2014-the-year-that-genre-film-making-hit-its-stride>
 released in 2014, truly a vintage year for local cinema. But the night ended 
on a weird note.

In the all-important best film category, the Australian academy (care of hosts 
Cate Blanchett and Deborah Mailman) announced it had no winner at all. The 
category was a tie between two polar opposites: glossy box office smash-hitThe 
Water Diviner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/09/the-water-diviner-first-look-review-a-handsome-crowdpleaser-from-russell-crowe>
, the most successful Australian film of 2014 at the box office, and low-budget 
psychological creepy crawlyThe Babadook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/oct/29/the-babadooks-monster-uk-box-office-success-highlights-problems-at-home>
, which made a paltry amount of money in local cinemas but found international 
success and acclaim.

Never has the ceremony highlighted such a stark contrast in film-making, and 
never has the academy seemed so confounded by the challenge of distinguishing 
great art from handsome mainstream product.

Aacta awards 2015 – as they happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2015/jan/29/aacta-awards-2015-live-coverage>
Perhaps the Aacta’s bad luck began in 2011 when the Australian Film Institute 
changed the distinguished sounding AFI awards, as they had been known since 
1958, to the current gimmicky-sounding acronym (Geddit? Actor?). Now the dust 
has settled, is it time to take a poll on which name we prefer?

One thing not up for debate was the extraordinary amount of talent that filled 
the room last night at Sydney’s Star casino. Tremendous achievements were 
recognised alongside Gulpilil, including Sarah Snook as best lead actress for 
Predestination, David Hirschfelder’s best original music score forThe Railway 
Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-railway-man> and The Babadook’s 
Jennifer Kent who picked up best original screenplay and best director. Richly 
deserved on all counts.
 