
Aaron Sorkin, the Oscar-winning screenwriter of the Social Network and creator 
of the popular political seriesThe West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing>, has written a letter 
to his wife and 15-year-old daughter after the election of Donald Trump, in 
which he calls on them to “fight injustice” anywhere they see it.

The letter, which is addressed to “Sorkin Girls”, focuses on the potential 
pitfalls of a Trump victory as well as the importance of keeping hope in the 
face of difficulty.

“Well the world changed late last night in a way I couldn’t protect us from,” 
Sorkin writes inthe letter published by Vanity Fair 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/11/aaron-sorkin-donald-trump-president-letter-daughter>
. “That’s a terrible feeling for a father. I won’t sugarcoat it – this is truly 
horrible.

Brexit and Trump mark a whitelash. Politicians must not pander to it | Polly 
Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/brexit-trump-whitelash-politicians-must-not-pander>
“It’s hardly the first time my candidate didn’t win (in fact it’s the sixth 
time) but it is the first time that a thoroughly incompetent pig with dangerous 
ideas, a serious psychiatric disorder, no knowledge of the world and no 
curiosity to learn has.”

Sorkin goes on to lament that it was not just Trump who won but his supporters 
too, including the Ku Klux Klan as well as “white nationalists, sexists, 
racists and buffoons. Angry young white men who think rap music and Cinco de 
Mayo are a threat to their way of life … men who have no right to call 
themselves that and who think women who aspire to more than looking hot are 
shrill, ugly and otherwise worthy of our scorn rather than our admiration.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Hate, he writes, was given hope, and “abject dumbness” was glamorised as the 
voice of the outsider. “And the world took no time to react. The Dow futures 
dropped 7,000 points overnight. Economist are predicting a deep and prolonged 
recession. Our Nato allies are in a state of legitimate fear. And speaking of 
fear, Muslim-Americans [sic], Mexican-Americans and African-Americans are 
shaking in their shoes. And we’d be right to note than many of Donald Trump’s 
fans are not fans of Jews.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Faaron-sorkin-publishes-letter-urging-daughter-to-fight-after-trump-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66c8673a97f2542f6d8ec919a2df90f95623dbaa%2F0_148_5266_3160%2F5266.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Sorkin%20publishes%20letter%20urging%20daughter%20to%20fight%20after%20Trump%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Faaron-sorkin-publishes-letter-urging-daughter-to-fight-after-trump-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Sorkin%20publishes%20letter%20urging%20daughter%20to%20fight%20after%20Trump%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Faaron-sorkin-publishes-letter-urging-daughter-to-fight-after-trump-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66c8673a97f2542f6d8ec919a2df90f95623dbaa%2F0_148_5266_3160%2F5266.jpg>
 Donald Trump smiles as he arrives to speak at an election night rally in New 
York. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
The West Wing detailed the inner workings of government and followed the 
two-term presidency of Jed Bartlet, a Democrat from New Hampshire – played by 
Martin Sheen – who was characterised by his fierce intellect, integrity and wit.

The drama, which won three Golden Globe awards and 26 Emmys in its seven-year 
run from 1999-2006, detailed the difficulties of executing power, and was often 
idealistic in its depiction of good triumphing over evil.

The 1600 Pennsylvania imagined by Sorkin could not be more different from the 
one expected under Trump. President Bartlet, a Nobel prize-winning economist, 
was in favour of foreign aid and immigration, pushed for progressive social 
policies and put a Latino liberal in the supreme court.

Madeleine Albright warns Trump against isolationist posturing on Nato
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/madeleine-albright-donald-trump-nato-isolationism>
In the letter, Sorkin advises his daughter, Roxy, and her mother, Julia, to 
remember that they are not alone, that a hundred million people in America and 
a billion more around the world feel similarly. “The Trumpsters want to see 
people like us (Jewish, ‘coastal elites’, educated, socially progressive, 
Hollywood …) sobbing and wailing and talking about moving to Canada,” he 
writes. “I won’t give them that and neither will you. Here’s what we’ll do …


“We’ll fucking fight. (Roxy, there’s a time for this kind of language and it’s 
now.) We’re not powerless and we’re not voiceless. We don’t have majorities in 
the House or Senate but we do have representatives there. It’s also good to 
remember that most members of Trump’s own party feel exactly the same way about 
him that we do. We make sure that the people we sent to Washington – including 
Kamala Harris – take our strength with them and never take a day off.

“We get involved. We do what we can to fight injustice anywhere we see it 
–whether it’s writing a cheque or rolling up our sleeves. Our family is fairly 
insulated from the effects of a Trump presidency so we fight for the families 
that aren’t. We fight for a woman to keep her right to choose. We fight for the 
first amendment and we fight mostly for equality – not for a guarantee of equal 
outcomes but for equal opportunities. We stand up.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Faaron-sorkin-publishes-letter-urging-daughter-to-fight-after-trump-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c6997b3635136e4487f63a64eaa27c98e591902%2F0_676_2433_1460%2F2433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Sorkin%20publishes%20letter%20urging%20daughter%20to%20fight%20after%20Trump%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Faaron-sorkin-publishes-letter-urging-daughter-to-fight-after-trump-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Sorkin%20publishes%20letter%20urging%20daughter%20to%20fight%20after%20Trump%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Faaron-sorkin-publishes-letter-urging-daughter-to-fight-after-trump-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c6997b3635136e4487f63a64eaa27c98e591902%2F0_676_2433_1460%2F2433.jpg>
 Jed Bartlet in The West Wing. Photograph: NBCUPHOTOBANK / Rex Features 
Recently, the cast of The West Wing, including Richard Schiff, Allison Janney, 
Bradley Whitford, Joshua Malina, Dulé Hill and Mary McCormack, reunited in Ohio 
to campaign for Hillary Clinton. Sorkin, meanwhile, who is also the mastermind 
of the series The Newsroom, concludes his letter by writing that throughout 
American history the darkest of days have always been followed by the finest 
hours.


“Roxy, I know my predictions have let you down in the past, but personally, I 
don’t think this guy can make it a year without committing an impeachable 
crime. If he does manage to be a douche nozzle without breaking the law for 
four years, we’ll make it through those four years. And three years from now 
we’ll fight like hell for our candidate and we’ll win and they’ll lose and this 
time they’ll lose for good. Honey, it’ll be your first vote.

“The battle isn’t over, it’s just begun. Grandpa fought in World War II and 
when he came home this country handed him an opportunity to make a great life 
for his family. I will not hand his granddaughter a country shaped by hateful 
and stupid men. Your tears last night woke me up, and I’ll never go to sleep on 
you again.”
 