
Steve Wozniak is upset. After being slighted and patronised one too many 
times, Steve Jobs’s right-hand man, the man with whom he foundedApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>, is about to break. In a theatre 
scattered with acolytes, all feverishly preparing for one of Jobs’s famed 
product launches, Wozniak snaps. It’s the end of a horribly public spat and he 
goes for Jobs’s jugular. “Your products are better than you are, brother,” he 
says. But Jobs is not offended. He fixes him in the eye. “That’s the idea, 
brother,” he replies.

He’d cut you to ribbons in order to get at what he knew was right
Aaron Sorkin 
And that, believes Aaron Sorkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin>, who wrote the scene, is the 
difference between Jobs and everyone else. The subject of Danny Boyle’s 
much-anticipated film biopic Steve Jobs was, its screenwriter says, obsessed 
with perfection, and comfortable with the cost of collateral damage. Sorkin 
hardly cuts corners, either; his work, beginning with A Few Good Men in 1992, 
is always rich with detail. Whether he’s tackling politics (The West Wing), 
tech prodigies (The Social Network) or media (The Newsroom), he meshes micro 
with macro, contrasting dense information with recurrent human themes: power, 
morality, control.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F12%2F1447337353294%2FKP_594371_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F12%2F1447337353294%2FKP_594371_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Steve Jobs - video review 
Sorkin is a fieldworker. The Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-social-network> was adapted from Ben 
Mezrich’s book The Accidental Billionaires, but that’s hardly the real story. 
Sorkin signed on when the book was just a 14-page proposal; he researched it 
himself, meeting many of the main players and studying the lawsuits. Similarly, 
while his Steve Jobs film is officially based on Walter Isaacson’s biography, 
Sorkin used it as a mere starting point, and it took him a year to interview 
Jobs’s colleagues, competitors and family. “I spent many months pacing and 
banging my head against the wall,” he says on the phone from Los Angeles, 
describing his efforts to work out what story he wanted to tell. But meeting 
those who knew Jobs was the key.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Faaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-michael-fassbender%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446653656859%2F5bc7c5b2-c76b-4bdf-b050-a9185b9626db-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Sorkin%20on%20the%20cult%20of%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20hadn't%20seen%20anything%20like%20it%20since%20John%20Lennon%20was%20killed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Faaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-michael-fassbender%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Sorkin%20on%20the%20cult%20of%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20hadn%27t%20seen%20anything%20like%20it%20since%20John%20Lennon%20was%20killed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Faaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-michael-fassbender%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446653656859%2F5bc7c5b2-c76b-4bdf-b050-a9185b9626db-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Seth Rogen and Michael Fassbender in Steve Jobs. Photograph: Everett/REX 
Shutterstock 
What he learned struck a chord, particularly the stories of Jobs’s unwavering 
commitment to perfection. One story Sorkin relates, from an Apple worker he 
met, involves Jobs wanting a photo of a birthday cake for a two-second slide at 
a product launch; she presented him with photos of 38 different cakes until he 
was happy.

Steve Jobs: the legacy of Apple's mysterious co-founder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/01/steve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney>
“If you got in the way of his creation of something you could love,” says 
Sorkin, “if you didn’t understand the point of spending more money on 
rectangles with rounded corners, or spending more money on having a whole bunch 
of fonts available to you, he’d cut you to ribbons in order to get at that 
thing he knew was right. It was also why he wanted control of the products; he 
didn’t want you turning them into something, for lack of a better word, ugly. I 
can identify with that feeling.

“Years ago, when we started learning that movies were gonna become kind of 
interactive, that you could take A Few Good Men, put it on your computer and 
change a scene around, put yourself in a scene with Jack Nicholson, smoke would 
come out of my ears. Don’t do that! I want the user to have the experience thatI
 built.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Faaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-michael-fassbender%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446653858146%2Fdcb662b8-f28b-4ac1-be32-1a2896c1f7d3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Sorkin%20on%20the%20cult%20of%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20hadn't%20seen%20anything%20like%20it%20since%20John%20Lennon%20was%20killed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Faaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-michael-fassbender%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Sorkin%20on%20the%20cult%20of%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20hadn%27t%20seen%20anything%20like%20it%20since%20John%20Lennon%20was%20killed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Faaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-michael-fassbender%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446653858146%2Fdcb662b8-f28b-4ac1-be32-1a2896c1f7d3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sorkin and Steve Jobs director Danny Boyle. Photograph: Amanda 
Edwards/WireImage 
Sorkin is famously protective of his dialogue. Once his scripts are done, they 
are not to be messed with. Every comma must be adhered to; the rhythms of the 
speech, he says, are as important as the content. There will be no 
improvisation. So, here, he gets Jobs. But it’s not just the control he relates 
to. Much of the film is about Jobs’s initially rocky relationship with his 
eldest daughter Lisa. For years, Jobs denied paternity, which was a stumbling 
block for Sorkin when he began writing it. “But as a writer you can’t judge 
that character,” he says now. “You have to be able to identify with that 
character, to write that character like they’re making their case to God why 
they should be allowed into heaven. And to do that you have to find the things 
about that character that are like yourself.” Which brings us back to Sorkin’s 
Jobs saying, “That’s the idea, brother” – the desire to have your work, rather 
than your human foibles, represent you.

He was able to feel love, human connection, by having people love these 
products
Aaron Sorkin 
“I used to believe,” says Sorkin, “before I became a father, that I would be 
most happy living a life in a room all by myself, slipping script pages out 
under the door and having somebody just slip me a tray of food back. That 
people would like me more if they only knew me through the things I wrote. If 
they didn’t know the human, flawed part of me. Because the characters I write 
are smarter than I am, quicker than I am, more polished than I am, funnier than 
I am. That’s what comes when you have time to think of the clever response. And 
so I understand the idea of Steve saying: ‘That’s the idea.’”

Jobs’s commitment to his products was, as Sorkin’s screenplay sees it, 
compensation for his own interpersonal flaws. The film’s first act, set at the 
1984 launch of the Macintosh, focuses on Jobs’s maniacal insistence that the 
computer say “Hello” to the audience. Whereas Sorkin’sMark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> lacked social graces 
but created a global social network, his Steve Jobs strives to put more 
humanity into his products than he displays to those around him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Faaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-michael-fassbender%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446653936414%2F1006dd9d-0d13-4541-ab9a-2638ba035eab-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Sorkin%20on%20the%20cult%20of%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20hadn't%20seen%20anything%20like%20it%20since%20John%20Lennon%20was%20killed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Faaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-michael-fassbender%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Sorkin%20on%20the%20cult%20of%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20hadn%27t%20seen%20anything%20like%20it%20since%20John%20Lennon%20was%20killed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Faaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-michael-fassbender%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446653936414%2F1006dd9d-0d13-4541-ab9a-2638ba035eab-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fassbender and Jeff Daniels in Steve Jobs. Photograph: Everett/REX Shutterstock
“I signed on to do this movie a few weeks after Steve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/stevejobs> died,” explains Sorkin. “And 
one of the first things I was curious about was the global outpouring of 
mourning and eulogising. I hadn’t seen anything like it since John Lennon was 
killed. And what that was about was an emotional attachment to the things Jobs 
made. He understood that emotional attachment, he stood at the intersection of 
technology and art. He had a vision of a device that would be more than useful, 
it would be something we would love, that we would love looking at, love 
holding, love owning. So that emotional attachment is not only important to me 
in terms of, ‘Oh, OK, that’s Steve Jobs’s genius’, but because this movie 
hypothesises that the emotional attachment people have to his devices was 
filling a hole he felt he had. That he was able to feel love, human connection, 
by having people love these products.”

Aaron Sorkin: 'my conscience is clear' over Steve Jobs accuracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/19/aaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-accuracy-london-film-festival>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fsteve-jobs-premieres-at-telluride-what-did-the-audience-think-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%20premieres%20at%20Telluride%3A%20what%20did%20the%20audience%20think%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fsteve-jobs-premieres-at-telluride-what-did-the-audience-think-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%20premieres%20at%20Telluride%3A%20what%20did%20the%20audience%20think%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fsteve-jobs-premieres-at-telluride-what-did-the-audience-think-video&media=>
Which they do. Jobs changed the way most of us use technology; you only have 
to look at what people are doing in train carriages to see the effect he had. 
Sorkin says he’s not an Apple fanboy, yet he owns a Mac, iPhone, iPad and iPod 
and uses them constantly. Jobs made us care about these things to the point of 
inseparability. In 1984, he wanted a computer to say “Hello”, and now the 
relationship is two-way; having a natter with Siri is commonplace. Yet Sorkin 
finds it all a little troubling. His 14-year-old daughter, he says, lives her 
life with a screen in front of her face. “And as a parent you have to actively 
get them to put down the screen. My daughter and all her friends have Instagram 
accounts. And they post only pictures of them at the party with the popular 
kids, doing something cool at the beach, eating a cool dinner, they post only 
the cleverest quips; they’re curating their lives. So their social media 
presence becomes more important than their actual presence, which all but 
ceases to exist. And that can only be a bad thing.”

So there’s Aaron Sorkin, obsessed with perfection in his script about a man 
obsessed with perfection, all the while worried that his daughter’s obsession 
with his subject’s products is causing her to cease to exist. And the loop eats 
itself.

Steve Jobs is in cinemas on Friday 13 November
 