
The Oscar-winning screenwriter Aaron Sorkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin> has hit back at claims 
family and former colleagues of Steve Jobs are fiercely opposing his 
controversial forthcoming eponymous biopic of the late Apple co-founder.

The Wall Street Journal wrote on 4 October 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/apple-co-founders-allies-take-aim-at-hollywood-over-steve-jobs-1444000308>
 that the tech guru’s widow Laurene Powell Jobs had repeatedly tried to “kill” 
Danny Boyle’s film, which stars Michael Fassbender in the title role. Current 
Apple CEO Tim Cook alsodescribed recent attempts to immortalise the late Jobs 
on the big screen as “opportunistic” 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/apple-co-founders-allies-take-aim-at-hollywood-over-steve-jobs-1444000308>
 during an appearance on the Late Show With Stephen Colbert last month.

Apple CEO Tim Cook attacks Steve Jobs films as 'opportunistic'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/17/apple-ceo-tim-cook-attacks-steve-jobs-film-as-opportunistic>
Speaking on the NBC network’s Today on Tuesday 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/aaron-sorkin-studio-set-up-829798> news 
programme, Sorkin said he hoped Cook’s view might have changed now that he had 
been given the opportunity to see the film. “Tim Cook – at the time he made 
that statement, at the time he took umbrage, he hadn’t seen the movie,” said 
the screenwriter, who adapted Walter Isaacson’s bookSteve Jobs: The Exclusive 
Biography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/oct/30/steve-jobs-exclusive-biography-review>
 for Boyle’s film. “The studio since set up a screening for him and he hasn’t 
said anything since.”

Responding to claims that Laurene Powell Jobs had not wanted the film made, 
Sorkin said: “Mrs Jobs hasn’t seen the movie. When she does, if she does, I 
think she’ll be pleasantly surprised. I don’t think it’s what she expects it to 
be.”

The film-maker’s script for the biopic touches on the former Apple CEO’s 
initial refusal to recognise his daughter,an episode Apple co-founder Steve 
Wozniak has described 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-07-02/wozniak-says-scene-in-jobs-trailer-is-fiction-loves-it-anyway>
 as “hard on me … when the money didn’t matter, and I can almost cry 
remembering it”. The Social Network screenwriter said he understood why those 
who cared about Jobs might be concerned.

Steve Jobs review: Fassbender excels but iWorship required if you're to care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/steve-jobs-movie-review-michael-fassbender-telluride>
“Certainly with Mrs Jobs – and yesterday was the anniversary of Steve’s death, 
it was four years – with Mrs Jobs, with Tim Cook who was such a good friend, I 
don’t begrudge them wanting to protect a good friend who isn’t here to defend 
himself,” he said. “But again, they haven’t seen the movie, and I think they 
will be surprised that it’s not the thing they’re scared of.”

But Sorkin, who recently described writing “antihero” characters such as Jobs 
“as if they are making their case for God”, admitted he struggled to find the 
humanity in his subject during the screenwriting process. “I’ll be honest, with 
Steve it was tough,” he said. “I’m the father of a daughter. He denied the 
paternity of his daughter. But it was his daughter, Lisa, who actually helped 
me get past that.”

Boyle’s film, also starring Kate Winslet as original Mac team member Joanna 
Hoffman, Jeff Daniels as former Apple chief executive John Sculley and Seth 
Rogen as Wozniak, hits US cinemas on limited release this weekend as it builds 
anticipation ahead of an expected Oscars run. The biopic, which takes the form 
of just three scenes, each shot in real time and taking place just before a 
vital product launch, is due out in the UK on 13 November.
 