
Harper Lee’s classic novel To Kill a Mockingbird is heading to Broadway in a 
new adaptation written byAaron Sorkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin>.

Producer Scott Rudin said the play will be staged during the 2017-18 season 
under the direction of Tony award winner Bartlett Sher, who is represented on 
Broadway now with revivals ofThe King and I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/17/the-king-and-i-review-a-glorious-siamese-dream>
 andFiddler on the Roof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/21/fiddler-on-the-roof-review-revival-broadway-danny-burstein>
. No casting was revealed.

Sorkin’s plays include A Few Good Men and The Farnsworth Invention. He won an 
Academy Award and a Golden Globe for his screenplay for The Social Network, 
which Rudin produced, along with Sorkin’s other films Steve Jobs and Moneyball.

The book has been staged before, including a 1991 adaptation by Christopher 
Sergel which premiered at New Jersey’s Paper Mill Playhouse. There was a 
production in 2013 that had a run in London withRobert Sean Leonard in the role 
of Finch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/28/to-kill-a-mockingbird-review>, 
the noble widower and lawyer called upon to defend a black man accused of 
raping a white woman in Depression-era Alabama. This new version will mark the 
story’s Broadway debut.

To Kill a Mockingbird, published in 1960, introduced Finch, Scout, Boo Radley 
and other beloved literary characters. The book was adapted into an 
Oscar-winning film starring Gregory Peck as Atticus and has worldwide sales 
topping 40 million copies .

Winner of the Pulitzer prize in 1961, and widely praised as a sensitive 
portrait of racial tension as seen through the eyes of a child in 1930s 
Alabama, it has been criticised as sentimental and paternalistic.

Last year saw the publication of Lee’s recently discovered manuscript, Go Set 
a Watchman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ng-interactive/2015/jul/10/go-set-a-watchman-read-the-first-chapter>
, described as a first draft of the story that evolved into To Kill a 
Mockingbird. Critics and readers were startled to find the heroic Atticus 
disparaging black people and condemning the supreme court’s decision to outlaw 
segregation in public schools.
 