
Aaron Sorkin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin> has claimed 
his “conscience is clear” over the portrayal of Steve Jobs put forward in the 
new Oscar-tipped drama about the key moments in the Apple icon’s life.

Steve Jobs review: Fassbender excels but iWorship required if you're to care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/steve-jobs-movie-review-michael-fassbender-telluride>
Speaking at last night’s European premiere at the London film festival, the 
screenwriter admitted that a certain manipulation had to occur in order to make 
the film.

“Steve Jobs did not, as far as I know, have confrontations with the same six 
people 40 minutes before every product launch,” he said, during a press 
conference. “That is plainly a writer’s conceit. But I do think that the movie 
gets at some larger truths, some more important truths than what really went on 
during the 40 minutes before product launches, which I don’t think was the 
stuff of drama. What you see is a dramatisation of several personal conflicts 
that he had in his life, and they illustrate something, they give you a picture 
of something. Are they fair? I do believe they’re fair. My conscience is clear.”

The film has been the subject of criticism by some for its portrayal of the 
Apple co-founder withhis ex-wife reportedly seeking to “kill” the project and 
begging Christian Bale and Leonardo DiCaprio not to take on the role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/08/steve-jobs-widow-leonardo-dicaprio-christian-bale-not-to-take-biopic-role>
. Michael Fassbender, tipped for a best actor Oscar, ended up starring.

“While Mrs Jobs, Laurene Powell, did from the get-go object to the movie being 
made, [his daughter] Lisa Jobs did not, and she’s the one portrayed in the 
movie,” Sorkin responded.

There has also been support for the film from those who knew Jobs, including 
former Apple CEO John Sculley, played by Jeff Daniels.

“[Sorkin’s] a brilliant screenwriter,” Sculley said. “While [the dialogue] may 
not have been the exact words that were spoken, it represented the kind of 
dialogue that said ‘yes, that’s that person’.”

The film has already been predicted to be a success at next year’s Oscars, 
with directorDanny Boyle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/danny-boyle>, 
Sorkin, Fassbender and co-star Kate Winslet all in the running for awards.
 