
The four members of Abba <https://www.theguardian.com/music/abba> performed 
alongside one another for the first time in over 30 years in Stockholm this 
weekend.

On Sunday, at a private gala to mark 50 years since songwriting duo Björn 
Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson met for the first time, the pair were joined by
Agnetha Fältskog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/12/agnetha-faltskog-abba-releases-album>
 and Anni-Frid Lyngstadon stage at Berns Salonger in Stockholm. As well as 
discussing their career, the group sang their 1980 hitMe and I 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wXCGcbAbNY4>, according to Swedish newspaper 
Expressen <http://www.expressen.se/noje/abba-together-on-stage-again/> – an 
event many fans never foresaw happening.

'We are here to party': Abba reunite – in a Stockholm restaurant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/20/abba-reunites-stockholm-restaurant-mamma-mia-the-party>
The impromptu performance reportedly began when Lyngstad and Fältskog recited 
the track as a tribute to Andersson and Ulvaeus, before the other half of Abba 
joined in and made the reunion official. Footage of the performance hasn’t yet 
surfaced, but images appearedon social media 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BGSjfUDCcra/>.

Although the group’s last tour took place in 1982, the four-piece were last 
publicly seen together in Stockholm for the opening of a new entertainment 
venture,Mamma Mia! The Party <http://www.mammamiatheparty.com/>.

Despite their occasional individual performances, the group – made up of two 
former married couples – decided they would not reunite for their induction 
into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2010. “Agnetha is not flying, so I don’t 
know how she’s going to get to New York,” Andersson told Rolling Stone at the 
time.

Abba: from Eurovision to the split – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/apr/10/abba-eurovision-split-official-photo-book-in-pictures>
Speaking to Expressen, Lyngstad said of their 2016 reunion: “It was absolutely 
amazing. A lot of emotions.

“We’ve made this journey throughout our history. Benny and Björn in 
particular. It’s been very nostalgic.”

“We took a break in ‘82, and it was meant to be a break,” Ulvaeus said in 2014 
<http://www.nme.com/news/abba/81659>. “It’s still a break and will remain so. 
You’ll never see us on stage again.”

 