
Stockholm has everything New York or London has but without the people and the 
traffic. Because it is built on islands and surrounded by water, you get this 
enormous sense of freedom. People don’t bother me at all, so I can walk around 
without any problem.

Naturally, I would recommend a visit to Abba the Museum 
<http://www.abbathemuseum.com/>. When they told me that it should be in 
Stockholm, that’s when it dawned on me – it’s going to be in a very prominent 
place that I will pass many times a year, with my children and grandchildren, 
and with friends. It had to be great, because I wouldn’t be able to escape it. 
That’s why I got involved. It’s a very hi-tech museum, but it also has warmth 
and humour. My favourite exhibit would have to be the homemade double bass from 
my first-ever group.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fbjorn-ulvaeus-abba-stockholm-sweden-travel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432216400775%2Fee468e30-7d73-482d-9015-0e13e149a67c-2060x1693.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abba%E2%80%99s%20Bj%C3%B6rn%20Ulvaeus%20on%20Stockholm's%20travel%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fbjorn-ulvaeus-abba-stockholm-sweden-travel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abba%E2%80%99s%20Bj%C3%B6rn%20Ulvaeus%20on%20Stockholm%27s%20travel%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fbjorn-ulvaeus-abba-stockholm-sweden-travel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432216400775%2Fee468e30-7d73-482d-9015-0e13e149a67c-2060x1693.jpeg>
 The Stockholm waterfront 
Stockholm is the most beautiful capital in the world. Visitors should take one 
of the sightseeing boats and see it from the water. They should also visit the
Vasa Museum <http://www.vasamuseet.se/en/>. It’s absolutely magnificent – a 
large 17th-century ship housed within a museum.

The Stockholm archipelago is unique, with tens of thousands of islands. It’s 
one of the most beautiful places in the world. I’ll often take my boat to 
Sandhamn, an island outside of Stockholm. There’s a restaurant there called
Monrad’s <http://monrads.se/> where I like to have lunch. Actually, I’ll be 
going there soon with the new lady in my life. I’ve called her Dancing Queen 
and she’s a Princess 64 Flybridge yacht.
 The group’s Waterloo costumes on show at Stockholm’s Abba museum. Photograph: 
/AFP/Getty Images 
There are lots of outfits in the museum. I’m proud to say that most of my Abba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/abba> costumes still fit me. I don’t have a 
favourite, but if I had to choose one it would be something from the later 
years. There’s a photo of me in a kind of Superman outfit from early on and I 
cry in pain every time I see it. It shows a level of bad taste unsurpassed by 
any other pop star.

I love the city’s food hall markets. Two of the best are Östermalmshallen 
<http://www.ostermalmshallen.se/> and Hötorgshallen 
<http://www.hotorgshallen.se/>. My favourite restaurant is at Hotel Skeppsholmen
 <http://www.hotelskeppsholmen.se/en/>, but the food I couldn’t do without is 
sashimi. I go to a great Japanese restaurant in the centre calledSeikoen 
<http://www.seikoen.se/>. There’s also a marina called Bullandö, just outside 
Stockholm, where I go to eat the best ice-cream in Europe – it’s calledBullandö 
Glassfabrik <http://www.glassakademin.se/bullando-glassfabrik/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fbjorn-ulvaeus-abba-stockholm-sweden-travel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432216611190%2F20e6492d-934b-4ea8-b061-1b9735c6ebc5-2060x1539.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abba%E2%80%99s%20Bj%C3%B6rn%20Ulvaeus%20on%20Stockholm's%20travel%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fbjorn-ulvaeus-abba-stockholm-sweden-travel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abba%E2%80%99s%20Bj%C3%B6rn%20Ulvaeus%20on%20Stockholm%27s%20travel%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fbjorn-ulvaeus-abba-stockholm-sweden-travel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432216611190%2F20e6492d-934b-4ea8-b061-1b9735c6ebc5-2060x1539.jpeg>
 Ice-cream at Bullandö Glassfabrik, near Stockholm 
My favourite thing about Stockholm, and Sweden in general, is that it’s not 
overcrowded. There are only nine million of us Swedes, so we’re not 
overpopulated in the way many areas of Europe are.

People in Stockholm are quicker to adapt to change than in the rest of the 
country. It has become a very creative city – for music, fashion and computer 
games. It is a lot more cosmopolitan than it used to be, but I wouldn’t want it 
to grow much bigger.

When I get time off, I love to relax with my grandchildren – sailing, 
kayaking, reading, and watching movies and documentaries. I love to take them 
all on holiday with me.

Benny comes to Stockholm regularly so I see him quite a bit, especially since 
we still work together from time to time. Agnetha and I have children and 
grandchildren together, so I see her at birthday parties and such. Frida comes 
to Stockholm from her home in Switzerland every now and then, and she’ll say 
hello.
 Old sailing ship on display at the Vasa museum. Photograph: /Atlantide 
Phototravel/Corbis 
There are some great Swedish musicians around at the moment. I’ve been 
listening a lot to the Swedish bandFirst Aid Kit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/first-aid-kit>. Their roots are in folk 
music and the same goes for me.

I don’t think I’ll be watching Eurovision this weekend. I rarely watch it 
these days. Not because it was better in the old days (it wasn’t), but because 
there are too many countries in the competition. And as a songwriter, I’d be 
more interested in a contest where the emphasis was on the quality of the song.

I love churches and there are a couple in the old city, such as the Storkyrkan 
<http://svenskakyrkan.se/stockholmsdomkyrkoforsamling/>, which I’d recommend 
visiting.

Another special exhibit at the Abba Museum is an award we were given which I 
had at home for years. It’s a hideously ugly German music award, a figurine in 
the form of Hiawatha called Silberne Otto. It was awarded to us by the German 
magazine Bravo and I kept it on my windowsill. Over time I grew rather fond of 
it and it was with a heavy heart that I gave it to the museum. Come to think of 
it, I miss my Silberne Otto.

During the Abba years, we did some television work in East Berlin. People 
there loved us but it was so depressing. I remember we were paid in whatever 
currency they had – East German marks or whatever – which you couldn’t change 
when you got to the west. Nobody would take it. I had one day to get rid of it, 
so I bought everyone in the bar a drink!

I only book holidays in winter. Why? Try a cold, windy and damp November day 
in Stockholm and you’ll know why!
 