
 Directors of banking giant Abbey National today faced harsh criticism from 
shareholders angry at the decision to sell out to Spain's largest bank.

Investors attended an extraordinary general meeting in Wembley, north London, 
to vote on the proposed the Â£9bn acquisition by Santander Central Hispano 
(SCH). They jeered and heckled the bank's chairman, Lord Burns, as they 
questioned the cash-and-shares takeover, which, if it is given the go-ahead, 
could take place in November.

In a fraught meeting to approve the deal, members of the 800-strong audience 
applauded the suggestion that they should vote against the purchase.

Longstanding shareholder Richard Pout asked: "If you can't communicate between 
London, Milton Keynes, Sheffield and Stockton ... how are you going to deal 
with management in Spain?"

Investors fought through bad weather to witness what was described by Lord 
Burns as "a momentous day". They spent more than two hours discussing the deal, 
but their opposition is likely to be overwhelmed by the views of City 
institutions when votes are counted later today.

Abbey has around 1.7 million small shareholders who received windfall shares 
when the bank converted from a building society in 1989.

One investor accused the board of a hurried transaction that was "done in a 
weekend", and said he did not agree with the way a deal involving so many small 
shareholders had been conducted. He added: "Abbey has a very special duty of 
care to these shareholders which I don't think has been carried out in landing 
them with foreign shares."

However, Lord Burns said he was satisfied the board had agreed a good price 
for Abbey and that this was the right move for the company. He said he believed 
the group would emerge a "stronger, more competitive force on the high street", 
and added that Abbey had become a "fitter and more competitive company" in 
recent months. He also said SCH would provide the "imperative support" to 
secure Abbey's future.

But shareholders did not give the chairman an easy ride, continuously heckling 
him - and even each other - as they said that takeover should be halted.

Another shareholder said: "This company is not being run as efficiently as it 
should be and nor is Santander." He added: "We should wait until we get our own 
house in order as somebody who is strong could take us home. I think we are 
jumping out of the frying pan and into the fire."

Santander received a boost last night when the Financial Services Authority, 
which has three months in which to decide whether or not it accepts the 
acquisition, said it could see "no material impediments" to the sale.

A spokeswoman for Abbey described the statement as welcome news ahead of the 
vote.

If the deal is today given the go-ahead by shareholders, it is expected to be 
completed as early as next month. The sale would mean that Abbey shareholders 
would receive one Santander share for each Abbey share they own. Earlier this 
week, the Spanish bank said it would allow Abbey investors with 2,000 or fewer 
shares and who live in the UK to use its free share dealing facility without 
needing to complete a Spanish tax form.
 