
Abbey National admitted today that progress in recent months had been 
disrupted as a result of its planned takeover by Spain's largest bank.

In a trading update, Abbey blamed the "distraction and uncertainty" resulting 
from the Santander Central Hispano deal. But it said that a "speedy conclusion 
to the transaction" - expected to be completed on November 12 - had "avoided a 
marked deterioration".

The statement came days after shareholders of both Abbey and Santander voted 
to approve the Â£9bn takeover. The tie-up, which will create Europe's fourth 
largest bank and the world's eighth largest, now only needs the go-ahead from 
regulators.

In July, when it reported its interim results, Abbey said its restructuring 
programme had resulted in short-term disruption. Today it said: "This has been 
compounded by the well-publicised distraction and uncertainty resulting from 
the takeover process, which has restricted progress in recent months."

Today's statement gave an update on third quarter performance, although final 
figures were not included. Abbey said its results had been "broadly consistent 
with second quarter trends" and were running ahead of the first half on a 
pro-rata basis.

Abbey, the UK's second biggest mortgage provider, said it had seen improved 
results at its rebranded personal finance services business. Results were also 
boosted by increased profits at the portfolio business unit.

Further progress included the upgrading of IT equipment in branches and call 
centres, and the rebranding of branches - a task that is nearly complete. Abbey 
said it was beginning to see signs of improved customer satisfaction as a 
result of the changes.

As part of a strategy launched last year to turn around two years of heavy 
annual losses, the bank started disposing of non-core assets, mainly in the 
corporate sector, to focus on personal finance.

Today it said the strategy was continuing, and that the transformation would 
move into the next phase once the Santander acquisition was complete. Chief 
executive Luqman Arnold said the group was "well on the road" to achieving its 
aims.

Santander revealed last week that its finance director Francisco Gomez-Roldan 
will take over from Mr Arnold following the takeover, marking the first time 
Abbey will have had a foreign chief executive. Abbey shares had climbed 3p to 
613.5p at 11am.
 