
Abbey's shareholders have approved an Â£8.9bn deal that will see the group sold 
to Santander Central Hispano.

Each shareholder had one vote, but votes were weighted according to the value 
of shares held by the investor. The indicative results, before auditing, showed 
that 65% had voted for the takeover by Spain's biggest bank, which equated to 
95% of shareholders by value. Less than a third, 32%, of shareholders voted 
against the sale, equivalent to just 5% of investors by value.

A spokesman at Abbey said the audited results of the vote could be expected 
early tomorrow morning.

The results followed a fraught extraordinary general meeting during which 
shareholders heckled the group's board, and each other, and applauded the idea 
of blocking the sale.

Investors fought through bad weather to witness what was described by Lord 
Burns as "a momentous day". They spent more than two hours discussing the deal, 
but their opposition was widely expected to be overwhelmed by the views of City 
institutions when votes were counted.

Abbey has around 1.7 million small shareholders who received windfall shares 
when the bank converted from a building society in 1989.

One investor accused the board of a hurried transaction that was "done in a 
weekend", and said he did not agree with the way a deal involving so many small 
shareholders had been conducted. He added: "Abbey has a very special duty of 
care to these shareholders which I don't think has been carried out in landing 
them with foreign shares."

However, Lord Burns said he was satisfied the board had agreed a good price 
for Abbey and that this was the right move for the company. He said he believed 
the group would emerge a "stronger, more competitive force on the high street", 
and added that Abbey had become a "fitter and more competitive company" in 
recent months. He also said SCH would provide the "imperative support" to 
secure Abbey's future.

Today's vote for sale means the deal could be completed as early as November. 
Abbey shareholders will receive one Santander share for each Abbey share they 
own. Earlier this week, the Spanish bank said it would allow Abbey investors 
with 2,000 or fewer shares and who live in the UK to use its free share dealing 
facility without needing to complete a Spanish tax form.
 