
The ABC’s international arm is adding a full Chinese news service in Mandarin 
that will be hosted in Australia but available to the whole region online.


It will supplement the international web portal AustraliaPlus.cn 
<http://AustraliaPlus.cn/>, which is designed to promote the Australia-China 
relationship rather than carry hard news.


Noel Pearson says ABC is a racist broadcaster 'willing the wretched to fail'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/noel-pearson-says-abc-a-racist-broadcaster-that-is-willing-the-wretched-to-fail>
Two years after the Australian Network was defunded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/14/budget-80-abc-staff-out-of-work-in-90-days-as-australia-network-closes>
 by the Abbott government, a strategic review of ABC International recommended 
increasing investment in the Mandarin language, as well as in Bahasa-language 
content for Indonesia and extra services for Pacific audiences.


Mandarin speakers in China and the region will have access to an additional 
Chinese language site with Mandarin news, separate fromAustraliaPlus.cn 
<http://AustraliaPlus.cn/>, the China portal which opened in April 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/09/abc-launches-web-portal-in-china-called-australia-plus>
.


The ABC International chief executive, Lynley Marshall, said the changes would 
benefit the wider audience base in the region.


“These changes are the result of careful consideration and commitment to our 
services in the region as we approach 2020,” she said. “The ABC has a long 
history with the Pacific nations while Indonesian and Chinese audiences 
comprise a growing audience base, both across our region and here in Australia.

“ABC International is determined to uphold the highest standards in 
international media services including our expanding digital and social media 
services. These changes represent ABC International’s commitment to delivering 
compelling content to key audiences.”

In May the ABC admitted AustraliaPlus.cn failed to abide by the ABC’s own 
editorial policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/abc-chinese-web-portal-editorial-policies]>
 when a journalist removed content critical of China from several news stories. 
The ABC said stories that were edited should not have been posted in the first 
place.

“In keeping with the intent of the service these stories would only have been 
published on the AustraliaPlus English language site, as indeed they were, in 
full,” he said.


In August, the ABC had to clarify its sponsorship arrangements with Swisse 
Wellness after Monash University came under fire for being too closely 
associated with the vitamin brand on the ABC’s international website.

ABC launches web portal in China called Australia Plus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/09/abc-launches-web-portal-in-china-called-australia-plus>
On Tuesday, a spokesman for the ABC said the new Mandarin site would be 
subject to editorial rigour and denied reportsAustraliaPlus.cn 
<http://australiaplus.cn/> had to comply with Chinese censorship. 

“The [Mandarin] website will be administered from within Australia by ABC 
International and will be subject to the ABC editorial policies and 
guidelines,” he said.


“Contrary to some media reports, ABC International’s separate ‘.cn’ site 
developed for Chinese audiences inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is not subject to censorship, nor it 
is required to adhere to any particular school of thought. The ABC strongly 
defends its position as an independent broadcaster.”

The chairman of the ABC, James Spigelman, previously called it a “digital 
doorway” to Australia for people in China, which also offers the ABC a 
commercial opportunity because it can carry advertising and sponsorship.


“There are tensions with our public broadcasting culture – not to mention our 
public responsibilities,” he said. “However, in a fiscally constrained 
environment, developing additional revenue streams is the only way to achieve 
our full potential.”

• This story was amended on 23 October 2016 to remove references to the ABC 
denying it would not comply with Chinese media laws.AustraliaPlus.cn 
<http://australiaplus.cn/> will comply with Chinese laws but be subject to 
editorial rigour, a spokesman said.
 