
The ABC says it made an “error in judgment” in allowing a former terrorism 
suspect to ask a question from the Q&A audience, after he accused the Coalition 
MP Steve Ciobo of giving Australian Muslims an incentive to go to Syria to join 
Islamic State.


The exchange between Ciobo, the parliamentary secretary for foreign affairs 
and trade, and Zaky Mallah, who was charged with terrorism offences in 2003, 
overshadowed earlier debate about the government’s plan tostrip the Australian 
citizenship of foreign fighters with dual nationality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/21/tony-abbott-close-to-winning-over-cabinet-and-labor-on-citizenship-laws>
.

Zaky Mallah: I stand by what I said on Q&A. Australia needs to hear it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/23/zaky-mallah-i-stand-by-what-i-said-on-qa-the-public-needs-to-hear-it>
“In attempting to explore important issues about the rights of citizens and 
the role of the government in fighting terrorism, the Q&A program made an error 
in judgment in allowing Zaky Mallah to join the audience and ask a question,” 
Richard Finlayson, the director of ABC television,said in a statement 
<http://about.abc.net.au/statements/abc-statement-qa/> on Tuesday morning.

“Mr Mallah has been interviewed by the Australian media on a number of 
occasions. The environment of a live television broadcast, however, meant it 
would not be possible for editorial review of the comments he might make prior 
to broadcast, particularly if he engaged in debate beyond his prepared 
question.”

The incident was now under review, Finlayson said.

In 2005 Mallah was acquitted of two terrorism offences but pleaded guilty to 
threatening to kill Asio officials.

Ciobo and Mallah engaged in heated conversation on Q&A after Mallah posed a 
question about his court case and how it would have been different had a 
minister decided the outcome.


Tony Abbott close to winning over cabinet and Labor on citizenship laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/21/tony-abbott-close-to-winning-over-cabinet-and-labor-on-citizenship-laws>
Ciobo replied that he wasn’t familiar with the circumstances of Mallah’s case 
“but I’m happy to look you straight in the eye and say that I’d be pleased to 
be part of a government that would say you are out of the country, as far as 
I’m concerned”.


“Rubbish,” said Mallah, adding: “As an Australian I would be happy to see you 
out of the country.”

Mallah later said: “The Liberals now have justified to many Australian Muslims 
in the community to leave and go to Syria and join Isis because of ministers 
like him.”


Q&A’s host, Tony Jones, labelled the comments “out of order”.

“I stand by what I said,” Ciobo said in response. “Best as I know your 
circumstances, the comments you’ve made, the threats you’ve made that you’ve 
pleaded guilty to, to me more than justify the concerns the government has. I 
think it’s very wrong for you to portray the Muslim population as all being 
incentivised to do those things.”

Earlier the MP said the government was trying to stop people leaving Australia 
to fight with Islamic State, and the proposed legislation was aimed at those 
who “slipped through the net” and committed acts “no different to the old act 
of treason”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-qanda-abc-security-zaky-mallah-review-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435043206034%2FTurnbull-Abbott-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turnbull%20orders%20ABC%20security%20review%20after%20%E2%80%98error%20of%20judgment%E2%80%99%20over%20Zaky%20Mallah%20on%20Q%26A%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-qanda-abc-security-zaky-mallah-review-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turnbull%20orders%20ABC%20security%20review%20after%20%E2%80%98error%20of%20judgment%E2%80%99%20over%20Zaky%20Mallah%20on%20Q%26A%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-qanda-abc-security-zaky-mallah-review-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435043206034%2FTurnbull-Abbott-001.jpg>
 Turnbull orders ABC security review after ‘error of judgment’ over Zaky Mallah 
on Q&A –link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jun/23/malcolm-turnbull-qanda-abc-security-zaky-mallah-review-video>
“If someone is a dual citizen we do not want them back in Australia and we’ll 
revoke their citizenship,” he said. “Labor wants to bring them back in 
Australia and I presume … to go through a criminal court process or something 
like that, and that is the fundamental point of difference.”

Jones sought to confirm the proposed laws were for people who had gone 
overseas to fight and would not be used to “banish” someone accused of 
terrorism in Australia.

“To be honest I would be happy to do that,” Ciobo replied. “I would be 
supportive of that effort as well.”


On Tuesday morning Ciobo reiterated his support.


“In the case of that individual last night, frankly if they’re a dual citizen 
and they’re in Australia, I think we should get rid of them if they’re engaged 
in terrorist activities,” Ciobo told Sky News.

Ciobo said Mallah’s subsequent tweets, including the statement: “the majority 
of the #qanda <https://twitter.com/hashtag/qanda?src=hash> audience tonight was 
pro Libs and pathetic. I would pay to see that Minister dumped on #ISIS 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ISIS?src=hash> territory in Iraq!” demonstrated he 
was a “sick individual”.


“He tweeted subsequently that he would like to pay money ... to have me 
kidnapped and taken to Iraq,” Ciobo said.


 It was “extraordinary” that audience members on the program had applauded 
Mallah’s comments, Ciobo said.


Joel Fitzgibbon, Labor’s agriculture spokesman, said on the program he did not 
believe a conviction should be necessary for citizenship to be taken. He said a 
lot of people were wondering if it was better to leave accused terrorists “over 
there to do bad things” or to bring them back to Australia.


“We support the principle the government of the day, the minister, with 
judicial review, should have those tools available to him.”

Fitzgibbon said Labor had no difficulty with the idea of stripping citizenship 
from accused terrorists and denying them the chance to re-enter Australia if 
that was the advice of security agencies.

When questioned by Ciobo, he clarified he was not saying there had to be a 
conviction. Fitzgibbon later said he was “more open to pushing the envelope on 
civil liberties” if it meant saving one life, once government legislation had 
gone through parliamentary review and been accepted.

The Q&A panel also featured the US anti-poverty campaigner Linda Tirado, the 
advertising director and author Dee Madigan, the political strategist and John 
Howard’s former chief of staff Grahame Morris, and theAntony and the Johnsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/antonyandthejohnsons> singer Antony Hegarty.

Hegarty earlier argued with Ciobo about statistics showing growing inequality 
in Australia after the MP dismissed the findings of Monday’s Australian Council 
of Social Services report as “a classic example of lies, lies and statistics”.

Ciobo said other reports showed a high median wealth in Australia. He said the 
report “focuses on particular things and I think we could focus on other areas”.

Hegarty also clashed with Morris, who spoke in favour of uranium and other 
resource mining, saying: “Not everyone wants a bloody big windmill in their 
backyard. Nuclear energy is clean.”

Antony Hegarty, the Martu and the mine: land custodians fight corporate might
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2015/jun/19/antony-hegarty-the-martu-and-the-mine-land-custodians-fight-corporate-might>
The singer replied: “We’d be happy to dig a uranium mine in your backyard.”

“That’s not the point,” Morris said. Hegarty argued that it was and that 
Morris was “utterly deluded”. Hegarty then accused him and his “cronies” of 
“padding their pockets”.

The topic of uranium came up in a question about native title rights not 
giving communities enough freedom to say no to mining companies but both 
government ministers confessed they were not sure what the Native Title Act 
allowed.

Hegarty has been in Australia supporting the Martu people from the Pilbara 
with an art exhibit about their battle against an approved mine at Kintyre 
inside the Karlamilyi national park.

“Some corporations have disingenuously sought to divide and conquer locals, 
and in the dust cloud of confusion, make off with the spoils,” shetold Guardian 
Australia last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2015/jun/19/antony-hegarty-the-martu-and-the-mine-land-custodians-fight-corporate-might>
.
 