
The ABC board has asked the director of radio, Michael Mason, to explain the 
rationale behindthe cuts to Radio National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/radio-national-to-lose-eight-staff-as-abc-cuts-several-programs-from-2017-schedule>
 at a monthly, two-day board meeting in Sydney on Wednesday and Thursday.

Guardian Australia understands the managing director of the ABC, Michelle 
Guthrie <https://www.theguardian.com/media/michelle-guthrie>, did not brief 
board members before the announcement last month of severe cuts to documentary 
and music programs.

The board’s discontent over Radio National cuts comes as Guthrie seeks their 
approval for a restructure of the ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/06/michelle-guthrie-murdoch-consultant-restructure-abc-jim-rudder>
 that would see some directors in her executive team demoted and a new, 
powerful position of chief content officer added.

Michelle Guthrie appoints Murdoch consultant to restructure ABC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/06/michelle-guthrie-murdoch-consultant-restructure-abc-jim-rudder>
Sources say executives at the ABC have been kept in the dark as Guthrie worked 
closely with chief of staff Sam Liston on a restructure and then hired outside 
consultants Jim Rudder, a veteran of Rupert Murdoch’s Sky, and Deb Frances to 
design the new corporate structure.

Liston, who often chairs executive meetings for Guthrie, has made all the 
executives sign a non-disclosure form to try to prevent leaks.

The cuts to the $23m Radio National budget will fund in part an expensive new 
layer of senior management introduced by Mason in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/08/veteran-broadcasters-condemn-abc-radio-restructuring-plan>
, including a new head of spoken content, Judith Whelan, a former editor of the 
Sydney Morning Herald.

The board has been “agitated” by the outcry from staff and the arts community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/30/abc-bosses-morally-and-spiritually-bankrupt-for-axing-catalyst-rn-presenter-says>
 and has called for a detailed explanation, sources say.

ABC board member and merchant banker Simon Mordant has been lobbied by dozens 
of heavy hitters from the arts establishment in his new role as chairman of the 
ABC’s arts reference panel.

In March the board established the panel – which includes Sydney festival 
director Wesley Enoch, Melbourne Theatre Company executive director Virginia 
Lovett, Museum of Contemporary Art director Elizabeth McGregor, Queensland 
Ballet’s director Li Cunxin, Opera Australia chief executive Lyndon Terracini, 
National Gallery of Australia director Gerard Vaughan and many other luminaries 
– to assess and provide recommendations on the ABC’s arts coverage.

But members have privately expressed outrage that the cuts were made without 
their knowledge and before a report into the ABC’s arts coverage had been 
finalised.

“Putting in Mordant on behalf of the ABC board was intended as a signal of 
serious intent,” one panellist told Guardian Australia. “It has led nowhere. I 
think these talkfests are meant to quell the (legitimately) cranky and noisy 
arts community and talking is so much easier than a genuine and visible 
commitment to arts programming. Someone else refers to the ABC management as 
staffed by the ‘program prevention officers’. I couldn’t put it better myself.”

The board will also receive a letter from a group of concerned RN listeners 
and musicians who formed theSave RN Music <http://www.savernmusic.com> group 
and have collected 16,000 signatures including many prominent musicians opposed 
to the cuts.

ABC bosses ‘morally and spiritually bankrupt’ for axing Catalyst, RN presenter 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/30/abc-bosses-morally-and-spiritually-bankrupt-for-axing-catalyst-rn-presenter-says>
In the letter the group told the board it had a responsibility to uphold the 
ABC charter, which calls for the “innovative and comprehensive broadcasting 
services of a high standard” as well as “programs that contribute to a sense of 
national identity and inform and entertain, and reflect the cultural diversity 
of the Australian community”.

“We have received thousands of letters, emails and comments from some of the 
most influential people in Australia’s music industry, numerous festivals, 
events organisers and from the listening public,” the letter said.

“We ask the question, ‘Has this change been managed effectively or explained 
sufficiently thus far?’ If it’s the case that Radio National management has 
made a value judgment that music is peripheral to the new roadmap, the 
alternative being offered should at least match what is being lost.

“Suggesting that Double J might provide a suitable channel is demonstrably 
incorrect and we challenge management’s judgment.

“We would enthusiastically embrace the opportunity to connect the ABC board 
and management to primary stakeholders and major industry representatives 
before these changes are cemented.”

Programs which have been axed include half of the Earshot documentary program 
stream, The Daily Planet, The Inside Sleeve, The Live Set, The Rhythm Divine 
and the removal of Jazztrack from Radio National’s linear schedule.
 