
“There’s nothing more horrific and scary than your own nightmares,” says Abel 
Ferrara <https://www.theguardian.com/film/abel-ferrara>, director of the likes 
of Bad Lieutenant and The King of New York. “A major fear of mine is bears. I 
would have recurrent nightmares about being attacked by bears.”

Abel Ferrara at Cannes: 'You gotta be careful what you say … but I'm not'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/23/abel-ferrara-interview> 
Such anxieties, alongside Homer’s The Odyssey, Carl Jung’s study of the 
language of dreams, The Red Book, and the deepest childhood fears of the actor
Willem Dafoe <https://www.theguardian.com/film/willem-dafoe>, are the 
inspiration for Ferrara’s new movie, Siberia, due to shoot later this year.

It will be a departure from Ferrara’s most recent films: hot potato biopics of 
the likes of Dominique Strauss-Khan (Gerard Depardieu vehicleWelcome to New York
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/welcome-to-new-york>) and Pier Paolo Pasolini
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/04/pasolini-review-abel-ferrara-willem-dafoe-venice-film>
 (which also starred Willem Dafoe). The director, now 63, intends to shoot in 
“the Sahara, desert caves, mythical farmland”, as well as over the snowy 
steppes of Siberia itself, with Dafoe’s character transported on a dogsled. 
“Willem’s afraid of dogs. I’m afraid of dogs … It will be beyond esoteric.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fabel-ferrera-kickstarter-cannes-siberia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F18%2F1431965033744%2F3e8e0725-33a3-41b1-9a88-6b657334b42a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abel%20Ferrera%20turns%20to%20Kickstarter%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20gonna%20hurt%20people%20with%20this%20film'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fabel-ferrera-kickstarter-cannes-siberia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abel%20Ferrera%20turns%20to%20Kickstarter%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20gonna%20hurt%20people%20with%20this%20film%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fabel-ferrera-kickstarter-cannes-siberia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F18%2F1431965033744%2F3e8e0725-33a3-41b1-9a88-6b657334b42a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Willem Dafoe in Abel Ferrara’s Pasolini 
“I’m gonna hurt people with this film,” Ferrara continued. “I’m gonna scare 
the shit out of people. I’m going back to that kind of film-making – to my 
horror film roots: old school, physical, audience-against-the-back-wall kind of 
shit, man.”

It is also a departure in terms of finance: Ferrara is the latest high-profile 
director (following the likes ofZach Braff  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/16/zach-braff-kickstarter-controversy-deepens>
andSpike Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/23/spike-lee-crowdfunds-film>) to 
turn to crowdfunding website Kickstarter for a portion of the cash.The film’s 
Kickstarter page 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1839258859/siberia-starring-willem-dafoe> 
features Dafoe reading aloud the entire screenplay, in an attempt to tempt 
people into pledging funds and becoming part of the project. Incentives range 
from branded hoodies to 15-minute Skype calls with Ferrera to suppers in Rome 
with cast and crew.

“I need to connect and be with the people who understand what I’m talking 
about, outside the system,” said Ferrara. “But outside the system nowis the 
system. TheKickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> 
thing works, bro, and I want it to work for me. Don’t let five companies decide 
what everybody’s going to watch.”

Ferrara’s most recent appearance in Cannes, with last year’s Welcome to New 
York, was away from the main festival; the film screened in a marquee on the 
beach, after it was turned down from the official selection. Monday’s rallying 
cry for the audience to help him make movies marked a further move outside the 
establishment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F08%2Fwelcome-to-new-york-gods-pocket-lilting-all-this-mayhem-video-reviews&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F7%2F1407429697019%2FGerard-Depardieu-in-Welco-011.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20Welcome%20to%20New%20York%2C%20God's%20Pocket%2C%20Lilting%20and%20All%20This%20Mayhem%20-%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F08%2Fwelcome-to-new-york-gods-pocket-lilting-all-this-mayhem-video-reviews>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20Welcome%20to%20New%20York%2C%20God%27s%20Pocket%2C%20Lilting%20and%20All%20This%20Mayhem%20-%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F08%2Fwelcome-to-new-york-gods-pocket-lilting-all-this-mayhem-video-reviews&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F7%2F1407429697019%2FGerard-Depardieu-in-Welco-011.jpg>
 Welcome to New York – video review 
Ferrara spoke on the roof terrace of Cannes’s pop-up Silencio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/31/david-lynch-disco-paris> club, 
which is inspired by the terrifying nightspot from David Lynch’s Mulholland 
Drive. Joining him were his producers, representatives from Kickstarter, and 
his new wife, Christina, with their baby daughter.

“I see that little girl,” said Ferrara. “She’s born free. For us to shackle 
ourselves, man – we gotta find a way out of that. That’s what the film is about 
and that’s hopefully what the financing is about.”
 