
Pasolini review – monument to a murdered film-maker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/10/pasolini-review-monument-to-a-murdered-film-maker>
Abel Ferrara has a charming chuckle, particularly when confronted with 
highfalutin statements about his work from nervous journalists. The grizzled, 
leonine exterior of the 64-year-old film-maker, a native New Yorker of Italian 
descent now living in Rome, appears to house a kind heart and a generous 
spirit. This might seem unexpected in the director ofBad Lieutenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/20/bad-lieutenant-review> and King 
of New York <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79262/king-of-new-york>, 
with their extremes of physical and emotional violence, but look past the cult 
status – built on the headlines inspired by 80s video nastyThe Driller Killer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Driller_Killer> – and what shines through in 
his work is a fearless, often painful but always exhilarating exploration of 
existential and spiritual faith. His more recent films – Mary,4.44 Last Day on 
Earth 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/23/movies/444-last-day-on-earth-with-willem-dafoe.html?_r=0>
, and this year’s elegantly profanePasolini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/10/pasolini-review-monument-to-a-murdered-film-maker>
, Ferrara’s imagining of the final day in the life of the Italian writer and 
film-maker – possess a graceful layering of the political and philosophical, 
the sensual and the spiritual. Says Ferrara: “That’s what it’s all about, dude 
– ya gotta have ’em all.”


Ferrara talks quite simply of “getting the shot”. For him, this involves 
respecting what Brad Stevens, in his book Abel Ferrara: The Moral Vision, calls 
“the holiness of impulse”, a trust in the emotional authenticity of 
improvisation. “It begins with trust. The script is an improvisation, 
rehearsals are an improvisation, and then you get out there ... In 4.44 and
Pasolini <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pasolini>, Willem [Dafoe] is 
actually working on the script with us. Then we get to the rehearsal, and that 
period is sacrosanct. Once we’re on the set we only do it once. We’re not big 
reshoot guys. Whatever’s gonna happen, is gonna happen there, and then, you 
just hope all the planets line up.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fpasolini-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441897374321%2FKP_405109_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pasolini%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fpasolini-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pasolini%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fpasolini-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441897374321%2FKP_405109_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Pasolini – video review 
If any contemporary film-maker qualifies for outlaw status, it’s Ferrara. He 
inspires loyalty in his actors and crew, and is utterly without ego about the 
collaborative nature of his work. “It’s a communal trip, man, everybody’s 
involved in the piece and the choices we make, from what film we’re gonna make 
to begin with.” He talks fondly of Nicholas St John, writer of King of New 
York, The Funeral and The Addiction, among others, in which emotional 
truthfulness and philosophical inquiry came crashing into cinematic myths. He 
and St John began making films together as teenagers. “We started making films 
when we were 16, and then at a certain point he just had enough, you dig? He 
didn’t dig the business, he didn’t dig the spirituality of the business, didn’t 
dig the lifestyle; and at the height of his game, of our game, he just said: 
enough.”


Like Christopher Walken <https://www.theguardian.com/film/christopher-walken> 
before him, Dafoe has become something of a muse for Ferrara. The actor’s mix 
of passive vulnerability and poised, panther-like physicality is explored in 
New Rose Hotel,Go Go Tales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/118817/go-go-tales>, and 4.44. Pasolini 
sees Dafoe and Ferrara take a shamanic approach to their subject, using the 
actual locations Pasolini frequented, objects he owned, even clothes he wore. 
“It’s not like some kind of fictional event, y’know. The restaurants are there, 
the beach where he was killed is there, it’s all right there. The family shared 
a lot with us. These objects have a lot of power to them. I mean, it only gets 
you so far, but at least it gets you so far.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fabel-ferrara-pier-paolo-pasolini-death-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441902281497%2Fceb10d5c-c112-4fde-bc97-f5518527ea42-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abel%20Ferrara%3A%20'Pasolini's%20death%20is%20not%20some%20kind%20of%20fictional%20event'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fabel-ferrara-pier-paolo-pasolini-death-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abel%20Ferrara%3A%20%27Pasolini%27s%20death%20is%20not%20some%20kind%20of%20fictional%20event%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fabel-ferrara-pier-paolo-pasolini-death-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441902281497%2Fceb10d5c-c112-4fde-bc97-f5518527ea42-1020x612.jpeg>
 Italian director Pier Paolo Pasolini, photographed in 1971. Photograph: Cine 
Text / Allstar/Sportsphoto Ltd / Allstar 
As for his choice of the Staple Singers’ I’ll Take You There as the soundtrack 
to Pasolini’s nocturnal adventures, Ferrara says: “It’s from the period. A 
friend of mine actually met Pasolini once in New York, and all Pier Paolo 
wanted to do was go see James Brown at the Apollo.”

Sadly, UK distributors have not looked kindly on several of Ferrara’s recent 
films. It has taken the BFI to get Pasolini in to theatrical release, despite 
its selection for last year’s Venice film festival, and the high profile 
enjoyed by Ferrara’s previous film,Welcome to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/welcome-to-new-york>. To console myself, I 
read the director’s note in the press handout for Pasolini, which takes the 
form of a poem. “I sit at my teacher’s feet / yearning then hearing the music 
of the waves / that wash the feet of the / Messiah on the beach at Idroscalo”. 
That music has sometimes been hard to make out beneath the clamour of the 
profane, but as his passion becomes compassion, we may be able to discern it 
clearly. If only we were able to listen.

 