
In November 1975, the Italian film-maker Pier Paolo Pasolini was killed in 
mysterious circumstances on a beach outside Rome – andnearly 40 years later the 
conspiracy theories run on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/24/who-really-killed-pier-paolo-pasolini-venice-film-festival-biennale-abel-ferrara>
. Was the controversial director murdered by a teenaged male prostitute or 
might his death have been arranged by the Italian authorities? A new film by 
Abel Ferrara purports to know the answer. It suggests that Pasolini’s death was 
the result of a ghastly accident during a panicked getaway.

Premiering in competition at the Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival>, Pasolini attempts to 
solve one of cinema’s history’s most notorious whodunnits. Ferrara’s drama 
shows that the 53-year-old director was injured by several assailants during a 
homophobic attack. But it claims the fatal blow was actually delivered by 
Pasolini’s own car, as teenager Giuseppe Pelosi fled the scene of the crime.

“As a Buddhist I tend to meditate on my masters, so I took the liberty of 
approaching [this subject],” explained Ferrara ahead of the film’s official 
unveiling. But the 63-year-old director rebutted earlier claims that his film 
provided the definitive story of Pasolini’s murder. “I never said I knew who 
killed him, that was a great misquote,” he insisted.

Instead, he argued that the drama was as much about Pasolini’s life as his 
death. “The point of this film is about his life and his work and his passion,” 
he said. “Like he said, ‘in one’s death, one’s life’. I was just trying to use 
that.”

He added: “The pursuit of truth is what really matters.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOVDmHmisQw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOVDmHmisQw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOVDmHmisQw&media=>
Pasolini is Ferrara’s second new film in the space of six months, following 
his explosive, fact-based Welcome to New York. It stars US actor Willem Dafoe 
as the acclaimed director of Theorem andSalo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/sep/22/books.culture>, who balances a 
refined home life with nights spent cruising Rome’s red light district. Early 
reviews have been positive and the film is tipped as an outside bet to win the 
festival’s Golden Lion award this weekend.

Following Pasolini’s death, 17-year-old Pelosi confessed to the murder and was 
subsequently sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment. But in 2005 he recanted his 
confession, insisting that it had been made under duress after organised 
criminals threatened the life of his family. Pelosi has yet to comment publicly 
on the film’s version of events.
 Abel Ferrara: ‘We need Pasolini’s courage.’ Photograph: Tim Knox/Guardian 
At the time of Pasolini’s death, Ferrara was just embarking his own career, 
shooting low-budget exploitation pictures in 1970s New York. “Decameron was my 
first exposure to him when I was a very young film-maker,” he told the 
Guardian. “My love and appreciation of his work has only gotten stronger since 
then.”

Pasolini <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pasolini> was a poet, philosopher, 
journalist and film-maker. He was an outspoken Marxist whose provocative films 
public pronouncements enraged the Italian establishment. Ferrara said that the 
director was unique and that he could think of no obvious equivalents within 
the film industry today. “But we all have it in us,” he added. “We just need to 
have his courage, and curiosity, and strength.”

 * Pasolini first look review: a bewitching walk on the wild side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/04/pasolini-review-abel-ferrara-willem-dafoe-venice-film>
 * Who really killed Pasolini? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/24/who-really-killed-pier-paolo-pasolini-venice-film-festival-biennale-abel-ferrara> 