
IFC Films, which is in dispute with Abel Ferrara over the US edit of his film 
Welcome to New York <https://www.theguardian.com/film/welcome-to-new-york>, has 
said the director refused to engage with the company in producing an R-rated 
version of his new film.

Abel Ferrara threatens to sue over US cut of Welcome to New York
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/20/abel-ferrara-threatens-to-sue-over-us-cut-welcome-to-new-york-dsk>
Ferrara threatened to sue IFC after it assembled a version of his film, based 
on the Dominique Strauss-Kahn scandal, without his involvement. IFC has now 
accused the director of “slinging mud and insults” and claims it would have 
“welcomed the opportunity to work more closely with him on the film, if he’d 
been willing”.

The film, which contains scenes of sex and drug abuse, stars Gérard Depardieu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gerard-depardieu> as a politician accused of 
rape. It was screened in Cannes last year, to positive reviews. But a new cut 
of the film has been put together for a global release and Ferrara claims it’s 
a “destruction” that goes against his contractual agreement of a final cut.

“Our contract with Wild Bunch [the film’s sales agent] is for an R-rated 
version,” the IFC Films statement reads. “We offered Mr Ferrara an opportunity 
to edit his own R-rated version of the film at our expense, but he did not 
respond.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F10%2Fwelcome-to-new-york-gerard-depardieu-trailer-abel-ferrara-strauss-kahn-scandal-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1404998716915%2FStill-from-Welcome-to-New-013.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20New%20York%3A%20watch%20G%C3%A9rard%20Depardieu%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20Abel%20Ferrara's%20take%20on%20the%20Strauss-Kahn%20scandal%20-%20world%20exclusive%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F10%2Fwelcome-to-new-york-gerard-depardieu-trailer-abel-ferrara-strauss-kahn-scandal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20New%20York%3A%20watch%20G%C3%A9rard%20Depardieu%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20Abel%20Ferrara%27s%20take%20on%20the%20Strauss-Kahn%20scandal%20-%20world%20exclusive%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F10%2Fwelcome-to-new-york-gerard-depardieu-trailer-abel-ferrara-strauss-kahn-scandal-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1404998716915%2FStill-from-Welcome-to-New-013.jpg>
“After his threats of violence towards the IFC Center last September, we 
decided we could not risk showing the film there, but we offered to screen his 
original director’s cut at the Anthology Film Archives theatre in New York. It 
is our understanding that the theatre was in touch withAbel Ferrara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/abel-ferrara>, after which they declined to 
screen it.

“Any edits made to the original version of Welcome to New York were made by 
Wild Bunch, since Mr Ferrara did not respond to our offer.”

Welcome to New York review – Abel Ferrara is unencumbered by good taste
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/07/welcome-to-new-york-review-gerard-depardieu-abel-ferrara>
Wild Bunch head Vincent Maraval has suggested that Ferrara is intentionally 
stirring up a row to promote the film. “[He is] putting on a show like always 
and the press is following along,”he told Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2015/03/abel-ferrara-welcome-to-new-york-ifc-wild-bunch-1201396438/>
. Maraval calls the cuts “very minor” although Ferrara believes they make an 
important and dangerous assertion about the core rape storyline.

“The version being released in the US may lead viewers to think that maybe she 
imagined it,” said the film-maker. “It does not respect the woman who was raped 
at all, and the fact that my name is on this film is a crime.”

Ferrara apparently issued a cease and desist letter to IFC last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/20/abel-ferrara-threatens-to-sue-over-us-cut-welcome-to-new-york-dsk>
, although the company says it has not yet received it.
 