
The maverick film-maker Abel Ferrara is threatening to sue the US distributors 
of his controversial film about the Dominique Strauss-Kahn scandal, Welcome to 
New York, tohalt the release 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/abel-ferrara-issues-cease-desist-782563> 
of a version made without his involvement for the American market.

Ferrara has issued a cease and desist letter to IFC films claiming the new 
version violates his contractual right of final cut and radically alters the 
“political and moral content” of the film. French sales company Wild Bunch is 
also named in the notice.

Welcome to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/jul/10/welcome-to-new-york-gerard-depardieu-trailer-abel-ferrara-strauss-kahn-scandal-video>
 stars Gérard Depardieu as a potential candidate for the presidency of France 
who lives a life of debauchery and is arrested after being accused of raping a 
maid at his hotel. The story closely mirrors events at the Sofitel New York 
hotel in 2011 involving former International Monetary Fund chiefStrauss-Kahn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dominique-strauss-kahn> which made headlines 
around the world.

“As a film-maker and a human being, I detest the destruction of my film,” said 
Ferrara in a statement to the Hollywood Reporter. “Behind all these entities 
are individuals ... who feel they can deny my contractual right of final cut, 
which is simply my freedom of expression.”

He added: “Some people wear hoods and carry automatic weapons, others sit 
behind their desks, but the attack and attempted suppression of the rights of 
the individual are the same. I will defend the right of free speech ’til the 
end and I ask all who believe, as I do, that they not support the showing of 
this film, on their networks, in their theatres, or wherever.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F10%2Fwelcome-to-new-york-gerard-depardieu-trailer-abel-ferrara-strauss-kahn-scandal-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1404998716915%2FStill-from-Welcome-to-New-013.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20New%20York%3A%20watch%20G%C3%A9rard%20Depardieu%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20Abel%20Ferrara's%20take%20on%20the%20Strauss-Kahn%20scandal%20-%20world%20exclusive%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F10%2Fwelcome-to-new-york-gerard-depardieu-trailer-abel-ferrara-strauss-kahn-scandal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20New%20York%3A%20watch%20G%C3%A9rard%20Depardieu%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20Abel%20Ferrara%27s%20take%20on%20the%20Strauss-Kahn%20scandal%20-%20world%20exclusive%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F10%2Fwelcome-to-new-york-gerard-depardieu-trailer-abel-ferrara-strauss-kahn-scandal-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1404998716915%2FStill-from-Welcome-to-New-013.jpg>
It is understood that the new version of Welcome to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/welcome-to-new-york> has been cut from 125 
minutes to 108 minutes. Ferrara appears to be most upset about the recutting of 
a central rape scene which now appears in flashback, potentially leaving the 
credibility of its victim open to interpretation. “The version being released 
in the US may lead viewers to think that maybe she imagined it,” said the 
film-maker. “It does not respect the woman who was raped at all, and the fact 
that my name is on this film is a crime.”

In the events of 2011, charges of criminal sexual assault against Strauss-Kahn 
were dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2011/aug/24/dominique-strauss-kahn-walks-free-video>
 by US prosecutors.

Ferrara has been locked in a battle with Wild Bunch and IFC since last autumn, 
with Welcome to New York having debuted outside the official lineup during the 
Cannes film festival in May. Wild Bunch says the Bad Lieutenant director was 
contractually obliged to deliver a cut which would meet strict guidelines for 
films rated R by the US censor. When the film-maker failed to deliver, 
producers made their own edit.

“This version has existed for eight months, has been released all over the 
world by distributors to whom we gave the choice between two versions, and all 
unanimously preferred the shorter version not only for commercial reasons but 
because they found it much better,”Wild Bunch head Vincent Maraval told 
Indiewire 
<http://www.indiewire.com/article/abel-ferrara-battles-for-directors-cut-of-welcome-to-new-york-but-heres-the-real-story-20150305>
 earlier this month.

But Ferrara now suggests there was always a plan to make a new version without 
his permission and insists he was never aware he did not have final cut. 
Meanwhile IFC has not made any public comment on the spat.

Welcome to New York has received mostly positive reviews, but was released via 
video on demand in France to escape what Maraval hinted at the time wasa 
national instinct towards self-censorship 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/dominique-strauss-kahn/10823445/Cinema-producer-warned-over-Dominique-Strauss-Kahn-film.html>
. Ferrara’s film is slated for a US release, albeit in its controversially 
edited form, on 27 March.
 