
Many years ago during a conversation with a supervisor, I was asked why I went 
into research. I said I wanted to help people. His reply was a belly laugh. I 
was confused. I know that it’s not open heart surgery, but my research – 
looking at the causes of and treatments for mental health problems – is still 
about helping people.

My dirty little secret: I've been writing erotic novels to fund my PhD
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/sep/02/my-dirty-little-secret-ive-been-writing-erotic-novels-to-fund-my-phd>
I am not alone in wanting my research to make things better. All researchers 
want their work to be useful and relevant and, of course, getting research 
funding is dependent on having all-important “impact”.

But it’s not that simple. In my area, mental health, messages for the wider 
world often boil down to one of two suggestions. Firstly, that service 
providers would benefit from additional or specialist training. Secondly, that 
the government ought to invest more into treating mental health disorders. In 
both cases, the answer is “Yes, of course, but there’s no money.” The 
conversation often ends there.

That isn’t to say that research never has an impact. It does. The most widely 
cited example is the rate of smoking cessation in the UK over the past few 
decades. But who, of the many, many researchers who looked at that topic, could 
accurately say what influence their individual study had?

Shot in the dark

There’s so much pressure for academics to ensure that their work ends up in the
right hands, but how much pressure is there for policymakers to keep up to date 
about the latestfindings in the areas they are responsible for? Very little, it 
seems.

So how can we get our messages heard? Despite the emphasis placed on impact, 
the pathways are not clear. We are told to tweet our findings, for instance. 
Notwithstanding issues about condensing complex and technical science into 140 
characters, if ever there was an example of a shot in the dark, surely this is 
it.

You can email an MP, in the hope that your message will spark a response more 
meaningful than the generic “Thank you for your comments”.

Academic superstars: stop playing to the cameras and get back to your labs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/feb/06/academic-superstars-stop-playing-to-the-cameras-and-get-back-to-your-labs>
What we’re talking about is lobbying – or at least attempting to. There are 
several issues with this. For starters, there’s problem of access. Take, for 
instance, the recent talks about whether to introduce an additional tax on 
sugary drinks. Representatives from the drinks industry had a reported130 
meetings with policymakers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/12/observer-editorial-campaign-against-sugar>
 during the process. It’s simply not possible for academics to compete with 
that.

But let’s imagine that your your tweets and/or emails do get read and you get 
through the door. The difference isn’t just quantity, it is the nature of the 
conversations themselves. Academics naturally tend towards caution and balance, 
talking about predictions and probabilities. Professional lobbyists, on the 
other hand, are free to talk about job losses, negative impacts on the economy 
and losses of votes and so on, as if they are certainties. And this is against 
a backdrop ofpolicy changes that attempt to restrict charities 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-35509117> (who often fund research) even 
getting a foot in the building.

Even if you can be heard, you still need several other things to be in place 
in order to get results – most crucial are political appetite and public 
support. These are beyond your control.

Which brings me back to my chortling supervisor. He was laughing, I later 
realised, because he had acknowledged a simple truth.Research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/research>, for the most part, isn’t 
about helping people. Not directly, at least. It’s about the pursuit of 
knowledge. We do what we can to obtain knowledge and we do what we can to “get 
it out there”, and ultimately, we just have to keep our fingers crossed that it 
makes a difference.


Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 