
Captioned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2010/nov/18/captions-plays-hearing-deaf-audience>
 andsigned <http://www.spit.org.uk/signed_performances> performances have 
become common in theatre, with BSL interpreters and LED displays a familiar 
presence at the side of the stage. But theatres are increasingly making their 
work accessible for deaf and disabled audiences in a more creative, integrated 
fashion and are placing issues of access right at the heart of their design.

Graeae theatre company <http://www.graeae.org/>’s touring production of Jack 
Thorne’s playThe Solid Life of Sugar Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/10/solid-life-of-sugar-water-edinburgh-festival-review-graeae>
, which arrives at the National Theatre in London this week, imaginatively 
incorporates live captioning at all of its performances.Birmingham Rep 
<http://www.birmingham-rep.co.uk/event/the-government-inspector/>, meanwhile, 
is preparing to open a new version of Nikolai Gogol’s The Government Inspector 
with an integrated cast of deaf, disabled and able-bodied performers. Rather 
than being hidden away, the latter show’s audio describer and sign language 
interpreters will be incorporated as characters within the world of the play 
and have been involved in the production right from the start.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faccess-all-areas-theatre-bsl-captioning-signing-deaf-disabled-audiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80c3d9a3e0fb736c4cfae4c45481fe81d6281827%2F294_248_6524_3915%2F6524.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Access%20all%20areas%3A%20the%20plays%20that%20took%20captioning%20and%20signing%20to%20their%20hearts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faccess-all-areas-theatre-bsl-captioning-signing-deaf-disabled-audiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Access%20all%20areas%3A%20the%20plays%20that%20took%20captioning%20and%20signing%20to%20their%20hearts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faccess-all-areas-theatre-bsl-captioning-signing-deaf-disabled-audiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80c3d9a3e0fb736c4cfae4c45481fe81d6281827%2F294_248_6524_3915%2F6524.jpg>
 Daryl Jackson, performer-interpreter, in rehearsals for The Government 
Inspector at Birmingham Rep. Photograph: Robert Day 
Roxana Silbert, artistic director of Birmingham Rep, is enthusiastic about the 
ways in which creative access can open up aspects of Gogol’s play. “Sign 
language is great for The Government Inspector,” she says, “because there are a 
lot of secrets and lies in the play and a lot of people who are saying things 
that other people don’t understand. So having that second language enhances 
what the play is already trying to do.”


The show’s aesthetic has been affected in more subtle ways by the access needs 
of its performers. “Once you start looking at it from the actors’ point of view 
and what they need to make the stage work for them, actually what it does is 
make the stage a really interesting place,” Silbert says. The set for The 
Government Inspector suggests the lobby of a hotel, with various levels 
accessed by ramps and a lift as well as stairways and ladders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faccess-all-areas-theatre-bsl-captioning-signing-deaf-disabled-audiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc06b7f351d6f616b01e60b18ff10a1268ca56bf8%2F0_0_1546_2100%2F1546.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Access%20all%20areas%3A%20the%20plays%20that%20took%20captioning%20and%20signing%20to%20their%20hearts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faccess-all-areas-theatre-bsl-captioning-signing-deaf-disabled-audiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Access%20all%20areas%3A%20the%20plays%20that%20took%20captioning%20and%20signing%20to%20their%20hearts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faccess-all-areas-theatre-bsl-captioning-signing-deaf-disabled-audiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc06b7f351d6f616b01e60b18ff10a1268ca56bf8%2F0_0_1546_2100%2F1546.jpg>
 Arthur Hughes in The Solid Life of Sugar Water. The bedroom is a third 
‘character’ in the play. Photograph: Patrick Baldwin 
Graeae has championed disabled artists and accessibility since it was founded 
in 1980. Those decades of work are now informing new initiatives aimed at 
improving access and widening opportunities for disabled artists across the 
sector. One of these isRamps on the Moon 
<http://www.graeae.org/news/ace-awards-2-3m-to-touring-project-for-disabled-artists/>
, a collaborative network of theatres being funded by Arts Council England and 
supported by Graeae to create three new pieces of touring theatre that put 
disabled artists and audiences at their heart. The Government Inspector is the 
first of these.

Graeae’s Amit Sharma, the director of The Solid Life of Sugar Water, is also 
interested in how access can be incorporated in ways that speak to the themes 
of the piece. Thorne’s play tells the story of a couple attempting to overcome 
grief and regain intimacy. The whole show is set in the protagonists’ bedroom 
and takes an incredibly candid approach to relationships, sex and the 
difficulty of communication.

“Because of the nature of the text and it being very explicit in how it’s 
describing certain sexual acts, I made the decision very early on of not using 
British Sign Language,” says Sharma. Instead, captions are projected on to the 
bed that the two characters share, which the audience see as if from above. 
“When we were working with the set and the elements of access … we always said 
there are three characters in the play: there are the actors and there’s the 
bedroom,” he says, stressing the importance of the design. The prominence of 
the captioning in this intimate shared space highlights the play’s themes of 
communication – and lack of it. As Sharma puts it, “to have those words spelt 
out gives it an extra meaning, an extra layer”.

Deaf and disabled artists: we will not let government cuts make us invisible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/13/deaf-and-disabled-artists-we-will-not-let-government-cuts-make-us-invisible>
Within the play, references to the specific disabilities of the performers are 
incidental rather than integral. “We just went for the actors who felt right 
for the roles,” says Sharma. After Genevieve Barr and Arthur Hughes had been 
cast, Thorne made small changes to the script to refer in passing to Barr’s 
deafness and Hughes’s arm impairment – details that are always secondary within 
the narrative. “Disability is irrelevant,” Sharma says. “It’s the story that 
matters.”

The Solid Life of Sugar Water was staged at the Edinburgh festival last summer 
where it was one of many shows representing agame-changing year for disabled 
artists at the fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/13/edinburgh-festival-fringe-disability-if-platform-stopgap-venue-access-disabled-performers>
. It prompted audiences and theatre-makers to think about accessibility in 
different ways. This kind of work, however, requires support. In addition to 
the backing of the Arts Council, which has awarded £2.3 million of funding to 
Ramps on the Moon, Silbert stresses the importance of safeguarding schemes such 
asAccess to Work <https://www.gov.uk/access-to-work/overview>. “It is about 
performers who have specific requirements being able to get the Access to Work 
support they need,” she says. “That’s where the problem is going to lie, not in 
theatre funding.”

 * The Solid Life of Sugar Water 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/the-solid-life-of-sugar-water> is at 
the National Theatre, London, 26 February- 19 March.The Government Inspector 
<http://www.birmingham-rep.co.uk/event/the-government-inspector/> is at 
Birmingham Rep 19-26 March 2016.  