
PC hardware vendors such as Acer, Asustek and Dell may withdraw from the 
tablet market next year because they cannot compete with Apple, Amazon and 
Barnes & Noble,suggests <http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20111116PD216.html> the 
Taiwanese news site Digitimes.

The report – which is based only on "sources from upstream supply chains", who 
would expect to be seeing orders from those companies by now if they were 
planning an aggressive push into tablets in 2012 – suggests that the PC vendors 
cannot see any profit in tablets because they do not have a compelling content 
offering like the existing trio.

However the sources' veracity is called into question by the same Digitimes 
report, which notes: "The sources pointed out that although iPad 2 is also 
seeing strong demand from consumers, sales were lower than those of iPad, 
indicating that consumers' strong enthusiasm for tablet PCs has already 
disappeared."

That isn't borne out by iPad sales, which in the two quarters since the launch 
of the iPad 2 in March to the end of September have sold more than 20m, 
compared to 15m sold in the four quarters of the first iPad's availability.

With Acer having said that it is committed to higher-margin products than just 
PCs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2011/apr/11/netbooks-dying-acer-google>
, andAsus aiming for a quad-core tablet 
<http://mobile.slashdot.org/story/11/11/09/1624211/asus-unveils-quad-core-transformer-prime-tablet>
 in 2012, it seems more likely that the companies named are delaying some 
orders until 2012 as they await the arrival of Microsoft's Windows 8, which 
will also run on tablets. That looks like it could offer better volumes in the 
tablet market – though the question still remains of how rival companies 
offering essentially the same operating system will eke out profits. While 
Microsoft can be certain of making handsome profits from Windows 8, the same 
isn't necessarily true for the hardware companies, where even Hewlett-Packard, 
the world's biggest seller of PCs, makes an average profit of just $40 on each 
PC it sells at an average of $800.

Windows 8 on tablets may allow tablet companies to raise prices because of the 
attractions of Microsoft's offerings, especially in apps – but they might find 
themselves in the same price-war struggle as they have been in the Google 
Android field, where Samsung has so far dominated sales. Amazon, notably, uses 
its own version of Android and its own cloud infrastructure to provide content 
for the Kindle Fire; none of the other Android tablet makers is able to offer 
the same.
 