 Acne, the pimpled curse of puberty, could be a plague triggered by refined 
white bread and breakfast cereal, according to researchers.
The Australians plan to test 60 teenage boys with a low carbohydrate diet for 
three months and see if there is a difference.

If a diet low on Mother's Pride turns the boys back into a pride and joy to 
their parents, it may demonstrate that wheat or refined starch has been the 
villain all along.

Acne <https://www.theguardian.com/society/acne> is a mystery affliction: US 
dermatologists recently looked at 250 studies involving 150 drugs or other 
medical treatments, and could come to no conclusion as to what worked or why. 
"Here we are in the 21st century and and we still don't have an answer," one 
admitted.

The New Scientist reports today that, according to Loren Cordain, an 
evolutionary biologist in Colorado State University, highly-processed breads 
and cereals are easily digested, producing a flood of sugars that in turn 
triggers high levels of insulin and an insulin-like growth factor.

This in turn leads to an excess of male hormones, which encourage the skin to 
ooze sebum, the greasy product that acts as a beacon for acne-promoting 
bacteria.

Up to 95% of 18-year-olds in modern societies are afflicted by zits, pimples, 
and explosions of acne. They are almost unknown in subsistence societies in the 
Amazon or Papua New Guinea. The Inuit of Alaska were once clear-skinned: acne 
arrived in the far north with a western diet of waffles, hotcakes, sliced 
bread, and doughnuts.

Neil Mann of RMIT University (formerly the Royal Melbourne institute of 
technology) is proposing a systematic study to take the starch out of his 
volunteer teenagers.

"Dermatologists will tell you they have put patients on low carbohydrate diets 
and seen improvements," he said. "This will be the first controlled study."
 