
Young people with severe acne should be carefully monitored as the condition 
can make them suicidal, and in some cases that may be worsened by their drugs.

A paper, published today in the British Medical Journal says drugs such as 
Roaccutane (isotretinoin) reduce the suicide risk in some young people as it 
improves their appearance. "For certain vulnerable patients, however, 
isotretinoin may trigger such behaviour," it finds.

Researchers at Sweden's Karolinska Institute found the risk of suicide rose in 
the year before the patient was given the drug. That is clear evidence, they 
say, that severe acne itself is a risk for suicide. The evidence is not quite 
so clear on any role played by the drug. "Some of the patients, possibly 
vulnerable to isotretinoin, who made their first suicide attempt in close 
relation to treatment, may have done so as a consequence of exposure to the 
drug," they write.

"However, patients without a positive effect of treatment might have despaired 
at the prospect of continuing to live with disfiguring acne."

They also cannot rule out, they say, the possibility that patients who 
expected their life would be transformed after treatment might be distraught 
when their social life did not improve. However if suicide can be precipitated 
in some people by the drug, they write, future studies must try to work out 
which patients are most vulnerable â€“ and their own research suggests it is not 
automatically those who have already attempted suicide.

"Much more important is the fact that suicide attempts can occur quite a long 
time after treatment has stopped," they write. "For this reason, close 
monitoring of the mental status of patients receiving isotretinoin, as well as 
those with severe acne, should be a part of the treatment process and should 
continue for at least a year after the end of treatment."

Dr Sarah Bailey, a lecturer in the Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacologyat 
the University of Bath, said it was "an important paper that strengthens the 
view that acne itself can have significant psychological effects and that there 
is a low risk of suicide for some acne patients.

"However, the controversial issue of increased suicide risk with isotretinoin 
use is not resolved by this paper, which the authors themselves acknowledge."
 