
Australian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-capital-territory> 
voters are being given a choice between a long-term government that says it’s 
refreshed and an untested opposition insisting it’s ready to lead.

Labor, which has reigned over the ACT since 2001, will rack up two decades in 
power if it wins Saturday’s poll – but not if the territory’s Liberal leader, 
Jeremy Hanson, can help it.

“There’s a mood for change across the town,” he said. “There is a smell around 
this government. We’ve also been a very credible, very professional opposition. 
We are ready for government.”

The chief minister, Andrew Barr, points out he’s the longest serving member of 
the government, even though he’s only been in the Legislative Assembly for 
eight years and the top job for two. “We’ve demonstrated that we can renew in 
office,” he said.

The two leaders faced each other in a televised debate on Wednesday. 

The relatively low-key election campaign has largely boiled down to a dispute 
about the fate of Labor’s planned light rail system. The Liberals say light 
rail is too expensive and have vowed to rip up project contracts and expand the 
bus system instead.

A record 141 candidates are standing for election as the Legislative Assembly 
expands from 17 members to 25.

Uncharted territory: why the ACT election result cannot be predicted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/uncharted-territory-why-the-act-election-result-cannot-be-predicted>
The territory has been carved into five electorates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/uncharted-territory-why-the-act-election-result-cannot-be-predicted>
, each with five MLAs, which is likely to make it harder for minor parties and 
independents to get a look in.

It’s a near-certainty that Labor and the Liberals will get 10 seats each.

Shane Rattenbury is likely to retain his seat for the Greens and the minor 
party could possibly pick up a second for the former MLA Caroline Le Couteur.

Which of the two major parties forms a government comes down to which wins the 
fifth seat of the other electorates.

Only once in 27 years of self-government have Canberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra> voters elected a majority 
government and Labor has governed during the past two terms with support from 
the Greens.
 