
In dramatic writing, it's good if your plot is full of surprises that in 
retrospect are seen to have been inevitable.

In the 1970s, if you parked outside the Space theatre in Cape Town, South 
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, you might have been 
less than pleased when your car was stolen, but – given the surroundings – you 
would also have realised it was pretty much inevitable.

Then, as quickly as your vehicle was stolen, you would get it back. 
Inevitable, really. The cops were watching the Space day and night.

Of course, automobile theft was low-level villainy. The serious crimes were 
taking place on the stage of the Space theatre, and were soon compounded in 
anti-apartheid venues elsewhere in South Africa. Today there are more than 100 
experimental performance spaces in the country, generating an energy that has 
found its way to the Jermyn Street theatre's South African season.

There's a British tradition of presenting South African shows. The phenomenon 
that isWar Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/26/war-horse-national-theatre-live-webchat>
 was made possible by Basil Jones and Adrian Kohler of Cape Town'sHandspring 
Puppet Company <http://www.handspringpuppet.co.za/handspring-people/>. It was 
also influenced by the South African artistWilliam Kentridge 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/william-kentridge-2680>. In the 60s, there 
was thetownship musical King Kong 
<http://soulsafari.wordpress.com/2009/08/10/king-kong-the-first-all-african-jazz-opera-1959/>
. And there have been umpteen other South African shows staged in the UK, 
including Umabatha, Welcome Msomi's breathtaking Zulu version of Macbeth.

After the dismantling of apartheid, it was expected that South African theatre 
would lose power. But there's a surprising amount of activity now. And 
attention is being paid to knottier, less morally clear-cut stories.

Pieter-Dirk Uys, the writer-performer who was once the hilarious scourge of 
apartheid governments, has delivered blistering attacks on key figures in the 
ruling African National Congress government, on the scepticism of former 
president Thabo Mbeki about the connection between HIV and Aids, and on a 
cabinet minister's recommendation of a supposedAids cure 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/5319680.stm> involving beetroot and 
garlic.

Uys performs in cities – his career began at the Space – but he also visits 
outlying schools and communities. As part of a tradition that goes back to the 
campfire and recalls the glorious storytelling of the women of Crossroads, a 
township in Cape Town, community-based theatre is mushrooming in South Africa, 
notably in the north-west.

In the 50s, the black townships spawned every conceivable form of communal 
performance. Sophiatown, near Johannesburg, produced particularly creative 
musicians and dancers , not to mention the literary brilliance of Lewis Nkosi, 
Nat Nakasa, and Bloke Modisane. All this work was banned from reaching white 
audiences.
 Arresting … Jasmine Hyde and David Judge in Statements After An Arrest Under 
the Immorality Act, by Athol Fugard. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
There were trade union performers, Johannesburg's Junction Avenue Company, 
Kessie Govender's ShahTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> 
Academy in Natal, Grahamstown's Ikhwezi Players, Rob Amato's Imitha Players in 
east London, and others. All were legendary, all were harassed or snuffed out.

The Theatre Council of Natal was destroyed when its leaders were jailed for 
being part of the black consciousness movement led by Steve Biko, who was 
killed in 1977. The People's Experimental Theatre disintegrated when several of 
its leaders were arrested for treason. Gangsters, a play performed by Maishe 
Maponya's Bahumutsi Group, was judged to be so inflammatory that it could only 
be performed in "small, intimate, four-wall theatres of the experimental or 
avante-garde type".

Well, those little theatre groups and their works roared around the world, 
bringing pressure to bear on the regime back home.

It's worth recalling three South African gems of surprise and inevitability. 
At Johannesburg's Market theatre, Percy Mtwa and Mbongeni Ngema – who had 
previously worked with Gibson Kente, touring black-produced, black-acted shows 
to black township audiences – joined forces with Barney Simon to create Woza 
Albert. The play, which explores what would happen if Jesus dropped in on 
Christian apartheid South Africa, became a worldwide hit.

Othello Slegs Blankes (Othello for Whites Only), written by Donald Howarth, 
showed how, inevitably in racist South Africa, Othello can't appear.

John Kani, Winston Ntshona and Athol Fugard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/athol-fugard> had massive international 
success with Sizwe Banzi is Dead, in which a man takes on a dead man's official 
papers. Kani and Ntshona were arrested in the Transkei while performing the 
play. Guarded by a young, rifle-bearing policeman, they were driven in a police 
vehicle through bare African countryside at the dead of night. As the van 
stopped at the police station in Umtata (since renamed Mthatha), the cop seemed 
ready to pick a fight. He leaned forward and whispered: "I saw your play last 
night." Then, after a pause, he added: "I thought it was wonderful."

• Under a Foreign Sky, written and performed by Jack Klaff, is at the Jermyn 
Street theatre <http://www.jermynstreettheatre.co.uk/> on 22 and 29 June and 6 
July
 