
Are there any companies left that can confidently say they are not technology 
companies? Whether you are a retailer or manufacturer, an artisan craftsman or 
farmer, a social entrepreneur or publisher: technology will rule your 
operations and business plan.

Indeed, if there's one thing we can take away from the Guardian's recent 
Activate <http://guardian.co.uk/activate/london> conference, it's that to have 
success, companies and organisations need to understand how technology can 
deliver for them. They need to learn how to use technology to best effect — 
whether they want to become the next start-up success or wage a media campaign 
against an authoritarian regime.

Of course, technology is no panacea, but it offers huge opportunities: it can 
be a source of wealth and knowledge; boost international trade; help (and harm) 
the environment; and it's a given that it will revolutionise politics and 
society.

For starters, technology can give us efficiency – just look at the UK 
government's "digital by default 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rDlvg7DBxhU&feature=plcp>" strategy. It's not 
been an easy journey, but as we learned from Mike Bracken, the British 
government's executive director of digital efficiency, the government's IT 
strategists are starting to cut through the clutter of services and deliver 
enormous efficiencies and cost savings.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrDlvg7DBxhU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrDlvg7DBxhU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrDlvg7DBxhU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
But efficiency alone is not enough. The key to success is agility.

It's not just the agility of the development process, like Skype's constant 
iteration <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DYwE7BzFTYY&feature=plcp> through 
development sprints and quality assurance that drives innovation. And it's not 
just the power of crowdsourcing knowledge and labour to speed up development 
and drive down cost.

It's also the agility of the business model, the ability of a company to pivot 
quickly when the market and the competition change. What's at the heart of this 
agility? Technology.

That's especially true in the current economic environment, where start-ups 
find it increasingly difficult to secure funding. But as the serial 
entrepreneur, investor and chief executive of Eventbrite Kevin Hartzexplained 
at Activate <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CV76CY_Yck8&feature=plcp>, agility 
can now be built into the business model of start-up companies. During the 
dot.com bubble of the late 1990s, many new companies were consumed by the 
cash-burn of high infrastructure and technical costs. Cloud computing, open 
source software and new collaboration tools are minimising the expense of 
setting up and rapidly scaling a new business – or coping with the setbacks 
dealt by a slowing economy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCV76CY_Yck8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCV76CY_Yck8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCV76CY_Yck8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Just take blogging and publishing platform Wordpress <http://wordpress.com>. 
There's no need for expensive offices or infrastructure,explained Matt Mullenweg
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QQ243UtfyaI&feature=plcp>, a founding 
developer of the venture. He hires and works with people that he has never seen 
or spoken to. It doesn't matter whether they speak good English or not, as long 
as they can write good code and understand the job at hand. The upside: When 
teams of the company come together, they do so in very nice locations. Better 
to spend the money on nice trips than on offices, says Matt.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQQ243UtfyaI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQQ243UtfyaI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQQ243UtfyaI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
But the benefit of technology is more profound than having access to reliable 
and cheap remote conferencing services. Its biggest impact will come in an area 
that once was considered to be more of a cost than a benefit: technology 
generates information, and plenty of it. During the past decade the speed with 
which technology generates data has accelerated, and the amount of information 
has multiplied.

Once considered to be a drain on scarce storage resources, businesses and 
organisations have to realise that these data points could now be one of their 
most precious commodities.

They are our real-time window to understand customer behaviour, our early 
warning system for problems in the supply chain or on the shop floor, our tool 
to understand when our business model may have reached an inflection point.

Yes, the data volume can be overwhelming. But we can harness the big data 
deluge, and turn it into pattern and context, into something that we can 
visualise, understand and act upon.

Capturing data drives activist organisations like Poland's EP Foundation, 
which bring transparency to the political process (video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JG8Iif3iKkk&feature=plcp>), and companies like 
Gavin Stark's environmental intelligence company AMEE, which captures data to 
calculate andtrack the carbon footprint 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZB06w_mqApU&feature=plcp> of companies and 
organisations.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZB06w_mqApU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZB06w_mqApU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZB06w_mqApU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
To achieve that, companies will need tools, whether they are big data 
solutions from established software giants like Microsoft, Oracle or SAS 
Institute, or the step-by-step approachchampioned by Conrad Wolfram 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qMMf492cmZk&feature=plcp>, who believes that 
applications can help companies get ready for the computational knowledge 
economy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FqMMf492cmZk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FqMMf492cmZk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FqMMf492cmZk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Whatever the technology: if it is not iterated all the time and if it is not 
highly adaptable, it will fail the companies that have to navigate the age of 
agility.

Tim Weber is a director at public relations agency A&R Edelman; he joined 
Edelman in July after more than 20 years with the BBC, where he was the 
business and technology editor for BBC News interactive.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://guardian.co.uk/professional>. To get more articles like this direct to 
your inbox,sign up for free membership 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/media-network/start.php> of the 
Guardian Media Network <http://guardian.co.uk/media-network>.
 