
This weekend, during the autumn/winter 2012 menswear shows in Italy's fashion 
capital, Milan, two key wardrobe themes emerged: sharp suits and strong coats. 
Last night,Miuccia Prada <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/prada?INTCMP=SRCH>
 took those trends to the next level with a blockbuster catwalk show based 
around the ideas of men and power. To convey that message, she enlisted A-list 
Hollywood actors, includingGary Oldman <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000198/>, 
Adrien Brody, Willem Defoe, Jamie Bell and Tim Roth, to walk a red, white and 
black carpet, alongside regular catwalk models.

The first outfit, an elegant black coat, worn with a white shirt and a white 
polo neck layered underneath, which finished high under the model's chin, set 
the tone. This was a collection that felt done up, sharp and refined. Striped 
coats in grey and mustard were neatly belted. Beautifully cut, modern 
double-breasted suiting sat perfectly against the body. Eveningwear flourishes, 
flower corsages and silk robes added glamour.

Backstage, Prada <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/prada> said that having 
done a fun collection last season – Americana meets golf with rhinestones – she 
wanted this men's collection to be more serious. "Men's power" was the starting 
point, she said. She talked of how dressing "would always be power" and "how 
for men power can be expressed through elegance and fashion". In the 
collection, she identified the high collars and "modern fitting" as key 
messages this season.

Meanwhile, quotes about "role play" and "a cinematic character study 
subverting male archetypes and formal codes of dress" appeared in the show 
notes.

Wearing a rhinestone jacket and popping an anchovy canape into her mouth, 
Prada explained that she had felt for this show that "maybe we should have a 
few actors". All the men the label approached said yes.Gary Oldman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gary-oldman> closed the show in a stunning 
double-breasted black evening coat.

The brand is not known for its starry front rows or the general courting of 
celebrities. But Prada is a designer known for seasonal about-turns, and the 
inclusion of actors on the catwalk was perhaps this season's unexpected twist.

After the show, Willem Defoe, wearing a black evening coat, said of his 
catwalk experience: "It's different [from walking a red carpet] because it's a 
more fluid thing, a very simple action. You have no agenda, you just present 
yourself and see what the reaction is like." The reaction was triumphant.

Adrien Brody <https://www.theguardian.com/film/adrien-brody>, still in his 
catwalk red foulard-style patterned cocktail coat with a contrast astrakhan 
collar and red lens circular sunglasses, which he had worn with convincing 
swagger, said he felt "regal" in his outfit. "I really appreciate how clothing 
can help to transform us," he said.

Jamie Bell, in a white waistcoat, joked that the catwalk experience had made 
his heart race. "You realise how short you are. You discover nervous twitches 
in your face you didn't know you had, and you don't know where to look." But he 
was taken with his outfit, particularly the sunglasses, which he dubbed a bit "
Woody Harrelson in Natural Born Killers <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0110632/>".

This being Prada, there were many other statement accessories on show – shoes 
encased in rubber or featuring painted daisies, colourful pens poking out of 
suit pockets, pins and badges pinned on the fronts of coats or jackets.

This latest collection, with its roots in tailoring and coats, is likely to 
sell well and continue the brand's run of good figures. Last year saw Prada 
sales soar, with a 25% increase reported in the third quarter. The label is 
expected to open around 80 new stores a year, 50% of them in Asia, until 2013.

This particular set of menswear shows follow a recent report by consultancy 
Bain & Co, which said that luxury menswear is currently the fastest-growing 
market.

It estimated that luxury menswear is worth around €180bn and growing at nearly 
14% a year – double the current growth in luxury womenswear. It is thought that 
these buoyant figures are being driven chiefly by China's male-dominated 
market. The economic growth in Asia-Pacific countries, such as China and India, 
looks set to continue to bolster figures for luxury brands across the board.
 