
Ever since Chinese doctors first poked their patients with sharp objects 4,000 
years ago, and charged them for the pleasure, acupuncture has been shrouded in 
mystery.

Tradition has it that the procedure works by improving the flow of "qi" along 
invisible energy channels called meridians, but research published today points 
to a less mystical explanation for the painkilling claims of acupuncture.

The answer, according to a team of scientists in New York, follows an 
extraordinary study in which researchers gave regular acupuncture sessions to 
mice with sore paws.

After each half-hour session the mice felt less discomfort in their paws 
because the needles triggered the release of a natural painkiller, the 
researchers say. The needles caused tissue damage that stimulated cells to 
produce adenosine, an anti-inflammatory chemical, that was effective for up to 
an hour after the therapy was over.

Modern acupuncture involves inserting fine needles into the skin at specific 
points around the body. The needles are pushed in a few centimetres, and then 
heated, twisted or even electrified to produce their claimed medical effects.

Acupuncture <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/acupuncture> has spread 
around the world since originating in China but conventional western medicine 
has remained steadfastly sceptical. Although there is now good evidence that 
acupuncture can relieve pain, many of the other health benefits acupuncturists 
claim are on shakier ground.

The latest research gives doctors a sound explanation of how sticking needles 
into the skin can alleviate, rather than exacerbate, pain. The discovery will 
challenge the view , widely held among scientists, that any benefits a patient 
feels after acupuncture are due purely to the placebo effect.

"The view that acupuncture has little benefit beyond the placebo effect has 
really hampered research into the technique," said Maiken Nedergaard, a 
neuroscientist at the University of Rochester medical centre in New York state, 
who led the study.

"Some people think any work in this area is junk research, but I think that's 
wrong. I was really surprised at the arrogance of some of my colleagues. We can 
benefit from what has been learned over many thousands of years," Nedergaard 
said.

"I believe we've found the main mechanism by which acupuncture relieves pain. 
Adenosine is a very potent anti-inflammatory compound and most chronic pain is 
caused by inflammation."

The scientists gave each mouse a sore paw by injecting it with an inflammatory 
chemical. Half of the mice lacked a gene that is needed to make adenosine 
receptors, which are found on major nerves.

The therapy session involved inserting a fine needle into an acupuncture point 
in the knee above each mouse's sore foot. In keeping with traditional practice, 
the needles were rotated periodically throughout the half-hour session.

To measure how effective the acupuncture was, the researchers recorded how 
quickly each mouse pulled its sore paw away from a small bristly brush. The 
more pain the mice were in, the faster they pulled away.

Writing in the journal, Nature Neuroscience, Nedergaard's team describe how 
acupuncture reduced pain by two-thirds in normal mice, but had no effect on the 
discomfort of mice that lacked the adenosine receptor gene. Without adenosine 
receptors, the mice were unable to respond to the adenosine released when cells 
were damaged by acupuncture needles.

Acupuncture had no effect in either group of mice if the needles were not 
rotated, suggesting that the tissues had to be physically damaged to release 
adenosine.

Nedergaard said that twisting the needles seems to cause enough damage to make 
cells release the painkilling chemical. This is then picked up by adenosine 
receptors on nearby nerves, which react by damping down pain. Further tests on 
the mice revealed that levels of adenosine surged 24-fold in the tissues around 
the acupuncture needles during and immediately after each session.

One of the longstanding mysteries surrounding acupuncture is why the technique 
only seems to alleviate pain if needles are inserted at specific points. 
Nedergaard believes that most of these acupuncture points are along major nerve 
tracks, and as such are parts of the body that have plenty of adenosine 
receptors.

In a final experiment, Nedergaard's team injected mice with a cancer drug that 
made it harder to remove adenosine from their tissues. The drug, called 
deoxycoformycin, boosted the effects of acupuncture dramatically, more than 
tripling how long the pain relief lasted.

"There is an attitude among some researchers that studying alternative 
medicine is unfashionable," said Nedergaard. "Because it has not been 
understood completely, many people have remained sceptical."

Although the study explains how acupuncture can alleviate pain, it sheds no 
light on the other health benefits that some practitioners believe the 
procedure can achieve.

Josephine Briggs, the director of the national centre for complementary and 
alternative medicine at the US National Institutes ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, said: "It's clear that 
acupuncture may activate a number of different mechanisms â€¦ It's an interesting 
contribution to our growing understanding of the complex intervention which is 
acupuncture."
 