
Advertising is showing signs of life, Britain's Got Talent is attracting more 
than 10 million viewers a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/19/britains-got-talent-tv-ratings>
and the ITV share price is at an annual high. If timing is everything in life, 
then Adam Crozier, who takes over as ITV's chief executive today, is arriving 
at arguably its most auspicious point for a decade. The company has returned to 
profit, albeit of just £25m, after swingeing cuts followed a loss of £2.7bn the 
previous year. Advertising revenueswere up 16% in March, and are expected to be 
up 25% in both April and May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/19/itv-ad-revenue-surge>, with the 
World Cup oiling the wheels. There is even a political consensus building 
around ITV's case for deregulation.

Yet, while the outlook is rosier than it has been for some time, the 
fundamental issues of increased competition and structural challenges remain. 
How will Crozier and his new chairman,Archie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman>, the former Conservative MP 
who is enjoying something of a honeymoon, deal with these challenges?

A strategic review set in place by Norman, who has won admiration for his 
appearances on the shop floor from ITV's troops, is nearing completion. It is 
likely to identify two key growth areas as new digital revenues and the 
programme production arm, ITV Studios, which has been neglected. Norman has 
moved to scotch persistent rumours that he would sell off the production arm, 
saying it would be "barmy" to do so.

One executive close to the process says that Norman and Crozier recognise that 
the means of distributing programmes to people will be revolutionised over the 
coming years. "But what no one denies is that viewers will want to be 
entertained, and go on watching stars. So, making and owning content and rights 
is the key to survival, whatever happens to the ITV network and channels."

Although he is some way from ruling out acquisitions – of which more later – 
Norman believes this can be done organically by changing a culture that insists 
on splitting editorial from sales.

He recently turned up unannounced to talk to the GMTV team, telling them how 
much he liked their business model of more closely integrated editorial and 
commercial units. The troubled morning show was also the main beneficiary of 
some star grabbing last week whenITV poached Adrian Chiles from the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/19/adrian-chiles-itv>. The 
announcement of the four-year and £6m deal for Chiles to become GMTV's main 
presenter and the face of ITV's football coverage comes after executives at 
both ITV and GMTV spent three unsuccessful years trying to do so. The coup, 
which was orchestrated by ITV's director of television, Peter Fincham, solves 
two problems: awarding GMTV the big name anchor it has been without since 2006 
as well as giving the main channel a popular host for the World Cup, 
Championship League, FA Cup, and other England games.

Norman, who is in total control of GMTV since buying out Disney's remaining 
25% stake last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/26/itv-buys-remaining-gmtv-stake>, 
is understood to want to extend the model of editorial and advertising teams 
sharing plans to the whole six hours of ITV's morning programmes. The company 
could buy independents, join partnerships , or focus on organic growth, using 
development seed corn money to buy creative people.

The most difficult challenge is to create and own the next big format that 
emerges. Norman is understood to want to bring greater professionalism and 
focus to the search rather than simply letting creatives take the lead. ITV 
Studios, which makes Coronation Street and Emmerdale, now supplies only 40% of 
ITV's network output, down from over 60% 10 years ago. The industry is waiting 
to see who Crozier will choose to reinvigorate demoralised producers. One 
insider calls it a "Pied Piper job, leading the creative community back into 
ITV".

Norman and Crozier have met Kevin Lygo, Channel 4's director of television, 
and runner-up for thechief executive's position landed by UKTV's David Abraham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/22/channel-4-david-abraham-chief-executive>
. No offer has (yet) been made. Any candidate would have to have a strong 
relationship with Fincham, who the top team are understood to want to retain. 
Fincham worked with Lygo on reviving C4's entertainment between 1997 and 2000 – 
Sacha Baron Cohen was the biggest star they found. But his stint at C4 could 
work against him. Another idea would be to give Fincham the job and recruit a 
new director of programmes.

The other big challenge facing Crozier is cutting back regulation, especially 
those governing advertising, which will come into play after the election.

It is assumed that Norman, as a former Tory MP and party chairman, would be 
able to reach a political understanding with an incoming Tory government. 
Anything else would be trickier to predict. In the dying days of the 
government, ITV was certainly able to delay the progress of independently 
funded news consortiums, opposed vehemently by the Conservatives.

Behind the scenes, ITV is offering to look again at the importance of national 
and regional news as a quid pro quo for political support for deregulation. One 
of its central issues is the continued existence of contract rights renewal – 
ad rules put in place whenITV plc <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ITV> was 
created from the merger of Carlton and Granada.

On 1 April, Ofcom was forced, following a freedom of information request, to 
publish its advice to the Competition Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/01/ofcom-itv-crr>that CRR should be 
abolished or substantially modified. This evidence, proving that the media 
regulator was in direct contradiction to the Competition Commission, is likely 
to be used to attempt to shift the commission's position. Few insiders are 
holding their breaths.

Yet the mass market power of ITV is about to be demonstrated. The bidding has 
already started for slots on its special event, the live finals of Britain's 
Got Talent – as happened with The X Factor last December – with a handy 
windfall of £75m suggested.

In an interview Norman described the current advertising market as 
"surprisingly strong", but added: "The outlook for the second half of the year 
and into 2011 remains very uncertain." It once more underscores the potential 
power of ITV. But the downside remains – that television advertising is 
volatile and in a fragile state of recovery, as is ITV.
 