
This article is the subject of a legal complaint made on behalf of Axonn Media 
Ltd

British prime ministers have started out as chemists, barristers and academics 
but should the ambition ofAdam Afriyie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-afriyie> ever be realised, he would 
surely be the first "word farmer" to run the country.

Afriyie, the MP for Windsor, who was forced to deny any ambition to unseat the 
PM, has made a multimillion-pound fortune from businesses that include an 
operation employing hundreds of young writers to churn out thousands of news 
stories a day about anything from car roof racks to the best way to cook 
Christmas lunch.

Afriyie owns businesses that include Adfero which bills itself as "the UK's 
leading dedicated online news provider". It produces thousands of short 
articles for corporate clients who need fresh content on their websites 
featuring popular keywords in the daily battle to appear near the top of 
Google's search rankings.

The targets set to the mostly novice writers are eye-watering and raise 
serious questions about the quality of content billed as news in certain 
reaches of the internet. A former manager told the Guardian that Adfero staff 
are asked to produce around 30 articles per day, each of around 200 words – a 
rate of one every 15 minutes in an eight-hour shift. The stories – many written 
from press releases harvested systematically – are then sold to clients at a 
price of around £18 per time to clients.

"I estimate I wrote roughly 25,000 news articles of 150-200 words each over my 
almost-five years at Adfero," wrote Bob Bardsley in a post on his own website, 
Phronesis freelance, after he left the company. He worked at the company from 
September 2006 until June 2011 as a writer, editor and manager, and still has 
friends working there. "For a time I was on performance-related pay, so my 
output was higher than the typical employee. At one point, in a managerial 
role, I held personal responsibility for the delivery of probably around 50 
clients' monthly quotas of news. With quite a few new team members who had not 
been fully trained, I had to pick up a fair bit of slack – if I remember 
correctly, I single-handedly produced 101 news articles in the space of a 
31-hour shift, during which time I slept twice, for an hour each time, with my 
laptop switched on and resting on my chest as I slept.." Adfero is part of the 
burgeoning industry of "search engine optimisation" and to make sure Google 
puts an organisation's website high up its list of search results whenever an 
internet user inputs search terms that relate to that organisation's trade. So 
by writing stories about a film star such as Jennifer Lopez and posting them on 
a film rental website, when a movie fan does a Google search for Jennifer 
Lopez, there is a higher likelihood of the company's site appearing in the 
search.

While rivals claim Adfero's "word farming" is not the most effective or best 
value technique, the Canary Wharf-based business is doing well. In 2011 Adfero 
turned over £9.4m, employed 251 staff and made a pre-tax profit of £1.3m. 
Afriyie is the biggest shareholder and he and his fellow directors split 
dividends of £2.2m in 2010 and 2011 and shared directors' pay of £1.397m over 
the last five years, according to accounts filed at Companies House.

Google has issued guidelines to websites which urge them to "make pages 
primarily for users, not for search engines", but the practice is not 
prohibited like "scraping" (copying other content onto your own website) and 
"spinning" (using software to subtly change content to try and trick the search 
engine into believing it is fresh and worth ranking highly).

Google declined to comment on Adfero specifically. The search engine said 
improvements to its algorithm meant unoriginal content that lacks in-depth 
analysis is now more likely to appear lower down its search results.

Neither Afriyie nor William Bracken, a co-owner of Adfero and its chief 
executive, returned calls and emails asking for comment.

Bardsley said it appeared the company was now moving away from their former 
core offering of online news, and into more general content marketing under a 
new name, Axonn Media.

Its website says promotes its "high quality, regular, keyword-optimised and 
audience-focused content".

"If nothing else, the size of the market alone makes it a good move, while any 
new regulation of news providers following the Leveson Inquiry could make it 
wise to have interests in non-news content," wrote Bardsley in a later post at 
the beginning of this year.

The stories running on Adfero's home page this week were six months out of 
date. It proclaims it has built its success on "core values of speed, 
impartiality and unparalleled depth of coverage", but instead of highlighting 
the war in Mali or rows over new high speed rail links, the headlines were more 
than six months old and include Roger Federer beating Andy Murray at Wimbledon 
and the latest injury news from last summer's England vs South Africa test 
cricket series.

The company has adopted several different guises. It is also known as Content 
Plus, NewsReach, DirectNews and Axon Media, all of which are registered at the 
same address.

Reports of Afriye's wealth vary from £13m to £100m. The 47-year-old who grew 
up in social housing in Peckham now owns two large houses, one in Westminster 
and a former 17th-century monastery near Windsor. Afriyie is also chairman of 
Connect Support Services, an IT support company. He owned two-thirds of 
DeHavilland, a political andparliamentary monitoring and news service which was 
sold to Emap in 2005 for £18m.

Afriye worked for Jeffrey Archer on his aborted mayoral campaign in 1999 
before the peer was jailed for perjury. In 2003 Afriyie was already being 
talked of as a possible candidate for prime minister and told the Observer: 
"The Conservative party did elect the first Jewish prime minister, the first 
bachelor prime minister, the first woman prime minister. Who knows? Anything is 
possible."

• This article was amended on 19 February 2013 to correct the figure for 
directors' pay. The correct figure is £1.397m.

• This article was further amended on 21 February 2013 to clarify that quotes 
from Bob Bardsley were taken from two published blogposts.
 