
The most scathing criticism yet of golf’s return to the Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> has arrived from a Masters 
champion, Adam Scott, who has branded the affair an “exhibition” and one he 
would happily avoid.

Golf’s Olympic exile, stretching back to 1904, will end next year in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/oct/09/ioc-olympics-golf-rugby-rio-2016>
. While in principle that has been welcomed, the underlying message relates to 
a hectic summer and whether or not professional players in the men’s game would 
really value a medal. Scott has suggested not. Australia’s world No11 is hardly 
renowned for controversial comment, which renders his sentiment as even more 
notable.

Speaking to Reuters, he said: “Whether I win an Olympic medal or not is not 
going to define my career or change whether I’ve fulfilled my career. It’s 
nothing I’ve ever aspired to do and I don’t think I ever will. It’s all about 
the four majors and that’s the way it should stay for golf. To go and play an 
exhibition event down there to meet some athletes [in other sports] in the 
middle of the major season – I don’t think any other athletes in their sport 
would do that.

“I don’t believe a lot of sports belong there. It’s got away from where it 
started. Most of the athletes at the Olympics probably have trained four years 
specifically to peak at this one event. It’s the pinnacle of their sport, they 
get one crack at their big thing every four years. They have put their life on 
hold for this event and it’s so important to them, and I feel it’s their time.
Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> doesn’t need to be in the 
Olympics.”

Pressed on whether he would represent his country in Brazil, Scott added: “I’m 
not planning my schedule around playing the Olympics. I’m planning my schedule 
around playing majors the best I can. If I can fit going to the Olympics into 
that it might be a bit of fun. Lucky me.”
 