
Since former Football Association and Royal Mail boss Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier> took over as chief executive 
in 2010, ITV has embarked on an ambitious acquisition spree.

The company has trained its sights on TV production companies capable of 
producing big hits with international appeal to boost itsITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> Studios division.

It hopes that by selling popular shows around the world, it can offset the 
decline in advertising revenue affecting broadcasters.

Peppa Pig owner Entertainment One rejects ITV's £1bn takeover approach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/peppa-pig-owner-entertainment-one-rejects-itv-1bn-takeover-approach>
Most of the deals have involved an upfront cash payment, with add-ons 
depending on the financial performance of the acquired company after the deal.

Talpa Media


ITV agreed last year to pay an initial £355m for Netherlands-based Talpa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/12/itv-the-voice-producer-talpa-media-john-de-mol>
, set up by Big Brother creator John de Mol. Talpa’s hits including The Voice, 
a singing talent show, and Utopia, a thriller that aired on Channel 4.

Mammoth Screen


Last year was a busy one for ITV, which also snapped up the 75% of UK producer 
Mammoth Screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/01/poldark-producer-bought-by-itv> 
that it did not already own. The deal saw the broadcasting group get its hands 
on the company behind Poldark, which has proved a huge ratings hit for the BBC. 
The production company is making the forthcomingeight-part dramatisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/26/michael-gambon-winston-churchill-itv-drama-churchills-secret%20eight-part%20dramatisation%20of%20the%20reign%20of%20Queen%20Victoria>
 of the reign of Queen Victoria for ITV.

Leftfield Entertainment


The British broadcaster became the largest independent producer of unscripted 
TV in the US in 2014, when itpaid an initial $360m for 80% of Leftfield 
Entertainment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/07/itv-buys-stake-pawn-stars-production-company-leftfield>
, with further payments dependent on performance. The reality TV producer is 
responsible for programmes such as Real Housewives of New Jersey and Pawn Stars.

TwoFour


LDC, the private equity arm of Lloyds Banking Group, sold 75% of TwoFour to ITV
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/09/itv-announcing-acquisition-twofour-tv-production-company-educating-essex-splash>
 in 2015 for £55m, with an option to acquire the remaining 25% from 2017 for a 
price adjusted to reflect its profits. TwoFour produced The Jump, a snow sports 
series featuring celebrity talent, and documentaries The Hotel Inspector and 
Educating Yorkshire.

Big Talk


ITV agreed to pay £12.5m for Big Talk in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/26/worlds-end-big-talk-itv> in a 
deal that could rise to £30m depending on earnings targets. Most of the 
production houses that ITV has acquired have been TV specialists but Big Talk 
has also made films starring the comedian and part owner, Simon Pegg. These 
included hits such as Shaun of the Dead and Hot Fuzz. The company also made TV 
comedies Rev, Friday Night Dinner and thenew series of comedy-drama Cold Feet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/22/tv-goes-back-to-the-90s-as-cold-feet-and-friends-return>
.

Gurney Productions


In 2012, ITV got its hands on the popular Duck Dynasty reality TV show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/01/duck-dynasty-phil-robertson-child-brides>
 with theacquisition of Gurney Productions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/dec/24/itv-buys-40-million-stake-gurney>
. ITV agreed to pay $40m for 61.5% with an option to buy the rest of the shares 
three years later. Gurney’s portfolio also includes Auction Hunters and 
American Digger.
 