
Australia’s hopes of a lucrative FedEx Cup title via world No6 Adam Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott> have taken a nosedive after the 
third round of the Tour Championship at East Lake Golf Club.

Late stumbles from world No2 Dustin Johnson on Saturday ensured some hope for 
those who played well, but unfortunately Scott was not one of the players to 
cash in.

After a one-under-69 Johnson remains in front, tied for the lead with fellow 
American Kevin Chappell (68) at eight-under 202.

‘Revolutionary’ European Tour proposals risk turning golf into a gimmick | 
Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/22/european-tour-world-super-6-perth-golf-gimmick>
Johnson, who’s guaranteed the season-long FedEx Cup and a US$11.53m ($15.10m) 
payday if he wins on Sunday, carded two bogeys and a double bogey in his last 
six holes, but countered them with two birdies to stay on top.

He’s chasing a fourth win of the season and his 13th career title.

Chappell has yet to win on the US PGA Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pga-tour> but has a great opportunity to do 
so, although his chances at the FedEx Cup are much slimmer because he would 
need Johnson too slide well down the leaderboard.

Rory McIlroy and Ryan Moore shot 66s to move to six under and within striking 
distance.

Former No1 McIlroy would win the US$10 million bonus if he won and Johnson was 
not second alone.

Scott opened with a bogey but managed three birdies in his next five holes to 
start a potential charge towards challenging the leaders, pulling within five 
shots.

But then disaster struck.

Facing a four-foot par save on the seventh green, Scott three-putted for a 
sloppy double bogey.

To compound the error, a poor tee shot on the eighth set up a risky approach 
shot and the Queenslander found water on the way to a triple bogey.

A birdie on the ninth stopped the rot but he managed just one more birdie on 
his final hole to post a 71, sitting one over for the week and a distant nine 
shots off the pace.

“That’ll derail any round. It’s unfortunate because otherwise I maybe would 
have had a chance,” Scott said.

“Obviously I’m not playing my best when I do stuff like that. Around a tough 
course you pay the price.”

World No1 Jason Day withdrew from the tournament in round two with a back 
injury.
 