
Adani has been shielded from potential legal challenges that loom for other 
miners under Queensland’s water-licensing reforms after last-minute changes to 
legislation by the Palaszczuk government.

Mining <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mining> projects in development 
will be forced to obtain a water licence under a government bid to manage 
impacts on groundwater use, which its predecessor tried to deregulate.

But an amendment by the government on Wednesday has exempted projects that 
have already been dealt with by the land court,such as Adani’s Carmichael mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/15/queensland-court-dismisses-green-groups-challenge-to-adani-coalmine>
, from further legal challenges to a licence.

Adani's Carmichael mine granted 'unprecedented' powers, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/adanis-carmichael-mine-granted-unprecedented-powers-says-report>
However, another controversial project – the New Acland mine, which is subject 
to a pending land court ruling – will not be spared further challenges.

This is despite a push from the Liberal National opposition for an amendment 
specifically exempting the mine, whose parent company is a major federal 
Liberal party donor.

The opposition accused Labor of an embarrassing backdown on Adani and 
hypocrisy on New Acland with laws that would “kill off close to 700 jobs”.

The environment minister, Steven Miles, said Labor had removed a “ticking time 
bomb [in the] reckless laws” passed by the former LNP government, which were to 
have made unlimited groundwater freely available to miners from December.

Miles said that parliament had agreed there was no benefit in courts repeating 
scrutiny of ground water impacts if it had already delivered a judgment after 
“exhaustive cross-examination”.

Adani Australia’s chief executive, Jeyakumar Janakaraj, singled out premier 
Annastacia Palaszczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk> for thanks 
in providing “transitional relief for Adani’s projects”.

“The relief is based on the company’s advanced approvals status and the 
rigorous science-based examinations including water management that have 
already been undertaken,” Janakaraj said.

“By recognising an area of concern in this bill that might have opened up a 
new line of activist delays and addressing it, the premier and her government 
have been true to their word.”

He said the company was confident of beginning construction on a $21bn coal 
project in 2017.

A Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> Greens 
spokesman, Ben Pennings, said the amendment represented “a midnight coup by 
Adani”.

“While Queenslanders watched [US president-elect Donald] Trump’s victory in 
shock, horror or celebration, the state government amended its own bill to 
fast-track Adani’s Reef-destroying mega-mine,” he said.

Miles criticised the LNP for moving amendments to exempt “specific projects 
chosen by the LNP from having to apply for and qualify for a water licence”.

“How did they select those projects and what undertakings did they make to 
those companies?”

Hearings in a land court challenge by local landholders to New Acland have 
been completed but the member is yet to hand down a judgment.

The Environmental Defenders Office, which has acted in land court challenges 
to both the Carmichael and New Acland mines, said the amendment that would 
benefit Adani was a concerning twist on what had otherwise been a “good 
initiative” by the government.

We should be putting the brake on the Carmichael coalmine, not hitting the 
accelerator | Graham Readfearn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2016/oct/14/we-should-be-putting-the-brake-on-the-carmichael-coalmine-not-hitting-the-accelerator>
Its chief executive, Jo Bragg, said it was “gravely concerning that, on the 
most controversial proposed coalmine in Australia, the ALP government has now 
moved amendments so there will be no public submissions or appeals relating to 
groundwater”.

Bragg said it was “a myth” that the government’s legislation would cause 
unfair delays to miners as it continued the longstanding need for miners to 
gain licences “subject to public appeal” to use groundwater under the Water Act.

“Adani could have lodged its application years ago,” she said.

Tim Seelig, the head of the Queensland Conservation Council, said the passage 
of Labor’s water legislation was “the best outcome possible” given the 
difficulties of passing environmental laws through Queensland’s hung parliament.

The laws would enable “some level of policy and legal scrutiny” of water 
licensing processes for major mining projects, he said.

“We look forward to a situation in a future parliament where new mining 
projects are brought back under a water licensing regime with full appeal 
rights.

“We urge the government to use the powers it now has to properly test the 
ecological sustainability of advanced mining proposals, and to ensure proper 
scrutiny and capacity to challenge decisions where environmental destruction is 
proposed.”
 