
Ade Adepitan <http://adeadepitan.com/>, the British Paralympic medallist and 
TV presenter whoseChannel 4 documentary 
<http://adeadepitan.com/2013/08/ade-adepitan-journey-of-my-lifetime/> about 
polio in Nigeria airs on Monday night, says he is shocked it is still an issue 
after he contracted the disease there 37 years ago.

"It is the only country in Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> 
where it is still endemic," he said. "Somalia, Sudan have been able to make 
progress despite all their problems."

Nigeria is one 
<http://www.polioeradication.org/Infectedcountries/Nigeria/Nigeriastrategy.aspx>
 of only three countries, alongside Afghanistan and Pakistan, that have failed 
to eradicate polio. Last year, 122 cases of the virus were reported, and there 
have been 40 confirmed cases this year.

Most polio cases in Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> are 
found in the predominantly Muslim north. In 2011, more than 95% of all cases 
occurred in Borno, Jigawa, Kano, Katsina, Kebbi, Sokoto, Yobe and Zamfara, the 
eight northern states where the disease is endemic.

Nigeria poses a significant risk to surrounding countries: in 2011, polio 
viruses originating from Nigeria were detected in five countries in west and 
central Africa. Despite dozens of vaccination campaigns over the years, only 
65% of children in Borno, Kano, Sokoto and Yobe states have received four or 
more oral polio vaccine doses.

Vaccination campaigns have been dogged by rumours and conspiracy theories. In 
February, nine women who were vaccinating children against polio wereshot dead 
in Kano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/08/polio-workers-nigeria-shot-dead>
, the biggest city in the north, apparently by Islamist militants, who claim 
the vaccines are part of a western plot to sterilise girls and wipe out the 
Muslim population.

For Adepitan and his team, who were scheduled to film in the area at the time, 
it was a close escape. "It was crazy and quite scary," he said. "The plan was 
to film coinciding with a vaccination campaign, but that was postponed after an 
assassination attempt on the emir of Kano, so we came back pretty upset, and 
suddenly heard this news. We would have been there, possibly interviewing. It 
was horrific."

Public sentiment against vaccination led to the suspension of campaigns in 
Kano in 2003, leading to a high number of children contracting the disease. 
Suspicions about vaccination programmes go back even further. In 1996, Pfizer, 
the US pharmaceuticals firm,used an experimental drug 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/05/06/AR2006050601338.html>
 during a meningitis outbreak in Kano; 11 children died and dozens became 
disabled as a result.
 Adepitan contracted polio in Nigeria as a baby, causing him to lose the use 
of his left leg. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
For Adepitan, lack of knowledge makes the local population receptive to the 
rumour-mongers. "When you look at the situation in the north, there are high 
numbers of people who are illiterate. That doesn't help," he said. "If somebody 
tells them something, they can't go on the internet to check whether it's just 
hearsay.

"There is also a mistrust of 'white medicine' … people who are in remote 
communities rarely have any contact with outsiders. All of a sudden, people 
come with vaccines, sometimes whites. They're going to be suspicious, thinking 
'They've never come to help us before'."

Adepitan says the authorities have learned from their mistakes and now enlist 
authority figures such as tribal leaders and imams to support vaccination 
campaigns. "Unless you get them on board, it's not going to work," said 
Adepitan. "That's what [the authorities] are trying to do.

"The sultan of Sokoto [another state struggling with non-compliance] got his 
grandchildren vaccinated in the public square. It is playing a big part in 
breaking down myths. They are trying to do more of this."

Adepitan was three when his parents brought him to the UK from Nigeria. He 
contracted polio at 15 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/18/ade-adepitan-disabled-kids-wild-cool>
, causing him to lose the use of his left leg, and his parents thought he would 
be better off in Britain. Returning to Nigeria to make the film reinforced his 
sense of how hard life can be there for people with disabilities.

"It's not because people don't care," said Adepitan. "Life is hard if you're 
able-bodied so, if you're disabled, it's another issue. Unfortunately, there is 
no access to transport, no national health system. In the north, if you have 
disabilities, opportunities are absolutely minimal. Your parents can't afford 
to take you to school, [and] there are no wheelchairs – people are either 
crawling on the floor or on makeshift boards with wheels."

Ade Adepitan: Journey of My Lifetime airs on Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> at 8pm on Monday
 