
Canadian-American singer Rufus Wainwright, Australian theatre production The 
Secret River, Barrie Kosky’s production of Handel’s opera Saul and a film by 
artist Del Kathryn Barton starringCate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett> mark the highlights of 2017’s 
Adelaide festival.

The March festival is the first under the co-artistic direction of Rachel 
Healy and Neil Armfield, who worked together for almost a decade at Sydney’s 
Belvoir StTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>.


The program for the 2017 Adelaide festival, which is run concurrently with 
Adelaide fringe, Adelaide writers’ week andWomadelaide 
<https://www.womadelaide.com.au/>, is a celebration of the dark, weird and 
surreal. Thursday’s announcement also featured details of new festival hub the 
Riverbank Palais, which will float on the river Torrens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/adelaide-festival-to-revive-historic-floating-venue-on-river-torrens>
 throughout March.

Adelaide festival to revive historic floating venue on river Torrens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/adelaide-festival-to-revive-historic-floating-venue-on-river-torrens>
Andrew Bovell’s adaptation of Kate Grenville’s The Secret River, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/10/the-secret-river-review-a-masterful-portrayal-of-australias-dark-past>
 directed by Armfield himself, is set to be one of the festival highlights. The 
stunning first contact story, which won six Helpmann awards, will be remounted 
at the Anstey Hill quarry, a natural outdoor amphitheatre. “We’re bringing in a 
sense of ownership for the Kaurna people, given that this is happening on 
Kaurna land,” Armfield said.

The festival will also feature the Australian premiere of Red, a new short 
film by two-time Archibald prize-winning painter Del Kathryn Barton and 
starring Cate Blanchett. The film is inspired by thebizarre mating ritual of 
the redback spider, whose males offer themselves up to the female as a 
post-coital meal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/21/male-redback-spiders-evade-cannibalism-by-mating-with-immature-females>
, and has been described as “a surrealist cinematic offering and a savage tale 
of female power”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadelaide-festival-2017-program-cate-blanchett-and-shakespeare-get-dark-weird-and-surreal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F220b768715931c29b5d05d8106418f7b0279bd7b%2F0_0_4162_2583%2F4162.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20festival%202017%20program%3A%20Cate%20Blanchett%20and%20Shakespeare%20get%20dark%2C%20weird%20and%20surreal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadelaide-festival-2017-program-cate-blanchett-and-shakespeare-get-dark-weird-and-surreal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20festival%202017%20program%3A%20Cate%20Blanchett%20and%20Shakespeare%20get%20dark%2C%20weird%20and%20surreal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadelaide-festival-2017-program-cate-blanchett-and-shakespeare-get-dark-weird-and-surreal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F220b768715931c29b5d05d8106418f7b0279bd7b%2F0_0_4162_2583%2F4162.jpg>
 Lars Eidinger as King Richard in Richard III, directed by Thomas Ostermeier 
for Schaubühne Berlin, and showing at the Adelaide festival. Photograph: Arno 
Declair 
Adelaide will also be treated to Rufus Wainwright’s “symphonic visual concert” 
Prima Donna, which will be matched with highlights fromRufus Does Judy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/17/rufus-wainwright-review-judy-garland-covers-political-grit>
, the artist’s recreation of Judy Garland’s 1961 Carnegie Hall concert which 
has never been performed outside of the iconic venue; UK company Complicite’s 
immersive theatre experienceThe Encounter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/17/the-encounter-review-simon-mcburney-complicite>
, which is also part of Sydney festival’s 2017 program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/nick-cave-pj-harvey-an-adult-ball-pit-and-nude-dancers-headline-sydney-festival-2017>
; and Schaubühne Berlin’sstrange, sinister and adrenaline-filled production of 
Richard III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/25/richard-iii-review-lyceum-edinburgh-thomas-ostermeier>
, directed by Thomas Ostermeier, which Healy said was suitable “for anyone 
who’s fearful that Shakespeare is usually served up lukewarm”.

Thomas Ostermeier: Richard III? He's a rock star, a standup comedian
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/06/thomas-ostermeier-richard-iii-language-german-shakespeare>
Richard III follows on from the company’s production of Hamlet, which played 
at 2010’s Sydney festival. The lead performance by Lars Eidinger, who also 
played the title role in Hamlet, has been described as “mesmerising”.

Healy and Armfield also pointed to Betroffenheit, a new dance work about the 
experience and aftermath of grief by rising dance star Crystal Pite and 
Canadian theatremaker Jonathon Young, who lost his daughter as well as a niece 
and a nephew in a cabin fire in 2009 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/arts-community-mourns-girl-killed-in-cabin-fire-1.817827>
. Healy described the piece, which received afive-star review in the Guardian,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/01/betroffenheit-review-human-suffering-transformed-into-heroic-brilliance>
 as “one of the most memorable and affecting pieces of work that I can remember 
seeing”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadelaide-festival-2017-program-cate-blanchett-and-shakespeare-get-dark-weird-and-surreal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe72a7c997c90967c5e985c9ea5ce413a1ef9811%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20festival%202017%20program%3A%20Cate%20Blanchett%20and%20Shakespeare%20get%20dark%2C%20weird%20and%20surreal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadelaide-festival-2017-program-cate-blanchett-and-shakespeare-get-dark-weird-and-surreal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20festival%202017%20program%3A%20Cate%20Blanchett%20and%20Shakespeare%20get%20dark%2C%20weird%20and%20surreal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadelaide-festival-2017-program-cate-blanchett-and-shakespeare-get-dark-weird-and-surreal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe72a7c997c90967c5e985c9ea5ce413a1ef9811%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
 Memorable and affecting: Crystal Pite and Jonathon Young’s Betroffenheit. 
Photograph: Michael Slobodian 
In Lebanese-British artist Tania El Khoury’s sound installation Gardens Speak, 
audiences will literally dig into the soil to hear the stories of 10 Syrians 
who lost their lives in the civil war.

Italian intersex performer Silvia Calderoni will blur fiction with biography 
and performance art with monologue in MDLSX, an exploration of gender fluidity 
and identity. Armfield, who saw MDLSX in Rome, called it an “amazing 
performance” but one that was “very hard to classify – I suppose you’d call it 
dance theatre”.


The program is packed with classical music, including a one-night-only 
performance of one of the first operas ever staged, Monteverdi’s L’Orfeo, which 
will be recreated by baroque ensemble Concerto Italiano; and the festival’s 
previously announced centrepiece, Handel’s opera Saul directed by Barrie Kosky.
Described by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/24/saul-review-glyndebourne-opera-lewes-sussex-barrie-kosky>
 as “a theatrical and musical feast of energetic choruses, surreal choreography 
and gorgeous singing” when it premiered in 2015, Christopher Purves will be 
reprising the title role, joined by a local and international cast.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadelaide-festival-2017-program-cate-blanchett-and-shakespeare-get-dark-weird-and-surreal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dc02d8820313bd32987a44e37073eb54d86283b%2F0_0_4719_3146%2F4719.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20festival%202017%20program%3A%20Cate%20Blanchett%20and%20Shakespeare%20get%20dark%2C%20weird%20and%20surreal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadelaide-festival-2017-program-cate-blanchett-and-shakespeare-get-dark-weird-and-surreal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20festival%202017%20program%3A%20Cate%20Blanchett%20and%20Shakespeare%20get%20dark%2C%20weird%20and%20surreal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadelaide-festival-2017-program-cate-blanchett-and-shakespeare-get-dark-weird-and-surreal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dc02d8820313bd32987a44e37073eb54d86283b%2F0_0_4719_3146%2F4719.jpg>
 Silvia Calderoni blurs genre and explores gender in MDLSX. Photograph: Renato 
Mangolin 
There will also be a suite of chamber music performances to showcase the new 
concert hall at the picturesque Mount Barker Summit. Curated by Anna 
Goldsworthy, Chamber Landscapes will focus on Schubert and be held over six 
days, with Australian composers including Calvin Bowman, Deborah Cheetham and 
William Barton responding to the landscape.

Among home-grown productions is the world premiere of theatremakers William 
Yang and Annette Shun Wah’s The Backstories, which will explore the 
Asian-Australian experience with collaboration from prominent South Australians 
including chef Cheong Liew, football official Moya Dodd and fashion designer 
Razak Mohammed.

There will also be a performance of a new experimental dance work by Restless 
Dance Theatre, held in anAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> hotel; and 1967: Music in 
the Key of Yes – a musical celebration of the 1967 referendum, in which more 
than 90% of Australians voted to remove racist clauses from the Australian 
constitution.

For families, Manual Cinema’s Magic City will use overhead projections, shadow 
puppets and live-feed cameras to create real-time animated cinema based on the 
children’s classic by Edith Nesbit; and Adelaide Symphony Orchestra will join 
Miriam Margolyes for a retelling of Peter and the Wolf.

• Adelaide festival takes place from 3-19 March, with the full festival 
program online now <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/>
 