
Adele’s headline set at Saturday night’s  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/26/adele-headline-saturday-glastonbury-2016-review>
Glastonbury has resulted in a surge in sales of the singer’s already multiple 
platinum-selling albums.

Brexit was the headliner – but Glastonbury restored my faith in Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/27/brexit-glastonbury-headliner-music-festival-restore-faith-britain>
Her three albums – 19, 21 and 25 have all hurtled up the charts in the past 
few days:her most recent album, 25 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/19/adele-25-album-review> rises 
from No 13 to No 1 in the Official Charts, with sales up 176% on the previous 
week. Its increase in popularity was also a result of the album’s arrival on 
streaming services on 24 June, a day before her debut Glastonbury performance.

21, meanwhile, has climbed from No 58 to No 9 in the charts, while her debut, 
19, looks set to re-enter the top 40 for the first time in six months, charting 
at No 13.

Most surprisingly, the biggest increase in terms of sales came from a group 
who performed at the festival’s smaller Park stage, rather than the Pyramid: 
according to Amazon UK’s latest data, Mercury Rev saw a sales increase of 
6,600% the day after they performed beforePhilip Glass’ tribute to David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/25/philip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself>
.

Muse headline Friday at Glastonbury 2016 – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/25/muse-headline-friday-at-glastonbury-2016-review>
The post-Glastonbury sales boost has also seen Muse’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/25/muse-headline-friday-at-glastonbury-2016-review>
 most recent album Drones rise from No 179 to No 15;Jeff Lynne’s ELO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/26/jeff-lynnes-elo-pyramid-stage-on-sunday-review>
’s best-of album – All Over the World – is now at No 3; with further sales 
increases for the 1975, Foals, the Last Shadow Puppets, ZZ Top, Chvrches, and 
Tame Impala.

Streams of Viola Beach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/10/viola-beach-crash-may-have-been-deliberate-swedish-police>
 have also increased by 6,148% following Coldplay’s tribute to the band on 
Sunday. The quartet died, along with their manager Craig Tarry, in a car 
accident in Sweden earlier this year.

The Official UK Charts are published on Friday.

 