
The singer Adele <https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> has revealed she 
would be happy if she never had to tour again, in an interview that also 
covered her long battle with depression and what she described as her “very 
dark side”.

The multi-Grammy Award winning songwriter said she would continue to make 
music, but was content to lose out on lucrative live tours and never to appear 
on stage again.

She told Vanity Fair magazine: “I’d still like to make records, but I’d be 
fine if I never heard [the applause] again. I’m on tour simply to see everyone 
who’s been so supportive. I don’t care about money.”

Adele soars back to the top of the charts after Glastonbury set
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/01/adele-soars-back-to-the-top-of-the-charts-after-glastonbury-set>
The 10-time Grammy winning musician, whose hits include Someone Like You and 
Rolling in the Deep, is nearing the end of a 10-month tour with her album, 25.

Adele told the magazine that the death of her grandfather when she was a child 
sparked her depression and that she had undergone therapy to tackle the illness.

The 28-year-old, born Adele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/27/hillary-clinton-thrilled-to-receive-adeles-backing-for-us-presidency>
 Adkins in Tottenham, north London, also spoke of having postnatal depression 
after the birth of her son, Angelo, four.

She is quoted in the December issue as saying: “I have a very dark side. I’m 
very available to depression. I can slip in and out of it quite easily.

“It started when my grandad died, when I was about 10, and while I never had a 
suicidal thought, I have been in therapy, lots.

“But I haven’t had that feeling since I had my son and snapped out of my 
postpartum depression,” she added. “I had really bad postpartum depression 
after I had my son, and it frightened me.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadele-endorses-hillary-clinton-for-presidency-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adele%20endorses%20Hillary%20Clinton%20for%20presidency%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadele-endorses-hillary-clinton-for-presidency-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adele%20endorses%20Hillary%20Clinton%20for%20presidency%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fadele-endorses-hillary-clinton-for-presidency-video&media=>
Adele endorses Hillary Clinton for presidency – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/oct/27/adele-endorses-hillary-clinton-for-presidency-video>
“My knowledge of postpartum – or postnatal, as we call it in England – is that 
you don’t want to be with your child; you’re worried you might hurt your child; 
you’re worried you weren’t doing a good job.

“But I was obsessed with my child. I felt very inadequate; I felt like I’d 
made the worst decision of my life. It can come in many different forms.”

Adele said any future songs were unlikely to match those she wrote for her 
2011 album, 21, which has sold more than 31m copies worldwide.

She said: “I can see from an outsider’s perspective that I will never write 
songs as good as the ones that are on 21, but I’m not as indulgent as I was 
then, and I don’t have time to fall apart like I did then.

“I was completely off my face writing that album, and a drunk tongue is an 
honest one.”

Since the birth of her son, Adele said she had stopped smoking and now drank 
less – just a couple of glasses of wine a week.
 