
Tickets for Adele’s shows in Australia were immediately being resold for more 
than $5,000 after they were released on Monday.

Tickets for the singer’s show at Perth’s Domain Stadium were on sale for 
$5,645.18 through Viagogo – more than 18 times the maximum ticket price of 
$308.77, with no guarantee of the seat number.

Reselling sites were offering tickets for $2,590.29 for the Adelaide and 
Melbourne shows, $1,946.29 for Brisbane and $1,349 for Sydney.

Adele’s tour of Australia, in February and March next year, was announced last 
week. The singers has attempted to circumvent scalpers in the past through the 
use of paperless tickets and hasspoken out against the practice 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/adele-tour-singer-offers-refund-fans-scammed-by-25000-ticket-touts-1550031>
 in public.

You must be joking: Seinfeld ticket frenzy highlights resale rip-offs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/20/you-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs>
The Viagogo tickets – which were offered through the primary seller Ticketek 
for less than $310 – had been promoted to the top position on Google using 
Google AdWords, prioritising the inflated listings over the authorised ticket 
seller. This meant many people searching for tickets may have mistaken Viagogo 
for the authorised sites.

Fans shared their frustration as the websites of official agents struggled to 
cope with the demand. Many fans spent an hour or more trying and failing to get 
through, although some were successful.

Adele’s shows in Brisbane, Perth and Melbourne are at Ticketmaster-affiliated 
venues, and went on sale two hours earlier at 10am AEDT Monday. Tickets for the 
Sydney and Adelaide shows were being sold through Ticketek from 12 noon AEDT.

On Monday Ticketmaster announced a second show in Brisbane and a second in 
Melbourne.

There is extraordinary demand for the tickets to Adele’s Australian shows, the 
artist’s first tour of the country, and scalpers are taking advantage, using 
automated bots to buy tickets in large quantities at high speeds before 
flipping them at inflated prices on resale sites.

Some of these tickets available through Viagogo may have been legitimately 
purchased during presales offered to stadium members last week. But with the 
high quantity of tickets listed so early in the day, it is likely that many 
were listed for resale before they had even been bought.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Ftickets-for-adeles-australian-shows-resold-for-more-than-5000-as-they-go-on-sale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F185879740e4d261a4fa792cf2d4962ce9f1a13f2%2F0_0_854_676%2F854.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adele's%20Australian%20tour%3A%20tickets%20offered%20by%20resale%20sites%20for%20%245%2C000%20as%20they%20go%20on%20official%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Ftickets-for-adeles-australian-shows-resold-for-more-than-5000-as-they-go-on-sale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adele%27s%20Australian%20tour%3A%20tickets%20offered%20by%20resale%20sites%20for%20%245%2C000%20as%20they%20go%20on%20official%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Ftickets-for-adeles-australian-shows-resold-for-more-than-5000-as-they-go-on-sale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F185879740e4d261a4fa792cf2d4962ce9f1a13f2%2F0_0_854_676%2F854.png>
 Tickets for Adele’s show in Perth are on sale for more than $5,000. 
Photograph: Viagogo 
Both Ticketek and Ticketmaster have warned the public that tickets purchased 
through unauthorised sellers including Viagogo and Ticketmaster Resale – 
Ticketmaster’s own resale site – will not guarantee a ticketholder entry.

“We urge fans to avoid the resale scalper websites,” a Ticketek spokesman told 
Guardian Australia last week. “They are predatory and misleading. There is no 
guarantee those tickets are genuine and you risk being ripped off. We see 
countless examples of people who buy from resale and never receive tickets or 
find that they are the third or fourth buyer of the same ticket. Fans should 
only purchase tickets from the official ticketing agent.”


A Ticketmaster spokeswoman also urged the buyer to beware, warning the public 
that “unauthorised tickets may face entry problems”.

She explained that tickets to Adele’s shows won’t actually be printed until 
one month before the event, meaning “anyone listing tickets online unofficially 
won’t actually have tickets in hand. We’re feeding this info to fans as it’s 
hugely important to remember when looking at any tickets listed by non-official 
selling partners.”

Adele to tour Australia for the first time in 2017: 'G'day, it's me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/15/adele-to-tour-australia-for-the-first-time-in-2017-gday-its-me>
As the Guardian reported, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/20/you-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs>
 resale sites including Ticketmaster Resale and Viagogo stand to gain major 
profits in fees which are charged to both the buyer and the seller of resale 
tickets. Moreover, such tickets might not even get the buyer in: each stadium 
reserves the right to refuse entry to anyone who arrives with a ticket sold to 
them through an unauthorised seller – and while the resale site may offer a 
refund guarantee, they still walk away with the fees.


Under the umbrella of the global touring, events and promotions group Live 
Nation Entertainment, Ticketmaster’s own resale site stands to gain at least 
25% on each secondary sale it makes. Last year Live Nation’s resale sites 
facilitated a gross transaction value of US$1.2bn globally.

Adele <https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> is a Live Nation tour, and 
tickets are not available through Ticketmaster Resale.

Scalpers are also using bots to buy tickets at higher speed and in higher 
quantities from the primary sellers Ticketek and Ticketmaster, and flipping 
them on the resale site Viagogo at inflated prices. Legislation is yet to catch 
up with the practice in Australia, although Senator Nick Xenophonrevived his 
fight to get the federal government to legislate against these bots 
<http://www.news.com.au/opinion/senator-nick-xenophon-wants-ticket-scalping-issue-revisited/news-story/31418f62c933dfa7492310a43fb4be20>
 in September.

Speaking to Guardian Australia last week, Live Performance Australia’s chief 
executive, Evelyn Richardson, advised the public to “know where you’re buying 
your ticket from”. “If you’re buying on a secondary site, you can’t be sure 
that the ticket you’re buying is a valid ticket,” she said.

“If it’s for a show where the promoter or the venue say you can’t resell, then 
they reserve the right to cancel the ticket – and they may do that. And if you 
bought it on a secondary site, then getting a refund is going to be difficult.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fadele-hello-new-song-25-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F23%2F1445593938139%2FKP_571793_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adele's%20Hello%2C%20her%20first%20new%20song%20in%20three%20years%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fadele-hello-new-song-25-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adele%27s%20Hello%2C%20her%20first%20new%20song%20in%20three%20years%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fadele-hello-new-song-25-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F23%2F1445593938139%2FKP_571793_crop_640x480.jpg>
Adele’s Hello, her first new song in three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2015/oct/23/adele-hello-new-song-25-video> 