
Thousands of staff at the motor insurer Admiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup> have been handed bonuses 
worth £3,600 each amid higher profits due to rising car insurance premiums.

The firm’s shares reached a record high on the annual figures, after a year 
that founder and chief executive Henry Engelhardt termed an “uncut diamond”.

Direct Line and Admiral accelerate as motor insurance prices rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/nov/03/direct-line-and-admiral-accelerate-as-motor-insurance-prices-rise>
Pre-tax profit at the Cardiff-based insurer, which owns brands such as 
Confused.com and Elephant, rose 6% to £377m in 2015, on turnover that grew by 
8% to reach £2.1bn.

Engelhardt said the improvement was partly down to Admiral increasing car 
insurance rates before the rest of the market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/nov/03/direct-line-and-admiral-accelerate-as-motor-insurance-prices-rise>
, having seen industry-wide rises coming. He said Admiral’s scale allowed it to 
increase rates more modestly than some rivals, which resulted in a 5% increase 
in the number of cars covered by the company to 3.3m.

“I would describe 2015 as the year of the uncut diamond,” said Engelhardt, who 
steps down this year. “When the year started many people thought it would turn 
out to be a lump of coal. But no, 2015 was no lumpy coal year.”

The absence of lumpy coal meant a windfall for 8,000 staff, who were handed 
shares worth £3,600 each under a bonus scheme linked to company performance. 
Shareholders were also rewarded with a total dividend for the year of 114.4p, 
including a special dividend worth 29.8p per share.

It said this was possible thanks to a solvency capital ratio of 206% under new 
European rules, with 100% meaning a firm has enough cash set aside to cover its 
costs and risks.

“Admiral continues to benefit from strongly rising prices, rising reserve 
releases, higher capital buffer returned to shareholders and extremely low 
investment risk,” analysts at Bernstein said.

In a statement that contained few downsides, Admiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup> said its price comparison 
business slipped to a loss of £7.2m, having made a profit of £3.6m last year. 
Its international business also finished the year in the red, to the tune of 
£22m.

Engelhardt is due to step down as chief executive in May, having launched the 
business in 1993 and floated it on the stock market in 2014.

Admiral’s chairman paid tribute to the Chicago-born chief executive’s work in 
building the company from scratch. “There is no way to measure adequately the 
contribution of a founder of a business that has grown from zero to now worth 
almost £5bn, employs over 8,000 people and serves more than 4 million 
customers,” Alastair Lyons said.

Engelhardt will continue working for Admiral on a part-time basis but will be 
replaced in the top job by chief operating officer and co-founder David Stevens.
 