
Car insurer Admiral was counting the cost of falling UK premiums as it 
disappointed the market with its latest update.

It said turnover dropped 7% in the first three months of the year despite 6% 
growth in customer numbers and a 2% rise in the vehicles it insured. Premiums 
fell 11% year on year, although that looks like a better performance than the 
overall market, judging by the 19% drop according to a recent survey by Towers 
Watson and Admiral's confused.com website.

Overseas, the company reported a 13% rise in turnover. Chief executive Henry 
Engelhardt said:
 Little has changed since the full year results, and our expectations for 2014 
remain positive and unchanged.

Even so, its shares have fallen 15p to £14.33.m Andy Hughes at Exane BNP 
Paribas put a £10.64 price target on the company, saying:
 We believe the market is expecting management to be able to maintain high 
cyclical earnings of over 100p a share and placing those earnings on a multiple 
of over 14 times. During 2014, this expectation is likely to change as the 
impact of price competition becomes clearer.

Oriel Securities was also negative:
 This statement shows little to make us more positive on Admiral Group. UK 
turnover and premiums were down, which when taken together with increased 
policyholders means a lower average premium per vehicle. This could be positive 
if this was a result of Admiral drastically reducing its risk tolerance (older 
drivers, more years no claims bonus, etc) but there is no indication of this. 
The statement points to focusing on retention which may indicate that it is 
trying to match competing quotes in order to retain customers. If this is the 
case, we should expect worse combined ratios, or lower margins than previously.

We retain our sell recommendation and price target of 900p. 

However Numis issued a buy note on the business, saying:
 From the brief statement Admiral looks to be on track to meet market 
forecasts - the company says that its expectations for 2014 remain positive and 
unchanged. The UK pricing environment remains a significant drag, but we think 
Admiral's comments imply a less negative environment than recently suggested by 
the confused.com and AA rate surveys. We continue to think that near-term 
earnings and dividends remain underpinned by positive reserve developments, 
with significant medium-to-long term upside potential from UK and International 
growth.  