
There is an old joke, attributed to no one in particular, that goes like this: 
some moon-faced tourist with a crumpled map asks, “How do you get toCarnegie 
Hall <http://www.carnegiehall.org/>?” And some classic New York artsy type 
answers, “Practice, practice, practice!”


If Andy Kaufman were alive (which some believe he may well be 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/the-belief-that-andy-kaufman-is-alive>
) and had given up on pranks (which, of course, he never would) he might 
answer: “Get some bongos you can’t play, have a sweet old lady die on stage and 
then appear in long underwear to wrestle women (slyly upending caricatures of 
masculinity by amplifying tropes of male physical and psychological superiority 
by wrestling them rather sincerely). Then rent 24 buses and take the audience 
of 2,800 people for cookies with the glee of a six-year-old birthday boy.” All 
of which he did at his legendaryCarnegie Hall show in 1979. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hlOUZ3OAX60>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt-wUe5aEwHM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt-wUe5aEwHM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt-wUe5aEwHM&media=>
If he was annoyed by an audience’s complicity, Kaufman might go for 
excruciating. He might set up the joke, and then proceed to read off every 
conceivable way to actually get to Carnegie Hall – every possible subway train 
(F, E), exhaustive bus route (the N41 to the N32 to the N4, if you’re coming 
from his hometown on Long Island), taxi routes, avenues with bike lanes, 
walking journeys and so on until the audience was so on the edge of insanity 
and frustration that they might run away. Except they wouldn’t, because of the 
lingering notion that if they just waited around long enough, there might be a 
punchline – which is similar to what he did when he began a gig byreading The 
Great Gatsby to the audience <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VAbuVM5oVV4>. 

But Andy Kaufman never told jokes. In fact, he hated being called a comedian. 
But we think of him as such, and that’s probably the only reason we even know 
who he is. Go on, name me one performance artist. And Marina Abramović doesn’t 
count if you only know her becauseshe did “a thing” with Jay-Z.  
<https://vimeo.com/80930630>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYxp23Gkvn9g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYxp23Gkvn9g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYxp23Gkvn9g&media=>
One of the most mercurial and brilliant of pranksters, Kaufman was a master of 
undermining context and expectation and messing with every audience he had the 
pleasure of entertaining. By every classification, he was a performance artist 
– content to bore the will to live out of anyone with the time to die of said 
boredom. And in wrestling women, I dare say, he was one of our best-known 
feminist performance artists. But even he must have known that you’re nothing 
without an audience, and that people love comedy and are far more likely to 
come see it with a couple of drinks than to trundle off to a small black box 
theatre in the bohemian part of town. When was the last time you saw the words 
“performance art” and “sold out” in the same sentence? (Again, Abramović and 
Jay-Z don’t count.)

Kaufman’s most famous bits ran the spectrum from Foreign Man, a guileless 
man-child who came off as a lovable buffoon for simply responding to the world 
literally, to doing nothing but miming one line of the theme song from Mighty 
Mouse, to climbing into a sleeping bag and sleeping through his spot, to his 
penultimate iteration as an “offensive”, easy-to-hate totem of misogyny, 
classism and arrogance as the boorish Inter-Gender Wrestling Champion (his last 
being the comic who refuses to die, on stage or off). Kaufman must have known 
what all comics know, which is that if you can get ‘em to laugh, you can get 
‘em to do anything.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRY3oRVzjSIg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRY3oRVzjSIg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRY3oRVzjSIg&media=>
If you ask a feminist performance artist how to get to Carnegie Hall, she 
might say, “Call yourself a comedian.” Maybe Kaufman was a feminist performance 
artist, and we’re all just comedians. Like Kaufman himself, the origin of that 
old joke will probably always remain a mystery. In the meantime, I’m having 
lunch with him next week to discuss it at881 7th Ave, New York, NY. 
<http://www.carnegiehall.org/Information/Directions/> 

 * Adrienne Truscott’s a One-Trick Pony! 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/adrienne-truscott-s-a-one-trick-pony> is 
at the Gilded Balloon, Edinburgh, 5-17 August  