
Is it ever OK to joke about rape? Adrienne Truscott thinks so. Since 2013, the 
comedian has been satirizing and skewering rape culture via her award-winning 
show Asking For It, which has been praised for its sophisticated treatment of a 
topic that so many comics fail to confront. Now, Truscott is coming back to New 
York City fora special election-themed production 
<http://www.publictheater.org/Tickets/Calendar/PlayDetailsCollection/Joes-Pub/2016/A/Adrienne-Truscotts-Asking-For-It1/?SiteTheme=JoesPub>
, promising to sling “pussy-flavored politics, protest and punchlines at the 
President Elect”. Truscott is no stranger to American audiences but things have 
changed in the last three years. Here, she tells us what the difference is 
between a good rape joke and a bad one – and why a Trump presidency means her 
work is more important than ever.

Rape is uncomfortable for many people to talk about – never mind laugh at – 
and yet your show has remained incredibly popular for years. Why do you think 
that is?

When I first made it, I imagined that if the project succeeded it might hit a 
nerve and be a kind of zeitgeisty thing for six months to a year. I toured as 
much as I could and what I found was that it just kept being relevant. Every 
time I sort of thought, “OK I’ll move on”, the world would hand me some golden 
nugget of material like Bill Cosby or Brock Turner, which as a comic was 
exciting and as a woman was depressing. I just kept having fresh stuff to 
include in my show. And now it just handed me the beauty of all beauties: 
Potus. Suddenly I was like, Jesus Christ, we are looking at rape culture at the 
executive level.


If a comedian tells a rape joke and no one laughs, was a joke really told? | 
Adrienne Truscott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/08/adrienne-truscott-if-a-comedian-tells-a-rape-joke>
The stakes have definitely changed. Is there a way to still make fun of rape 
culture when, as you say, the president-elect has openly bragged about sexual 
assault?

With my show it was never about being funny. It’s about satire and emotional 
release and truth. I’m interested in using comedy to speak the truths in my 
show to a broader group of people than might otherwise hear them. If I wanted 
to just be an activist, I think I would find myself speaking to the same group 
of people over and over again. My interest is to reach people who don’t agree 
with me right away. I have faith in comedy’s ability to stand in front of a 
mixed group of people and speak truths that they weren’t intending to hear.

I never ever make fun of the act of rape and I never make fun of the 
experience of a victim of rape

How you draw the line between what is good material for your show and what 
isn’t?

In my show I never ever make fun of the act of rape and I never make fun of 
the experience of a victim of rape. Satire gets underneath the prevailing logic 
that goes unquestioned and points out how ridiculous – to the point of hilarity 
– some of those notions are. I have a whole bit in our show from the last 
election about the “legitimate rape” controversy. The notion that somebody can 
“shut that whole thing down” if they’re raped so they don’t get pregnant is 
farcical. I can make fun of the fact that that person has the gall to run for 
office in this country when, if that’s the level of their understanding, I 
wouldn’t give them the grocery list. But I understand that that comedy right 
now feels different because they didn’t just get the grocery list, they got the 
keys to the Oval Office.

But not all comedians can make rape jokes work. Why do some bomb?

Bad rape jokes are lazy. Let me explain. A joke can be evaluated based on 
three elements: the writing/structure, personal taste and context – but even 
then, it’s complicated. A good example of how complex “rating” a joke can be is 
Jimmy Carr’s infamous rape joke: “What do nine out of 10 people enjoy? Gang 
rape.” I find the joke super offensive, but that’s my personal taste. I also 
think the way it is written and constructed is brilliant – concise and 
surprising; it uses a generic intro with a shocking punchline. As far as 
context, it kills in a room of “his audiences”, but he may be harder-pressed to 
make it work at a women’s studies course at Sarah Lawrence College. On the 
other hand, there’s Daniel Tosh’s joke: “I replaced my sister’s pepper spray 
with silly string. Well, she got raped.” For me, this one is super lazy. 
There’s no twist or element of surprise to the punchline really – in a waythat 
is the twist but I don’t think it works. And again, does this joke work in any 
room? Or just a room of his (mostly) male fans?
Part of what makes lazy rape jokes so annoying to me – where the victim is the 
punchline and it’s coming from a straight guy to an audience of other mostly 
straight guys – is that the comic is so confident that his material is “edgy” – 
when in fact that’s the last thing it is.

Can a rape joke ever be funny? Sexual assault survivors find out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/10/comedy-tour-rape-is-real-everywhere-canada>
Do you think there’s a difference when a man jokes about rape v a woman doing 
it?

One thing I find interesting, as it pertains to “context” is point of view – 
or the presumed relationship of the comedian to the material and how that is 
gendered. I am constantly asked by journalists and others – either directly or 
in a coded way – if there’s a “reason” I made this show – ie, is that “reason” 
that I’ve been raped – because I’m a woman making rape jokes (granted a whole 
show of rape jokes) I must have a first-hand experience with it. I’ve never 
heard of a male comedian who makes rape jokes because they have areason for 
making them – and several have a lot of them in their arsenal. That discrepancy 
speaks to the comedic license they are given to joke about anything.

What do you think about how comics defend their rape jokes?

I think their defense of “it’s just words” reveals their laziness. Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/comedy> is all about words so of course they 
are significant and powerful. It’s interesting, since the election how easily 
people who are devastated by the election of Trump say we can’t “normalize” 
what he says – but heaven forbid someone suggests that a genre of comedy could 
be considered contributing to the “normalizing” of rape. I think comedy is at 
it’s most genius when it is denormalizing things we lazily think of as normal – 
which can make comedy a crucial tool in the coming years of this ungodly 
administration.

Would you invite Trump to see your show?

I would love for Trump to come and see my show. I tweeted in the wake of him 
encouraging a Hamilton boycott – which by the way, was so ridiculous 
considering you can’t get tickets for Hamilton anyway – that there were tickets 
available if he and Pence wanted to brush up on rape culture before 
inauguration. I don’t expect to see them there, but I feel like I have to keep 
speaking truth to power, now more than ever. Artistic commentary feels like 
it’s in peril. And so for performers like me, it’s time to decide you’re going 
to stay in the game and keep doing what you do.

What can people expect from Asking For It?

I think that my show will probably be darker this time around. I felt like in 
doing my show over the last few years, we were winning. It felt like we had let 
the genie out of the bottle. I don’t feel like the genie is going back in 
there, but I do feel like someone else just got their hands on the bottle and 
they wanna put the lid on. I can’t pretend that my show is gonna make sure that 
doesn’t happen. But I know if I stop doing my show right now it would feel like 
I was retreating from the frontlines.

This interview has been edited for length and clarity.
 