
The Oscar-winning actor Adrien Brody has successfully blocked the further US 
sale of a film by Italian horror masterDario Argento 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000783/> in which he stars as an FBI special agent 
hunting a serial killer in Turin.

Brody secured a court order on Monday banning the continued sale on DVD of 
Giallo, an English-language Italian thriller, until he is fully paid for his 
performance. The actor says he is still owed $640,000 (£400,000) for his role 
and stands to lose up to $2m if it is sold freely on DVD in the US. In a sworn 
declaration made prior to Giallo's video release inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> last month, he said fellow producers 
lied to him about financing and vastly overstated how much the film's Italian 
distribution rights were worth.

US district judge Dale S Fischer ruled that the film should no longer be 
distributed, marketed or sold in the States. He also said Brody was likely to 
win the final case and ruled that his likeness could not be used in the film or 
to promote it (the actor's face appears twice on the DVD cover). The ruling 
also states Brody was "suffering, and [would] continue to suffer, immediate and 
irreparable harm" unless the injunction was granted.

Argento's film sees Brody play Inspector Enzo Avolfi, an Italian-American 
detective who teams up withEmmanuelle Seigneur's 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0782561/> French flight attendant to find her 
younger sister, a model who has been abducted by a serial killer – also played 
by Brody, in heavy makeup – known only as "Yellow" (giallo in Italian). The 
term also refers to the pulp crime novels with trademark yellow covers which 
lent their name to the horror-infused crime thriller subgenre for which Argento 
is most famous.

Giallo has not yet received an official UK release, though it did screen at 
the Edinburgh film festival and London'sFrightFest 
<http://www.frightfest.co.uk/> event last year. Total Film's Jamie Graham 
<http://www.totalfilm.com/news/frightfest-2009-giallo-review> called it 
"shockingly bad – so bad it's actually raucous good fun. The hilariously dud 
script gives Brody all the worst lines and the actor generously returns the 
compliment by delivering them amid a tornado of Method-y tics and twitches, 
like King Lear with a power drill in his ear." He added: "Argento's decline 
[is] a distressing thing to witness."

There have been reports that Argento disliked the producers' cut of the film 
and is no longer attached to the project. Brody has reportedly been paid nearly 
$1m for his role. The film-makers deny any wrongdoing.
 