 Now I know I am an intellectual. I saw Malcolm Muggeridge on the television 
last night, and I understood nearly every word. It all adds up. A bad home, 
poor diet, not liking punk. I think I will join the library and see what 
happens. 
There's only one thing more boring than listening to other people's dreams, 
and that's listening to their problems.

I'm not sure how I will vote. Sometimes I think Mrs Thatcher is a nice kind 
sort of woman. Then the next day I see her on television and she frightens me 
rigid. She has got eyes like a psychotic killer, but a voice like a gentle 
person. It is a bit confusing.

My mother is in the hospital grounds smoking a cigarette. She is looking old 
and haggard. All the debauchery is catching up with her.

I don't know why women are so mad about flowers. Personally, they leave me 
cold. I prefer trees

[Good Friday] Poor Jesus, it must have been dead awful for him. I wouldn't 
have the guts to do it myself.

I used to be the sort of boy who had sand kicked in his face, now I'm the sort 
of boy who watches somebody else have it kicked in their face.

My father was reading Playboy under cover of the candlelight and I was reading 
Hard Times by my key-ring torch.


I have never seen a dead body or a female nipple. This is what comes from 
living in a cul de sac.

Glenn has been excluded from school, for calling Tony Blair a twat.

My brother has published a volume of poetry, called Blow Out The Candle. The 
reviews were ecstatic. I hate him already.

I fear I am losing the battle to mould William's character to my own 
satisfaction. He's only six, but at his age Mozart was selling out concerts all 
over Europe.

Now over to you.

rickylee369 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11526501> suggests:

My skin is dead good. I think it must be a combination of being in love, and 
Lucozade.

rosiefiore <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4571855> suggests:

Nigel is a punk at weekends. His mother lets him be one providing he wears a 
string vest under his bondage T-shirt.

LevNikolayevich <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11871179> 
suggests:

Went to see Hadrian's Wall. Saw it. Came back.

Tom Hamid <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12688832> suggests:

I am an intellectual, but at the same time I am not very clever.

Cobblerjane <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11607399> suggests:

Pandora! / I adore ya! / I implore ye / Don't ignore me.

fishworld <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2882532> suggests:

The woman said it is important for an author of romantic fiction to have an 
evocative name, so, after much thought, I have decided to call myself Adrienne 
Storme.

And Victoriatheoldgoth <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1020479>
 contributes Adrienne Storme's first few lines:

Jason Westmoreland's copper-flecked eyes glanced cynically around the terrace. 
He was sick of Capri and longed for Wolverhampton...

ChrisNoir <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1705944> suggests:

At tea-time I was looking at our world map, but I couldn’t see the Falkland 
Islands anywhere. My mother found them; they were hidden under a crumb of 
fruitcake.

GermanGunner <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1590023> suggests:

I've changed my mind about going to London. According to The Guardian lead 
pollution is sending the cockneys who live there mad.

Keith6000 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12095430> suggests:

Nigel says that Sharon Botts will show everything for 50p and a pound of 
grapes.

Kester Lovelace <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10350318> 
suggests:

A telegram! Addressed to me! The BBC? No – from my mother. 'ADRIAN STOP COMING 
HOME STOP.' What does she mean? 'Stop coming home'? How can I stop coming home? 
I live here!
 