
Cakewalk. Quonset hut. Written on the Wind. Eyefuck. Words and more words fill 
Roni Horn’s drawings inButterfly Doubt 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/exhibitions/2480/roni-horn-butterfly-doubt/view/>, 
the largest exhibition of the American sculptor’s drawings I have seen. Drawing 
precedes writing. For Horn the two are inextricable. There is no end to the 
words: movie titles, names, dirty words, nouns, conjunctions and slang. She has 
a way with words, and sense is not a part of it.


The spiralling vortices in Roni Horn’s drawing Or 5 look like weather-systems 
seen from a satellite, or like bugs, pond life, things caught under a 
microscope and blown up huge. Other drawings in the Or series evoke weather 
too, clouds colliding or dropping rain down onto the huge sheets of paper above 
which which they float, and are captured in a latticework of cuts and 
realignments.

Nature and weather are important to Horn and her art – she once compiled a 
book,Weather Reports You 
<http://www.libraryofwater.is/weather_reports_you_philosopher.html>, in which 
dozens of Icelanders talk about the country’s extreme and variable weather, and 
their relationship to it. Horn is as much concerned with the weather in the 
soul, emotional weather, as she is in cold fronts, south-easterlies, gales and 
pressure drops.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Froni-horn-butterfly-doubt-drawings-hauser-and-wirth-london-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433438867383%2Fe076b10f-d73a-46b4-983b-9d904b2034d7-2060x1934.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adrian%20Searle%20encounters%3A%20Roni%20Horn's%20mysterious%20drawings%20that%20just%20won't%20leave%20you%20alone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Froni-horn-butterfly-doubt-drawings-hauser-and-wirth-london-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adrian%20Searle%20encounters%3A%20Roni%20Horn%27s%20mysterious%20drawings%20that%20just%20won%27t%20leave%20you%20alone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Froni-horn-butterfly-doubt-drawings-hauser-and-wirth-london-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433438867383%2Fe076b10f-d73a-46b4-983b-9d904b2034d7-2060x1934.jpeg>
 Or 1 2014 by Roni Horn. Photograph: © Roni Horn/Courtesy the artist and Hauser 
& Wirth 
Look again and the drawings make you think of heads and brains, or mash-ups of 
Islamic or Celtic pattern, fragments reassembled out of order into new and 
surprising forms. They’re all arcs and vectors, broken tessalations and cells. 
As much as I grasp for ways to describe these drawings, to relate them to some 
kind of stable imagery, they mutate into something else.

Five of her Or drawings fill one large gallery at London’s Hauser & Wirth 
gallery. They are inescapably physical things. It isn’t only the dense lines of 
varnished, powdered pigment and charcoal that makes them so. The heavy sheets 
of Arches paper have been cut and recut many times, fragments of drawing 
rotated and realigned to make surprising and complex forms that appear organic 
– as much as one is aware of shearing, slicing, razoring, jamming, and joining. 
Each is in fact a splicing and rearrangement of two seperate drawings. They 
look as if they were made for each other, which they probably were.

As you begin to investigate them, the forms begin to appear three dimensional –
Tacita Dean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2013/sep/13/tacita-dean-jg-ballard-video>
 has called them “dysfunctional honeycombs”. Looking at them can be like the 
experience of walking around a complex abstract sculpture: you can never quite 
grasp it in its entirety. If there is one. They are incomplete diagrams, 
details, instances. There was no whole to begin with, only a segment of 
something bigger that reveals itself in glimpses over all the series of 
drawings that she has been making for years. Her art is cumulative, and her 
drawings especially so.

Words erupt and interrupt the drawings. At times they are the words that creep 
up on you in the night and won't go away

Up close you become aware not just of the numerous sharp cuts and reassembly, 
but of pencil notations, numbers, scorings, and signs that the artist has 
circumnavigated the drawing, and worked on it as though she were a 
cartographer, mapping a new place, and writing little notes to herself as she 
goes.

Words erupt and interrupt the Or drawings, repeating and stuttering and 
appearing out of nowhere. Sometimes they are like the rain of words that 
spilled out ofTristan Tzara’s hat 
<http://www.dadart.com/dadaism/dada/037-Tzara.html> in a Dadaist cabaret. At 
other times they are the words that creep up on you in the middle of the night 
and won’t go away.

There are names: Russian poet Anna Akhmatova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/oct/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview32>
, American writerLydia Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/24/my-hero-lydia-davis-smith>, jazz 
and blues singersShirley Horn <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vSL5AHhpi6U> (no 
relation), Billie Holiday andAlberta Hunter 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x9qIcBk4pMI>. Was she listening to these 
singers as she drew? Is that why thePogues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/16/pogues-review-apollo-manchester> 
are in there too? Maybe they are shout-outs of the things Horn likes. Did 
Charlie Hebdoe get in there because the name was in the air?

The words in the Or drawings are a kind of interference. They don’t annotate 
the drawings and the drawings don’t illustrate the words. They come simple and 
declarative. They rhyme and sprawl and stand alone. Crop, hop, Coca, lyme, 
toper. Suck, fuck, trigger. Duck, dove, suck. Love, love again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Froni-horn-butterfly-doubt-drawings-hauser-and-wirth-london-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433439019003%2F19967d46-c18d-4696-b1b2-960f989e0a5e-1948x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adrian%20Searle%20encounters%3A%20Roni%20Horn's%20mysterious%20drawings%20that%20just%20won't%20leave%20you%20alone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Froni-horn-butterfly-doubt-drawings-hauser-and-wirth-london-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adrian%20Searle%20encounters%3A%20Roni%20Horn%27s%20mysterious%20drawings%20that%20just%20won%27t%20leave%20you%20alone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Froni-horn-butterfly-doubt-drawings-hauser-and-wirth-london-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433439019003%2F19967d46-c18d-4696-b1b2-960f989e0a5e-1948x2040.jpeg>
 Hack Wit - aching cheap, 2014 by Roni Horn Photograph: © Roni Horn/Courtesy 
the artist and Hauser & Wirth 
One Or drawing is like a bug caught in a spider’s web. The words stick there 
too. In another the words cascade along with a kind of drawn rain, or rays of 
sunlight angled through clouds. Nag, rag, lob, fob, bob, nob. No wonder 
scat-singerBetty Carter <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IMsFeMANjPY> makes her 
appearance. But what the hell is “nematode” doing here?

A second series here, Hack Wit, plays on commonplace phrases, colliding and 
splicing them physically on the paper. The writing appears woozy on the 
spliced-together papers, and surrounded by stutterings. Working with 
watercolour, pen and ink, a scalpel and tape, Horn makes drawings as though 
seen through a fractured glass. The collisions are visual as much as verbal. “A 
fool’s rainbow chasing paradise”, reads one, “A cheap suit all over me like an 
aching void” another. The technique (so far as she has one) is reminiscent of 
William Burroughs’s cut-ups, but the word play is more playful and benign, 
though there is an sardonic edginess here too. Think how sharp a paper edge can 
cut.

In a book accompanying the Hack Wit drawings, Canadian poet and classicist Ann 
Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/16/red-doc-anne-carson-review> 
writes a text that at one point collides the English “peasant poet”John Clare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jul/09/john-clare-poetry> and 
Marilyn Monroe. “They were both peasants,” Carson writes, “both lit by an 
all-consuming genius and woe … They might have knocked each other’s socks off … 
instead each died alone.” Carson’s collisions mirror Horn’s, and she splices 
what seem to be Horn’s words (it is hard to know, exactly) with her own. Carson 
takes Horn’s art somewhere it hadn’t been before. Which I guess is our job too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Froni-horn-butterfly-doubt-drawings-hauser-and-wirth-london-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433439603495%2Fe5e7b400-57a6-4faf-a4d3-0482df170dc1-1583x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adrian%20Searle%20encounters%3A%20Roni%20Horn's%20mysterious%20drawings%20that%20just%20won't%20leave%20you%20alone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Froni-horn-butterfly-doubt-drawings-hauser-and-wirth-london-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adrian%20Searle%20encounters%3A%20Roni%20Horn%27s%20mysterious%20drawings%20that%20just%20won%27t%20leave%20you%20alone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Froni-horn-butterfly-doubt-drawings-hauser-and-wirth-london-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433439603495%2Fe5e7b400-57a6-4faf-a4d3-0482df170dc1-1583x2040.jpeg>
 Remembered Words - (Drive-in), 2013 by Roni Horn. Photograph: © Roni 
Horn/Courtesy the artist and Hauser & Wirth 
A third series fills the last room. Remembered Words consists of 15 groups of 
nine framed drawings. They line the walls. Each drawing and each group could be 
a colour chart, an eye test or a language game. Most present hand-painted, 
almost circular gouache blobs, lain out in 6x5 grids. Some look like 
astronomical observations of the moon on a murky night, others, a fastidious 
watercolourist’s palette. There are grids of full black discs, blobs of faded 
siennas and mousey greys, darker and washed-out blues, charts of gradations 
from full-strength colour to the weakest dilute hues.

Each drawing could be a colour chart, an eye test or a language game. Some 
look like astronomical observations

This is where things begin to get complicated. While some grids present colour 
alone, in others each blob is accompanied by a word. There’s no sense to it: 
arrangement, cervix, Agnes Moorehead. Butt plug, waddle, crease. On one sheet 
we go from Blue Devils to soil, by way of hydrophobia, spider crab, pretzel and 
wiseacres. There are dirty words, drugs (opiates, mostly) and curse words, 
places and names. What’s Jakarta doing here?

Sometimes the circles proliferate and break up the grid, words disappearing 
under blobs that have machine-gunned the surface. Sometimes the words flee 
altogether. But they’re sneaky. They won’t leave us alone. As soon as things go 
quiet, they start up again. The words are like the weather passing through.

 * Roni Horn Butterfly Doubt is at Hauser & Wirth, London, from 5 June to 25 
July 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/exhibitions/2480/roni-horn-butterfly-doubt/view/>
 