
One of the biggest challenges for marketers in the digital age is how to 
market a product when there are 2.4bn global internet users and a brand's 
message can cross continents in a matter of seconds.

"A purely global idea is still a holy grail," Greg Coleman, president of 
targeted online advertising company Criteo, told an audience inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>.

Six male advertising executives met on Wednesday to discuss how to market to a 
global audience at an an advertising week panel moderated by Guardian CEO 
Andrew Miller.

With a Guardian employee at the helm of the discussion, the conversation 
naturally veered to the importance of privacy when there are so many ways to 
collect data from people online, especially considering marketers rely on this 
data to create online advertising and other marketing initiatives.

"Unfortunately your data is being collected somehow, somewhere whether you're 
opting out or in," said Duff Stewart, CEO of advertising agency GSD&M

The panel agreed this issue is one that has yet to be adequately solved and 
presents myriad challenges as marketers want to create advertisements targeted 
to the most effective consumers, but also the discomfort that can arise from 
the multitude of data companies have on users.

Rob Schwartz, global creative president of international advertising agency 
TBWA Worldwide noted that consumers do not want to see targeted ads on websites 
based on online shopping searches they conducted months earlier.

"I eventually think its going to be the consumer who controls his own data," 
said Naveen Tewari, CEO and founder of InMobi mobile advertising.

Advertisers are clearly focused on how best to use individuals in the digital 
marketing realm, as consumers have more control over the life of a marketing 
campaign and the direction it takes.

Richard Guest, US president of digital-centric global advertising company 
Tribal Worldwide, explained how a marketing campaign in Canada accidentally 
became a global success, even though it was unlikely to be approved if it had 
been pitched as a global campaign.

"Some of the content they produced, a global marketer wouldn't agree with, but 
instantly, overnight, it became global content," Guest said. "It did great 
things for the brand â€“ but pockets of innovation that happen in local buckets 
can no longer be considered local because once its on YouTube, whether they put 
it up in Canada or London, it's global."

The panel said this also poses threats because if you create a mediocre 
marketing plan, it can have a worldwide audience.

Tewari said the culture of global advertising is changing because generalized 
global plans used to be effective in small markets in Japan, China, Korea and 
India, but now the markets are too big for such broad schemes. "There's a 
global plan, but the execution is very local," Tewari said.
 