
It is no secret that charities are continually having to do more with less in 
light of funding cuts and increased service demand.

Charity finance is becoming an increasingly important topic for the sector, 
but many – especially smaller charities – don't have the resources to begin to 
tackle it.

For the week beginning Monday 19 May, our financial experts will be popping in 
and out of the finance clinic to answer your concerns and queries.

Whether it may be budgeting for the next financial year, negotiating costs or 
managing reserves, our experts are here to help you.

If you would like to question our experts, leave your questions and 
experiences below and our panellists will join us throughout the week to 
discuss how to manage your charity finances.

Remember that to participate you need to register for a Guardian ID and log in 
prior to the discussion. To create a Guardian ID,click here. 
<https://id.theguardian.com/signin?returnUrl=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fcharity-invest-in-the-future>

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community – it's free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>

Our expert panel

Kate McLeod, chief financial officer at Mencap <http://www.mencap.org.uk/>

Kate McLeod joined Mencap in 2009 after spending many years working for a 
range of top-tier US investment banks and management houses as a financial 
controller and chief financial officer. Kate became chief financial officer at 
Mencap in 2013. She says that moving from the private to the charity sector is 
"the best move anyone can make". It has afforded her a better work-life balance 
and the opportunity to study part-time for a Masters degree in Organisational 
Psychology.

Colin Walton, head of client relations - charities at CAF 
<https://www.cafonline.org/>

Colin Walton heads up client relationships at Charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> Aid Foundation, managing a 
fourteen strong team dedicated to meeting the financial and fundraising needs 
of charities. Colin's long career in the banking sector has given him extensive 
financial, product development and customer service experience. For the past 13 
years he has worked with charities of all sizes to advise on and provide 
tailored solutions for all their short and longer-term financial needs. Colin 
also has considerable experience of both the Corporate and Retail Banking 
sectors. Outside of work, Colin holds a number of voluntary positions within 
the charitable sector.

Helena Wilkinson, partner and head of charities at Price Bailey 
<http://www.pricebailey.co.uk/>

Helena is a partner and head of charities at accountancy firm Price Bailey 
specialising in the audit of charities and not-for-profit organisations. She is 
vice-chair of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales 
(ICAEW) Charity and Voluntary Sector Special Interest Group. She has worked 
within the sector for nearly 25 years, including 17 years in professional 
practice, in addition to seven years as finance director for Alexandra Park and 
Palace. Her roles within the industry have encompassed financial management, 
corporate governance and strategic planning.

John Tranter, policy consultant at Charity Finance Group 
<http://www.cfg.org.uk/>
John is an experienced finance director in both commercial and charity sectors 
and has been a charity trustee. Among other roles, he is currently a policy 
consultant at the Charity Finance Group where he is chairing the Charity 
Finance Group's latest report on pensions due for publication in July 2014. 
John speaks at conferences and other professional events, and has had many 
articles published including pensions, shareholder value and building 
excellence in finance teams.
 