
Steven Tyler has claimed he turned down the chance to join Led Zeppelin. The 
Aerosmith singer confirmedreports last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/feb/05/aerosmith-steven-tyler-led-zeppelin>
 that he auditioned for Jimmy Page, John Paul Jones and Jason Bonham, but 
denied he was rejected from the planned comeback. "I looked Jimmy in the eyes," 
Tyler said this week, "[and] I went, 'No.'"

Tyler was asked to audition following Robert Plant's refusal to rejoin his 
bandmates. The group reportedly tried several singers, including Alter Bridge 
frontmanMyles Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/oct/13/led-zeppelin-new-singer>. In an 
interview with the Pulse of Radio last year, Aerosmith guitarist Joe Perry 
claimed Tyler fumbled through a "shambolic" performance and forgot the lyrics. 
"Page felt really awkward about the audition, but ultimately it was a group 
decision," Perry said.

But in conversation with US radio presenter Howard Stern this week, Tyler 
painted a different picture of his brief tenure in Plant's shoes. "I spoke to 
Jimmy Page's manager, Peter Mench, who's been a good friend of mine forever," 
Tyler said. "He said Robert wouldn't play with them again, and would I want to 
come over and jam with the guys? I went over and played." The audition, he 
suggested, was a triumph. "It came time for [Jimmy] to say, 'You want to write 
a record with me?' I went, 'No.' I'm inAerosmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aerosmith>. He's in the biggest band in the 
world and I'm in a band like that. I have such an allegiance to my band and I 
love it so much."

Tyler was reported as having parted ways with Aerosmith in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/09/aerosmith-guitarist-steven-tyler>
. Aerosmith spent months squabbling – with Tyler threatening to sue the group – 
before they reconciled last spring. But despite plans to tour and record, 
things at Aerosmith HQ appear to be far from rosy. Tyler claims Perry has 
disappeared, angry at the singer's decision to become a judge on American Idol. 
They haven't spoken for "a long time", exchanging messages only via text.

This weekend, most of Aerosmith will reunite in Los Angeles to rehearse and 
"write some shit". "[Bassist] Tom [Hamilton], [drummer] Joey [Kramer], 
[guitarist] Brad [Whitford] will be there," Tyler said. "Joe is missing in 
action. I texted him 20 minutes ago. 'Hey, Joe: Where are you?' He's angry with 
me for what? Because I took fuckin' Idol? What a crock of shit."
 