
Aerosmith will perform their first live show in four years, headling 2014's 
Download festival <http://www.downloadfestival.co.uk/>.

Fronted by Steven Tyler, the band have been named as the third and final 
headline act for next summer's rock festival at Donington Park, Leicestershire, 
joining Avenged Sevenfold and Linkin Park forthe weekend's mainstage slots. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/05/linkin-park-avenged-sevenfold-download-2014>

"It's been too long since we've been to England and we're sincerely fucking 
charged to be coming back! See you there,"Aerosmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aerosmith> guitarist Joe Perry said of the 
band's Sunday night headline set.

Main support on the final night will be Orlando rock band Alter Bridge 
<http://www.alterbridge.com>. Other acts announced so far are Fall Out Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/06/fall-out-boy-london-review>, who 
will support Linkin Park on Saturday night, and Rob Zombie on Friday, who 
follows his headline set on the Second stage in 2011. Next year's event takes 
place from 13-15 June 2014.

Aside from news of Aerosmith's comeback gig, Tyler this week revealed that he 
was preparing to release his solo debut early next year, telling Boston radio 
stationWZLX <http://wzlx.cbslocal.com> to expect it in January, February or 
March.

The vocalist initially began to suggest his intentions to release a solo LP to 
Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/q-a-with-aerosmith-steven-tyler-itching-to-make-solo-album-20130620>
 back in June: "I've got this itch in me to do a solo record, and that's what 
I'm gonna do next. I've got some great people that want to get involved in it. 
It's early on right now, but that's the itch I got," he said.

"I'm into electronica – I used to listen to Stockhausen in '65. So there's 
just a lot of stuff – good, weird fucking music that I want to get off my 
chest."
 