
Aerosmith's first album in more than eight years will feature Julian Lennon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/fbe1a6d6-12c9-459e-bf73-fdcc76b14b7e>,
Johnny Depp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/49654ec9-0c4d-44a6-a909-580ee9fbabb7> 
and country singerCarrie Underwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/70f0e309-5418-49b6-a130-666e2f76eecd>
. Music From Another Dimension, due in November, also includes a cover of the 
Temptations' 1975 single Shakey Ground.

"We can be the best Aerosmith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aerosmith> 
cover band out there, [but] I was getting tired of it," said guitaristJoe Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/be797221-0117-45e3-81da-996f8d29db62> 
in an interview with Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/aerosmith-tap-johnny-depp-carrie-underwood-for-another-dimension-lp-20120730>
. Although Aerosmith have scarcely stopped touring since 2004'sHonkin' on Bobo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/album/65ad56ff-dcef-378c-b172-4a92aedb6958>, 
the lack of new material had begun to cause friction within the band. "Everyone 
wants to hear the same Dream Ons and Walk This Ways, but that's not what I had 
in mind," Perry said. "I'm really glad to have this record."

Aerosmith's internal crisis was well-publicised: amid reports of arguments and 
estrangement, particularly between Perry and frontman Steven Tyler,the band 
held auditions for a new singer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jan/22/aerosmith-hold-auditions-steven-tyler?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
 in early 2010. But even as Tyler signed on as a judge on American Idol, the 
rockers were able to mend their fences. No matter his TV commitments, Perry 
said, Tyler was tireless in the recording studio. "I never felt for a minute he 
was lagging … He did his whole thing [on Idol] and then showed up at eight at 
night and was in the studio until two in the morning."

Tyler was reportedly paid $20m for his two seasons on American Idol. But the 
serieswasn't his "cup of tea" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/jul/13/american-idol-jennifer-lopez>
, he said this week. Although he "made a tonne of money", it was mostly 
"something to do while the [Aerosmith] storm blew by".

Now, Aerosmith are back together, releasing their 15th studio album. Music 
From Another Dimension was recorded with producer Jack Douglas, with whom they 
worked on their feted 70s records as well as Honkin' on Bobo. It also includes 
material written by Diane Warren, who penned one of Aerosmith's biggest modern 
hits, 1998's I Don't Want to Miss a Thing. As for their guests, everyone seems 
to have just popped into the band's studio in Los Angeles. Lennon, who sings on 
the "Beatlesesque" Love Three Times a Day, is "such a sweet fucking guy," Tyler 
said. "And he's John's first son, with that voice and sense of humour – gimme a 
break!" Depp,who also appears on Patti Smith's new LP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/02/patti-smith-new-album-banga>, 
offers backing vocals on Freedom Fighter, a "politically conscious" tune that 
may allegedly be relegated to the B-sides. The album is due on 6 November.
 