
2001

September 11: Hijackers fly planes into the World Trade Center and Pentagon. 
Washington blames Osama bin Laden and tells the Taliban to hand him over

October: The US begins bombing Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, to root out bin Laden and his 
Taliban protectors

November: Forces from the rebel Northern Alliance enter Kabul

November 25: CIA officer Johnny "Mike" Spann is killed during a prison 
uprising in Mazar-e-Sharif, becoming the first US combat casualty of the 
campaign. One of the 80 fighters found at the prison turns out to be an 
American, John Walker Lindh

December 7: The Taliban stronghold of the southern city of Kandahar falls. 
Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar and Bin Laden escape

December 16: Tora Bora, the complex of mountain caves sheltering al-Qaida and 
Taliban holdouts, falls

December 22: Hamid Karzai, an ethnic Pashtun who leads one of the largest 
tribes in southern Afghanistan, is sworn in as chairman of a six-month interim 
government

2002

June 13: Karzai is elected as president of the new interim government of 
Afghanistan by the loya jirga, or grand council

2004

January 4: Rival Afghan factions agree on a constitution, paving way for 
elections

April 1: In Berlin, 23 donor nations pledge a total of $8.2bn in aid to 
Afghanistan over three years

April 22: Former US professional football star Pat Tillman is killed when his 
Army Ranger unit is ambushed. Although the US military says he died from enemy 
fire, it later emerges he was accidentally shot by his own side

June 9: Gunmen storm a camp for Chinese road workers in Kunduz, northern 
Afghanistan, killing at least 10, in the deadliest attack on foreign civilians 
since the fall of the Taliban

September 16: Karzai escapes an assassination attempt in the town of Gardez in 
the early stages of campaign for a presidential election

October 9: Afghanistan begins holding its presidential election. Karzai is 
declared the winner in early November, with 55% of the vote

2005

April 6: A Chinook helicopter crashes during a dust storm in Ghazni province, 
killing 15 US servicemen and three American civilian contractors

June 28: Sixteen US special forces troops are killed when militants shoot down 
their Chinook during a mission to rescue a four-man Navy Seal team trapped in a 
battle in the north-eastern province of Kunar. Three members of the team are 
killed and one rescued

2006

May: The worst rioting seen since the fall of the Taliban breaks out in Kabul 
following a traffic accident involving a US vehicle

September 2: Fourteen British personnel die when their Nimrod surveillance 
aircraft crashes near Kandahar in southern Afghanistan

October: Nato takes control of security operations across Afghanistan

2007

February 1: Defence secretary Des Browne announces that Britain will send a 
further 800 troops to Afghanistan, boosting numbers to 5,800

June 17: A Taliban suicide bomber blows up a police bus in Kabul, killing at 
least 35 people in the country's most devastating suicide bombing since the 
fall of the Taliban

November 7: A suicide attack on a parliamentary delegation kills at least 59 
people in the northern town of Baghlan, in the country's worst attack to date

2008

February: Prince Harry, third in line to the British throne, is pulled out of 
Afghanistan after serving 10 weeks in action in Helmand province because a 
media blackout collapses
 