
The Afghan Whigs are to make London's Alexandra Palace the site of their first 
concert in 13 years. The 90s rockers will headline All Tomorrow's Parties' I'll 
Be Your Mirror festival in May, replacing Guided By Voices.

"My wife Deborah adores [the Afghan Whigs]," ATP's Barry Hogan told Spin 
magazine <http:// 
www.spin.com/articles/afghan-whigs-reunite-first-shows-13-years-playing-atp-fests>
. "When we first started dating she would always say we had to get the Afghan 
Whigs to play for us. I used to love going to see them. They always sounded 
great, put 110% into their performances … We are truly honoured they chose I'll 
Be Your Mirror UK to be their first [comeback] show."

Formed in Cincinnati, Ohio, the Afghan Whigs released six albums between 1988 
and 1998. Known for explosive gigs and charging, soulful grunge-rock, they 
scraped the UK charts in 1993 and 1996 but split in 2001, before ever really 
breaking the mainstream. Frontman Greg Dulli went on to form the Twilight 
Singers and later the Gutter Twins, with Mark Lanegan. Despite reuniting to 
record two new songs in 2006, the band haven't played live since 1999.

News of the Afghan Whigs' performance at I'll Be Your Mirror follows the 
announcement that Guided By Voices have cancelled their headline slot. "[GBV] 
are breaking up due to personal reasons and have cancelled all 2012 live 
appearances,"ATP said <http://www.atpfestival.com/newsview/1112071500.php>. But 
the band – whose original lineup reunited last year – deny they are dissolving. 
"[We] have not split up and continue to work on new material together,"Guided 
By Voices said 
<http://drownedinsound.com/news/4144194-guided-by-voices-are-not-atp-ing-but-is-not-rip>
. "In addition to the [January] album release of Let's Go Eat the Factory … the 
band are at work on another album, Class Clown Spots a UFO. [Frontman] Robert 
Pollard will also be releasing a solo record in March called Mouseman Cloud."

In addition to playing Alexandra Palace in May, the Afghan Whigs will perform 
at a SeptemberAll Tomorrow's Parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/all-tomorrows-parties> in New Jersey curated 
by Dulli. "Greg is a fan of great music, that's why we are excited to work with 
him," Hogan said. "I am sure it will eclectic, as I know he likes anything from 
Solomon Burke to Mazzy Star."

I'll Be Your Mirror will be held from 25-27 May 2012. Other performers include 
Slayer, Mogwai, Dirty Three, Yuck, Melvins, Sleep, Mudhoney, Codeine, Archers 
of Loaf, Chavez, Yob and Wolves in the Throne Room.
 