 The financial toll of America's wars in Afghanistan and Iraq was laid bare 
yesterday when a congressional committee estimated the cost of both conflicts 
at $1.6 trillion (Â£771bn) and rising - $20,000 for every family of four in the 
US.
The assessment, by the joint economic committee, factors in knock-on effects 
including long-term healthcare for the wounded, interest on money borrowed for 
the war chest and oil market disruptions.

Democrats, who produced the report, said it demonstrated how George Bush's 
foreign policy had real consequences for Americans back home. But White House 
spokeswoman Dana Perino said the committee had produced a report that was "an 
attempt to muddy the waters on what has been some positive developments being 
reported out of Iraq".

The report coincided with a statement from the military indicating that the 
surge launched by Bush in January to put a lid on sectarian violence and 
insurgent attacks is starting to wind down. A 3,000-strong armoured brigade has 
started withdrawing from Diyala province and will not be replaced, the second 
large unit to leaveIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> since 
September.

Attacks on US troops have fallen, while Sunni tribes in the western Anbar 
province have sided with the Iraqi government against foreign al-Qaida fighters.

One threat to the security gains is the prospect of a Turkish invasion in the 
north, in pursuit of Kurdish rebels who have attacked government forces in 
eastern Turkey. Yesterday, hundreds of Turkey's counter-terrorist special 
forces were sent to reinforce 100,000 troops after four Turkish soldiers died 
in clashes with guerrillas from the Kurdistan Workers' party (PKK) rebel 
movement.
 