
The Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani, will meet foreign leaders 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/london-conference-on-afghanistan-2014>
 in London on Thursday with little to show for two months in power but with a 
pressing need to persuade international donors to stay involved as concerns 
intensify that fragile gains won over 13 years may be lost as most foreign 
troops withdraw.


Ghani, who formed a power-sharing government in September after a disputed 
election, has not yet named his cabinet. Meanwhile, Taliban insurgents have 
increased attacks as if to underline just how pivotal these next months are.


The withdrawal of most Nato troops has triggered soul-searching about the 
achievements of a 13-year military mission that cost billions of dollars and 
thousands of lives, including those of 2,210 American and 453 British soldiers.

Ahead of the conference, the Taliban has struck again and again, killing 
Afghans and foreigners. Last Thursday, a suicide bomberattacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/27/kabul-suicide-attack-uk-embassy-six-dead>
 a British diplomatic convoy near Kabul, killing six people including a British 
embassy security guard. The week before, about 50 peoplewere killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/23/suicide-bomber-kills-at-least-40-volleyball-match-afghanistan>
 when a suicide bomber attacked spectators at a volleyball match near the 
border with Pakistan.

“We are hitting the kinds of peak levels of violence that we haven’t seen 
since the troop surge of 2011 … What is terrifying is that it means the war 
will very much continue in our absence,” said Graeme Smith, senior analyst at
International Crisis Group 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/asia/south-asia/afghanistan.aspx>.

According to the Cost of War project 
<http://costsofwar.org/article/afghan-civilians>, based at Brown University’s 
Watson Institute for International Studies in the US, at least 21,000 civilians 
are estimated to have died as a result of the war, as of February 2014.

In London, Ghani and former rival Abdullah Abdullah, who holds the prime 
ministerial post of chief executive officer, will meet David Cameron and 
representatives of other governments to evaluate progress on mutual commitments.

The British government says the conference will allow Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> to show its commitment to 
reform, looking ahead to the “transformation decade” to 2024.


 Ghani could face tough questions on the budget deficit, the failure to form a 
cabinet, his commitment to women’s rights and his security forces’ ability to 
counter the Taliban threat.

The Nato force will shrink from a peak of about 140,000 soldiers in 2011 to 
12,000 after 31 December. Recently, President Barack Obama approved an expanded 
combat mission for the remaining troops, allowing them to engage insurgents and 
provide air support.


But Afghan forces are already taking heavy casualties 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2014/12/01/uk-afghanistan-security-insight-idUKKCN0JE0VT20141201>
 and the withdrawal deprives the economy of the benefits of tens of thousands 
of foreign troops stationed in the country: there will no longer be demand for 
armies of trucks to carry gravel, diesel or other inputs to military bases, and 
construction activity is expected to slow.

“The Afghan economy is a war bubble and we are seeing it slowly deflate,” said 
Smith. “While we’re putting Afghanistan through these shocking political and 
military transitions, it behoves us to try to ease the economic transition – to 
smooth the way with some cash.”

But many international partners are disillusioned after 13 years of 
administrative corruption. Although Ghani represents a new start after Hamid 
Karzai’s discredited presidency, it is not clear yet whether this will be 
enough to guarantee long-term financial support. Afghanistan depends on foreign 
assistance fortwo-thirds of its budget 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/12/02/us-afghanistan-government-idUSKCN0JG0TG20141202>
.

Smith says history has shown that when troops pull out of a country, funds 
tend to follow. “When you don’t have fresh-faced British soldiers whose lives 
are at risk, it’s much easier to turn off the tap. And that’s the real danger 
now for Afghanistan: that the world will forget.”

The negative impacts of the withdrawal are already being felt in other 
spheres, and there are fears that years of work to bolster human rights, 
education and justice may be undermined.


Ahead of the conference, Oxfam warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/24/taliban-peace-talks-a-threat-to-womens-rights-in-afghanistan-oxfam-warns>
 that women risked being excluded from any future peace talks with the Taliban. 
Activists want Britain and other donors to insist that women’s rights are 
protected during any negotiations.

At a pre-summit meeting of civil society activists, dubbed the Ayenda 
conference (“future” in the Dari language), in London on Wednesday, delegates 
spoke of the shrinking humanitarian space.

“The situation of Afghanistan, especially regarding security, is deteriorating 
and humanitarian funds have declined,” said Sabirullah Memlawal, chief 
administrator ofJapan International Volunteer Centre 
<https://www.ngo-jvc.net/en/>, which runs health and education projects in 
Afghanistan.

“The circle has been limited. Humanitarian workers cannot move freely so that 
is a concern,” he added.

Umbrella advocacy group Baag  <http://www.baag.org.uk/>(British and Irish 
Agencies Afghanistan Group), which organised the Ayenda event, said 60% of 
delegates – representing about 30 groups – felt less safe after the past year, 
half had received death threats or had been intimidated while more than 70% had 
seen a reduction in funding.


“There is a clear picture of people feeling abandoned, vulnerable, 
underfunded,” said Jawed Nader, director of Baag. “We risk leaving our 
colleagues in Afghanistan with a feeling of betrayal, that we are turning our 
back on them and leaving them exposed, both in terms of security and 
financially.”

Speaking at the conference Desmond Swayne, minister of state for international 
development, said: “We have, all of us in this room ... invested a great deal 
in the future of Afghanistan and we are about to invest a great deal more. I 
quite believe that Afghanistan has a very bright future ahead of it,” adding 
that if Afghanistan failed to reach its potential, it must not be because of 
neglect by civil society or donors. “Let no one be able to point at us, civil 
society or donors, and say it was because you didn’t do enough.”

Najiba, an Afghan delegate who did not want to give her last name because of 
the sensitive nature of her work, trained as a paralegal withActionAid 
<http://www.actionaid.org.uk/where-we-work/afghanistan> to help women report 
cases of violence and runs a women’s shelter in Bamyan.


She said good governance was essential to guarantee the rights of women and 
youths, and she felt women’s lives had not drastically improved over the past 
13 years. In Bamyan, she said, most women were not aware of their rights, and 
those who were faced too many obstacles in realising them. Insecurity was also 
creating a “horrifying situation” for women.

 “One of the outcomes from the London conference should be to focus on the 
judicial system and access for women. I don’t know what mechanisms are 
available [but] it should be monitored constantly. The framework must … be 
monitored by international community,” she said, speaking in Dari through a 
translator. 

Inside the conference room, delegates took their seats under a screen 
proclaiming: The Ayenda Conference: Fulfilling Afghan Futures. But for Najiba, 
who has resolved more than 100 domestic violence cases, fear has replaced hope 
for many.

“In Kabul, I hear people saying ‘ if we go out, we don’t anticipate coming 
home alive’,” said the mother of two teenage boys and a girl of eight. “In 
other countries, people think about the future, but in Afghanistan, it’s a 
constant struggle for survival.”
 