
Save Richmond


 “Nine times”. Say it again, Ed Rooney, and again. ‘Nine times ... nine 
times’. That’s how many games on the trot Richmond had to win to elbow their 
way into the finals. At 3-10 a little over two months ago, coach Damien 
Hardwick went on record saying the Tigers were no better than ordinary. And 
that was being kind. Somehow, from somewhere, Richmond produced a run that 
would make Black Caviar proud. I doing so, they avoided a return to type after 
last year’s breakthrough. Were the Swans trying their damnedest on Saturday 
night? Once they awoke, approximately halfway through the second quarter, it 
did seen like those chosen to play did care. Regardless, Richmond are alive, 
their Save Ferris routine earning a knockout shot at the Power in Adelaide. 
Stranger things have happened.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3F0rPFASUXY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3F0rPFASUXY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3F0rPFASUXY&media=>
 Go fourth and multiply (your chances)

 On Port Adelaide, they certainly gave it an almighty shake in the west before 
narrowly going down to Fremantle, who were always doing just enough to 
safeguard fourth place and, with it, the double chance. The scoreline possibly 
flattered the Power, six goals down as they were deep into the game, but 
they’ll rue a host of missed opportunities early on and a lapse either side of 
half-time that saw the Dockers boot nine straight. This was a ripping game, 
played at a level of intensity that will top off both teams in readiness for 
week one of the finals. Port will be strong favourites to topple the Tigers 
but, as their reward, Freo face the might of the Swans in Sydney. They may just 
need that double chance.



 Rivals to resume rivalry

 As if September footy isn’t anticipated enough, we get the delight of 
Hawthorn v Geelong to commence this year’s finals series. The Cats will again 
be underdogs against their great modern rivals, particularly in light of the 
clash a fortnight back in which the Hawks displayed an impressive set of gears 
to turn a position of some doubt into a fairly comfortable win. But you can’t 
write off Geelong. They tuned up for this with a sparring session against 
Brisbane, and note Joel Selwood’s best-on-ground showing in the last round that 
Brownlow votes are counted. Hawthorn did a number of their own on another 
punching bag in Collingwood, who end 2014 early with a litany of injuries but 
just as many questions about the overall quality of their playing group.



 The also-rans

 So we know who will be slugging it out in September, but what of those 
occupying the lower rungs of the ladder? Both Gold Coast and GWS enjoyed their 
best seasons to date, the Giants finishing the season with a gusto of sorts 
that bodes well for 2015. Of the others, Adelaide and West Coast performed well 
enough at times to suggest a spot in the top eight could, even should, be 
theirs next season. Without wanting to get too far ahead of ourselves, it seems 
possible, even likely, that the top eight could look markedly different in 12 
months’ time. But who of the current crop drops out?



 Thanks for coming. Really

Round 23 saw the curtain fall on a number of decorated careers. We bade an 
emotional farewell to Lenny Hayes, Ben Rutten, Luke Ball, Daniel Giansiracusa 
and Josh Hunt, great players each of them. None finished his career as romance 
dictated it might, with a flag or at the least a finals fling, but that’s sport 
for you. There was a sense of occasion at Adelaide Oval with Lenny Hayes 
surpassing Jude Bolton as the standout tackler inAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> history and ‘Truck’ Rutten scoring a 
six-pointer with his last career kick (to go with three from his first three). 
Though Ball did win a flag upon his move from St Kilda to Collingwood his 
career was anything but idyllic, and along with others he leaves the game as 
proof that individual excellence often doesn’t reflect team success.
 