
If this was the grand final preview …

… then roll on the last Saturday in September. It’s rare that blockbusters 
live up to the hype (mostly down to all and sundry’s rabid inclination to apply 
the moniker to any old stoush between two good teams), butSaturday night’s 
slugfest between Hawthorn and Sydney at the MCG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/26/brisbane-lions-win-q-clash-to-hit-gold-coast-suns-finals-hopes>
 was one for the ages. Had every muscle moved and point scored the other night 
taken place in a grand final, rather than a humble regular-season fixture, no 
one would have left disappointed (fans of the losing side respectfully 
excluded). It was an unflinchingly tense, uncompromising – and hence not always 
pretty – affair, with both sides looking apparent winners at various stages. 
But there was plenty of room for individual brilliance – see flashes from 
Franklin, Goodes rolling back the years, Puopolo’s inspirational first goal, 
Roughead rising to the occasion – and the final siren left you wanting more. 
And we may well get more. Though Geelong and Fremantle are plausible candidates 
to upset the applecart, these two certainly appeal as the most likely pairing 
for the 2014 decider.

Honesty is alive and well … wait, no it isn’t

You had to pinch yourself to make sure you weren’t watching a game of footy in 
some sort of bizarro parallel universe. There he was, Sydney’s Ben McGlynn, in 
the biggest home-and-away match of the year, immediately fessing up to arbiters 
and teammates that his goal in the third quarter was in fact touched by 
Hawthorn defender Josh Gibson. McGlynn later said we’d all misinterpreted his 
actions, that he’d in fact tried to indicate that the ballhadn’t been touched. 
Sure, Benny, we believe you. Your hangdog expression as one hand tapped the 
other was precisely that of someone who'd just kicked a goal. The other one 
plays Jingle Bells, by the way. It’s a mighty shame he woke up with an honesty 
hangover on Sunday morning and backtracked, because'McGlynny doing a Gilly' 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jXYbWIi8u7E> would have opened the floodgates 
for more acts of rectitude in the AFL. How about 'No, ump, it’s not a throw-in 
… I deliberately knocked the ball out of bounds’or 'Negligent contact? Only one 
week? Heck, throw the book at me … I absolutely meant to drop the bastard.’
Should be more of it.


Crows soar, Pies plummet

We were short on quantity in the second weekend of this split round, but not 
quality. September really did come early, with Sunday's Collingwood-Adelaide 
game played at a similar intensity to the one that graced the home of footy the 
night before. And with reason: this was not far off an elimination final, with 
the Crows in danger of slipping into the abyss had they lost. They didn’t lose, 
adding another layer to an absorbing race to the play-offs. This was nothing 
like a spotless performance from Adelaide, but it was full of character andgood 
enough to displace the Magpies in the eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/27/adelaide-crows-displace-collingwood-in-afl-top-eight-with-mcg-victory>
; their finals fate is now in their hands. Collingwood, outran early on, showed 
courage of their own to respond, stifling the Crows and hitting the lead midway 
through the final quarter. That’s where their game ended, and perhaps, only 
perhaps, with it their season. There’s no shortage of ticker in this 
Collingwood outfit, but, undermanned as they are, their perspiration far 
outweighs their inspiration. The Pies are still in it, but they have their work 
cut out to avoid an early finish to the season for the first time since 2005.


Hardwick defends the indefensible
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F27%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-18%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F27%2F1406458327069%2Fa24c3502-bc61-4563-bc2e-c796b47328ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2018&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F27%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-18%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2018&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F27%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-18%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F27%2F1406458327069%2Fa24c3502-bc61-4563-bc2e-c796b47328ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dean Cox sees stars after copping a roundhouse from Ty Vickery. Photograph: 
Paul Kane/Getty Images 
I like a bit of rough and tumble as much as the next guy. I also have no 
problem with a coach sticking up for his players. But there seemed something 
unpalatable about Richmond coach Damien Hardwick fighting Ty Vickery’s corner 
in the press conference after hiscombative big man had felled West Coast’s Dean 
Cox with a doozy of a roundhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/25/vickery-knocks-out-cox-as-tigers-bring-down-eagles>
 during the second term at Subiaco. Cox hit the deck like a sack of spuds after 
Vickery settled a little tete-a-tete between the two with a blow that 
momentarily knocked the Eagle out cold. So much for giving the Eagles legend an 
easy time in the week he announced his retirement from the sport. Now Vickery 
has form when it comes to the rough stuff, but Hardwick showed scant concern 
for Cox’s welfare when he applauded Vickery’s no-nonsense approach to the game. 
"To me, he's a hard, tough player," Hardwick said. "That's what we want at the 
Tigers.” Those who want thuggery out of the game will want Vickery dismissed 
for a decent spell. And he will be.


No Ablett is no excuse

It would be far too easy, and far too convenient for the players themselves, 
to blame Gold Coast’s apparently inexorable decline to the loss of their 
captain and the best player on the planet, Gary Ablett. Two weeks back, during 
the home game againstCollingwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood>
, Ablett went down but the Suns soldiered on to hold out the Magpies and signal 
they were ready for their maiden finals assault. Since then they’ve served up 
dross, and Saturday’s effort in the Q-Clash against Brisbane surely ranks as a 
contender for the most insipid of 2014. There was no fight, no passion, heck in 
the first half there were hardly any possessions. They played like a team with 
nothing left to play for (that’s the Lions, by the way), not a team up to their 
ears in finals reckoning (that would be the Suns). Maybe an arduous and 
draining campaign to get where they’ve got has taken its toll. But if some Suns 
players have tossed in the towel since it was confirmed Ablett was done for the 
season, then it doesn’t speak too highly of their character. Or self-belief for 
that matter.

 