
The Tigers still aren’t going to make the finals

You’ve all heard it: during a routine loss, having scraped together half a 
dozen goals all day, a team nicks a couple of late ones to get the margin under 
30 points and suddenly the commentators are talking up a comeback. It’s an 
effort to manufacture some interest in a foregone conclusion, and it’s exactly 
what’s happening with Richmond’s supposed finals tilt.

Yes, the Tigers were excellent against Essendon on Friday night. They played 
fiercely and won deservedly. But winning six in a row for the first time in 
nearly 20 years speaks more of two decades of underachievement than two months 
of brilliance. Beating half a dozen opponents that have all struggled this 
season is no more than solid.

So ease off the talk of being a game out of the eight. Having only beaten one 
team from that end of the ladder this year, Richmond are not going to bring 
home the required spoils fromAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> and Sydney. As ever at Tigerland, 
it’s a case of maybe next year.

There’s a millimetre between genius and also-ran

Fremantle showed again that the margins in football are wafer thin. Kick a 
goal after the siren and you’re a hero. Miss it and you’re nobody. But it isn’t 
fair to put the spotlight on David Mundy – his was but one missed shot in a 
series. Fremantle had 24 scoring shots to Geelong’s 21, but still lost by two 
points.

Had they converted, Ross Lyon would have been hailed a genius, the guru who 
had cracked the code of beating Geelong in the Cats’ home fortress. Fremantle 
would have been third on the ladder and scary premiership contenders. Miss a 
shot or two and now the Dockers will be regarded as unconvincing outliers on 
the edge of the top four. The same team playing the same game, bar one kick, 
would have inspired a completely different sequence of commentary. It’s worth 
remembering.

Tom Rockliff is the best loser in the comp
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-20%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F10%2F1407708011114%2Fe36f47da-2851-4c10-bb4c-20f348626a78-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2020%20%7C%20Geoff%20Lemon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-20%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2020%20%7C%20Geoff%20Lemon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-20%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F10%2F1407708011114%2Fe36f47da-2851-4c10-bb4c-20f348626a78-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tom Rockliff unleashes his usual genius in a losing cause. Photograph: Chris 
Hyde/Getty Images 
Brisbane’s midfield dynamo did it again this weekend: while his Lions were 
getting smashed by Adelaide he had 40 disposals, 10 marks, 10 tackles and 
kicked 1.1. Rockliff is having a good year whichever way you slice it, but with 
an anomalous twist. When his team wins, he’s good. When they lose, he racks up 
stats like Monopoly money.

In going down against Richmond <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richmond> a 
month ago he had 36 possessions and 10 tackles. Against Fremantle a fortnight 
earlier it was 45 and 12; against Essendon, 35 and 11; against Port, 30 and 13. 
In losing to Gold Coast early in the year he had 35 stats, 11 marks and kicked 
three goals.

His excellent winning average of 30 possessions rises to 32.1 in losses. His 
3.7 marks in wins become 6.1 in defeat. His scoresheet reads 8.3 in losses, 2.0 
in wins. The only stat going marginally the other way is in tackles, presumably 
because he has to get the ball off someone first. It would take a deeper 
statistical analyst to work out the ramifications: does he raise his game in 
adversity, or is he ineffectual if his apparent blinders don’t influence the 
result?

Gold Coast are nothing without Gary Ablett

Admittedly we’ve had a fair idea of this for weeks, but I was willing to give 
Gold Coast the benefit of the doubt. When their champion demolished his 
shoulder joint halfway through a game against Collingwood in round 16, the 
young Suns played bravely in his absence to hang on for a win. Instead of 
inspiring them to push on without him, they went on to be smashed by 2014 
cellar dwellers the Western Bulldogs and Brisbane, blowing a golden chance to 
lock in their first finals appearance.

Belting St Kilda a week later gave them one last hope of a season revival, but 
that has surely evaporated after yet another lacklustre display against yet 
another team below them on the ladder. Carlton have been good the last few 
weeks, but they’re still a team that a finals contender has to beat. Instead 
Gold Coast played like an absence of a football team, and by halfway through 
the last quarter had managed five goals. They need the champ.

There’s big trouble in Little Adelaide

Not much is going right in the City of Not Having a Very Interesting Nickname. 
The Power’s death spiral continues, just two wins against bottom-tier sides in 
their last eight games. After winning 10 of their first 11, it has been 
bitterly disappointing. The capital Port built up during that run has kept them 
afloat – they remain only a game out of the top four – but they need a spark 
that is not forthcoming.

The Crows, meanwhile, had a massive win to get into the top eight, but turned 
their change room into a hospital ward in the process. Defender Andy Otten is 
gone with a ruined knee, big forward Tom Lynch came off with a frightening neck 
injury, and star player Patrick Dangerfield also hurt his knee in the final 
quarter. With Scott Thompson still to return from a bad hamstring, Adelaide’s 
mission to consolidate their finals place looks a tough one.

 

 