
The timeless inevitability of the howler

This round provided a salient example of the enduring theory that when your 
football side is struggling, things actually can get worse. Up to the plate 
stepped Carlton, who despite putting in a commendable underdog performance for 
much of their clash with Freo, conspired to lose by five points in another 
heartbreaker. Such is their tale of woe this year that only a week prior, ruck 
journeyman Cameron Wood seemed like a kind of saviour. The ex-Pie was more 
willing and more physical than Robbie Warnock, they thought. He could take a 
grab too.

On Friday night that brief window of popularity ended, obviously. There is 
nothing like the closing stages of a tight match to unfairly cement the 
reputation of a player and though the stakes were low (a win would not have 
altered Carlton’s 2014 fate a jot) Wood had his own moment of abject calamity, 
grabbing the ball deep in defence, spinning in a tackle and artlessly punting 
it straight into the hands of Fremantle livewire Lachie Neale. Neale slotted 
the resultant set shot to win the game. Of course he did. “Why in Bruce Doull’s 
name did he not just hit the boundary line?” screamed Blues fans as they 
fantasised about putting their foot through the TV. The poor bloke.

It’s always stupid to single out one mistake when your side loses. Instead 
Blues fans should ponder the fact that it was their most leg-weary veterans – 
Chris Judd, Jarrad Waite and Kade Simpson – who propelled them into a winning 
position in the first place. Judd played injured for most of the game, too. 
Tory Menzel aside, it’s been a struggle to find hope this year.

Subplot from the Freo win: has there been a safer bet (and I mean this in a 
literal sense; Tom Waterhouse is almost certainly framing a market) for an 
ineligible Brownlow ‘winner’ than Nathan Fyfe this year? The Dockers midfielder 
put in another three-vote performance on Friday. He shall henceforth be 
referred to in these pages as‘Corey’ 
<http://tooserious.net/Portals/0/Users/208%5C44%5C8144/McKernan_non.jpg>.

West Coast provide the upset of the round

After performances like Saturday’s 31-point road win over finals fancy 
Adelaide, you scratch your head and wonder how West Coast can have been so 
shoddy throughout this season. Coach Adam Simpson rightly points to the fact 
that Matt Priddis aside, the Eagles haven’t gotten a lot of output from their 
top-tier players in an inconsistent and generally dissatisfying campaign. It’s 
so much more frustrating for a side to struggle when they possess the weaponry 
that West Coast have and much of it was on display against the Crows.

To begin with, it’s seemed business as usual as Simpson’s side allowed 
Adelaide a four-goal buffer in the blink of an eye. But just as quick as they’d 
gone behind, the Eagles turned it around, making a mockery of the home side’s 
recent form in a near 10-goal turnaround. Josh Kennedy stood at the apex of a 
potent forward group, while Andrew Gaff and Luke Shuey for once both played 
exactly the way their packaging suggests they should. With that, so many other 
elements fell into place and so with a typically-wonderful Shannon Hurn bomb 
from 60 metres out on the run, the Eagles at long last gave something back. The 
relief was palpable.

Could Geelong actually win a Premiership this year?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-19%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F3%2F1407066198810%2F5d432a4d-0af1-45d0-b9fe-9de5bd1683fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2019&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-19%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2019&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-19%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F3%2F1407066198810%2F5d432a4d-0af1-45d0-b9fe-9de5bd1683fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Arty Shot No83: James Kelly walks out for his 250th game. Photograph: Michael 
Dodge/Getty Images 
Firstly, this proposition is not as crazy as it sounds. OK, it kind of is, but 
humour me a little. After dispatching North Melbourne on Saturday night to 
bring up one of the more nondescript five-game winning streaks you could wish 
for, the Cats now sit equal on wins with Sydney and Hawthorn and well on track 
for a top-four finish, maybe even top-two if things fall into place.

In the final month of the season they face Brisbane and Fremantle at home, 
Carlton at Etihad and Hawthorn at the MCG in a finals preview. It’s improbable 
but not impossible that they’ll win all of those games to ensure a top two 
spot. The AFL ladder is not a perceptual map, remember. On the other hand, 
North Melbourne reverted to type. Nothing looked worse thanLindsay Thomas’s 
spectacular and quite epic dive <http://gfycat.com/PaltryUniformCrocodileskink>
. AFL football, you just surrendered one of your long-held moral high ground 
points to the round ball code and it’s all Thomas’s fault.

Taking care of business

On the topic of Premiership fancies, the two most likely from the top of the 
pile both got the job done this weekend as they continue to tune-up for 
September. In Hawthorn’s 62-point win over the Bulldogs, Jarryd Roughead was at 
his dominant best with six goals and alongside Jack Gunston (three) he’ll 
continue to pose headaches for almost any defence in the competition. Of slight 
concern to Hawks supporters was the sight of Gunston hobbling off the ground 
with an ankle complaint and he’ll be closely monitored this coming week.

One thing that Hawthorn do have though is depth. Sam Mitchell and Isaac Smith 
were both late withdrawals, but it’s a luxury to have youngsters of the quality 
of Taylor Duryea and Will Langford to call on in those situations.

The Swans found the going a little tougher against the Bombers on Friday night 
but won by 22-points, even with Lance Franklin sitting in the sheds with a knee 
complaint. The Swans have the struggling Port next week but then face St Kilda, 
the Bulldogs and Richmond on the run home, so a top-two spot appears a foregone 
conclusion. Sydney has now even passed the 40,000 member mark for the first 
time in the club’s history. The harbour city loves a winner.

Port have probably squandered their double-chance and they don’t even deserve 
it

These are the harsh facts. Last night against Collingwood, Ken Hinkley’s side 
was at first listless then frustratingly-competent for the short window of time 
it took to snatch back the lead from a workmanlike Pies outfit, but ultimately 
a giant let-down in failing to seal the game when their class should have shone 
through. Port only have themselves to blame. Early on they were tactically 
outgunned and for all that flirtation and excitement of the first three months 
of the season, their Premiership aspirations now appear to have been a mirage. 
Hawthorn and Sydney are the Beatles and the Stones. Port Adelaide are Badfinger.

It’s unfair to single out one player, but Chad Wingard is emblematic of the 
Port slump. His only major contribution on Sunday was to rather heartlessly 
shove Tyson Goldsack into a post. With a name and a haircut like his, the Pies 
defender needs all the help he can get, not a facial reconstruction. Goldsack 
and his team-mates were stoic all night, worming their way back inside the 
eight and giving the Pies back their chance of finals action and the fans who 
showed up should have no complaint with their endeavor. On the latter point, 
Eddie McGuire did an unintentionally hilarious Dad-dance in his post-game wrap, 
but you could tell he was secretly seething over the meager crowd number of 
32,804. It was the Pies’ lowest home attendance in a decade.

By the way, it was “bring a friend” day for Pies members. I’ll leave you to 
draw your own conclusions from the statistics I’ve presented.
 