
Top spot belongs to anybody

Well, five anybodies. Sixteen games deep and the top end is as congested as a 
Fremantle backline in flu season. As Sydney flirted with the idea of losing to 
West Coast on Sunday, we regarded the prospect of the top five teams all 
sitting on 44 points.


The Swans eventually poked their beaks in front to move one win ahead, but 
Hawthorn,Port Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide>, 
Fremantle and Geelong have the wafer-thin mint of percentage between them. 
They’re sufficiently clear of the trailing pack but it’s hard to predict who’s 
going to settle when any of them could go any which way at all.


Port is wavering after their flying start, Hawthorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn> have injury worries and the 
toughest run home, Fremantle always battle footy’s toughest travel schedule and 
Geelong have been as patchy as Talk Like a Pirate Day. We know the quality of 
each when running well, so now it’s down to who can pull it together.


Their fates are in their hands. Each of the current top-four sides has two 
games to play against other top-four sides. Either two of these sides will drop 
eight points; all of them will drop four points; or two will drop four points 
while one drops eight. All these scenarios open up chances forGeelong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong>, who will also have their own shot 
at influence when they play Hawthorn and Freo.


Sydney are favourite to finish top but travel to play Hawthorn and Port. Port 
travel to play Fremantle, as well as top-eight sides Gold Coast and 
Collingwood. Hawthorn also travel to Perth and face the Magpies, while 
Fremantle’s home games are offset by the long trip to Geelong. The Cats have to 
handle the erratically brilliant Kangaroos. Anyone can finish on top, but 
whoever does will have earned it.


No one can get a handle on North

Speaking of North Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne>
, the Kangaroos are this year’s great AFL mystery. Last week they lost to the 
Brisbane Lions, a team second-last on the ladder with a percentage below 60. 
This week they handsomely beat Hawthorn, a team top of the ladder with a 
percentage nudging 150.

That means they’ve now beaten the entire current top four yet are nowhere near 
breaking into it. They might give it a shake if they win all seven games from 
here, but with six of those coming against lower-ranked opposition you still 
don’t know which North Melbourne will show up.


Rage in Placid Lake 

As good as North’s win was, it contained one scene we didn’t want to see. 
Fighting in theAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> is usually 
ridiculous: a lot of jumper-pulling, shoving and yelling, like an adolescent 
moose overwhelmed by pheromones and unsure what to do about it. The worst we 
see might be a cheap elbow or flailing rabbit-punch, while bad injuries are 
sustained in tackles or falls.

In that context, watching Brian Lake choke out Drew Petrie on the Etihad 
Stadium turf was genuinely distressing. Lake lost the plot, pinning Petrie flat 
on his back, kneeling over him and pressing hands and forearms round Petrie’s 
neck and throat for a prolonged period. Petrie clawed blindly at Lake’s head, 
then went limp, but even as Lake was eventually dragged away he was trying to 
maintain his hold. It was a horrible display and the Hawthorn defender should 
get a far longer holiday than the AFL tribunal is likely to hand down.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F07%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F7%2F1404687709489%2F81547646-66e4-4d81-8800-04470a979b47-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F07%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F07%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-16%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F7%2F1404687709489%2F81547646-66e4-4d81-8800-04470a979b47-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Drew Petrie is tackled by Brian Lake before the ugly incident. Photograph: Joe 
Castro/AAP 
Ablett injury throws the Brownlow into chaos

I’m going to put my hand up here. Earlier this season I wrote that Gary Ablett 
was an iron-clad, guaranteed, rolled-gold certainty for this year’s Brownlow 
medal. “So let’s not bother having Brownlow night, it’s a waste of time anyway. 
Just send the medal to Gary now and maybe throw in a couple more while you’re 
at it.”

He got through four and a half more games, but I didn’t account for him having 
his shoulder ripped from its socket.


A prognosis should be announced today, with early speculation suggesting four 
weeks of recovery. But there’s no way of knowing which injuries will turn out 
to be complicated or hamper players after a short turnaround. By my reckoning 
Ablett already has 22 votes locked in, with a chance at 27 depending how 
baldy-centric the umpires have been. Many a Brownlow has been won with totals 
like those, but if the Little Master is slow on the comeback, the next rank of 
medal contenders is in with a chance.


Interchange? Why bother?

Ablett, you’d think, would be more concerned about his team’s fortunes than 
his own decorations. Until now you’d have said no Ablett, noGold Coast Suns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gold-coast-suns>, but what they produced 
without him on Saturday was one of the braver team efforts I’ve seen.

It’s easy to overlook the interchange bench. In modern football players surge 
the length of the field in a pattern of tidal movement. They move ahead of each 
advance to provide options, searching for space or creating it for teammates. 
Turnovers require hundred-metre sprints the other way, running defensively to 
close down opposing options. Resting your runners makes it possible for them to 
keep the pace.


Against Collingwood, Gold Coast added to Ablett’s injury by losing Charlie 
Dixon, Sean Lemmens and Trent McKenzie. This meant they had to play out the 
final quarter with no bench whatsoever. The18 players on the field would have 
no rest until the game was done. It seemed only a matter of time until 
Collingwood overran them. Instead, the Suns ran themselves into the ground, 
keeping their opponents at bay by under a goal. The biggest struggle with 
franchise teams is that they have no identity. That’s the kind of game that 
establishes one.
 