
This sport is really awesome

In a year dominated by the Bombers' off-field drama, the last week of the 
home-and-away season was a reminder of just how great the sport can be. It was 
the best weekend of footy of the year â€“ with no fewer than four 
edge-of-your-seat-shouting-at-the-TV thrillers.North Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne> and Collingwood's meeting 
also provided us with a tense race for the Coleman Medal for the competition's 
leading goal kicker, with Travis Cloke attempting to chase down Jarryd 
Roughead's lead but missing about by just two goals. It was the ideal prelude 
to the now set-in-stone first week of the finals, which promises more of the 
same.

The Swans are still a threat

In a thriller at Olympic Park, the Swans proved once again that they're so 
much more than the sum of their parts (even when most of their parts are 
missing). Hawthorn might have got the 12-point win, but Sydney looked like 
authentic finals contenders despite the absence of Adam Goodes, Lewis Jetta, 
Kurt Tippett, Dan Hannebery and Lewis Roberts-Thomson. It's hard not to draw 
the conclusion that the absence of Tippett forced the Swans back to a more 
traditional attacking strategy with multiple goal kickers. Hawthorn coach 
Alastair Clarkson won't be happy with his side's effort, despite the win. The 
Hawks seemed to lack focus in the first quarter and spent the rest of the game 
playing catch up. After doing the same thing against North last week, there's 
reason to be worried a pattern is emerging heading into the finals. Of course, 
the headlines will be grabbed by Buddy Franklin's stupid high bump on Nick 
Malceski, which will see him out for next week's rematch. The Hawks will hope 
they play as well as theSwans <https://www.theguardian.com/music/swans> do 
without their big target.


Ross Lyon still has a soft spot for the Saints

Resting 12 players the week before the finals probably isn't grounds for Ross 
Lyon to be charged with bringing the game into disrepute, as a few wags on 
Twitter suggested, but it made for a rather predictable encounter at Etihad 
Stadium on Saturday. The 71-point drubbing was the first time Lyon's Fremantle 
has ever lost to the Saints (nor did the Lyon-managed Saints ever lose to the 
Dockers). The unflappable Fremantle coach didn't seem particularly fazed by it 
all (not that he ever does). Maybe he was happy to see retiring former charges 
Jason Blake, Justin Koschitzke and Stephen Milne out with a win. Milne looked 
lethal in his last game, though listening to the Fox commentary team, you'd be 
forgiven for thinking he was a brave humanitarian, rather than a man facing a 
rape charge. Kosi, for his part, played an entirely fitting last game, coming 
on in the final term and booting four behinds.

Carlton can play finals footy

It's just they only chose to play it for one quarter this week. In old school 
"prison bars" guernseys for their last game at football park, Port had the 
Blues under lock and key for three quarters before they stormed back to grab a 
thrilling 104-103 victory and assure their spot in the finals. After going down 
to the Bombers last week, it looked likeCarlton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carlton> would just be making up the 
numbers, if they made the finals at all. But a seven-goal final term with their 
backs against the wall proved that the Blues have what it takes to play (and 
maybe even win) in the finals. Despite early wobbles (perhaps due to an awful 
clash of strips that left the two sides indistinguishable), they stepped up and 
streamed forward in attack, with Marc Murphy, Jeff Garlett, Chris Yarran and 
Eddie Betts all notching multiple majors. Ed Curnow might have been the pick of 
the lot. Now if they can do it for four quarters, they might actually be a 
threat.

Adelaide, North and Brisbane could have been contenders

There was a strange period (about the length of a football game) on the 
weekend in which Crows fans were actually cheering for Port. Had they managed 
to hold off Carlton,Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> could 
well have made the finals thanks to their 86-point annihilation of West Coast. 
But fear not, the natural order of things has returned and Crows fans once 
again hate their cross-town rivals. Meanwhile, Paul Chapman's outstretched 
fingertips (and that Port collapse) were all that kept Brisbane from making the 
finals themselves, and who would have denied them the right after their late 
season surge? And nobody told North their game against Collingwood was a dead 
rubber (and that they're meant to be chokers), with the Pies forced into a 
spectacular shootout that began with an 83-point first quarter and finishing 
with the Kangaroos winning 125-114. If only the season had been a couple of 
weeks longer ...
 