
Worst. Score. Ever. Almost

When a terrible team is playing a pointless game, you have to be grateful when 
they give you something extra to think about. With league strugglers Brisbane 
taking on league tightarses Fremantle at a subaquatic Subiaco Oval, no upset 
was on the cards. Brisbane started promisingly with a rushed behind after three 
minutes, but then … that was it. Not a point was added right through to half 
time.

It was impressive – this is the AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>, 
after all, where half the field is a scoring zone. Surely a team could score 
something, even if they just ran the ball through for a try. It’s not like you 
have to balance it on your nose while you do it.


Four minutes into the third quarter Daniel Merrett got a free kick 15 metres 
out, and hit the post. He’d doubled their tally. Then, after five minutes and 
forty seconds, it came. Zac Dawson took a mark, wasn’t paid, and the ball was 
slapped clear for Josh Green to send one through. Brisbane’s crawl across the 
barren Nullarbor of football was over. By full time they had three whole goals, 
improving their half-time score by 2100%.


That ruined hopes of the lowest score in a match, but the Lions were right up 
there with the worst in a half. Fremantle themselves managed a single point 
against Adelaide in 2009, and then it’s back to the original Lions, with 
Fitzroy scoreless to half time against Essendon in 1995 and Footscray in 1953. 
All other scoreless or one-point halves came before 1903, when the general 
conditions of the day lent themselves to a rather slower method of play.


Umps have put the whistle away

Umpires aren’t always the first to be decorated with praise, but there must 
have been some good decisions made at Lime Green HQ this season. There 
certainly appear to be far fewer minor technical free kicks being paid. It’s 
been a frustration for some time that any genuine contest for the ball was 
likely to be whistled up one way or the other, turning the game into a lottery. 
Now the adjudicators would apparently prefer to err on the side of prescribing 
a spoonful of concrete.

The fend-off especially has been almost penalised out of the game. So when 
Lance Franklin palmed down Richmond’s Anthony Miles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/21/sydney-survive-scare-to-beat-struggling-richmond>
 with a mighty thud while sprinting down the wing on the weekend, I drank in 
the sound of no whistle with joy. Of course, the replays then showed Franklin 
planting one entire smoked-ham hand in the centre of Miles’ face, so perhaps a 
cheeky free wouldn’t have been entirely unreasonable.


Yes, the Suns are playing finals

Not that there should have been much doubt, but after three recent losses and 
with a couple of tough games to come, there was plenty of speculation that Gold 
Coast would slip from finals contention at the business end of the year. That 
talk should now have settled after a fierce win overGeelong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong> that dumped the Cats from the top 
four. Eighth spot has been stamped as the Suns’ own, and they’re only a game 
off fourth themselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-14%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403487169391%2F8c9bacc5-0cbd-4788-a805-7a2296f379d4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-14%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-14%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403487169391%2F8c9bacc5-0cbd-4788-a805-7a2296f379d4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Harley Bennell was in blazing form for the Suns against Geelong. Photograph: 
Chris Hyde/Getty Images 
No one expects Gold Coast to do much against Hawthorn in Tasmania, the venue 
where interstate footballing hopes go to die. But Collingwood at Metricon is 
now a genuine chance, and then comes a month against Western Bulldogs, 
Brisbane, St Kilda and Carlton. The Suns’ closest rival is Essendon, already a 
game behind, and facing a run of Geelong, Port Adelaide, Collingwood,Western 
Bulldogs <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/western-bulldogs> and Sydney. If 
all goes Gold Coast’s way, that one-game gap could widen to five.


Port Adelaide patent their late explosion

In 2014, the third quarter belongs so comprehensively to Port Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide> that they should have it 
stuffed, mounted and hung in the pool room. All year they’ve boosted their 
running and intensity in the third quarter, just as other teams are starting to 
tail off. All year it has allowed them to hand out punishment.

The Bulldogs, fresh from a rousing win against Collingwood, led at quarter 
time and remained well in touch at the half. ThenPort shrugged them clear, 
piling on 12.9 to 3.3 after half time. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/21/eight-goal-jay-schulz-stars-as-port-adelaide-down-bulldogs>
 The match had flattered one side into thinking it was close. Port Adelaide 
just chuckled and went about their day.

This is where the myth of the bunyip comes from

Porofessional footballers do not enjoy a dignified profession. They’re told 
what to eat, are injured for our entertainment, then made to sing songs that 
were naff back when Brylcreem was Australia’s staple food. I mean, why ask 
someone with no training or ability at a thing to do it on live TV? Cyclists 
don’t follow up a stage win with some juggling, nor do newly elected presidents 
dabble in televised watercolours.

But if that wasn’t enough, after his team’s big win, the dressing room cameras 
latched onto Fremantle’s Michael Barlow where he lay on the floor, rolling 
around, one end of a giant green rubber band around his ankle, the other firmly 
wrapped around his head, vaguely trying to stretch one or other of the things 
involved. I don’t know if it was recreational, disciplinary, or just something 
Ross Lyon used to distract him from chewing himself, but surely the man could 
be left to do it alone.


And then there was Pav. Bashed in the nose by a teammate, Matthew Pavlich’s 
bleeding was staunched with the subtly controlled method of jamming a wad of 
cotton wool roughly into the hole in his face, then wrapping Elastoplast tape 
around his entire head to hold it in. Thus he played out the game, literally 
reduced to a mouth-breather. If you ever wondered where the bunyip legend came 
from, try Pavlich on Saturday night, roaming the field, bashing through packs, 
a monstrosity of smooshed flesh, snot and first aid gear. Imagine waking up in 
the night to hear that thing snuffling and snorting up the hall towards your 
door.
 