




Freo’s sense of occasion

Fremantle’s home game against Geelong on Saturday was important on several 
levels. Most importantly, the clash presented an opportunity to arrest a run of 
indifferent form against quality opposition; on the flip side, lose at 
Patersons against a team they’ve had the wood over recently, and four losses 
from the past five would’ve had the Dockers out of the eight and hard pressed 
to prove that last year’s grand final showing was little more than a fluke. It 
was also a special match by dint of it being the indomitable Fremantle captain 
Matthew Pavlich’s 300th game. No doubt the latter helped gather resolve for the 
former, such is the trend ofAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> clubs 
in celebrating the milestone games of their favourite sons with victory. The 
writing was splashed on the wall with permanent purple ink inside 30 seconds 
with Pavlich marking and goaling, moving the no-nonsense Dockers coach Ross 
Lyon to later admit he might have for the first time witnessed an omen. Freo 
never let up all night and were back to their high-intensity best of 2013 – 
something we saw in round one this year against Collingwood but not again 
before Saturday. The premiership tilt undoubtedly is back on track. As for 
Pavlich, who over the years has had ample opportunity to return to his native 
South Australia if he wanted to, the performance of his team- mates was the 
least he deserved. He’s a beacon for all that’s good in the game: loyalty, 
fairness, professionalism. And boy can he play.



Most teams can beat most teams

While it isn’t quite true that anyone can beat anyone – though Greater Western 
Sydney’s job on the Swans in round one would suggest otherwise – the modern 
game is such that there are no lay down miseres any longer. The days of simply 
turning up against apparently inferior opposition and winning simply don’t 
exist like it seems they once did. The point being, unless your quality reaches 
such heights that 80-90% is good enough – right now that would be Port Adelaide 
and Hawthorn – if you don’t play to your full potential, you’re vulnerable 
almost regardless of the opposition. This point was evidenced twice this round, 
firstly on Thursday night at Adelaide Oval and then two days later at the MCG.
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> beating Collingwood won’t 
go down as the biggest upset of the season, but there really was little reason 
to think the Crows could come away with a win – even allowing for the boost 
that the return of the team’s heartbeat, Taylor Walker, would provide. But the 
Magpies were subdued – or, if you like, becalmed by Adelaide’s intensity – and 
the chance to cement a top-four spot went begging. Melbourne, the team that 
stunned the Crows a fortnight ago, were roundly expected to play their part in 
the reignition of Richmond’s stuttering season. But the Dees looked like they 
wanted it more, and once again they beat a team which, on paper, they had no 
right to. Cue Pies midfielder Luke Ball: “It's one of those years where it's 
really tight. The last four weeks have shown that we can play well and our best 
is good but the competition is so tight you can't have a bad week.”



Did the real Crows stand up?

The one true sit-up-and-take-notice showing of the round belonged to Adelaide, 
insofar as it was played out to a level hitherto unseen from them in 2014. They 
were really good on Thursday night, and didn’t give Collingwood as much as a 
sniff after quarter-time. But only time will tell if what we saw at Adelaide 
Oval was the start of something new and special – or just a peak performance in 
a season littered with more troughs than a pig farm. What their high-octane, 
high-pressure win demonstrated is that their best is good enough to stop a very 
good team. It may even be good enough to beat an outfit a rung or two above the 
Pies. But the onus is now on the Crows to show that this wasn’t a solitary 
swallow. As coach Brenton Sanderson said: "Hopefully we can back that up. 
What's important for our footy team now is that that's not a one-off." Their 
tackles – all 92 of them – bordered on maniacal, while Taylor Walker’s comeback 
was a palpable shot to the arm. Walker was good enough after such a long 
lay-off, but more importantly his presence adds layers to the forward line and 
allows the likes of James Podsiadly and Josh Jenkins, who kicked a game-high 
four goals, to roam more freely, with most defensive focus on big Tex. Charlie 
Cameron was assured and lively in a promising debut, also. However, as 
witnessed against the Demons, Adelaide’s worst is quite awful. This potentially 
watershed victory won’t matter a jot in the long run if the Crows revert to 
type and prove themselves to be just another team who can claim a big scalp, if 
the mood catches them and the planets align.



Swans looking seriously scary
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F19%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-nine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F18%2F1400415070411%2F539b7570-015f-4688-867b-7a5b7bb6fd85-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%20nine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F19%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-nine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%20nine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F19%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-nine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F18%2F1400415070411%2F539b7570-015f-4688-867b-7a5b7bb6fd85-1020x612.jpeg>
 Keep Kurt Tippett quiet and you still have to contend with Lance Franklin. 
Photograph: Quinn Rooney/Getty Images 
It was one of the year’s most vexing questions: would Lance Franklin settle 
well in Sydney, into the famed Bloods culture, and indeed into a forward line 
already rich in quality. It sounds strange even thinking it, given Franklin’s 
class and match-winning abilities, but the former Hawk’s move to the Swans 
really could have gone pear-shaped. But Franklin has been getting progressively 
better this year, and any doubts the Swans could make it work with him and Kurt 
Tippett, not to mention Adam Goodes and Sam Reid, in the same forward structure 
were put to bed against Essendon on Friday night. Sydney’s forward set-up will 
be a nightmare for opposition defences from now on. Both Franklin and Tippett 
would attract the best defender or two wherever they played, but in the same 
outfit there just aren’t enough stoppers to go around. Sydney’s hard-working 
and effective midfield has options galore when it heads inside-50 – the reality 
is: keep one gun quiet and the other will go bang. This was the case against 
the Bombers, with Franklin booting four goals in a vintage first-half display 
that saw him roam to all parts of Etihad and take Michael Hurley to the 
cleaners. Tippett was mostly held by the admirable Cale Hooker, but with 
Franklin quieter in the second half he picked up the slack with three majors of 
his own. The Swans have now won five on the trot and are nestled inside the top 
four. It would take a brave person to say they won’t still be there when the 
regular season is complete.



Giants mean business

Off the field, the Greater Western Sydney Giants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/greater-western-sydney-giants> made a 
significant statement when it handed a five-week suspension and $5,000 fine to 
20-year-old Toby Greene for breaching club protocols. Greene has not yet been 
found guilty of any of the numerous charges he’s facing in connection with an 
incident he was involved in while drunk in Melbourne last week. But what he was 
guilty of is drinking while injured and failing to let the Giants know in 
reasonable time that said incident comprised his participation. Greater Western 
Sydney could have gone one of two ways on this one: they could have played the 
caring, concerned parent and stood by their man even if his rightful innocence 
turned to guilt, or they could have gone down the road of tough love. They took 
the latter option and, by way of the leadership group, made an example out of 
him. You can’t blame Greene for appealing the severity of the Giants’ 
treatment, an appeal he ended up withdrawing, and no doubt he’s smarting. But 
the Giants haven’t forsaken him, and he’ll have learned a precious lesson. As 
will all of his team-mates who are looking on. The Giants are an infant club 
trying to build a culture. They won’t – repeat, won’t – tolerate behaviour that 
undermines the club and what it wants to stand for. And good on them. Sometimes 
tough love is the only way to go.






 