
Dockers do the business


 Without doubt the biggest statement of the weekend was made by Fremantle, who 
convincingly toppled Hawthorn, the reigning premiers, in a show of class and 
determination at Patersons Stadium on Sunday. A question mark has been hanging 
over the Dockers since they were flogged by, of all teams, St Kilda. They 
showed a distinct return to form last week away to Geelong, and followed that 
up with a win over the Hawks that shows to all that Freo are back as flag 
contenders. They’re now in with a shout of finishing higher than fourth, and 
hence avoiding a likely trip to Sydney in week one of the finals. Another 
observation: how good is Nat Fyfe? It’s a shame for him he’s ineligible for the 
Brownlow Medal this year, because there won’t be a bigger poller of votes. If 
he wants to do what he should, and bag at least one Charlie before his career 
is done, he’ll need to stamp out of his game the recklessness that detracts 
from his prodigious talent. This was in evidence on two occasions in the first 
quarter against Hawthorn, where both Jordan Lewis and Will Langford came off 
second best, and the match review panel’s take on these incidents could shape 
Fyfe’s, and hence Fremantle’s, campaign.



 Tigers fans dare to dream


 Adelaide and North Melbourne have done a good job of putting their fans 
through the wringer this season, but fancy being a Richmond supporter. The 
Tigers couldn’t lift their legs at the start of the season, but, in a run 
that’s been frighteningly predictable, they’re seven from seven and, ahem, in 
ninth spot, barely percentage out of the eight. They were really good against 
the Crows, a team which had enjoyed a 105-point win on the road just six days 
prior. Richmond were clean, direct and in most cases first to the footy in 
Adelaide; truth is they would have won by a lot more but for dreadful 
inaccuracy in the third term. So the surge to September is on, with the 
contrasting challenges of St Kilda at home and Sydney away to round out the 
regular season. For the ride home, the Punt Road faithful have welcomed back 
that most vindictive of all deceivers: hope. Who’d be aRichmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richmond> fan?



 Should’ve gone to Specsavers


 In footy, as in life, sometimes you see something that defies comprehension. 
One such event occurred at Adelaide Oval on Saturday night when Rory Sloane 
snapped truly in the third quarter to ignite a comeback for the Crows against 
Richmond. Play was about to resume in the centre circle when it became apparent 
the six-pointer was the subject of a score review. Long story short the goal 
umpire’s decision was overturned, the work experience kid/comedian upstairs 
100% convinced that the ball had brushed some timber. The adjudication was so 
ludicrous that Sloane, an honest competitor not given to remonstration, was 
moved to cross swords with a field umpire when expressing his exasperation. 
Said arbiter sympathised with roaring Rory and, you must understand, his 
learned colleagues are privy to a number of varied camera angles. Yes, they 
are. And not one of them gave the slightest indication, let alone conclusive 
proof, that the ball touched the post on its way through the uprights. As far 
as boneheaded bloopers go, this was a beauty.



 Collingwood, thanks for coming
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F18%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F17%2F1408280014721%2F509e63b9-464a-4216-8a2a-391bc9462e45-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2021&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F18%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2021&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F18%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F17%2F1408280014721%2F509e63b9-464a-4216-8a2a-391bc9462e45-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Better file this one under ‘disconsolate’. Photograph: Michael Dodge/Getty 
Images 

 The clamour for the finals this year is too tight to be absolute about 
anything, but it looks like Collingwood did their dash when they went down, 
dare I say embarrassingly, to the tune of 67 points at home against Brisbane on 
Saturday. This was the same Lions team which six days ago were spanked by over 
100 points by the Crows, who either side of that win had their own pants pulled 
down – in Adelaide – by West Coast and Richmond. Yes, the Magpies have had 
their share of injury worries, but this only serves to cloud the fact of the 
matter: thisCollingwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> outfit 
just ain’t that good. No matter which way you look at it, the likelihood is 
that Nathan Buckley et al will be able to start Collingwood’s end-of-season 
audit in August for the first time since 2005.



 Another Giant step


 Seriously, good onya Greater Western Sydney. While the AFL’s other expansion 
team, Gold Coast, have stopped as if shot, the Giants are finishing the season 
with the sort of gusto and conviction that augers well for 2015 and beyond. OK, 
their victims at the weekend, Melbourne, might not be up to much, but they at 
least were good enough to push the Power to a kick in Adelaide recently. The 
reality is the Demons were thoroughly outplayed by the Giants, who have now won 
at the MCG and this campaign they have mixed the customary floggings that young 
sides cop with a dash of gumption – and it is seeing them close out the year 
with some legs. It’s to be hoped Jon Patton can recover, again, from a serious 
knee injury. He’s an important ingredient as the Giants look to evolve from 
fodder to finals contenders. As for Melbourne, they’ve improved under Paul Roos 
but this lopsided game highlights how a mob like the Dees has suffered as theAFL
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> has expanded. Were it not for the 
Giants and the Suns, some of these good young players would otherwise be 
turning out for them.
 