
Hawthorn underline premiership credentials

Round 17 got off to a rollicking start on Friday night courtesy of a gripping 
affair between theCrows and Hawthorn in Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/12/hawthorn-hawks-adelaide-crows-match-report>
. The Hawks were supposedly there for the taking, missing a few stars through 
injury and suspension, but there is no substitute for quality. The Crows, in 
reasonable nick themselves, threw everything at the defending champs and looked 
to have them on the ropes at times, but Hawthorn responded like good sides do. 
Adelaide had their noses in front by most statistical measures except the one 
that counts: the scoreline.

Much is being written about Sydney (you’ll find even more written below) and 
with good reason, but Hawthorn won’t surrender their title without a fight. 
Come September, should they get close to their best 22 together, the Hawks will 
be a match for any team, anywhere. The Crows can hold their heads high and 
they’ll live to fight another day, insofar as their finals chances are 
concerned. Certainly, they won’t come up against a team as good asHawthorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn> for the rest of the regular season.


How many gears do Sydney actually have?

Carlton probably went into half-time at the SCG on Saturday night thinking 
they were in with half a chance against the Swans. Poor, misguided Carlton.When 
the Swans reached for the gearstick in the third quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/12/kangaroos-continue-in-right-direction-with-trouncing-of-saints>
 - the quarter that separates the pretenders from the contenders - the Blues 
were given windburn by a Rolls Royce of a team that is frighteningly good.

It was a momentous night on a number of levels: club record-equalling number 
of wins (12), Josh Kennedy’s record number of contested possessions (a 
mind-blowing 29), a 10-goal third quarter (including five from Lance Franklin), 
top spot and flag favouritism preserved. Oh, and they did it without their 
other million-dollar man and arguably the best contested mark in the 
competition, Kurt Tippett. They’ll play in the grand final as sure as night 
follows day. The question is who’ll join them.

Port powerless to stop the slide?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F13%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-17%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F13%2F1405247964327%2F54a52ccb-0d5f-4674-bbb2-abcf6a063997-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F13%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-17%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AFL%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20in%20round%2017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F13%2Fafl-what-we-learned-in-round-17%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F13%2F1405247964327%2F54a52ccb-0d5f-4674-bbb2-abcf6a063997-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ken Hinkley powers as a coach will be put to the test in the coming weeks. 
Photograph: Darrian Traynor/Getty Images 
Which brings us nicely to the next item. The reason they don’t hand out 
premierships in May is because, well, the grand final is in September. The 
point is, July and August have a habit of distilling the wheat from the chaff; 
these months demand that you maintain, or improve, you standards, else you’ll 
be banished to the naughty corner or a fate even worse (like an elimination 
final). It’s apparent that the likes of Geelong (yes, the same Cats who were 
flogged asunder by Sydney) and Fremantle are steeling themselves for a top-four 
finish; the same cannot be said forPort Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide>, who look to be running out 
of puff and fit men in equal measures.

The Power didn’t play altogether bad against Richmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richmond> at Etihad - they had plenty of 
ball and plenty of run - but their conviction and self-belief looks to be in 
tatters. True, the Tigers were very good, and when they play like this they 
look all over a top-eight team. But for Port, the ledger doesn’t lie: they've 
dropped four of their past five - and along with it, in all likelihood, the 
double chance. What a difference a month makes.

It’s black and white: Pies aren’t very good

For comments on Port Adelaide, see also Collingwood. The Magpies well and 
truly had their pants pulled down by Essendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/13/port-adelaides-top-four-hopes-take-a-hit-with-loss-to-richmond>
 at the MCG on Sunday, the Bombers handsomely avenging their harrowing Anzac 
Day defeat. Collingwood have looked a little off colour these past few weeks, 
but a 64-point flogging by a team they beat less than three months ago sets 
alarm bells ringing. Outplayed, outhustled and outclassed, Collingwood have 
reached a new low under Nathan Buckley.

They’ll be out of the eight if they lose to the Crows on Sunday week (an 
eight-pointer if ever there was one), and it shows how far they’ve slipped to 
think they could actually miss the finals. The Bombers, however, continue to 
impress and fully deserve their place in the upper echelon. Their run home is 
kind enough and it would be a surprise if they dropped out of the eight from 
here.

Suns’ season going to the Dogs?

It will probably get little more than a footnote at the end of a chock-a-block 
season, but the Western Bulldogs’ quiet progression should not be overlooked. 
Since going down to the Lions in Melbourne in early June the Dogs have been 
quite good, taking a top-eight scalp (at the time) inCollingwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood>, and then again on Saturday in 
the form of the Suns. Perhaps the timing was right with Gary Ablett’s premature 
seasonal exit taking the stuffing out of Gold Coast, but it’s debatable the 
result would have been any different even with Gazza on the field.

Brendan McCartney has a fair bit to work with in the coming seasons, not least 
Jack Macrae, who on the weekend became the youngest player to win more than 40 
touches in anAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> game, and Jason 
Johannisen, who made the most of his late call-up as Ryan Griffen's 
replacement. The Suns, now out of the eight, are at a crossroads. They’ll want 
to waste no time, starting with the Q-Clash on Saturday week, proving that no 
Ablett doesn’t mean no Gold Coast.
 