
Sydney’s arsenal is firing just fine

Earlier this year, as the Sydney Swans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-swans> compiled offensive weaponry 
like a resentful nation looking to remilitarise the Rhineland, we wondered 
whether they could ever make such a force work in concert. Friday’s preliminary 
final saw a well-drilled unit operate to devastating effect. Lance Franklin, 
Kurt Tippett, Adam Goodes and Sam Reid ran a revolving series of patterns that 
opened up space for the next man along. One would push up the ground while 
another drifted deep.

Franklin roamed up to half forward to provide the pass for three of Tippett’s 
four goals. Tippett returned the favour with a couple of long passes to 
Franklin, who ended with five of his own. Franklin provided a couple for 
Goodes, who played the third forward role to perfection, notching three 
opportunist goals while North Melbourne’s key defenders were otherwise 
occupied. Reid had a couple of shots himself and was prominent early in the 
game, during the brief period when the Kangaroos were on top. Add to that the 
fact that Franklin has dramatically strengthened his marking, and teams should 
stay scared for a long time to come.

But then there’s a Roughie

As always, Franklin gets first mention. But Jarryd Roughead has at least 
emerged from his shadow at Hawthorn now that Franklin has moved on to Opera 
Housier pastures. Again in Saturday’s preliminary final win overPort Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide>, Roughead showed he could do 
it all: a key forward who can mark on the lead and nail his set shots, but also 
has the tank and the agility to push up through the midfield, contest centre 
bounces, win the ball and carry it with pace, and drop back to offer an extra 
pair of hands in defence.

Roughead was the difference on the weekend, not just for ending with six 
goals, but that the first five seemed to come from his first five kicks. Even 
as Port were on top, he somehow keptHawthorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn> in it, then shoved them over the 
top. For versatility see his 60m boomer on the run from the centre bounce, then 
his rugby-style chip kick to his own advantage in the goal square.

Hawthorn ride the winds of fortune

Making three grand finals in a row is a fine achievement, but Hawthorn have 
hardly been without luck. They’ve won their last three preliminary finals by a 
combined total of 13 points. Like Fremantle in the grand final last year, Port 
should have beaten Hawthorn but wasted too many shots early. A first-quarter 
return of 3.9 was never going to be good enough, and after 15 minutes you just 
knew that Hawthorn would weather the period of Port supremacy before surging 
back with a run of their own. All too often, underdog sides waste the chance 
they have when they find themselves on top. To lose by three points after 
missing half a dozen gettable chances will burn for a long, long time.

We know which umpires will have the week off

It was a weird old day for the umpires in the second prelim, and on that form 
we won’t see any of the crew picked for the grand final. Holding the ball was 
the most erratically enforced rule of the day, some players given a free pass 
while others were whistled up despite having an opponent in their pocket when 
they received the ball. Port got the harsh end, not least when Thomas Jonas was 
nailed with a minute to play after being pushed over the ball by two tacklers. 
Then with five seconds left Brian Lake wandered to the defensive 50 and pretty 
much lay down on the ball for a nap without penalty. At one point Taylor Duryea 
thought there had been a whistle on play, and casually stood there with the 
ball for 10 seconds waiting for instructions. Even when he was tackled to the 
ground, there was no whistle.

Hawthorn, meanwhile, could question the start of Port’s late comeback. Josh 
Gibson went back with the flight of the ball while looking over his shoulder at 
it, colliding with a leaping Angus Monfries without ever having glanced at the 
Port forward. A free was paid against Gibson for tunnelling, and Monfries’s 
goal lit the fuse.

The Bulldogs have won something
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F22%2Fafl-preliminary-finals-what-we-learned-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F21%2F1411336413075%2Fd3f306dc-4e9d-451d-8454-2fbd2a3d5aad-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AFL%20preliminary%20finals%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F22%2Fafl-preliminary-finals-what-we-learned-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AFL%20preliminary%20finals%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F22%2Fafl-preliminary-finals-what-we-learned-this-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F21%2F1411336413075%2Fd3f306dc-4e9d-451d-8454-2fbd2a3d5aad-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jordan Russell of Footscray celebrates with fans after winning the VFL grand 
final. Photograph: Quinn Rooney/Getty Images 
Not quite the AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>, but it’s worth 
noting that Footscray has won a premiership. They played the VFL grand final 
over the weekend against Hawthorn affiliate Box Hill, and won their first flag 
at state or national level since their only top-flight premiership in 1954.

It’s tough supporting the Western Bulldogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/western-bulldogs>, a club whose best era 
involved losing a spate of preliminary finals in the 1990s and 2000s. But this 
season they cut their affiliation with VFL team Williamstown and reintroduced 
their own Footscray side. The move paid off. Club stalwart Brett Goodes joined 
with up-and-comers Lin Jong and Liam Jones to finally land some silverware.

Perhaps it can be the start of something. Geelong broke decades of premiership 
drought with the 2002 VFL flag, and the relief and jubilation were palpable. 
Young members of that team included Gary Ablett Jr, Jimmy Bartel, Paul Chapman, 
Steve Johnson and James Kelly, who repeated the dose at AFL level five years 
later.

 * And join Russell Jackson tonight from 7pm for live coverage of the Brownlow 
Medal (including Russell’s expert fashion analysis)
 