
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> may be taking a great leap 
forward into the digital era. But when technology reaches a new area, the 
hackers are never far behind.

Many are familiar with the African hacker cliche: revolving around a badly 
written email from someone,claiming to be a friend 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/anonymous-nigeria-hacks-government-websites-declares-cyberwar-against-corruption-2257401>
, for example, who has been mugged and needs an urgent money transfer.

But the reality is more nuanced. Smartphones and Facebook may be ubiquitous, 
but the continent still lags behind in other basic infrastructure, such as 
reliable power.

These gaps have created the perfect hacking environment, according to the 
technology expertEthan Zuckerman 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/article/africas-hackers-are-todays-world-class-tech-innovators>
, who describes Africa’s hackers as “world-class tech innovators”.


Hackers have also stepped in to help citizens living under oppressive regimes 
and those who are aware of endemic political corruption but feel powerless to 
stop it.

Here are seven of the continent’s most innovative, sometimes controversial, 
technology hacks.

3D-printed limbs 

There was a mild moral panic when it transpired that 3D printers could be used 
to make anythingfrom handguns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/06/3-handgun-fired-cody-wilson> to 
drugs 
<http://www.techrepublic.com/article/the-dark-side-of-3d-printing-10-things-to-watch/>
. But one project has been using the technology – which transforms digital 
files into physical objects – to replace limbs that children lost in the civil 
war in South Sudan.

Using a laptop, bunches of plastic and cables and two 3D printers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3d-printing>, the American startup Not 
Impossible Labs created its first limb for a boy called Daniel in 2013. The 
team left the equipment behind and continue to supply the plastic to Daniel’s 
village to continue making prosthetic limbs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fafrica-most-innovative-controversial-tech-hacks-hackers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05326c2c00de1f56407e20579f2152c21850e4a3%2F0_12_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa's%20most%20innovative%20%E2%80%93%20and%20controversial%20%E2%80%93%20tech%20hacks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fafrica-most-innovative-controversial-tech-hacks-hackers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%27s%20most%20innovative%20%E2%80%93%20and%20controversial%20%E2%80%93%20tech%20hacks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fafrica-most-innovative-controversial-tech-hacks-hackers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05326c2c00de1f56407e20579f2152c21850e4a3%2F0_12_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 The 3D-printed limbs being created. Photograph: Not Impossible/Project Daniel 
After the success of the Daniel project, one inventor took the technology a 
step further by designing the Robobeast – a 3D printer that is durable enough 
“to be thrown in the back of a Land Rover, carted off into the bush, and to 
start working as soon as the power is on”,says the tech blog Htxt Africa 
<http://www.htxt.co.za/2014/02/15/robobeast-3d-printer-tough-can-print-kick/>. 
In other words the perfect 3D printer for Africa, as long as a power supply can 
be found.

Angolans fool the free internet 

Internet for all is one of the current crusades of Mark Zuckerberg and his 
tech peers, who havelaunched free services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/05/facebook-mark-zuckerberg-internet-access-africa>
, otherwise known as zero-rate services, across many countries in Africa.

The rationale being that some internet, albeit restricted, is better than 
nothing.

Both Facebook and Wikipedia have rolled out their services in Angola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> where they presumably had not banked 
on hackers having a field day – hiding pirated films, music and games in the 
internet they give away for free.

People started to upload the files to free Wikipedia pages and shared the 
links on closed Facebook pages, creating “a totally free and clandestine 
file-sharing network in a country where mobile internet data is extremely 
expensive”,writes Vice 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/read/wikipedia-zero-facebook-free-basics-angola-pirates-zero-rating>
.


The debate over what to do about it is ongoing. To cut off free services 
undermines the mission. But so would letting piracy spiral out of control.

Defying social media bans 

The strongman president Yoweri Museveni has led Uganda for 30 years – having 
previously scrappedpresidential term limits 
<http://observer.ug/component/content/article?id=18710:how-term-limits-were-kicked-out-in-2005>
 and cracked down heavily on opposition parties.

But this year’s election race was more vigorous than in previous years. 
Opposition candidates put up a spirited fight and thousands of Ugandans turned 
to social media to support them and play citizen watchdogs on election day.
Gerald Bareebe (@GeraldBareebe) 
I had a quick drive around Kampala this evening. Major junction are like 
military barracks. Checkpoints along major highways#UgandaDecides 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UgandaDecides?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/GeraldBareebe/status/700734652890402816> February 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/GeraldBareebe/status/700734652890402816> 
But the online chatter did not please the government, which blocked social 
media sites <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35601220>including 
Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp.

Museveni said <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35601220> the move was 
to “stop people telling lies” but citizens, undeterred, started to share 
details of virtual private networks (VPNs) enabling voters to essentially trick 
the internet into thinking they were accessing it from a different country.

The search for “VPN from Uganda 
<https://www.irinnews.org/maps-and-graphics/2016/02/19/ugandans-look-bypass-election-social-media-ban>
” spiked dramatically on Google and the opposition politician Amama Mbabazi 
tweeted out advice on the right app to use.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fafrica-most-innovative-controversial-tech-hacks-hackers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5534881e3ffcfa5bfcde209895eeca72c4176189%2F0_230_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa's%20most%20innovative%20%E2%80%93%20and%20controversial%20%E2%80%93%20tech%20hacks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fafrica-most-innovative-controversial-tech-hacks-hackers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%27s%20most%20innovative%20%E2%80%93%20and%20controversial%20%E2%80%93%20tech%20hacks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fafrica-most-innovative-controversial-tech-hacks-hackers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5534881e3ffcfa5bfcde209895eeca72c4176189%2F0_230_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Ugandans used VPNs to circumvent a social media ban imposed during elections. 
Photograph: Dai Kurokawa/EPA 
Sure enough #UgandaDecides <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23ugandadecides> 
kept trending, even if some of those people were tweeting “from Canada 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/news/canada/tweeting-from-canada-voting-in-uganda-how-ugandans-evaded-an-election-day-internet-crackdown>
”.

Opening up South Africa’s constitution


South Africa’s constitution, which turned 20 this year, is in crisis. In March 
the president, Jacob Zuma, narrowly survived impeachment after a court ruled 
that he had failed in one of his principle jobsto uphold 
<http://www.meetup.com/HacksHackersAfrica/events/230897295/?a=socialmedia> it. 

Instead he was making expensive upgrades to his private  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/jacob-zuma-ordered-repay-upgrades-nkandla-home-south-african-state-funds>
residence with public funds.

“Never again should political power be allowed to run amok, and act in a 
manner that is counter to the nation’s interests,” arguedan editorial 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/thetimes/2016/04/01/Zuma-has-failed-the-test-but-our-constitution-has-not>
 in South Africa’s The Times, summing up the national feeling.

But a group of hackers from Johannesburg say the language of law is so 
complicated that many do not realise how it should protect them.

The group has begun work on a website that will help South Africans find the 
parts of the constitution that are relevant to them quickly and efficiently.

Drawn up at the end of apartheid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/jun/03/double-vision-how-apartheid-tore-soul-out-of-south-africa-port-elizabeth-south-end>
, the 180-page constitution is one of the most liberal and far-reaching in the 
world, says Adam Oxford, one of the people behind the project. The law protects 
workers’ rights and enabled South Africa to be thefirst country on the 
continent to legalise gay marriage 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/estelle-nagel/gay-marriage-south-africa_b_3167222.html>
.

“We want to help people understand their rights, but to also get excited about 
the laws of their country,” says Oxford. “That would be a very positive 
outcome.”



Calling out quacks 

Last year, the story 
<http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2000176023/doctor-mugo-wa-wairimu-to-be-held-for-2-weeks>
 of a fake gynaecologist who anaesthetised Kenyan women before raping them 
shocked the country and highlighted serious failings in the healthcare system.

One of the major issues is a lack of regulation 
<http://en.rfi.fr/africa/20150915-fake-doctors-run-kenya-s-unregulated-hospitals>
, which allows unqualified medics to treat, and profit from, their oblivious 
patients.

Code for Africa <https://codeforafrica.org/> came up with a solution: Dodgy 
Doctors <http://health.saharareporters.com/>, an online verification tool that 
helps patients check out their doctor’s credentials. The web-based app allows 
patients in Kenya and Nigeria to search for their doctors on the national 
database and report them if they cannot find their name on the list.

Users can also cross-reference how much they are being charged for medicines. 



When Anonymous attacks

Hell hath no fury like an attack at the hands of hacktivists Anonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/17/anonymous-war-isis-hacktivist-group-confirms>
 who, in less than a year, have gone after the governments ofKenya, Angola , 
South Africa, Uganda and Rwanda 
<https://www.hackread.com/anonymous-opafrica-tanzanian-telecom-firm-hacked/>.

The group, operating under the Operation Africa banner, with the hashtag 
#OpAfrica, says it is targeting those who “enable and perpetuate corruption on 
the African continent”, and those responsible for child abuse and child labour.

In April it leaked a selection of the terabyte of data it claims to have 
obtained from the Kenyan ministry of foreign affairs, exposing details of 
security arrangements, an arms deal with Namibia and international trade deals.

The previous month, Operation Africa attacked 20 Angolan government websites 
after 17 young activists were jailed for plotting a “rebellion”, asentence 
decried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/28/angola-jails-17-activists-rebellion-public-book-reading>
 by many as a travesty of justice.

The group pledged 
<https://www.hackread.com/anonymous-targets-african-countries-because-corruption/>
 to keep embarrassing governments until they “end their corruption and feed the 
poor”.
 