
The end of British imperial rule in the Indian subcontinent in 1947 was a 
triumph for the anti-colonial campaigners. But at the very moment when an 
independent, democratic, self-governingIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/india>
 was born, the hope ofMahatma Gandhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/india/story/0,,2145946,00.html> and others for a 
multi-faith, united state was dashed. Parturition meantpartition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/flash/page/0,,2144256,00.html> - a traumatic 
division of territories, largely along ethnic and religious lines.

Partition may have forestalled the outright civil war that had been feared, 
but it still resulted in widespread and bloody communal violence. It also led, 
later, to protracted conflict in West Bengal and East Pakistan (the latter of 
which became the independent nation ofBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> in 1971, following the defeat of 
Pakistani forces in a civil war). To this day, Kashmir remains a bitterly 
disputed and highly militarised region, where a full-blown shooting war 
constantly threatens to break out - with consequences scarcely to be thought 
of, given the nuclear capability of both nations.

Despite so much shared history and heritage, India and Pakistan have enjoyed 
very different legacies of empire - democracy v dictatorship, prosperity v 
poverty, stability v crisis - and yet there is a more complex and nuanced story 
to be told about partition and its aftermath than can be captured by such 
cliched oppositions. So, here begins a series on Comment is free by writers and 
commentators reflecting on where India,Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> and Bangladesh find themselves, 60 
years on.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 