
Did Andy Rubin jump, or was he pushed out of the top position running Google's 
Android division - the part of the company developing the platform on which the 
company's future will depend? Andnow he's gone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/mar/13/andy-rubin-google-move>, 
what happens?

It's pretty easy to work out that Google's chief executive Larry Page wanted 
change - and that for whatever reason, Rubin wasn't willing to be part of it.

That emerges from two things. First is the choice of person to replace Rubin - 
Sundar Pichai, who has previously led the development of the Chrome browser, 
the Google apps on Apple's iOS platform, and - crucially - the desktop 
ChromeOS. Second is Page's remark that Pichai's new job is "doubling down on 
Android as we work to push the ecosystem forward", according to thenote from 
the chief executive 
<http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013/03/update-from-ceo.html>. 

Meet the new boss, not like the old boss

Pichai's presence tells you that Page wants change to happen. He wants a 
focus, and someone who can really drive change. But what change? What pushing 
is there needed on the ecosystem? You might think that Android is huge enough. 
But Page clearly isn't satisfied. The signs are that Google wants a few things: 
to monetise Android better (as evidence, see how Google isbanning ad-blocker 
apps from the Google Play store 
<http://phandroid.com/2013/03/13/google-play-store-ad-blocker/>) and to control 
its development even more tightly. The idea that Android is "open" in the way 
that, say, Linux is, doesn't hold together. The "open" tag is a story to 
contrast Android with iOS and Microsoft's offerings. The reality is that Google 
decides precisely where Android is going, and what it's going to do.

So what does Page, and now Pichai, want Android to do? To answer that you have 
to look at what Google wants, first of all; and then at how it can accomplish 
that throughAndroid <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>.

What does Google want? Nothing less than everything. All the information it 
can possibly get about you and what you're doing and about to do. It wants that 
all the time. That's the meaning of "organise the world's information". You're 
part of the world; so is what you do. Android phones collect that (with your 
permission) - that's howGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> 
Now knows what you might want to do next.

But the desktop space is also a big and still-important part of the world of 
computing. Pichai has been very successful in drivingChrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/chrome> from nowhere to most-used 
browser (in a number of countries). Google is carefully positioning ChromeOS, 
its desktop operating system, to drive a wedge into the chunk of Windows users 
(or organisations) who can put all their work into the cloud and only need to 
sync from the desktop occasionally.

That's why there's a lot of speculation that Pichai will merge Android and 
ChromeOS into a single OS - and that the reason why Rubin left (jumping or 
being pushed) was that he wasn't willing, or seen as able, to effect that 
change.

Rubin said, back when ChromeOS was announced in 2009, that different 
technologies were needed for different products. But at exactly the same time 
Sergey Brin, Google's co-founder,suggested 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-30684_3-10402653-265.html> that the two OSs would 
"likely converge over time" because they have Linux (OS) and WebKit (browser) 
code in common.

And here is what Google itself said when asked back then - four years ago - 
about how and when the two might become one. "As Sundar [Pichai, Google's vice 
president of product management] said in his presentation, we're reaching a 
perfect storm of converging trends where computers are behaving more like 
mobile devices, and phones are behaving more like small computers. Having two 
open source operating systems from Google provides both users and device 
manufacturers with more choice and helps contribute a wealth of new code to the 
open source community."

Two become one

And now, the coalition. As Henry Blodget of Business Insider commented 
<http://twitter.com/hblodget/status/311935323426914304>: "Sounds like Google 
wants to unify Chrome and Android, and the Chrome boss won."

But having one OS, of course, would simplify lots of things. The question is, 
can it be done? Possibly Google, which works on multi-year strategies relating 
to what it sees as inevitable technology developments (through Moore's Law and 
others relating to screens and networks) is looking forward to a world where 
all computers, including desktop machines, have touchscreens; then it's just a 
question of upscaling (or downscaling) apps depending on what screen you're 
running on. Android on the desktop? Not impossible if you're running a 
touchscreen. And astablets become a bigger part of the computing mix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/mar/13/tablets-challenge-pc-sales-2017-android>
 over the next few years, a single OS makes a kind of sense.

After all, Apple's move from Lion (Mac OS X 10.7) to Mountain Lion (10.8) was 
described by Steve Jobs to developers as "bringing iOS to the desktop", while 
Windows 8 and Windows Phone obviously share a heritage in design thinking.

So it may not be a question of if, but when, Android and ChromeOS get crunched 
together. And perhaps that's something that Rubin didn't want to oversee. 
Certainly it has the feeling of a circus act - riding two galloping horses in 
front of everyone. Falling off would hurt.

Rubin seems to see himself less as a manager of that sort of project, and more 
as an "entrepreneur". The Wall Street Journalreports 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324077704578358420185789616.html>
 that he tried to run the Android division more like a startup than a division 
within a giant company - and that that caused friction when he declined to let 
other Google products be preinstalled on Android.

The obvious case in point: the mobile version of the Chrome browser, which 
collects more data than the Android browser that Rubin's team built, and so is 
better for Google's business. Rubin resisted making that the Android default. 
Pichai won't.

Rubin was also involved in the acquisition of Motorola Mobility in 2011; he 
was the one whogot in touch with Motorola's management in July 2011 
<https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1495569/000119312511246952/d224940dprem14a.htm#tx224940_40>
 to suggest the idea, after Google had failed to buy the patents from theNortel 
Networks bankruptcy sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/jul/01/nortel-patents-sold-apple-sony-microsoft>
.

The idea was that Motorola Mobility's huge patent portfolio would bolster 
Android from attacks by Apple, Microsoft, Nokia and others. That hasn't worked 
out so well; many of the patents are classed as "standards-essential", and so 
can't be used for injunctions and aren't effective as bargaining chips in 
litigation.

Don't expect to see ChromeOS and Android merged soon; that may be a five-year 
plan, especially since Pichai has only just got his feet under that table. But 
as more computing devices have touch screens, the finer distinctions between 
Android and ChromeOS may seem unimportant.

Android's little problem

More generally, though, Google needs to reassert control of Android. Despite 
its success - 750m devices activated since 2008 - Google has a problem with 
Android. The shape of that problem is best illustrated by Samsung, which is 
about to launch its new top-end smartphone, and by China.

Samsung dominates sales of Android: it makes up about half of all Android 
device sales worldwide. But it is also pushing Android in its own direction, 
adding services (such as S-Voice) intended to tie users to its brand rather 
than other Android brands. It's using the strategy that worked so well for 
Microsoft on the desktop in the past with new technologies - "embrace and extend
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embrace,_extend_and_extinguish>" (though not 
"extinguish" as Microsoft also used to).

But that means that Samsung is the company that in effect decides how Android 
looks to most of the public. Although Google has pushed its Nexus range, the 
numbers sold are comparatively tiny - perhaps a million per quarter, compared 
to more than 200m smartphones sold in the fourth quarter of 2012. The focus on 
the Nexus brand distracts from the reality of Android: most people don't get 
that, and many people get Samsung's version.

However, the big numbers attached to Android by research companies such as IDC 
and Gartner - who put Android's share of the market at around 70% of the 207m 
smartphones shipped in Q4 of 2012 - conceal one subtlety: about half of those 
Android shipments don't connect to Google's servers, ever. They use AOSP - the 
Android Open Source Platform - and Google doesn't have any control or even 
knowledge of them.

For Google, losing control isn't good news. It hates that. But the tension 
over AOSP works both ways; the Chinese government indicated last week that it 
doesn't like the reliance of handset manufacturers there on AOSP: 90% of 
smartphone sales in China use Android (more specifically, AOSP; they don't 
connect to Google services, because those are banned on the mainland; instead 
they link to local app stores and search engines such as Baidu). As the report 
from the China Academy of Telecommunications Researchput it 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324539404578342132324098420.html>
, "The development of Chinese operating systems constantly faces commercial 
discrimination from Google." Google decides how quickly updates to Android get 
pushed to the open source branch (in the case of Android 3.0 "Honeycomb", for 
tablets, there was a delay of many months between it appearing on 
Google-approved tablets such as the Motorola Xoom and its AOSP release).

What could Google - specifically, Pichai - do to regain control? First, 
tighten up distribution of Android by lengthening the period between a new 
"Google Android" release and the AOSP release. If it gets no benefit from AOSP, 
why keep updating it? The simple answer is that any handset running AOSP is one 
not running any rival's OS. So it has that competitive benefit.

Aside from that? Not much. Google's own stats 
<http://developer.android.com/about/dashboards/index.html> show that more than 
half of the devices connecting to Google Play in the past month are using 
Android 2.3 or earlier - software that's more than two years old. Google could 
let AOSP stagnate and save the good changes for its own branch - except that 
the Chinese governmentmade it a condition of approval for the MMI acquisition 
<http://www.chinahearsay.com/china-approves-google-motorola-deal-with-conditions/>
 that AOSP would be provided "on a free and open basis" and that all OEMs would 
be treated on a "non-discriminatory" basis.

The AOSP condition, as we've seen with Honeycomb, could be fudged. And as 
China doesn't actually let Google carry out its business directly on the 
mainland, you could wonder about what comeback there would be.

Despite its disquiet about Samsung's dominance, Google's probably less 
troubled by that than the prospect of handset makers with AOSP coming out of 
China and overrunning the developing world (especially Africa and Latin 
America) with localised services and search engines.

That would be a nightmare - and finding a way to ensure that it doesn't happen 
may be one of the prime tasks for Pichai, well before he looks at merging 
Android with a desktop operating system few are yet using.

There have been some suggestions (from outside Google) that the "Android" 
brand itself might be dumped, in favour of "Nexus" - its "pure" version" of 
Android - or even a different name altogether. The name is historical; that was 
what Rubin called the company he set up, which was bought by Google in 2005.

But to the original question, of whether Rubin was pushed, or jumped? To some 
extent, it doesn't matter. Clearly, though, the future being mapped out for 
Android wasn't one he saw himself leading. For the person who led it from being 
just a concept that he struggled to interest carriers in, to a world-straddling 
behemoth, that's got to be a bit of a comedown.

Though as he said in his email to Android partners 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2013/03/13/andy-rubins-email-to-android-partners/>:

 I am an entrepreneur at heart and now is the right time for me to start a new 
chapter within Google. I am amazed by what we have accomplished from those 
early days (not so long ago!), and remain passionate about the power of a 
simple idea and a shared goal — an open source platform freely available to 
everyone — to transform computing for people everywhere.

And in that, he was successful. So he leaves that job not as a failure; just 
as someone who didn't want to do the next changes coming to Android, which will 
reverberate for years.

Updated: Corrected spelling of Sundar Pichai's name throughout.
 