
So now we know. We have waited 10 years to be told that the Russian leader, 
Vladimir Putin, is an unprincipled thug. He gets his minions to rub out his 
enemies and traitors, such asAlexander Litvinenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-was-probably-murdered-on-personal-orders-of-putin>
, even when they are living abroad.

Litvinenko murder suspect dismisses inquiry as 'nonsense'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/22/litvinenko-murder-suspect-andrei-lugovoi-dismisses-inquiry-nonsense>
Holding interminable inquiries into “historical crimes” is the new bloodsport 
for the British legal classes. They dominate each evening’s news. A high court 
judge has sonorously intoned that Putin is not very nice. Real men drop drone 
bombs on their enemies in foreign parts; dastardly Russians poison cups of tea 
– and fail to wash the pot afterwards.

How to respond? Great power relations conducted through official and 
unofficial channels in foreign capitals are a world unto themselves. Diplomacy 
and espionage have shielded a multitude of malpractices down the ages, from 
money-laundering to murder. They seem a quasi-fictional miasma, unconnected to 
any genuine balance of interests.

In 1971 a massive clear-out of Soviet spies in London had little noticeable 
impact on Anglo-Soviet relations. Nor did the tit-for-tat expulsions at the 
time ofOleg Gordievsky’s defection 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oleg_Gordievsky> in 1985. It was a “game of 
spies”.

The strangely mild reaction to the Litvinenko report from the home secretary, 
Theresa May, is certainly puzzling 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/home-secretary-statement-on-litvinenko-inquiry-report>
. A Commons rebuke and a summoning of the Russian ambassador (for “tea”?) in 
the Foreign Office is hardly retaliation. Moscow’s reaction was one of 
hilarity. Surely we could send a drone over a Russian embassy somewhere and 
drop a note of protest?

The suspicion has to be that any action against London’s burgeoning and 
lucrative Russian population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/may/09/rich-russians-buying-london-property-real-estate>
 would not have been welcome to the Treasury and the City. London’s booming 
supply of financial, educational and property services to migratory Russians 
must surely offer scope for retaliatory knuckle-rapping, if Britain’s 
self-esteem needs it.

Alexander Litvinenko: the man who solved his own murder | Luke Harding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/alexander-litvinenko-the-man-who-solved-his-own-murder>
What would be pointless would be to extend existing economic sanctions against 
Russia generally. Asan article in the current issue of Foreign Affairs argues 
<https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/russian-federation/2015-12-14/not-so-smart-sanctions>
, these have been “an outright failure”. They have probably hurt the Russian 
people. But they have been costly to Europe, especially to the frontline 
states, and have bolstered Putin in his self-righteousness and siege economy, 
rewarding those closest to him.

Economic sanctions are virtue signalling. They demonstrate the imposer’s 
weakness not strength.

Handling Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> during the reign of 
its latest self-styled strongman needs patience and cunning, not the kneejerk 
of “more sanctions”. The killing of one’s enemies abroad is odious, be they in 
London or Syria. But we do it too.
 