
Andre Agassi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> will be nervous. 
"There's not a match I play in when I'm not but I'm excited too. This match 
offers me the opportunity to push myself more than I've ever been pushed in a 
long time and that's a great feeling."

For Pete Sampras, now read Roger Federer. Sampras held a 20-14 career 
advantage over Agassi; Federer leads 4-3. The meeting of the two Americans was 
always a super-charged affair and it is clear that Agassi regards playing the 
Swiss world No1 with a similar sense of electric anticipation.

Federer won 6-3 in the fifth set of their US Open quarter-final last autumn 
when Agassi was perhaps the marginal favourite. Tomorrow he will be the 
underdog. "I suppose it was a matter of time," he said, smiling. "Roger has 
earned the respect he deserves and I want to make him go out there and prove it 
to me again."

Federer reached the last eight with a stroll in the park against the 
19-year-old Paris-based Cypriot Marcos Baghdatis. Federer won 6-2, 6-2, 7-6 
without having to extend himself beyond trying to hit a winner through his 
legs. He failed. He is, apparently, human.

In stark contrast Agassi had to withstand four sets of astounding serving and 
hitting from the 22-year-old Swede Joachim Johannson, who struck 51 aces, a 
world record.

"It wasn't fun," said Agassi, who won 6-7, 7-6, 7-6, 6-4. "You have to admire 
it but there's not a whole lot you can do. It's a phenomenal weapon, as well as 
his forehand. He has a lot to look forward to." And so does inner-city tennis 
in Australia, which picks up a donation for every ace hit in the tournament. 
"I'm a team player and I won't undermine his efforts by saying I let a lot of 
them go by. I'll just say that all the money is going to a good cause," Agassi 
joked.

Johansson, 6ft 6in, began to make a name for himself last year when he knocked 
out Andy Roddick on the way to the US Open semi-finals. Roddick gives the ball 
a fearful battering himself but the Swede is his match and more talented. As he 
gains experience he appears destined for the top five before long.

Deprived of rhythm, or semblance of a rally, Agassi edged his way back into 
the match, step by small step, refusing to relent under the barrage. "Along 
with his winners came lots of errors," he said, "and I had to make sure I 
didn't give away any of the points that I did have control over."

The match against Federer will be altogether different. There is no doubting 
Federer's power and his ability to change up several gears in an instant but it 
is death by a thousand cuts rather than the bludgeon. "He's been playing the 
best tennis in the world for some time now but somebody has to beat him sooner 
or later, right?" said the veteran American.

Federer's confidence is such that, when asked if he was at the right level to 
defeat Agassi, he replied, a touch waspishly: "I know my game is good enough 
and, even when I'm not playing perfect, I know I can beat him. He's not as good 
as he was when he was at the top of the rankings, otherwise he would still be 
there. I think he has to raise his game, not me."

This was not arrogance. But it was fighting talk, nevertheless. 

The other quarter-final tomorrow will be between Marat Safin and Dominic 
Hrbaty of Slovakia. Hrbaty beat Thomas Johansson, who in 2002 surprised himself 
and the tennis world by defeating Safin in the final here.

Briefly yesterday, against Belgium's Oliver Rochus, it appeared Safin was in 
danger of a serious lapse in self-composure. But after losing the first set he 
won three successive tie-breaks. In the old days the breaks were to his rackets.

Argentina's Juan Ignacio Chela has been fined $2,000 (Â£1,067) by tournament 
officials for unsportsmanlike conduct after he spat towards Lleyton Hewitt 
during their tense match on Saturday. The Australian won 6-2, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4.
 