
For about five or six minutes it appeared as if Fortress Agassi was about to 
be breached. First a drop shot which the great man's skittering legs failed to 
reach, then an unforced backhand error after a long, intense rally. Paradorn 
Srichaphan was 2-0 up, and memories of his straight-sets second-round Wimbledon 
victory over the American, their only previous meeting, came flooding back.

Any slam defeat for Andre Agassi has been something of a shock since his 
second coming in the late 1990s, and that 2002 defeat to Srichaphan was one of 
the most startling. For a while there was cathedral-quiet inside the Rod Laver 
Arena yesterday: was this to be the day that the American's unbeaten run at the 
Australian Open, stretching back to the start of the millennium, and 
encompassing three titles, was to come to an abrupt end?

Then came another drop shot - cheeky and testing. All eyes were fixed on the 
Agassi legs which blurred into fast-forward, accompanied by a burst of staccato 
grunts. This time he reached it, and the crisis suddenly eased. It was not 
quite over, though, and before the opening set was won Agassi had to save five 
set points. But thereafter the Srichaphan challenge gently subsided, with 
Agassi winning 7-6, 6-3, 6-4 for his 25th consecutive victory in this 
tournament. Next comes a repeat of last year's quarter-final against France's 
SÃ©bastien Grosjean.

"It's like when Pete Sampras went on his big Wimbledon run. I think it's 
Andre's title until someone takes it away from him," said Andy Roddick, who 
surged into what promises to be a thrilling second week in the men's draw with 
another crushing victory, this time over Holland's Sjeng Schalken who was 
beaten 6-1, 6-2, 6-3.

Roddick and Agassi are due to meet in the semi-finals, although Roddick, the 
world No1, has first to put away Russia's Marat Safin who in his fourth round 
match defeated James Blake 7-6, 6-3, 6-7, 6-3. Safin has the power to knock 
Roddick out of his stride, and the Russian, a former No1 himself, is displaying 
a sense of purpose that should signal a return to the top 10 later this year.

Agassi has been a little disappointed that to date the weather has been 
considerably cooler here than usual, although the Melbourne climate is 
notoriously fickle. "I enjoy playing in the heat, although you are never sure 
when the weather is going to be your friend or come as a curse."

Plenty here have had cause to curse Agassi, and his annual rage against age. 
He will be 34 in April and, despite being sur rounded by young bloods, 
continues to defy them all at this tournament. If he does again, much will be 
down to Agassi's coach, Darren Cahill, formerly with Lleyton Hewitt.

"He's coached the youngest No1 in the world and the oldest, and he constantly 
helps me improve by always being aware of the subtleties that make my game 
tick," said Agassi. "But it gets harder every year. I have a lot of belief in 
my training programme, so I don't struggle with the motivation. But you 
struggle with getting older and having to make different decisions."

Many believe this may be Agassi's last year though as yet he has not committed 
himself in public to retirement. Three years ago, when he won his third 
Australian Open, he gave what some believed was a valedictory speech. But back 
he came to win again. Second guessing Agassi has never been a fruitful 
occupation.
 