
Warner Bros’ enormous investment in a new five-part franchise based on the 
wizarding world created by JK Rowling appears to have paid off.Fantastic Beasts 
and Where to Find Them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/13/fantastic-beasts-review-jk-rowling-eddie-redmayne-harry-potter>
, which stars Eddie Redmayne as a Hogwarts alumnus in 1920s New York, was the 
year’s best opener in the UK, where it took £14.8m – better than everyHarry 
Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter> film save for the final 
two instalments.

The film, which has still to open in lucrative markets such as China and 
Japan, has already recouped a total of £176.8m against its estimated £240m 
production budget and marketing costs.

However, it opened less spectacularly in the US, with £63.8m, less than any of 
the Potter films, but in line with other major franchise spin-offs, such as the
Hobbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/22/peter-jackson-hobbit-trilogy-most-expensive-film-production-ever-battle-of-the-five-armies>
 movies. The studio behind the film attributed the dent in expectations to a 
lack of familiarity with the source material (Fantastic Beasts is not based on 
a book), despite the action being moved to America. “This is dead on what we 
were looking for,” said Jeff Goldstein, president of US domestic distribution 
at Warner Bros. “Jo Rowling brilliantly told a story that inspired her fanbase 
to come out in a big way.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-eddie-redmyane-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fantastic%20Beasts%20cast%3A%20'A%20bunch%20of%20squirrels%20together%20...%C2%A0that's%20pretty%20fantastic'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-eddie-redmyane-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fantastic%20Beasts%20cast%3A%20%27A%20bunch%20of%20squirrels%20together%20...%C2%A0that%27s%20pretty%20fantastic%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-eddie-redmyane-video-interview&media=>
Fantastic Beasts cast: ‘A bunch of squirrels together ... that’s pretty 
fantastic’ – video interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/17/fantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-eddie-redmyane-video-interview>
In the US, audiences appeared to be largely made up of grownup Potter fans, 
with 65% of the crowd over the age of 25: a double-figure percentage point 
increase from the final Potter movies, which were released in 2010 and 2011. Of 
moviegoers on the opening night, 55% were aged between 25 and 35, and the same 
proportion of them were female.

Doctor Strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/24/doctor-strange-review-benedict-cumberbatch-marvel-eyepoppingly-freaky-extravaganza>
,Trolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/trolls-review-dreamworks-family-animation-anna-kendrick-justin-timberlake>
 andArrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/arrival-review-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-science-fiction>
 continue to perform well in the US, but two new films which had hoped to be 
strong awards contenders flopped.Bleed for This 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/bleed-for-this-review-miles-teller-vinny-paz-boxing-biopic>
, a boxing drama with Miles Teller, made just £1.9m, while Ang Lee’s 
technically innovative Iraq war dramaBilly Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/15/billy-lynn-long-halftime-walk-review-ang-lee-war-drama>
 took £754,000.

But there were better results for a couple of other Oscar hopefuls. Manchester 
by the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergans-morose-echo-of-margaret>
 opened in four cinemas to around £200,000; it’s £48,000 site average is one of 
the best of the year. And Tom Ford’sNocturnal Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/02/nocturnal-animals-review-tom-ford-returns-with-wildly-gripping-revenge-tale>
 made £400,000 from 37 locations.

In the UK, there was a strikingly poor showing for Idris Elba’s London-set 
drama100 Streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/100-streets-review-idris-elba-gemma-arterton>
, which took just £245 in total.
 