
This blog contains mild spoilers for Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>.

Captain America was trapped in Arctic ice for 60 years before they thawed him 
out forAvengers Assemble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/26/avengers-assemble-review>. For UK 
fans ofAgents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>, it must feel 
almost as long since they saw a new episode of the much-ballyhooed Marvel TV 
show. Channel 4 screenedepisode 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/dec/13/agents-of-shield-recap-series-one-episode-ten>
 – a cliffhanger, naturally – back in mid-December. Since then, five new 
episodes have already been shown in the US, albeit in rather piecemeal fashion 
due to the Winter Olympics and production breaks.

In the age of online spoilers and nefarious online access, the delay seems a 
little counterintuitive – but there's method in Channel 4's tardiness. It can 
now screen the remaining dozen episodes of season one in an uninterrupted block 
for continuity-obsessed comic fans, but it's also a long enough furlough that 
those who didn't stick with it might be tempted to get back onthe Bus 
<http://marvel.com/news/tv/2013/10/2/21264/check_out_the_bus_safety_pamphlet_from_marvels_agents_of_shield>
.

Looking back at those first 10 episodes with a little critical distance, it's 
clear that some elements were pretty weak sauce – and that's coming from 
someone whowrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/agents-of-shield-episode-by-episode>
 10,000 words about them. You could point to the inevitable disconnect between 
sky-high expectations – the Marvel movie universe is coming to telly! – and the 
rather more prosaic reality of hammering out a weekly TV show. Agents of SHIELD 
had to try and carve out a distinct identity in the shadow of billion-dollar 
characters like Iron Man and Thor. While viewers knew the mysteriously 
resurrected Agent Coulson (Clark Gregg) was a stand-up guy from his appearances 
in various Marvel movies, SHIELD as an organisation is a problematic concept: a 
surveillance-heavy, secrecy-obsessed, militarised Big Brother with global 
reach, near-limitless resources and a laissez-faire attitude to due process. 
And even though Coulson's team of attractive, pop-savvy agents were 
semi-autonomous troubleshooters, whenever they got into a serious scrape, the 
nagging question remained: why don't they just phone Captain America to sort 
all this nonsense out?

The good news is that after 10 slightly shonky episodes that ironed out 
character dynamics andendlessly teased 
<https://twitter.com/ABCStudiosUK/status/443770648737751040> the mystery of 
Coulson's return from the dead, Agents of SHIELD has gone from beta to better. 
In the next few episodes, the stakes are higher and the jokes are a little 
looser. Previous tangled plot points are revealed to actually be the origin 
story of a cult Marvel Comics antihero, a topline character the show can 
genuinely own. The team visit the SHIELD equivalent of Hogwarts, shading in 
some character hinterland. There are also guest stars who make an actual 
impression, from the great Bill Paxton (in a recurring role) to Thor's imposing 
Asgardian BFF Lady Sif (Jaimie Alexander). Even the contractually obligedStan 
Lee cameo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PsMUVZ9OyGs> is borderline bearable. 
Agents of SHIELD is a show that used to get knocked for being bland – a sci-fi 
NCIS – but tonight's cliffhanger-resolving episode features a Coulson scene so 
unexpectedly graphic and unsettling it could be on American Horror Story.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FtqNXrYvozXw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FtqNXrYvozXw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FtqNXrYvozXw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here for video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tqNXrYvozXw>

Recent reviews have been kinder, and after weeks of decline, there's even been 
an uptick 
<http://www.deadline.com/2014/03/ratings-rat-race-agents-of-s-h-i-e-l-d-mind-games-rise-about-a-boy-the-voice-fall-glee-ties-low/>
 in the ratings. Not that SHIELD was ever in much danger of being put to the 
sword: it makes sense for ABC (owned by Disney) to keep the show on-air because 
it's an ambient dripfeed of awareness for the many movies coming up from Marvel 
Studios (also owned by Disney). Sometimes the advertising becomes overt: 
instead of a new episode next week, US viewers are getting an hour-long
"Assembling The Universe" <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QUiywZ_b_30> special 
outlining how the Marvel sprawl of past, present and future movies intersect 
with the TV show, ahead of a major tie-in with the SHIELD-centric blockbuster
Captain America: The Winter Soldier 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7SlILk2WMTI>.

Simply by being the first to make it to air, Agents of SHIELD also 
unofficially functions as the anchor and entry point for Marvel's ambitious 
plans to expand further into TV. As well as developing Agent Carter – a 
1940s-set spin-off for Captain America's plucky Brit love interest played by 
Hayley Atwell – the studio has teamed up with emerging power player Netflix to 
make multiple series spotlighting "street-level" Marvel characters like Luke 
Cage and Iron Fist. In this context, "street-level" means characters with 
powers and abilities that are TV-friendly – less CGI armour and Hulk-outs, more 
brawlers and ninjas. Marvel characters live in real-life cities rather than 
Metropolis or Gotham, sothe fact that 
<http://marvel.com/news/tv/2014/2/26/22021/marvels_netflix_series_to_film_in_new_york_city]>
 the four Netflix series are actually being filmed in New York also bodes well.

All this world-building and franchise-expanding is exciting – particularly for 
investors – but corporate synergy is not actually a superpower. Now that it's 
found its feet, Agents of SHIELD will have to work even harder to keep things 
inventive and exciting, to make the show feel more than just a cog in Marvel's 
expanding corporate machine. But as long as they keep making in-jokes for 
outcasts, I'm in.
 