
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people watching Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>. Don't read on if 
you haven't seen episode five



Click here to read Graeme's episode four blogpost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/18/agents-of-shield-series-one-episode-four>

This episode was named after Ruth Negga's character Raina, a seductive 
recruitment officer doing the legwork for the evil Centipede organisation. But 
it may as well have been called "Scorch On The Rocks". Poor Scorch. As plain 
old Chan, he was just your average Houdini-worshipping, beer-swigging street 
magician scraping together a living in Hong Kong, having been advised by SHIELD 
to keep his moderate pyrokinetic powers a secret. As played by Louis Ozawa 
Changchien, he seemed like a nice enough guy. He just made some terrible life 
choices.

Even after being kidnapped by Raina and her hooded Centipede goons, Chan still 
allowed himself to be injected with the volatile super-serum last seen in the 
pilot episode, boosting his power level from ailing Clipper lighter to F-16 
afterburner. Somehow, it was the allure of "Scorch" that made him acquiesce; 
Chan even did some impromptu market research about the name with nearby lab 
techs.

Meanwhile, after initially suspecting Skye of leaking Chan's secret SHIELD 
file to Centipede, Coulson's team went after the real culprit: Rising Tide net 
wizard Miles Lydon (Austin Nichols). In case there was any doubt about his 
elite hacking skills, Fitz reminded everyone it was Lydon who distributedthose 
beloved pictures of topless Putin on horseback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2013/oct/10/australia-russia-abbott-putin-macho>
.

I was hoping for more from Fitz and Simmons, the divisive SHIELD techies 
keeping the British end up, but this was another episode focused primarily on 
the inner turmoil of superficially cocky wiseass Skye, enduring yet more 
splashback from her Rising Tide involvement. After Lydon escaped the usually 
infallible Ward and Coulson by using an Italian Job-styletraffic-light hack 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4bKclB7ag4c> to clog up the streets of Austin, 
Texas, we discovered – via some afternoon delight – thathe and Skye were very 
much in cahoots 
<http://marvel.com/videos/watch/2944/maos_season_1_ep_5_-_clip_3>.

Things got a little rockier when they were both apprehended by Agent May and 
Skye learned that her boyfriend had sold SHIELD secrets for a million bucks, 
although her yelling "YOU ARE SO DEAD!" like a hormonal teen was a prime 
example of the honking dialogue that marred this episode. There were just too 
many lines that felt like placeholders; leaden, rather than Whedon.

In Hong Kong, Scorch was discovering the hard way that Centipede were baddies. 
They didn't want him to be a superhero, they just wanted to harvest all his 
fire-resistant blood platelets to help them future-proof their super-serum. It 
was enough to make him flip out, even during SHIELD's belated rescue attempt. 
His supercharged flame powers trashed the entire building, with only some slick 
work from Agent May buying Coulson and his team enough time to bail out before 
Scorch overheatedlike those glowing super-soldiers in Iron Man 3 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vT9QE0pQRpY>. (Or maybe, like his hero Houdini, 
he actually escaped?)

It was another compromised half-victory, but it did conclude with Skye baring 
her soul to Coulson; she'd dedicated her life to infiltrating SHIELD because 
the organisation had redacted the one official document she had uncovered 
relating to her parents. Now thatOrphan Hack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/20/orphan-black-sci-fi-thriller>
's biggest secret is out, perhaps some of the other agents will get their time 
in the spotlight.

After last week's comic poker game final scene, this episode went teaser-ish 
with Raina touching base with a sweaty-looking dude in prison. There were dark 
allusions to putting diabolical plans into action, and taking "toy soldiers" 
off the shelf. It suggests that Ruth Negga will recur, which is good, but also 
felt very reminiscent of theMitchell and Webb sketch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U6cake3bwnY> about villains using needlessly 
ambiguous terms.

There's no new episode of Agents of SHIELD next week – ABC is repeating the 
pilot in the US and Channel 4 is screening an Embarrassing Bodies special. If 
you're desperate to know what's coming in episode six, there has beena brief 
trail <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ip2V6ICIkWw> suggesting the team 
investigates bizarre murders in a small US town. X-Files-esque, with a guest 
appearance from Deadwood badass Titus Welliver? I'm in.

Notes and observations

• An enjoyable early scene between Coulson and May alluded to their past 
adventures, dropped a hint about Coulson's existential troubles – "I just have 
a little extra energy to burn" – and provided the episode's obligatory shot of 
SHIELD's own-brand bottled water.

• Possible alternative names for "the Index", SHIELD's watchlist of people and 
objects with powers: the Plotlocker, the Supermenu, the MacGuffin Manifest.

• Coulson even has a model of Lola on his desk!

• The redheaded Centipede scientist we last saw in the pilot was incinerated 
in a surprisingly graphic sequence that also invoked the countless vamps Buffy 
staked into clouds of glowing ash over the years.

• Ward and May drowned their post-mission disappointment with double measures 
of an 18-year-old single malt called Glencallan. It's a fake brand,from a 
company that specialises in making such things 
<http://issprops.com/graphics/products/category/whiskey>; they can also hook 
you up with "Jake Danzel's Bourbon". But since boxes of Glencallan also 
featured in the season three finale of bad-cop-worse-cop seriesThe Shield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2008/nov/19/television-theserial-thewire-cop-shows>
, I can daydream that both these shows take place in the same universe, and 
that Coulson might meet Vic Mackey some day.

Biff! Bang! Quip-ow!

• "Body probes? That's ridiculous. SHIELD doesn't do that. We don't do that, 
do we?" (Fitz frets about tracking methods.)

• "So are you guys just going to destroy all my stuff?" "Yes." (SHIELD trashes 
Lydon's base of operations.)

• "You're a hacker, Skye, not Seal Team Six." (Lydon doesn't want his squeeze 
to go into the field.)

• "You've got two choices. Take what's in this box or we put you in a slightly 
bigger one." (Coulson puts a leash on Lydon.)

The SHIELD games club

Everyone was playing games in this episode. Skye and Ward's opening duel over 
Battleship was goofy but fun, and there was a surprisingly in-depth discussion 
of Lydon's obsession withMinecraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/05/minecraft-33-million-users> 
– he apparently developed his own rock-hard modified version featuring "zombie 
pigmen". Agent May also has some videogame hinterland: Ming-Na Wen played 
high-kicking Chun-Li in the 1994 movie adaptation of Street Fighter.

Has anyone mentioned Hawkeye yet?

Captain America began life as a propaganda tool. But it was still weird to 
hear Raina invoke his name to sell Chan on the idea of becoming Scorch. "Have 
you ever heard of Steve Rogers?" she said. "No. But Captain America? He's on 
the news, on a lunchbox, on a poster on the wall … " This would probably not 
have been as effective with Hawkeye, who remains unreferenced inAgents of SHIELD
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>.

Meanwhile, in the real world …

• Thor: The Dark World had its UK premiere this week, and Marvel also released 
a poster for 2014's Captain America: The Winter Soldier 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/movies/news/a525613/captain-america-the-winter-soldier-chris-evans-in-official-poster.html>
 that featured the SHIELD logo prominently.

• That SHIELD logo has also started turning up on Halloween pumpkins 
<https://twitter.com/MingNa/status/391953185067118593>.

• This episode was directed by Jesse Bochco, son of TV legend Steven Bochco.

What did you think of Agents of SHIELD episode five? Will you be tuning back 
in when it returns to Channel 4? Let us know below
 