
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people watching Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>. Don't read on if 
you haven't seen episode seven.



Click here to read Graeme's episode six blogpost. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/nov/08/agents-of-shield-series-one-episode-six>

"I didn't realise Big Brother was this … big." That's what Skye, still tagged 
with a probationary security bracelet after her recent betrayals, said when 
entering The Hub, an enormous SHIELD operations facility. With so many agents 
striding around looking purposeful, it suddenly seemed not only plausible but 
practical that the Strategic Homeland Intervention, Enforcement and Logistics 
Division would manufacture its own branded bottled water – a logical step 
toward vertical integration. (How long before our heroes visit "The Sweatshop", 
the SHIELD outpost that churns out all those dark suits?)

If the intention was to put some open water between "big SHIELD" and Agent 
Coulson's semi-autonomous team of rascally cut-ups and rigid ninjas, it worked. 
None of them looked totally comfortable amid the bustling, Pentagon-esque hive, 
ruled over by queen bee Victoria Hand (guest star Saffron Burrows, who gave off 
a strong vibe of administrative menace).

While Coulson – fresh from a Bond-esque opening sequence that involved 
breaking out of a Siberian prison – preached a gospel of "trusting the system" 
to the team, combat specialist Ward and lab sprat Fitz found themselves on 
secondment to Hand. They were tasked with a Level 8 mission: tracking down and 
disabling a sonic weapon that deactivated other weapons – the so-called 
"Overkill device" – in the fractious Caucasus region. To emphasise how 
unqualified Fitz was for field work, he had a Frank Spencer-esque interaction 
with a Hub sliding door. Even with a special packed lunch prepared by Simmons, 
his chances of survival looked slim.

Sensing something was up, Skye bullied Simmons into helping her uncover more 
operational details about the Level 8 mission, even when she could be heisting 
the mysterious redacted SHIELD document that alluded to her parents. While the 
girls made mischief in the identikit corridors of The Hub, Ward and Fitz 
bickered and bonded while tracking down the Overkill device, using an 
entertaining mix of hi-tech gadgetry (an x-ray scanner that rolled up like an 
Athena poster) and more old-fashioned espionage techniques (a camouflaged 
sleeping bag).

After an amusingly one-sided conversation with a tai chi-performing Agent May, 
Coulson uncoupled from his long-held loyalty to the SHIELD hierarchy and butted 
heads with Hand. Despite the vast resources at her disposal, she seemingly had 
no plans to extract Ward and Fitz, and clearly knew more than she was letting 
on, teasing Coulson with Tahiti chat and ribbing him about "coming back to the 
big leagues". Her half-smile after he launched his own unauthorised operation 
to rescue his boys suggested that … maybe that's what she'd planned all along? 
To goad Coulson into incriminating himself?

Despite what could charitably be called an avalanche of insubordination, 
including but not limited to hacking Level 8 security and incapacitating poor 
Agent Sitwell, Coulson's SHIELD team scarpered after completing their mission. 
Amid all the hullabaloo, Coulson had accessed the SHIELD document Skye had 
dedicated her life to uncovering, and he broke the news to her that the only 
relevant information it contained was that she had been dropped off at the 
orphanage by a SHIELD agent. Mysterious and, of course, convenient.

The further revelation – that the female SHIELD agent was subsequently killed 
– Coulson kept between himself and May. "Some secrets are meant to stay 
secret," he said, although he didn't look that convinced in the final 
pre-credits scene, where his request to access his own "death and recovery" 
report was denied. He didn't have clearance.

With Fitz in the field, this episode felt more like Get Smart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125551/get.smart> than The A-Team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2010/jul/25/pass-notes-the-a-team>, 
and while all the business in The Hub seemed a little rote, watching the 
usually imperturbable Coulson struggle with some of his most deeply-held 
beliefs gave it a bit of emotional weight. It would be nice to give Agent May 
something to do other than tai chi, though. Ming-Na Wen's default expression of 
haughty disdain/boredom may not even be acting anymore.

Notes and observations


• Simmons mentions "the Triskelion" on arrival at The Hub. In the comics, the 
Triskelion is atowering SHIELD island base <http://marvel.wikia.com/Triskelion> 
that is also rumoured to feature in the upcomingCaptain America: The Winter 
Soldier <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/158216/captain-america>.

• This episode was originally titled "The Sandwich Incident", and in all 
fairness, that prosciutto and buffalo mozzarella baguette (with a drizzle of 
Simmons' homemade pesto aioli)looked extremely tasty 
<http://marvel.com/images/gallery/story/21514/go_behind-the-scenes_of_last_nights_marvels_agents_of_shield./image/965875>
.

• So the Bus can hover. Useful for short runways.

• Good to see Maximiliano Hernández reprise his role as Agent Sitwell from Thor
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/139926/thor> and Avengers Assemble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/26/avengers-assemble-review>, but it 
would be interesting to know how the meeting went. "OK, Max, we want you back 
forCaptain America 2 alongside Robert Redford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/25/robert-redford-captain-america-sequel>
. But we also need you to be in the SHIELD TV show, where you will creep on and 
then get stun-gunned by a young Englishwoman. We good?"

Biff! Bang! Quip-ow!


• "Can you ask what beers they have on tap?" Fitz clearly has his priorities 
straight in a South Ossetian tavern.

• "He's acting like a robot version of himself right now." Skye moans to 
Simmons about Coulson's inflexibility … or is it something else?

• "I can't be a part of your bad-girl shenanigans. I like following the rules 
and doing what's expected of me. It makes me feel nice." Simmons vocalises what 
some viewers seem to dislike about her character.

• "This is a mission, not a picnic." Ward throws away Fitz's beloved baguette.

The SHIELD TV club


While Fitz is packing his rucksack in preparation for his field mission, 
sharp-eyed viewers may have spotted aTardis model on his shelf 
<http://shieldtv.net/doctor-who-on-the-bus>. That a lab geek would be into 
Doctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> isn't really 
that surprising, and Fitz's Bus quarters are positively spartan compared to all 
the old memorabilia Coulson has crammed in his office.

Has anyone mentioned Hawkeye yet?


You get the sense that Victoria Hand is ruthless, and she's killed this 
running gag stone-dead. After six episodes with nary a mention of Avengers 
bowman and longstanding knock-knock joke Clint Barton, she references both him 
and Black Widow to shut down Coulson's objections to her strategy. "Barton, 
Romanoff, they never have an extraction plan …"

Meanwhile, in the real world …

Already a hit in global markets, Thor: The Dark World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/03/thor-the-dark-world-review> 
opened equally strong in the US last weekend with $85m. Agents of SHIELD 
producers will be hoping that translates into buzz fornext week's episode The 
Well <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J2xw3ckWo6o>, which has an Asgardian 
flavour.

Agents of SHIELD and Battlestar Galactica composer Bear McCreary blogs 
extensively and entertainingly about his music for the show, with performance 
videos and musical notation. For The Hub, he wrotea new harp version of the 
Coulson theme <http://www.bearmccreary.com/#blog/agents-of-s-h-i-e-l-d-the-hub/>
 to reflect the dapper super-agent "at his most vulnerable".

What did you think of Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> episode seven? Does 
the prospect of a Thor tie-in excite you, or should the show be focusing on 
doing its own thing? Let us know below
 