
Superheroes: not what they used to be. At least, not Joss Whedon’s Agents of 
SHIELD <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> after the 
Marvel series returned to Channel 4 with 1.3 million viewers, a fraction of the 
3.1 million who watched the first series opener.

The small-screen Avengers Assemble spin-off had a 6% share of the audience 
between 8pm and 9pm on Friday,down from 3.1 million (14.2%) for its Channel 4 
debut in September last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/28/marvels-agents-of-shield-ratings-channel-4>
.

The series is one of numerous small-screen takes on big-screen superheroes, 
including Channel 5’s Gotham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/19/batman-gotham-tv-bruce-wayne-juvenile>
 and The Flash on Sky 1.

There was better news for Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> at 9pm when the fourth in the new 
series of Gogglebox had its highest ever overnight audience in its new Friday 
slot, with 3.5 million viewers (16.1%) between 9pm and 10pm off the back of the 
previous Friday’s celebrity special.

Gogglebox still has some way to go before beating BBC1’s Have I Got News for 
You, but the gap is narrowing, the comedy news quiz was watched by 4.3 million 
viewers (19.9%) between 9pm and 9.30pm, followed by Lee Mack sitcom Not Going 
Out, seen by 3.3 million viewers (15.8%) between 9.30pm and 10pm.

Channel 5’s Alex Polizzi’s Secret Italy had the misfortune of launching into 
the teeth of Gogglebox, the first of its four parts watched by 876,000 viewers, 
a 4.1% share, down 35% on its three-month slot average.

It was the second new Channel 5 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channelfive>
 show of the night after Rome: the World’s First Superpower, fronted by actor 
Larry Lamb, which began with 874,000 (4.1%), up 14.5% on the slot average.

Gogglebox gave a leg-up to Alan Carr: Chatty Man at 10pm, which had 1.5 
million viewers (9.5%) between 10pm and 11.05pm.

But it was still no match for The Graham Norton Show on BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1>, watched by 3.5 million viewers 
(25.3%) between 10.35pm and 11.20pm.

Elsewhere, BBC2’s The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Children in 
Need Sewing Bee finished its three-part run with 1.6 million viewers, a 7.5% 
share, between 8pm and 9pm.

All ratings are Barb <http://www.barb.co.uk> overnight figures, including 
live, +1 (except for BBC channels) and same day timeshifted (recorded) viewing, 
but excluding on demand, or other – unless otherwise stated. Figures for BBC1, 
BBC2, ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5 generally include ratings for their HD 
simulcast services, unless otherwise stated

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 