
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people watching Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> on Channel 4 in the 
UK. Don't read on if you haven't seen episode two

Click here to read Graeme's episode one blogpost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/27/agents-of-shield-recap-season-one-episode-one-pilot>

They may not have invented the concept, but the Marvel movies have perfected 
the "post-credits sting": addictive choc drops for fans faithful enough to sit 
through screeds of acknowledgements. These scenes featured surprising cameos 
and dangled enough common plot threads to sell the idea of a shared Marvel 
universe, where Tony Stark couldsashay into the world of the Incredible Hulk 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n9cByNCQwXA> or the Avengers could silently 
enjoy somepost-New-York-saving shawarma 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EYiZeszLosE>.

Since it worked so well on the big screen, it shouldn't be that much of a 
surprise that the same gimmick has been applied to Agents of SHIELD. And after 
the ABC network confirmed a post-credits cameo appearance in episode two to 
sustain the initial hype, the smart money was always going to be on Samuel L 
Jackson. As eye-patched Nick Fury, he technically heads up the whole SHIELD 
operation and watching him carpet Agent Phil Coulson for nearly destroying "the 
Bus" – everyone's preferred nickname for SHIELD's airborne mobile command 
station – was undoubtedly a thrill. Even just hearing Fury exasperatedly refer 
to science spods Fitz and Simmons felt like it helped establish them as "real" 
characters.

This, of course, all happened after the episode proper, which was technically 
the first field-test for Coulson's hand-picked crew of loners and outcasts: two 
antisocial yet lethal operatives, two science geeks and now Skye, an embedded 
hacker unfamiliar with all the barked military jargon, feeling essentially like 
a spare part. The episode title was 0-8-4 – SHIELD code for "an object of 
unidentified origin" – but this was really a team-building exercise in all 
senses, an opportunity to flesh out the relationships and dynamics hurriedly 
established in the pilot. And for the most part, it worked – in that by the end 
of the episode, the squabbling team had found some common ground. Turns out 
nothing clears the air like an unexpected rapid depressurisation at 30,000ft.

The 0-8-4 in question was a volatile Hydra 
<http://marvelcinematicuniverse.wikia.com/wiki/HYDRA>, super-laser powered by 
theTesseract <http://marvelcinematicuniverse.wikia.com/wiki/Tesseract>, the 
neon-blue cosmic energy MacGuffin previously featured in both Captain America 
and Avengers Assemble. After retrieving it from a Peruvian temple – an action 
encounter with local rebels that, deliberately or not, evoked the A-Team in its 
jeep-flipping, arbitrary-machine-gunning heyday – the team regrouped in the 
relative safety of the Bus. There, they fraternised with a squad of military 
police led by Commandant Reyes (Leonor Varela), a lady with some tantalising 
history with Coulson.

Watching these former lovers reconnect over tales of espionage and memorabilia 
showcased perhaps Agents of SHIELD's greatest asset: Clark Gregg, who imbues 
Coulson with both stoicism and self-amusement. When the inevitable double-cross 
came, with Reyes and her lackeys hijacking the Bus in an attempt to secure the 
0-8-4 for the motherland, Coulson's faith in his imprisoned team seemed genuine 
rather than a desperate bluff. These bickering agents of SHIELD are elevated 
when we see them through his eyes.

The hero fightback involved the five prickly talents each applying their 
skillsets – "Pieces solving a puzzle," according to Skye – and the operation 
even shaded in more backstory for neck-snapping ninja Melinda May. The Bus, 
however, took a hell of a beating, although it remained structurally sound 
enough to accomodate some post-0-8-4-saving beers on the boarding ramp. The 
heartwarming scene of backslapping and bonding was undermined at the death by 
the texted revelation that Skye might be an infiltrator rather than ally.

So that was episode two, which had far less hands-on involvement from Joss 
Whedon himself, but generally seemed to stay on course in terms of tone, 
garlanding the necessary exposition with gags and keeping things shuttling 
along at a decent clip. The trip to Peru managed to imply SHIELD's global 
bailiwick, even if most of the action was restricted to the more manageable 
interior of the Bus. Plot-wise, things perhaps still feel a little 
inconsequential, but there is already an emotional fuse running under the 
surface – the more time we get to spend hanging out with Coulson, the bigger 
the emotional wallop when the dark secret of his resurrection is revealed.

Notes and observations

• The cute little quadcopters introduced in the pilot look set to be recurring 
gadgets. Like Marvel, ABC is owned by Disney, which must make it easier to get 
away with naming these sensor drones after the seven dwarves.

• As Skye settled into her new SHIELD digs, a lot of visual emphasis was 
placed on the hula-skirted dashboard doll she brought from her hacker van. 
Could it be a memento from Tahiti? I hear it's a magical place.

• Simmons snapping a quick selfie of her and Fitz at the Peruvian ziggurat: 
very 2013.

• Did Coulson's old flame Reyes look familiar? Chilean actor Leonor Varela 
previously starred as a vampire ninja princess in Guillermo del Toro'sBlade II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/91611/blade.ii>, yet another property 
based on Marvel characters. Here she is (SPOILER)turning into dandruff in 
Blade's arms <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nmECv3jv9GM>.

Biff! Bang! Quip-ow!

• "Imagine what she'll do with our resources." "I am. That's exactly what I'm 
imagining during this frown." (Agent Ward smuggles a joke into his sternness.)

• "You took a bullet?" "Ish." (Coulson downplays his return from the dead.)

• "This is my fault. I should have learned kung-fu." (Fitz feels bad about 
being overpowered by a Peruvian squaddie.)

• "Oh Phil, you're not even aware! Your renewed idealism, your collectibles, 
your airborne man-cave! Surrounding yourself with young, attractive agents! 
You're having a midlife crisis!" (Double-crossing Reyes offers her own recap of 
the show.)

• "Are you mental? I did explain in great detail what I meant, using the 
Queen's bloody English!" (Fitz drops some lines that sound moreMisfits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/misfits> than Marvel.)

The SHIELD book club

After guerilla-marketing the Travis McGee series of novels in the pilot, there 
was another reading recommendation in episode two. Skye catches straight-arrow 
Agent Ward thumbing a paperback. "Hunger Games?" she asks. "Matterhorn," he 
replies, referring toKarl Marlantes' gruelling 2010 novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/11/marlantes-matterhorn-book-review>
 about Vietnam told from a GI's point of view.

Comics callbacks

In this episode, we learned the callsign for "the Bus" was SHIELD 616. With so 
many comics stories involving alternate dimensions, Marvel eventually had to 
create a filing system to keep track of their bulging multiverse.Earth-616 is 
the mainstream Marvel universe, the "real" one 
<http://marvel.wikia.com/Earth-616>. Days of Future Past, the apocalyptic X-Men 
storyline being adapted into a 2014 movie, takes place over inEarth-811 
<http://marvel.wikia.com/Earth-811>.

Meanwhile, in the real world ...

The final tally of US ratings for the Agents of SHIELD pilot – factoring in 
timeshifted viewing and a Thursday night repeat that actually beat the season 
six premiere ofParks and Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/27/parks-and-recreation-season-six-london>
 – topped 22 million viewers. That's good news, right?

Not entirely. Those Galactus <http://marvel.wikia.com/Galactus>-sized numbers 
meant the ratings for episode two looked disappointing at first glance, down to
8.4 million viewers watching live 
<http://insidetv.ew.com/2013/10/02/agents-of-shield-ratings-samuel-l-jackson-makes-cameo/>
, a drop of 34%. Still fairly respectable though.

Channel 4 will be happy enough – with over 3.1 million viewers, Agents of 
SHIELD was the channel's biggest drama launch of 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/sep/30/the-it-crowd-channel-4>. The 
first episode also rolled straight intothe last ever episode of The IT Crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/27/it-crowd-finale-great-comedy-ayoade-odowd>
, another show focused on abrasive backroom staff charged with keeping things 
running smoothly. (By accident or design, the opening minutes of the IT Crowd 
were littered with Marvel references too.)

If you fancy another ad-hoc Marvel double-bill, Sky Living is screening The 
Blacklist on Fridays at 9pm from tonight. It's an opportunity to catch up with 
how oily and evil James Spader can be – useful, since he's playingmechanical 
baddie Ultron 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2013/10/01/the-avengers-2-james-spader-talks-ultron>
 in the blockbusting sequel to Avengers Assemble.

What did you think of Agents of SHIELD episode two? Has the show found its 
feet or do you expect more turbulence ahead? Let us know below.
 