
"I'm here to talk to you about the Avengers Initiative." When Samuel L Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/samuel-l-jackson>'s Nick Fury appeared after 
the credits ofIron Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/123770/iron.man> 
in 2008, it was a clear message to the fanboy world: theMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/marvel> universe was about to supersize 
itself. Under the careful guidance of studio presidentKevin Feige 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/23/marvel-studios-kevin-feige>, it's 
delivered on the promise, planting the seeds for blockbuster showdownAvengers 
Assemble <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144027/avengers> throughout 
its flagship superhero franchises (seven films so far, with more on the way). 
After finding a story big enough to contain a billionaire playboy inventor, a 
defrosted second world war super-soldier, a Norse god and a scientist with 
anger-management issues, what's the next challenge for the "Marvel Cinematic 
Universe"? Conquering TV, without the help of Iron Man, Captain America, Thor 
or the Hulk.

Instead, it's turned once again to Joss Whedon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joss-whedon>, the geek guru who gave the 
world Buffy before assembling Avengers Assemble. Along with brother Jed Whedon 
and Jed's wife Maurissa Tancharoen – veterans of Joss's cult series Dollhouse – 
he's created Agents Of SHIELD, a show that delivers a snappy balance of action 
and wisecracks with the added bonus of Marvel-flavoured Easter eggs.

To pull off the trick of being in the Marvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> universe but not necessarily in 
the same postcode as the films, the writers have assembled a team around Clark 
Gregg's Agent Coulson. Originally just a SHIELD suit in the first Iron Man, he 
grew to cult status before being apparently offed in Avengers Assemble. Now 
he's back and in charge of a rogue hacker, an action man, an expert pilot and 
an inseparable pair of genius scientists. Their mission? To explore "the 
aftermath of the battle of New York" – the massive punch-up from the end of 
Avengers Assemble. As Tancharoen puts it, "They've created this big world and 
now we get to be the people who live in that world and are witnessing it from 
an ordinary person's point of view."

Also on the line from Los Angeles is her husband, Jed Whedon. "SHIELD used to 
keep things secret to protect people from things they weren't ready to hear," 
he says. "But now they've heard it, so what happens then? SHIELD's job 
description has changed a bit to help people deal with that."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMVl5NYtutp0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMVl5NYtutp0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMVl5NYtutp0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view <>

Tancharoen and Whedon credit the fan reaction to Agent Coulson's demise as the 
starting point for the SHIELD series. "After Agent Coulson was killed in 
Avengers Assemble," Tancharoen explains, "it was the fans who started a 
campaign that said 'Coulson Lives' and I do think that plays a part in why we 
have a show now about SHIELD and about Agent Coulson." Whedon laughs: "The fan 
energy has spawned a TV show." After Iron Man, he says, "Clark Gregg went on to 
do a couple of lines and the part got bigger, and he found himself in the next 
movie, and he sort of became this glue linking them together, along with 
director Fury. It's a testament to Clark Gregg and how likable he was in those 
films, as a contrast to the bigger-than-life characters… here's a guy in a 
suit."

Both producers are hopeful that the focus on people without powers in a world 
full of "extraordinary things" is what will make Agents Of SHIELD work. "TV is 
different from film: you have time to explore characters and see how they're 
going to deal with new situations," says Whedon. "But of course we've also 
tried to pepper in lots of humour and cool Marvel stuff."

Whedon admits that the nature of talking about a show like this is that they 
find themselves using "lots of adjectives, no nouns". ("When you're welcomed 
into the Marvel family, it's pretty much a classified situation all the way 
around; you have to sign a million NDAs, you have to give blood, you have to 
give your grandmother's urine…") They're characteristically reluctant to give 
away any details about characters they're going to be pulling out of the Marvel 
sandbox. But as well as being open to one ofStan Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2009/sep/25/stan-lee-interview-marvel-alliance>
's trademark cameos ("Chances are high, and he's always welcome"), they reveal 
that "there will be some moments when costumed heroes pop up". Thanks to a 
complicated real-world tangle of film rights it probably won't be any of the 
X-Men or Spider-Man, though. "There are huge characters that are flagged for 
their own franchises and there are other characters owned by other studios," 
Whedon says. Even so, there's probably enough Marvel action to keep them going. 
As Whedon points out, "We have gods, we have tech, we have aliens, and SHIELD's 
been around since at least world war two, so there's a lot of history there to 
explore, plenty to uncover and plenty of fallout for our team to have to deal 
with."

Marvel's roadmap for the next few years is also likely to keep SHIELD busy. 
Thor: The Dark World will be released on 30 October, followed by Captain 
America: The Winter Soldier and Guardians Of The Galaxy next year, with Joss 
Whedon's The Avengers: Age Of Ultron and Edgar Wright's long-awaited Ant-Man 
scheduled for 2015. "There are opportunities to play with the fall-out from 
their films," says Whedon. "But we want people to feel like the movies are the 
webisodes for the TV show, not the other way around! We want to establish our 
identity and have people love the characters and not just be waiting round for 
an Iron Man reference, or 'Oh, you just missed Thor! He was here two seconds 
ago with his shirt off!'"

Tancharoen interrupts her husband: "We're not going to have Thor with his 
shirt off?"

"Well, we're going to try. We're in negotiations."

Marvel's Agents Of SHIELD starts in the UK on 27 Sep, 8pm, Channel 4
 