
Channel 4's US drama import Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D shed 800,000 viewers on its 
second outing on Friday night, but remains one of the broadcaster's most 
popular autumn shows.

The Marvel spin-off, which debuted with 3.1 million viewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/sep/30/the-it-crowd-channel-4> the 
previous week, making it Channel 4's biggest drama launch in more than three 
years, attracted 2.3 million viewers and a 10.3% share of viewing on Friday 4 
October.

After the hype and marketing push for the first episode, Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> will be hoping the show can settle 
down to a regular weekly audience of 2 million-plus.

Also on Friday, BBC1 sitcom Citizen Khan began its second series with an 
average of 2.9 million viewers and a 14.3% share between 9.30pm and 10pm.



Strictly has the moves over X Factor

BBC1's Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> comfortably 
took the ratings honours on Saturday night, attracting an average audience of 
9.3 million between 6.20pm and 8.25pm. The show had a 42% audience share in its 
slot.

ITV's the X Factor drew an average audience of 8.5 million and a 36% share 
between 8pm and 9.50pm.

 Strictly comfortably outstripped the X Factor in the audience popularity 
stakes in the 25-minute overlap between the two shows, from 8pm to 8.25pm.

And elsewhere …

Earlier on ITV on Saturday night, the return of prankster Dom Joly for a 
second series of Fool Britannia managed 1.9 million and a 9.2% share between 
6.30pm and 7pm.

All ratings are Barb <http://www.barb.co.uk/> overnight figures, including 
live, +1 (except for BBC channels) and same day timeshifted (recorded) viewing, 
but excluding on demand, or other – unless otherwise stated. Figures for BBC1, 
BBC2, ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5 generally include ratings for their HD 
simulcast services, unless otherwise stated

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.


 