
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people watching Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>. Don't read on if 
you haven't seen episode nine

Click here to read Graeme's episode eight blogpost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/nov/22/agents-of-shield-recap-series-one-episode-eight>

It's fair to say that no-nonsense ninja Melinda May (aka the Bus driver, aka 
"The Cavalry" aka actress Ming-Na Wen) has been, by a considerable margin, the 
least chatty character inAgents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>. Even compared to 
stoic Ward – now her regular agent-with-benefits, judging by their bedroom 
scene in tonight's episode – May has remained a mystery swaddled in an enigma 
wrapped in a tight flightsuit. In situations where other team members, 
including Coulson, throw out pop-culture references or wisecracks, May just 
rolls her eyes or, more commonly, jabs a flattened palm into a throat.

This episode dove deeper into May's backstory, but surprisingly little of it 
came from her directly. The team were sent to Utah for an "Index Asset 
Evaluation and Intake", scoping out a suspected unregistered gifted. After 
surviving an accident at the local Particle Accelerator Complex(!), the devout 
Hannah (a haunted, plausibly frantic Laura Seay) had exhibited signs of 
telekinetic ability – rattling cutlery, levitating tinned fruit, blowing up 
petrol stations – that had put the wind right up the local community, who 
already held her responsible for the four deaths caused by the particle 
accelerator incident.

As a mob descended on Hannah with metaphorical pitchforks and real-life eggs 
to throw, things looked like they were going to go full Carrie until May 
defused the situation with the night-night gun. Back on the Bus, what had 
started out as a story about someone coming to terms with uncanny powers – an
X-Men <https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men> comic, basically – sidestepped 
into something else: a full-on slasher movie homage. A hulking figure in 
overalls appeared and disappeared around the Bus, moving things around, 
stealing stuff and, in a failed attempt to access Hannah's shielded Blockbuster 
cell, sabotaging the plane's power supply, which led to yet another hard 
landing for the battered Bus.

Belatedly, the team figured out the slasher was Tobias Ford, a blue-collar 
worker thought dead in the accident who was actually bouncing back and forth 
between Earth and another less-friendly dimension, clinging on to his wrench 
but still losing a little of himself each time. Ford was really just a big, 
volatile softie trying to protect and impress Hannah. After he had trapped 
Coulson and Skye, and clocked Ward in an unfair fight, Ford went looking for 
his crush, unaware that May had already used her ninja skills to spirit Hannah 
away to a nearby, poorly lit barn.

We had previously heard three stories about how May acquired her Cavalry 
nickname: Fitz and Simmons's over-the-top version involving two pistols, 100 
baddies and a horse; Ward's only slightly less fantastical version about taking 
down 20 opponents single-handedly and, finally, Coulson's almost eye-witness 
report, about a fearless but warm-hearted agent who had gone into a Bahrain 
building to save civilians from a twisted gifted and his mind-controlled army, 
emerging victorious, but fundamentally changed. In her final confrontation with 
Ford, high-kicking, hard-punching May opted to talk him down, pointing out that 
by clinging on to Hannah, he would drag them both down to hell, or at least a 
hellish dimension. "Let the girl go," she whispered, apparently the same words 
Coulson had used to try and comfort her post-Bahrain, and Ford obligingly 
dematerialised.

Repairs was written by showrunners Maurissa Tancharoen and Jed Whedon, so you 
could look at it an exemplar of what they're looking for in an episode of 
Agents of SHIELD, or an encapsulation of where they want to take the series. It 
balanced banter and emotion, character moments and action, and while it didn't 
crack open the entire mystery of Agent May, it made her seem more relatable and 
moved her icy character forward a few steps. Besides, that final, shy smile was 
worth a million bucks.

Notes and observations

• "Let the girl go." Could Skye be the young girl May rescued in Bahrain, then 
subsequently ditched at an orphanage, unable to deal with the guilt of not 
saving her parents? Let the theorising commence!

• Not one reference to Coulson's resurrection this week, which was fine and 
dandy.

• Wrench-wielding teleporter Ford was played by Robert Baker, who turned up in 
the most recent series of Justified as a bare-knuckle fighter who seemed, 
briefly, to be the physical equal of Raylan Givens.

• Well done to the commenters who spotted the lines lifted directly from Joss 
Whedon's previous series Dollhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/dollhouse-whisky-tango-foxtrot> in 
last week's episode ("Did I fall asleep?"; "For a little while ...") In-joke or 
deliberate foreshadowing about consciousness-downloading?

• On the sing-along DVD commentary to another previous Whedon production, Dr 
Horrible's Sing-Along Blog, Maurissa Tanchareon wrote and sang a trenchant, 
hilarious song calledNobody's Asian in the Movies 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MNmzegQUtFA>. It's really quite something.

Biff! Bang! Quip-ow!

"Alright, I get it! I didn't go to your stupid SHIELD Hogwarts or whatever 
..." Skye pouts after Fitz pulls rank at the hologram table.

"You can catch a lot more flies with honey than napalm." Skye throws some 
shade at May.

"Did we crash? Who was screaming?" Fitz, locked in a cupboard, always 
comfortable talking to himself.

"This guy's travelling back and forth between alien worlds ... with a wrench?" 
Ward can't quite believe the threat he has to deal with.

The SHIELD games club

This week's before-credits tease scene was notably breezy, with the recently 
terrorised SHIELD agents unwinding over a game of Scrabble (or, more 
specifically,Scrabble Upwords <http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/1515/upwords>
). Simmons showed off her mad vocab skills by playing "aglet", the name of 
those little plastic sheaths at the end of shoelaces, while the board already 
contained "strange" and "tales" – presumably a nod tothe Marvel Comics 
anthology series 
<http://marvel.com/comics/series/2076/strange_tales_1951_-_1968> that first 
introduced Nick Fury as an agent of SHIELD back in 1965.

Comics callbacks

As well as the Strange Tales callback, the Roxxon logo featured prominently on 
the petrol station Hannah seemed to explodify in the opening scene. This 
rapacious oil company has already featured in the background of all three Iron 
Man movies and has a long and generally villainous hinterland in the comics, 
where it first featured inCaptain America issue 180 in 1974 
<https://marvel.com/universe/Roxxon_Oil>.

Meanwhile, in the real world ...

Agents of SHIELD is taking another scheduled break next week before returning 
with its final episode of the year, a mid-season finale featuring the 
reappearance of J August Richards, the super-hot supersoldierlast seen in the 
pilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/27/agents-of-shield-recap-season-one-episode-one-pilot>
, and Ruth Negga, the evil fixer in a flower dress fromepisode five 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/25/agents-of-shield-series-one-episode-five>
. It comes billed as SHIELD attempting to take down the mysterious Centipede 
organisation, and is apparently a two-part cliffhanger ...

What did you think of Agents of SHIELD episode nine? Will you be back in a 
fortnight for episode 10? Let us know below
 