
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people watching Agents Of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>. Don't read on if 
you haven't seen episode six.

Click here to read Graeme's episode five blogpost. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/25/agents-of-shield-series-one-episode-five>

After taking Halloween week off, it seemed a little odd that Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> returned with an 
episode that began with a spooky tale around a campfire in rural Pennsylvania. 
A troop of boy scouts – heads stuffed with imagined horror, mouths filled with 
marshmallow-and-chocolate crackers – got a genuine shock when their scout 
leader was killed in an electrical mini-storm.

A hovering, electro-fried corpse was mysterious enough for Agent Coulson's 
team to swoop in on the bus to investigate; when they discovered another 
similarly overcooked body floating in a barn, it looked like it could be the 
work of a superpowered serial killer. But why would an "unregistered gifted" 
have a grudge against two brave firemen who had helped clean up after the 
Battle of New York?

But there was no serial killer. The "baddie" was an alien virus that was 
transmitted through electrostatic shock, presumably the inspiration for the 
weird episode title. The virus had lain dormant on a Chitauri helmet, salvaged 
as a firehouse keepsake, but was now back with a vengeance. In a brief but 
surprisingly affecting scene, Coulson talked life, death and afterlife with 
Diaz, a third infected fireman, before the unfortunate public servant FZZTed 
out.

While the bus arced over the Atlantic to deposit the helmet in a secure SHIELD 
facility, some floating lab tools made it clear that expert biochemist Simmons 
had also become infected. With two hours before she sparked up, likely shorting 
out the bus as well, it was a quarantined race against time to synthesise an 
anti-serum. Three lab rats later, it looked like they were out of time.

Not everyone has warmed to Elizabeth Henstridge's head-girl-and-hockey-sticks 
performance as Simmons, but even hard-hearted souls may have softened after 
seeing her try to hold it together while asking Coulson to break the news of 
her death to her dad first: "I just think my mum would take it better coming 
from him." Then she brained Fitz and jumped off the bus, so as not to doom her 
friends. This turned out to be slightly premature – the most recent iteration 
of the anti-serum actually worked, so Agent Ward leaped after her to apply the 
dosage in mid-air, a sequence that was pretty exciting despite some slightly 
shonky wirework and CGI.

The pre-credits teaser scene was a welcome non-Skype appearance by Agent Blake 
(Titus Welliver, the veteran actor whose name already makes him sound like a 
cool comics character). Blake stomped up the loading ramp to commandeer the 
Chitauri helmet and warn Coulson that his flagrant disregard for protocol was 
starting to irritate SHIELD's high command. "That doesn't sound like the Phil 
Coulson I used to know," he said. "Get used to it," replied Coulson, suggesting 
he's coming to terms with his feelings of post-resurrection ennui.

It also seemed to be setting up next week's episode, where Coulson's 
semi-autonomous team of elites and geeks will clash with the implacable 
bureaucracy of "big SHIELD" in the form ofintimidating accountant Victoria Hand 
<http://marvel.com/news/story/21468/victoria_hand_comes_to_marvels_agents_of_shield.>
 (played by Saffron Burrows). Will there be a "talk to the Hand" gag? If so, it 
will probably be an ironically self-aware one.

Notes and observations

• Before the plot kicked in, Iain De Caestecker did an excellent job of 
channelling Alan Partridge – hand on hip, nervous stuttering – as Fitz tried 
bravely to establish a romantic beachhead with Skye.

Are SHIELD carbon-offsetting the bus? So many air miles.

• The Sandbox can be filed alongside The Slingshot in the 
SHIELD-facilities-with-cute-codenames-and-definite-articles list. Next week, 
the team visit "The Hub".

• We finally got to see the scar on Coulson's chest after he was run through 
with a cosmic power-lance in Avengers Assemble – if this version of Phil 
Coulson is, in fact, a clone, or a robot (or a ghost, or a Tesseract-powered 
hologram), at least they didn't skimp on the details.

• That was a too-brief appearance by Welliver, but he efficiently demonstrated 
Agent Blake's badass nature <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OdfCL9ezQYc>.

Biff! Bang! Quip-ow!

• "I don't sweat, I glisten." Coulson is cool even when working out.

• "It's so sad a man died this way … and yet so amazing." Simmons is entranced 
by a floating corpse.

• "You left his liver next to my lunch!" Fitz did not enjoy Simmons's previous 
autopsy.

• "Coulson, nice to see you're not dead." On Skype, Agent Blake is all 
business.

• "The minky bastard who actually wore the helmet had the virus!" More Fitz. 
You can take the boy out of Scotland …

The SHIELD film club

"This guy makes Captain America look like the Dude." Skye's nominally hip 
reference to The Big Lebowski (1998) seemed to sail over the heads of Agents 
Coulson and Ward, but that was probably just as well. If Coulson did stick on 
the Coens classic as an in-flight movie on the bus, he might start wondering 
why the Dude bears such a strong resemblance toTony Stark's old business 
partner Obadiah Stane <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hRSb3Z2mWAE> …

Has anyone mentioned Hawkeye yet?

Though light on classic comics lore, this whole episode was predicated on some 
unexpected fallout from the Chitauri invasion at the climax of Avengers 
Assemble. Captain America got a shoutout, and there was even a (deliberately?) 
clunky Iron Man gag from Coulson. But still no mention of poor old Hawkeye.

Meanwhile, in the real world …

• Stormy sequel Thor: The Dark World is finally out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/31/thor-the-dark-world-review> in 
the US this weekend, and Marvel has confirmed a future episode of Agents of 
SHIELD will deal with the aftermath of the movie. Will this mean atrip to Asgard
 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/agents-shield-feature-thor-2-652757>
 or something a bit more low-key?

• And the Marvel screen universe just got a lot more crowded. On Thursday, 
Netflix announced plans to bring Daredevil and other classic Marvel 
street-level characters to the small screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/07/netflix-marvel-superhero-broadcasters-daredevil>
, with four different shows and a mini-series scheduled to start rolling out in 
2015. (Last time he was on TV,Daredevil was defending the Hulk in court 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8EOgNwr0QAU>, and things went about as well as 
could be expected.)

What did you think of Agents of SHIELD episode six? Did a week's absence make 
your heart grow fonder? Let us know below.
 