
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people watching Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>. Don't read on if 
you haven't seen episode eight.

Click here to read Graeme's episode seven blogpost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/nov/15/agents-of-shield-recap-series-one-episode-seven>

Stop: hammer time? The advance hype for this episode dangled the tantalising 
prospect of a crossover withThor: The Dark World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154500/thor>. At first blush, the 
tie-in seemed to consist of SHIELD agents tidying up in the wake of Asgardians 
who might either be gods or aliens but who are definitely dreamy. Sifting 
through the wreckage of a dark elf doomsday device, Coulson's team indulged in 
notably good-natured ribbing and quipping, with Agent Ward preaching how 
vitally important it was to keep anything potentially harmful locked up, 
presumably in a special SHIELD containment box labelled "foreshadowing".

While the agents played chambermaid in London, two members of a Norse pagan 
hate cult fired up a chainsaw in Norway's Trillemarka national park to cut out 
an Asgardian berserker staff. Broken into three pieces and hidden centuries 
ago, the staff reputedly amplified the holder's deepest, darkest fears while 
also imbuing them with superhuman strength and conspicuously poor impulse 
control. One of the affable park rangers who confronted the vandals found this 
out the hard way.

With the newly juiced-up cult rioting in Oslo, Coulson's squad were tasked 
with tracking down the other two pieces of the staff, a Da Vinci Code-esque 
quest that involved working out geographical clues embedded in poetic fragments 
and teaming up with Professor Elliot Randolph, a Seville-based professor of 
Norse mythology whose tertiary interests included fancy pens and taking 
attractive young students out for tapas.

Randolph – played by guest star Peter MacNicol, of Ghostbusters II, Ally 
McBeal and other fine work – had good patter but bad intel. The angry pagans 
nabbed the second piece of the staff right out from under SHIELD's nose, but 
only after Ward had unwittingly received a jolt of its power, unlocking 
traumatic memories from his past and causing him to say mean, hurtful things to 
geek gang Fitz, Simmons and Skye while getting his vitals checked on the Bus.

Thanks to some deductive leaps from Coulson that really shouldn't be placed 
under too much scrutiny, the team got to meet a real-life god/alien after all. 
Randolph was secretly an Asgardian mason-turned-berserker-turned-deserter, a 
centuries-old being who had fallen in love with Earth and her ladyfolk. He had 
lain down the magic staff of the berserker and picked up the 
leather-elbow-patched jacket of the academic, somehow remaining invisible to 
the all-seeing eye of Heimdall.

With Randolph belatedly onside, the Bus stopped off to pick up the last bit of 
the staff that he'd stashed in a Irish church, a routine operation that turned 
into an almighty brawl when the hate-fuelled Alpen Fight Club turned up 
mob-handed, stabbing Randolph with his own weapon. As Coulson performed 
invasive heart massage on the downed Asgardian, angry Ward took on the 
unfriendly Scandinavians, letting his Sith flag fully fly. When even more 
cultists arrived, Agent May picked up the slack, her tai chi mastery and innate 
badassery allowing her to wield the reconstituted berserker staff without any 
obvious emotional blowback.

Uneasy flashbacks to Ward's childhood, where his evil older brother prevented 
him from throwing a rope to his younger brother trapped at the bottom of a 
well, were dotted throughout the episode, but never really paid off (though the 
odds of his older brother turning up in a future episode must be high). The 
most intriguing part of this generally solid episode was Ward's unexpected 
hotel room assignation with Agent May. If this wasn't the first inter-team 
hook-up on the show, it was certainly strongly implied. Or maybe they just 
talked about past traumas over a couple of drams ...

Notes and observations

• The final pre-credits scene gave us a dream-glimpse of Tahiti, the "magical 
place" that is apparently the key to Coulson's problematic resurrection. Can 
the writers really keep this story thread bubbling along for another 14 
episodes? Should they?

• Agent Ward looked pretty ripped with his shirt off, even with various 
medical doodads attached. A fine advert for the beneficial effects of SHIELD's 
bottled water.

• When Randolph expresses a desire to relocate from Seville, Coulson suggests 
the American north-west. "You should consider Portland. Good food scene, great 
Philharmonic ..." Back inAvengers Assemble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144027/avengers>, Coulson was teased by 
Pepper Potts about a cellist he was seeing, who had recently moved to Portland. 
Will we ever meet this love interest?

• Coulson then offered to introduce Randolph to Thor someday. Maybe he was 
just joking, but wouldn't that be unlikely to happen, since Thor and the rest 
of the Avengers still think their favourite SHIELD agent is as dead as a 
Norwegian Blue parrot?

Biff! Bang! Quip-ow!

• "It would be nice if, for once, Thor and his people sent down the god of 
cleaning-up-after-yourself. They have probably have a magic broom for this kind 
of thing." Coulson surveys what's left of Greenwich University.

• "What if it called to them through magic? We know it's Asgardian, so the 
rules are a little bendy here." Skye's theory about finding the berserker staff.

• "Lots of bones. Let's see what we can dig up. See what I did there?" Coulson 
attempts to ironise a terrible line.

• "This is way, way better than the History Channel. This guy has lived 
through all the scary stuff: the Crusades, the Black Death, disco." Skye on 
discovering Randolph has been AWOL on Earth for yonks.

Comics callbacks

According to Agent Ward, the Bus's interrogation room – the one that looks 
inspired by the old Blockbusters set – is reinforced by a "silicon 
carbide-coated vibranium alloy".Vibranium is a rare metal  
<http://marvel.wikia.com/Vibranium>that has long been featured in Marvel 
comics, and is apparently the secret ingredient that makes Captain America's 
shield so shiny (and indestructible). This precious resource is primarily 
associated with the African kingdom of Wakanda, ruled byroyal superhero Black 
Panther <http://marvel.wikia.com/T%27Challa_%28Earth-616%29>, who might get his 
own Marvel movie someday 
<http://splashpage.mtv.com/2013/10/23/black-panther-movie/>.

Meanwhile, in the real world ...

The Well was directed by Jonathan Frakes, one-time Number One on the USS 
Enterprise D, and now a prolific director of episodic TV. His no-nonsense style 
has apparently earned him the nickname"Two-Takes" Frakes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4hWDn19RaDI>.

The Lego Marvel Super Heroes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2013/may/03/lego-marvel-super-heroes-trailer-video>
 videogame was released in the UK, to generally good reviews. As well as dozens 
of playable heroes and villains, it features a minifig version of Agent Coulson 
and voice work from Clark Gregg in his semi-official role as the glue that 
holds Marvel's various universes together. The level where Coulson has totidy 
up the Daily Bugle office with Doctor Octopus looks fun 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pst1pu59Njk>.

What did you think of Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> episode eight? Did 
you feel it lived up to the hype? Is the prospect of an ongoing Ward/May 
romance appealing? Let us know below
 