
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people watching Marvel's Agents of Shield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>. Don't read on if 
you haven't seen episode four

Click here to read Graeme's episode three blogpost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/11/marvels-agents-shield-recap-the-asset>

It was all kicking off in Malta last week. This time the agents of SHIELD 
continued their extended Eurotrip with a mission that began in Sweden and ended 
in Belarus. The pre-credits sequence featured creepy besuited men wearing 
flatcaps and red facemasks trooping through Stockholm's distinctive Sergel's 
Square, each with a metal briefcase handcuffed to their wrist. Avant-garde 
flashmob orPeaky Blinders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/peaky-blinders-episode-by-episode>
 crossover? It was hard to tell.

After the red-faced troupe stepped on to the tube, Jay Z-style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/13/jay-z-tube-london-timbaland-coldplay-chris-martin>
, they were attacked by a woman, who killed the lights before ripping them 
apart and vamoosing with the one briefcase that contained something valuable. 
This, we learned, was Akela (Pascale Armand), a SHIELD agent who was MIA after 
a botched operation seven years earlier. A protege of Agent Coulson – who had 
tried to convince her of the benefits of teamwork, despite her lone wolf name – 
she was now heisting diamonds from all over the globe.

The personal stakes for Coulson justified why his SHIELD team were going after 
a Marvel version of Catwoman rather than a bigger threat. He also opted to keep 
the operation under wraps in case his superiors simply wanted to kill Akela. 
This feels like it could be where the show works best: dealing with a situation 
on the fringes of authorisation with the squad also operating at the limits of 
their capability.

Partly, that's because it's easier to cheer for scrappy underdogs than a huge, 
militarised Big Brother organisation like SHIELD. Coulson even acknowledged 
their peeping powers while searching for smartphone pics that could help 
identify Akela. "It's amazing," he said. "Every year this part of our job gets 
easier. Between Facebook, Instagram and Flickr, people are surveilling 
themselves."

The title of the episode, Eye-Spy, turned out to be a little on the nose. 
After a fractious encounter in Belarus, Skye managed to hack a video signal 
coming from their target, and the science team of Fitz and Simmons deduced 
Akela had been implanted with a cybernetic eye. It gifted her backscatter 
vision – like an upgraded form of x-ray – but also contained a deadly failsafe 
if she refused to follow text orders from her handler.

After the high-kicking Agent May brought Akela in, Agents of SHIELD cranked 
right up intoMission: Impossible <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k55NuWQCh78> 
mode. While Fitz and Simmons prepared to surgically remove her cybernetic eye 
before the failsafe was triggered, Agent Ward attempted to dupe her handler 
into thinking she was still active and on-mission with a jury-rigged version of 
Google Glass. It was precarious, tense and also funny – especially when Ward 
received the instruction to seduce a grumpy guard. Some of you are down on 
Brett Dalton's ramrod-straight performance, but his croaked "help" to tech 
back-up Skye was a highlight.

After taking an eye-cam pic of what looked like an alien scientific formula in 
the secure facility, Ward blasted his way out, while Fitz successfully snipped 
Akela's eye-wire and Coulson intercepted her mysterious handler: an overweight 
former M16 agent who turned out to have his own ocular augmentation, which 
self-destructed in less than five seconds to prevent him being apprehended. So 
unlike last week, the team managed to actually save a SHIELD asset, although 
Akela – sporting a cool, almost Nick Fury-esque metal eyepatch – was 
frogmarched off to face trial for all that heisting. She did manage to plant a 
seed of doubt in Agent May's mind by asking why Coulson was so different: "What 
did they do to him?" Ominous!

Some talking points. Bear McCreary's music for the Battlestar Galactica reboot 
was a huge part of setting the tone of that show,all cosmic chorals and tribal 
drumming <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zu0FMaEneO0>, yet his work on Agents 
of SHIELD seems a little backgrounded. Should they beef it up and bring it the 
fore? In fact, now action footage from at least four episodes exists, should 
Agents of SHIELD just go all in and compilea kickass 1980s-style opening 
credits montage <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PNl9M5TxGC8>? And finally, this 
week's post-credits scene went for humour rather than world-building – did you 
dig it?

Notes and observations

• Before we found out she had a cybernetic eye and SHIELD training, Akela's 
uncanny abilities suggested some sort of ESP. But there's supposed to be a 
scientific explanation for everything in this version of the Marvel universe, 
so Skye's initial theory about mind powers was shot down pronto. "There are no 
credible studies of pre-cognition, telepathy or extra-sensory perception," 
tutted Agent May.

• Those SHIELD-branded spring water bottles sure get a lot of screen-time.

• The Bus interior that looks like it was made from the old Blockbuster set 
made a welcome return. It even seemed thematically appropriate as earlier, Skye 
– bursting for the loo while stuck in a van – had essentially asked: "Can I 
have a pee please, Phil?"

• There was a second mention of Vanchat, a possible big bad for SHIELD. Agent 
Ward was introduced retrieving alien tech from him in the pilot, while Akela's 
ill-fated mission seven years ago was apparently to take him down. "Vanchat". 
Hmmm. Still sounds like an online messageboard for Ford Transit fans.

• The lo-fi, real-world surreality of the guys in red facemasks marching 
through an urban centre reminded me of the Avengers –the 1960s UK version 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GeK3Lkd_XL4> rather than Cap's spandex 
playmates. Would Agents of SHIELD benefit from cribbing more from its other 
namesake? Coulson as Steed? Agent May as Mrs Peel?

• We learned that Agent Ward was ticklish. IT COULD BE IMPORTANT.

Biff! Bang! Quip-ow! (Skye needling Ward special)

"Did you ever learn the thing where boy parts and girl parts are different? 
And our parts aren't penises?"

[Discovering Akela's x-ray vision] "You're a robot, Ward. Can you do that?"

"You're going to have to bromance him. Talk sports. Vodka. The Victorinov's 
Secret catalogue. Be friendly, Agent Ward. Can you be friendly?"

The SHIELD science club

During the field trip to Zloda in Belarus, Simmons fangirls about real-life 
Nobel prize-winning physicist andinventor of the heterotransistor Zhores Alferov
 <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2000/oct/12/features11.g2>, who was 
born nearby. "I've dreamed of visiting Zloda since I was a schoolgirl!" she 
squee-ed. The 83-year-old Alferov was unavailable for comment.

Has anyone mentioned Hawkeye yet?

Nope. In fact this episode was very light on Marvel callbacks or references.

Meanwhile, in the real world…

At New York Comic-Con – where Eye-Spy was screened in full to attendees at a 
dedicated Agents of SHIELD panel 
<http://www.comicbookresources.com/?page=article&id=48455> – it was officially 
confirmed that the show had been picked up for "the back nine", meaning a full 
first season of 22 episodes. There were also whispers of five other TV shows 
based on Marvel properties being at various stages of development.

This episode was directed by former Star Trek Voyager star Roxann Dawson.

Chloe Bennet, who plays Skye, revealed she had four wisdom teeth removed this 
week <https://twitter.com/ChloeBennet4/status/389817302402998273>. IT COULD BE 
IMPORTANT.

What did you think of Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> episode four? Would 
the show benefit from some kickass opening credits? Let us know below
 