
Peggy Carter is coming home (sort of). This weekend, Agent Carter, the Hayley 
Atwell-starring Marvel TV spinoff about the resourceful English rose who stole 
Captain America’s heart, belatedly makes its UK debut after screening in the US 
six months ago. It’s set in 1946, a year afterCaptain America: The First Avenger
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/28/captain-america-film-review>, 
but even in peacetime, Peggy is under pressure. She’s adjusting to single life 
in New York after being reposted to the covert Strategic Scientific Reserve 
(SSR) and still grieving the loss of Cap after he “died” heroically ditching a 
Hydra megabomber into the freezing North Atlantic. Can Peggy get things back on 
track? Here’s what you need to know about the show.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiCA2F96-ulo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiCA2F96-ulo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiCA2F96-ulo&media=>
 Watch a trailer for Agent Carter. 
No powers, no problem

The Marvel universe is crammed with characters who have superpowers or uncanny 
abilities of some kind. EvenSHIELD company man Agent Coulson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> came back from the 
dead. But Peggy hasn’t been exposed to or bitten by anything radioactive – she 
is just a smart, capable woman who has to rely on her wit and will, rather than
a flying suit of cyber-armou <https://www.theguardian.com/film/iron-man>r 
(although she does seem reasonably proficient in judo). It makes Peggy a 
relatable lead who is exceptionally easy to root for, which is helped 
enormously by Atwell’s charming, subtly layered performance. Her only armour is 
a necessarily no-nonsense attitude and Keep Calm resilience, which can’t quite 
obscure her grief.

Sexism can be as bad as any supervillain

The SSR, a sort of proto-SHIELD, are supposed to be the good guys. But Peggy’s 
work colleagues are almost universally boorish and sexist – notably former One 
Tree Hill hunk Chad Michael Murray as a vain, vindictive agent who implies she 
is a hussy exploiting her past relationship with national hero Captain America 
to advance her career. The SSR are unwilling to put Carter in charge of 
anything other than making coffee. So when they accuse playboy industrialist 
Howard Stark (Dominic Cooper) of selling weapons of mass destruction, you will 
likely cheer when Peggy goes behind their backs and turns double-agent to help 
clear the name of her wartime ally.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV13W9gQ_1GA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV13W9gQ_1GA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV13W9gQ_1GA&media=>
 Take a sneak peek at Agent Carter. 
It’s relatively light on continuity

As the Marvel screen universe expands exponentially in the present day, 
there’s a danger it will tie itself up in narrative knots attempting to 
organically link Iron Man withDoctor Strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/iron-man> and whatever is going on with 
Agents of SHIELD. Due to historical displacement alone, Agent Carter doesn’t 
have to worry too much about the twists and turns of current continuity, 
although it can root around in the past. Later in the season, Peggy 
investigates the origins of the Red Room, the brutal, brainwash-y Soviet 
assassin school that eventually createdBlack Widow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/08/black-widow-flashmob-campaign-marvel-scarlett-johansson>
. The show isn’t so hermetically sealed off that Peggy herself can’tpop up in 
other Marvel properties <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man>, but Agent 
Carter can still be enjoyed footnote-free, and feels all the breezier for it.


Meet Daredevil, TV’s emo superhero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/10/daredevil-tv-emo-superhero>
It has style in spades


It’s late-1940s New York: that means curvy cars, and everybody wears hats. The 
period setting makes Agent Carter feel like a genuine departure from the 
antiseptic blue-grey palette of Agents of SHIELD’s techno-offices and the 
permanent Hell’s Kitchen murk of Daredevil. As a statement of intent, an early 
scene where Peggy navigates the New York throng in a smartly tailored red, 
white and blue ensemble is a strong start, and she rivals current champ Taylor 
Swift in the deployment of her red lipstick – as both fashion statement and spy 
gadget.

It might remind you of the Avengers

Nope, not those Avengers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/26/avengers-assemble-review>. These 
ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/sep/22/your-next-box-set-avengers>
. Howard Stark is on the run, so he orders his loyal butler Jarvis (James 
D’Arcy) to assist Peggy in her secret missions. Any question of romance would 
be quite unseemly – Peggy still carries a torch for heroic ice-pop Cap, and 
Jarvis has an unseen wife on whom he clearly dotes. But there’s a definite 
sizzle of chemistry between the manners-obsessed English gent with a fondness 
for umbrellas and his glamorous, headstrong, karate-chopping partner. Perhaps 
the recently announced second season of Agent Carter will prominently feature 
some kinky boots.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVvjjm8hMdKI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVvjjm8hMdKI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVvjjm8hMdKI&media=>
 The other Avengers … 
Agent Carter starts on Sunday on Fox UK at 9pm




 