
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people watching Marvel's Agents Of SHIELD on 
Channel 4 in the UK. Don't read on if you haven't seen episode one.

Cut-and-shunting a beloved movie into a TV series is nothing new: just ask 
poor RoboCop. What makes Marvel's Agents of SHIELD a little bit special – over 
and above being the small-screen spin-off ofone of the most successful movies 
of all time <http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=avengers11.htm> – is the 
unprecendented overlap of talent involved, both in front of the camera and 
behind it. With Joss Whedon directing this opening episode, and the resurrected 
Agent Coulson (Clark Gregg) large and in charge, it has had the best possible 
start. Now it just has to try and not be hopelessly overshadowed by its 
blockbusting source material as the production line of Marvel movies rumbles on.

This pilot had to do two key things: make the Strategic Homeland Intervention, 
Enforcement and Logistics Division seem compelling without Tony Stark and the 
rest of the Avengers, and come up with a satisfying explanation for how Agent 
Coulson came back from the dead (after being "shanked by the Asgardian 
Mussolini" in Avengers Assemble). There was some screenwriting sleight-of-hand 
at work: apparently Coulson was only dead for eight seconds but Nick Fury 
opportunistically took a leaf out of Loki's book and spun his murder to give 
the then-bickering Avengers something to actually avenge.

This neatly justified why Coulson won't be speaking to Bruce Banner any time 
soon – would you want to tell the Hulk you'd pulled the wool over his eyes? – 
and cannily steered the TV show away from interacting with the movie big 
hitters. But the deception could go even deeper. Coulson seemingly believes he 
recuperated in Tahiti with Mai Tais and a super-friendly masseuse. But 
according to his colleague Maria Hill – a substantial cameo from Cobie 
Smulders, another holdover from Avengers Assemble – there's another layer of 
truth to be uncovered. Secrets!

The rest of the episode assembled Coulson's squad, with a Paris-set 
introduction to action man Ward (Brett Dalton) that made him seem likethe man 
from Milk Tray <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i0ya5kh4_ZM>. Brits were 
represented by squabbling boffins Fitz (Iain De Caestecker) and Simmons 
(Elizabeth Henstridge). Add overqualified pilot Melinda May (Ming-Na Wen) and 
Anonymous-esque truth-hacker Skye (Chloe Bennet), and you had the makings of an 
ensemble capable of sniping and snarking at each other like Buffy'sScooby Gang 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=scooby%20gang> in their prime.

Their first assignment – tracking an "unregistered gifted" played by J August 
Richards, a face familiar to long-standing Whedon fans as Gunn from Angel – was 
a little underwhelming, but at the very least it introduced Centipede. This 
codenamed conspiracy to create meta-humans using a cocktail of gamma radiation, 
super-soldier serum and whatever else works in the Marvel universe looks likely 
to be the Big Bad of series one.

While it never looked cheap, Agents of SHIELD clearly doesn't have movie 
megabucks. Coulson's team are making do with a roomy cargo jet rather than a 
flying aircraft carrier, and most of the vehicles essentially look like they've 
just had SHIELD decals applied to their doors – apart from Lola, Coulson's 
cherry-red classic Corvette that's convertible in more ways than one. But 
without the budget for endless CGI effects, many of the stunts had a pleasingly 
real, almostDuncan Dares <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GtQRiLDy03I> feel to 
them, especially when J August Richards started tossing his unsympathetic 
factory boss around a warehouse.

With their quarry threatening to explode in Union station – a plausible 
side-effect of the Extremis technology established in Iron Man 3 – the SHIELD 
squad had to work together to defuse both the situation and their target, which 
mostly involved some speechifying from Coulson and a rather pat ending, albeit 
one featuring an extremely gif-ready thumbs-up from Fitz.

With every preceding bit of exposition and interaction garlanded with clever 
gags and endless patter, the gear-shift to heartfelt rhetoric felt a little 
rough. Joss Whedon and SHIELD showrunners Maurissa Tancharoen and Jed Whedon 
are past masters when it comes to landing unexpected emotional gut punches 
after lulling and lol-ing audiences with sugarsnap dialogue. Perhaps it's just 
becauseAgents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> is still getting 
off the runway that in this case, it felt a little hinky.

Notes and observations

• The interrogation room where Agent Coulson and Ward question Skye seemed to 
take its interior-design cues fromstudent-friendly quiz Blockbusters 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xCUPnPIpXXE>. You half-expected to see a Hulk 
gonk perched on the desk.

• The SHIELD universe has a cultural hinterland that stretches beyond 
spandex-clad superheroes, with Harry Potter, Terminator 2 and John D 
MacDonald's belovedTravis McGee novels 
<http://arts.nationalpost.com/2013/03/05/perfect-crime-john-d-macdonalds-travis-mcgee-is-the-thinking-mans-detective/>
 all referenced by the pop-savvy characters.

• The brief appearance of Ron Glass as a high-up SHIELD science guy was a 
thrill for fans of Whedon's short-lived but beloved space western Firefly. In 
fact, did the cargo bay of the SHIELD plane remind anyone else ofSerenity's 
cargo bay <http://people.wku.edu/amanda.mcdowell822/firefly/ship.html>?

Biff! Bang! Quip-ow!


• "Sorry ... that corner was really dark and I couldn't help myself. I think 
there's a bulb out." (Coulson undermines his dramatic resurrection reveal.)

• "With great power comes ... a ton of weird crap that you are not prepared to 
deal with." (Though he's originally a Marvel character, Sony currently owns the 
rights to Spider-Man so there will be none of that "with great power comes 
great responsibility" stuff.)

• "This is actually where they make the red tape isn't it? I always wondered." 
(Coulson again, trying to tempt legendary operative Melinda May away from her 
boring desk job.)

• "What are we seeing?" "The man is angry at the other man." (Fitz makes his 
play to become the witty mutterer of the ensemble, a Whedon hallmark.)

Comics callbacks


• "Are you excited to be coming on our journey into mystery?" The odd way that 
Simmons first greeted Ward was presumably a shoutout to Journey Into Mystery, 
the long-running Marvel comic thatfirst introduced Thor 
<http://marvel.com/comics/issue/9779/journey_into_mystery_1952_83> back in 1952.

• The fact that Lola has sci-fi hover-tyres isn't a Back to the Future nod 
– SHIELD has been using flying cars sincea 1967 issue of Strange Tales 
<http://marvel.wikia.com/Strange_Tales_Vol_1_159>.

Meanwhile, in the real world ...


• In the US, SHIELD premiered on the ABC network on Tuesday and attracted 
11.9m viewers, making it thehighest-rated drama debut in four years 
<http://insidetv.ew.com/2013/09/25/agents-of-shield-ratings/>. (Mind you, the 
last holder of that record was V, a series that only managed two seasons.)

• This ambitious live promotional stunt 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=psR8FidoHFU#t=33> to promote the show in 
Mexico was extremely cool. Could you call it a Hulk smashmob?

• This isn't the first time SHIELD has appeared on the small screen – there was
an ill-fated 1996 TV movie 
<http://comicsalliance.com/nick-fury-agent-of-shield-review-david-hasselhoff-david-goyer-marvel/>
 starring David Hasselhoff as Nick Fury. His performance was ... patchy.

What did you think? Did the mix of workplace banter and stunt action leave you 
thrilled? Or did you miss Hulk and co? You now have Clearance Level 7, so let 
us know in the comments below.
 