
Star Wars: The Force Awakens – your interactive cheat sheet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ng-interactive/2015/dec/14/star-wars-the-force-awakens-your-interactive-sheet>
The new Star Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> movie, The Force 
Awakens, is poised to break UK box office records after racking up advance 
ticket sales of more than 500,000 at one cinema chain alone.

Odeon, the UK’s largest chain with more than 100 cinemas nationwide, reported 
the figure ahead of the release of JJ Abrams’ new instalment on Thursday. It is 
double the company’s previous record, which was held by October’sSpectre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre>.

The chain will stage close to 5,000 screenings across the movie’s opening 
weekend, with the first shows beginning at 12.01am on Thursday at 113 cinemas 
nationwide. Tickets are still available to see the film on its first day of 
release, but only between the unsociable hours of 3am and 6am.

“Odeon is to become a 24-hour operation ahead of the launch of Star Wars: The 
Force Awakens <https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> – which 
we expect to become the biggest film of all time, and promises to be a landmark 
cinematic event” said Andy Edge, commercial director at Odeon UK & Ireland.

Church of Jediism 'signing up thousands' ahead of new Star Wars film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/14/church-of-jediism-signing-up-thousands-ahead-of-new-star-wars-film>
The UK’s third-largest chain, Vue Cinemas, has reported selling more than 
355,000 tickets in advance, also breaking a previous record of 270,278 for 
February’sFifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fifty-shades-of-grey>.

James Bond adventure Skyfall currently holds the record for the 
highest-grossing film of all time at the UK box office, with £102.9m in 
receipts. The Force Awakens, which world premieres in Los Angeles on Monday, is 
widely expected to be the year’s highest-grossing film and could yet challenge 
Avatar’s $2.7bn world record for the mantle of highest-grossing movie of all 
time.

Industry experts believe the film needs to make at least $1.5bn 
<http://www.eonline.com/news/723730/star-wars-the-force-awakens-must-earn-1-5-billion-to-be-considered-a-success-and-the-burden-terrifies-j-j-abrams>
 to be considered a success on Wall Street. However, sources close to Disney, 
which bought Star Wars and other Lucasfilm franchises for $4bn (£2.5bn) in 
October 2012,have told the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/star-wars-carries-its-own-marketing-weight-for-disney-1449536686>
 that the marketing spend on the Force Awakens will actually be less than 
Hollywood would usually spent on major blockbusters, suggesting the saga 
effectively sells itself.

Carrie Fisher: Star Wars' resident Dorothy Parker remains riotously off-message
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/14/carrie-fisher-star-wars-princess-leia-history-profile>
In one of his final published interviews prior to the film’s premiere, Abrams 
told the Los Angeles Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/herocomplex/la-et-hc-jj-abrams-star-wars-the-force-awakens-20151213-story.html>
 he was confident in his work, no matter how well the new episode is received 
(reviews are embargoed until 8am GMT on 16 December).

“It’s like I’m standing at the doorway of the airplane door and we’re about to 
open the door,” he said. “Do I hope the parachute opens? Yes. But every time I 
feel remotely paralysed by the noise or anticipation or expectation of it, I 
just look at the work I’ve seen done and I’m just grateful.”

Abrams said he had been most excited by the “homespun” approach to creating 
effects on the Force Awakens. “In that shot in the trailer where Daisy [Ridley] 
and John [Boyega] are running in the desert, everything you’re seeing in that 
shot, with the exception of the little teeny-tiny TIE Fighters and the 
blasters, it’s all in camera,” he said. “The explosions are all practical and 
real. The entire set you’re seeing was in Abu Dhabi.”

Where the much-derided Star Wars prequel trilogy relied almost entirely on CGI 
for its planetary vistas, alien creatures and epic battles, Abrams said digital 
effects were largely used to complement more traditional techniques on the new 
episode. “This is not a movie lacking in amazing CG work,” he said. “But what 
was so cool was how CG was often used to remove puppeteers or take out wires or 
rigs or legs sticking out of a creature.”
 