
‘It was a long time before I admitted to myself that I’d nearly died’

I didn’t realise how my work affected me at the time. Within five months of 
arriving at my new post, I had been in a plane accident and nearly died of 
malaria. Though it was a long time before I admitted to myself that I’d nearly 
died, I had a few small breakdowns and would start crying about something that 
seemed trivial. I sometimes felt trapped in my town, which was accessible only 
by plane. My organisation had a counselling line I could call and those people 
listened but had zero experience with people working in humanitarian settings.


I’ve now been in the industry for a decade and I can’t believe the lack of 
security protocol we had then. I left because I felt that the aid agency wasn’t 
well placed to support the kind of work that they had me doing. I sought 
counselling but didn’t pursue it because I didn’t want to spend my own money. 
Several years later I decided to see a therapist for a few reasons and was able 
to better understand that I had experienced stress, anxiety and mild PTSD. I’m 
glad I’ve been an aid worker and that I still work in humanitarian settings, 
but organisations need to take better care of their staff.
Data on mental health 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/mental_health_issues/giv-32650uCuEPEqdXgmK/>
 The data from the Guardian survey shows the percentage of contributors that 
identified with different mental health issues. 
‘The feelings of fear, confusion, shame and anger remained and even festered’

The organisation I currently work for handled my PTSD impeccably, both 
informally and formally. I was fully supported with counselling and was given 
sick leave with full pay. I feel the way it was dealt with genuinely saved my 
life.


However, this is the sixth international non-governmental organisation (INGO) 
I have worked for and the first time I have experienced anything near this 
level of support. Several years ago I went through a number of highly traumatic 
experiences in a short space of time and was clearly demonstrating symptoms of 
PTSD. The organisation that I worked for at the time, rather than offer 
support, tried to make me accept blame for the things that happened to me. They 
were clearly trying to cover up negligence on their own part and this was 
confirmed when I heard a security evaluation of the events that had happened to 
me found the organisation’s security management had been seriously lacking. I 
was accused of insubordination and immaturity when I said I did not feel that 
my safety was being adequately managed. My contract was not renewed. I then 
took five months off from work in a spiral of depression, anxiety and confused 
anger.

I eventually went back to work and was able to put some of it behind me, but 
as it had never been properly dealt with some of the feelings of fear, 
confusion, shame and anger remained and even festered – I was short tempered 
and easily spooked. It wasn’t until I got full-on PTSD again at the end of last 
year after a series of violent incidents in a conflict zone, and was given the 
support that I needed by my current organisation, that I realised how 
traumatised I had been and how great the lasting impact was. It’s hard not to 
resent my previous organisation for the years of guilt and anger.

‘The best support we received was from each other’

During a traumatic experience for my colleagues (several were abducted and 
executed) and I last year, I felt a massive lack of mental health support. What 
can be best defined as tokenistic support was made available to staff. But it 
was brief, late and hugely insufficient. As a senior manager I could not 
participate in the one group support session (in case colleagues may not be 
comfortable speaking up in front of me), and I was offered no other support. 
Overall, the total mental health support was inappropriate. Instead the best 
support we received was from each other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Faid-workers-stories-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcc43fa50f557ec1dacc45014b1950eac96cf825%2F0_153_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aid%20workers%20speak%20out%20about%20mental%20health%3A%20'I%20was%20afraid%20they%20would%20think%20I%20couldn't%20handle%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Faid-workers-stories-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aid%20workers%20speak%20out%20about%20mental%20health%3A%20%27I%20was%20afraid%20they%20would%20think%20I%20couldn%27t%20handle%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Faid-workers-stories-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcc43fa50f557ec1dacc45014b1950eac96cf825%2F0_153_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A family takes refuge following floods in Pakistan’s Punjab province. One aid 
worker shares what it was like to work in the aftermath. Photograph: 
STR/Pakistan/Reuters 
‘We all had coping mechanisms – negative and positive’

I was on the frontline of a lot of events and issues related to conflict and 
insecurity that arose during my time in the field. Crossfire, shelling in the 
camp, wounded soldiers, triage, attacks on humanitarian workers, threats 
against myself and others, lack of water for the internally displaced people 
and us for more than 36 hours (a tank drove over the pipeline) ... there’s a 
long list.

There were times I thought I was going to die. I lived in a compact, isolated 
environment along with an amazing group of humanitarians, and we all had coping 
mechanisms – negative and positive. I felt cared for by individuals in my 
organisation, if not necessarily always psychologically looked after in the 
best way as NGOs struggle with making psycho social support more than a 
tick-box exercise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Faid-workers-stories-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad9eae2af44d352b646fd0e64f718896be1dbc85%2F0_0_2377_1426%2F2377.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aid%20workers%20speak%20out%20about%20mental%20health%3A%20'I%20was%20afraid%20they%20would%20think%20I%20couldn't%20handle%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Faid-workers-stories-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aid%20workers%20speak%20out%20about%20mental%20health%3A%20%27I%20was%20afraid%20they%20would%20think%20I%20couldn%27t%20handle%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Faid-workers-stories-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad9eae2af44d352b646fd0e64f718896be1dbc85%2F0_0_2377_1426%2F2377.jpg>
 Many contributors said specific incidents they witnessed in the field had an 
impact on their wellbeing. Photograph: Goran Tomasevic/Reuters 
Because of the high turnover in the field I think it’s easy for organisations 
to forget people and the things they went through. The mental health issues 
such as depression, anxiety, sleep disorder and issues with reintegration came 
after I left the field. I dealt with it in my own way and think there will 
always be a part of me that will. Once you leave the organisation, it’s hard to 
get care unless you have identified issues beforehand, and have it organised 
through them before your contract is up. Meaningful action on this issue will 
not happen until it becomes mandatory for donors to fund NGOs to provide this 
follow up care as a standard part of their budgets and HR policies.

‘After two weeks I collapsed in the field’

I spent four months on a project in west Africa under difficult political 
circumstances. I then commuted every month from London as funding didn’t allow 
for a permanent position. The travelling on weekends and work during the week, 
as well as splitting time between two continents led to a gradual social 
isolation. The feeling of restlessness and fatigue started to take its toll and 
I spent more and more time alone.

Instead of taking a break, I applied for a transfer to South Sudan where I 
thought life would be more stable and support systems would be better, 
especially as more people of my organisation were based there. However, after 
two weeks I collapsed in the field. I took immediate sick leave, but left to my 
own devices in my room and in the hospital in Juba I just wanted to get out of 
the whole situation. I also felt an element of shame, afraid of being judged 
that I “couldn’t handle it”.


In this very fragile state I decided to hand in my notice instead of speaking 
out and seeking support. I am still coming to terms with what happened, the 
financial loss and coping with finding a new job.


I wish I had been more honest with the organisation I worked for, demanding 
better support and making sure that this does not happen to other young 
idealistic aid workers who put the job first and their wellbeing second.
Data on mental health - leaving job 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/mental_health_leave_job/giv-32650SZ6O6L7v0LPr/>
 A high number of respondents said mental health issues had led to them 
consider leaving the industry. 
‘Family and friends could not fathom what he had been through’

I think this [mental health] is a huge, hidden and important issue. I have 
worked in the sector for about 10 years and have many friends and colleagues 
working in the sector. I have witnessed many of the issues you have mentioned 
[in the survey] including people I know feeling isolated, overworked, underpaid 
and extremely affected by feelings of guilt, apathy, cynicism and hopelessness 
because of the difficult circumstances they have worked in and witnessed.

My partner worked in Haiti during the time of the 2010 earthquake. He 
continued to work and received little or no care from his organisation at the 
time or after. Over a period of several years he experienced extreme stress 
compounded by a delay in processing his experience, as well as anger, guilt, 
and I would suspect undiagnosed PTSD.

He did not know how to handle this, and as his partner neither did I. The 
relationship suffered, as did many of his other close relationships with family 
and friends who could not fathom what he had been through. As his partner I 
experienced extreme anxiety, and a feeling of hopelessness in terms of being 
able to help him, as well as the stress of a relationship breakdown. I don’t 
think these experiences are unique.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Faid-workers-stories-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feacaf91ea15bf42e2cc56292abe76dbe1ad9a2fc%2F0_273_3498_2099%2F3498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aid%20workers%20speak%20out%20about%20mental%20health%3A%20'I%20was%20afraid%20they%20would%20think%20I%20couldn't%20handle%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Faid-workers-stories-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aid%20workers%20speak%20out%20about%20mental%20health%3A%20%27I%20was%20afraid%20they%20would%20think%20I%20couldn%27t%20handle%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Faid-workers-stories-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feacaf91ea15bf42e2cc56292abe76dbe1ad9a2fc%2F0_273_3498_2099%2F3498.jpg>
 Graves in the aftermath of Haiti earthquake. One contributor reveals the 
impact the tragedy had on her aid worker partner. Photograph: Shannon 
Stapleton/Reuters 
‘I am in no way an exception within the sector, which is what I find most 
disturbing’

I was never diagnosed with mental health issues by a professional, but I have 
identified signs of PTSD and burnout myself. I left my last position and 
organisation because of the lack of attention to mental and physical wellbeing 
and I am happy to say I found an organisation that seems to place more 
attention to these issues. In over five years of field work, I have experienced 
direct threats to my life, lived in extremely insecure conditions with strict 
security measures which led to isolation, sustained unreasonable rest and 
recuperation (R&R) policies and worked an average of 60-65 hours per week for 
over three years without significant breaks. I am in no way an exception within 
the sector, which is what I find most disturbing.
Mental health data - impacted on job 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/mental_health_impacted_job/giv-32650jKRktEFr2q5m/>
 Many contributors said their mental health issues were impacting on their work.
‘I couldn’t sleep, but I was always tired’

I worked on the response to the Pakistan floods. We all worked outrageous 
hours – 18 hours a day, no weekends. I cried. I couldn’t sleep but I was always 
tired. I took a variety of prescription meds without a prescription to make 
myself sleep. I couldn’t disconnect. I worked every day. I lost my temper at 
work. I stopped doing the things I loved. I stopped seeing my friends. I only 
worked.

After about eight months of this insanity, I was incapable of doing my job 
well. I broke down during in my performance appraisal and my line manager 
suggested I resign. I did. My friend said at the time: “I know how you feel: 
like a lemon. Cut in half, squeezed, and thrown away”, and I did. I took time 
off and got a part-time job but I couldn’t concentrate and I had short-term 
memory loss. I went to a counsellor, who referred me to a psychiatrist. I was 
diagnosed with depression, and started taking antidepressants. As for the 
short-term memory loss, my doctor said I had damaged my hippocampus and that 
with two to three years of sleeping properly and not getting stressed, I might 
get better. But I’ve never really gotten back the capacity to work like that, 
not even for a day or a week. I’ve never felt as sharp as I did before that.
Mental health data - impact on work 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/mental_health_continued_working/giv-32650lbG5LpIAuudd/>
 Many contributors shared their thoughts on why it was difficult to talk about 
and get support for mental health issues in the sector. 
‘Staff are expected to go home and return to life within “normal” society’

Most aid workers are prone to burnout and many that I have worked with have 
PTSD. Little or no psychological support is provided post- or pre-deployment to 
help aid workers deal with these issues. While organisations expect their staff 
to have “coping mechanisms, adapt to stressful environments, work long hours in 
basic conditions”, no support is provided for staff to be able to do so. 
Working in conflict-affected countries in these conditions, staff are then 
expected to go home and return to life within “normal” society without any 
reintegration support. Many organisations have a hotline that staff can call to 
talk to a psychologist in another part of the world that they have never met - 
but this is simply a tick-box process. INGOs need to place additional focus on 
the wellbeing of their staff and provide obligatory psycho social support 
sessions.

We will be continuing to explore the issue of mental health and well being in 
the aid sector this week on Global Development Professionals Network. You can 
follow the coveragehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/aid-worker-wellbeing>
.Get in touch on globaldevpros@theguardian.com if you would like to comment on 
the topic.

 * If you have been affected by the stories in this article, the Samaritans can
be contacted on 116 123 in the UK 
<http://www.samaritans.org/how-we-can-help-you/contact-us>. If you live outside 
the UK, a list of organisations providing support internationally can be found
here 
<http://in2mentalhealth.com/2011/06/23/50-mental-health-ngosuser-organizations-around-the-world/>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.

 