
The king is dead, long live the king! Caravaggio coasted in to win the Group 
One Keeneland Phoenix Stakes at The Curragh on Sunday and the bookmakers 
slashed his odds as favourite for next May’s2,000 Guineas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2000-guineas>. Half an hour later Air Force 
Blue finished a tailed-off last of seven in a Group Three race at The Curragh. 
It was the same Air Force Blue who a year ago won the Phoenix in impressive 
fashion and was promoted to hot favourite for this year’s Guineas – in which he 
finished 12th in a field of 13. In fact, the colt has flopped in all four of 
his runs this season.

Both colts are trained by Aidan O’Brien and his masters at Ballydoyle will be 
hoping Caravaggio’s Classic career will not need any of the miracles often 
depicted by the man he was named after.

O’Brien was certainly not holding back in his praise of the colt on Sunday: 
“Everything went 100%. In his last piece of work he hit a top speed of 45 miles 
per hour – no horse in Ballydoyle has ever been able to do that.

“He’s very pacey and has a great mind. He’s so relaxed he could get further 
but I’d say we’ll have a look at the Prix Morny [Deauville, 21 August]. He’s 
the fastest we have ever had and I’d not be in a rush to go over seven 
furlongs. He could always go for the Middle Park [Newmarket, 24 September] 
after the Morny.”

With Ryan Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/ryan-moore-air-force-blue-2000-guineas>
 sidelined, Seamus Heffernan was riding Caravaggio for the first time since the 
son of Scat Daddy made his debut at Dundalk in April. Heffernan said of his 
mount, who won at odds of 1-8: “I’d say he has all the attributes needed to go 
all the way, yes.”

Air Force Blue, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/air-force-blue-dewhurst-stakes-emotionless-aidan-obrien-william-buick>
 by another top Kentucky-based sire, War Front, started at even money but he 
was slowly away and, although quickly making up ground to track the leaders, 
the response was minimal when Heffernan asked for an effort. The partnership 
eventually trailed in 18 lengths behind the winner, Toscanini.

Ryan Moore says specialist has told him to take break from racing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/04/ryan-moore-specialist-break-horse-racing-hip-problem>
At Deauville on Sunday there was drama during the Prix Maurice de Gheest. 
Signs Of Blessing made all the running under Stéphane Pasquier to give the 
trainer François Rohaut his biggest career triumph.

But the Group One race was marred when Gold-Fun came down 150 yards out, 
giving Christophe Soumillon a crashing fall from which he was lucky to walk 
away unscathed. It was later confirmed that the fall of Gold-Fun, trained in 
Hong Kong by Richard Gibson, had been a fatal one. The seven-year-old had won 
11 of his 32 starts, earning not far short of £4m in prize money. At Royal 
Ascot in June he had finished runner-up, beaten a neck, in the Diamond Jubilee 
Stakes.

Signs Of Blessing, who finished just behind in third place in the Diamond 
Jubilee, forged clear to win on Sunday. Rohaut then outlined ambitious plans 
for the winner that will take the gelding out of France at least twice more 
this year: “Sprinters like this get stronger as they get older. If the ground 
is good he’ll go for the big sprint on Champions Day at Ascot and then on to 
Hong Kong.”
 