
Aidan O’Brien won his first Irish Classic of the year when Seventh Heaven was 
a surprise winner of the Irish Oaks at 14-1. The filly, running for the first 
time sincefinishing a tailed-off sixth in the Epsom equivalent, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/03/minding-ryan-moore-wins-the-oaks-epsom>
 produced a sustained and powerful run up the home straight to pull clear of 
the English raiders Architecture and Harlequeen.

O’Brien, winning the race for the fifth time, had a more obvious chance with 
Even Song, sent off the 4-5 favourite after herRibblesdale success at Royal 
Ascot, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/16/royal-ascot-gold-cup-day-live?page=with%3Ablock-5762bedfe4b088b489cb20a3>
but she never got into the argument and was a disappointing seventh under Ryan 
Moore.

It is more than a decade since O’Brien was made to wait until mid-July for his 
first Classic win in his home country. The trainer admitted to raising an 
eyebrow when Seamie Heffernan, who had the second pick of O’Brien’s four 
runners, plumped for Seventh Heaven, having ridden her in her home work.

“I was surprised when I saw her in the parade ring and had to take a second 
look at her to see the physical development,” O’Brien added.

Next month’s Yorkshire Oaks could be next for the winner. “She’ll love the 
flat track,” her trainer said. “She’s a lovely, big, flowing Galileo filly.”

Undulations are now thought to have been the main reason for Seventh Heaven’s 
poor showing at Epsom and indeed for her underwhelming performance inlanding 
the Lingfield Oaks Trial in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/07/humphrey-bogart-derby-lingfield-trial-richard-hannon-horse-racing>
when something more emphatic had been expected. But that form now looks better 
than it did, since Architecture was runner-up there, at Epsom and again here.

Of Even Song, O’Brien said: “I trained her hard for Ascot and didn’t want to 
train her hard again. Maybe it left a mark. Ryan said she was very slowly away 
and never fired up and never got into it. She’s a big mare and she’ll be OK.”

The Roger Varian-trained Ajman Princess raced prominently until the home turn, 
where she dropped out as if something was amiss and was allowed to canter home 
in her own time. There was no immediate explanation. She had been re-shod just 
before entering the stalls.

Mecca’s Angel bounces back with impressive win in Sapphire Stakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/meccas-angel-sapphire-stakes-michael-dods-the-tin-man-newbury> 