
AIG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig> is considering whether to join 
a lawsuit against the government that spent $182bn (Â£115bn) to save it from 
collapse.

American International Group said its board of directors will weigh whether to 
take part in a shareholder lawsuit against the US over the government's bailout 
of the New York-based insurer.

If AIG decides to join the complaint, which seeks $25bn in damages, it would 
pit the company against the government that in 2008 kept it from buckling under 
the weight of huge losses on mortgage-backed securities and other toxic assets.

AIG said that after a meeting on Wednesday, its directors should have a 
decision by the end of the month.

Starr International, the investment firm of former AIG chief executive Maurice 
Greenberg, filed the lawsuit in November 2011 on behalf of the firm and AIG 
shareholders.

The complaint, filed in the US court of federal claims and the US district 
court for southern New York, claims the government did not provide shareholders 
with fair compensation when it took a near-80% stake in the insurer as part of 
the bailout. In doing so, the government violated the constitution, Starr 
claims.

AIG said that, by law, its board must consider three options: take over the 
lawsuit and pursue the claims on its own; attempt to prevent the claims from 
being pursued by Starr; or, allow Starr to continue to pursue the complaint on 
AIG's behalf.

The insurer noted that, if it decides not to let Starr pursue its claims on 
the company's behalf, Starr would probably challenge the move. Under that 
scenario, if Starr won the case, AIG would not receive any damages or portion 
of a potential settlement.

The court of federal claims denied a request by the US to dismiss the lawsuit, 
which means the case will go forward regardless of AIG's participation.

The government came to the rescue of AIG in September 2008, at the depths of 
the financial meltdown. The New York company did business with hundreds of 
firms around the world, and officials feared its collapse would wreck the 
financial system.

All told, AIG's bailout was the largest of the Wall Street rescue packages.

Since the financial meltdown, AIG has undergone a restructuring that has cut 
its size nearly in half. Its aim is to focus the company on its core insurance 
operations.

In 2010, the company spun off Asian life insurer AIA Group in Hong Kong's 
biggest ever initial public offering to raise $20bn, which was used to pay 
bailout debt.

In November, AIG reported a third-quarter profit of nearly $2bn thanks to 
strength in its insurance operations and investment returns. In the same period 
a year earlier it lost $4bn.

The US treasury announced last month that it sold all of its remaining shares 
in AIG, ending up with $22.7bn more than it put into the company during the 
height of the financial crisis.
 