
American Insurance Group, the insurer whose collapse triggered pandemonium in 
financial markets across the world two years ago, is preparing to sever its 
ties with the US government's purse strings.

AIG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig> executives said today that they 
expected to finalise an agreement with government officials that could pave the 
way for the biggest stock offering in US history, worth tens of billions of 
dollars.

AIG will convert outstanding preferred shares acquired by the US Treasury into 
common stock, giving the taxpayer approximately 92% of AIG's common shares when 
the transaction is complete. The government and AIG, which has an estimated 
market value of $96bn (Â£61bn), are interviewing Wall Street banks as they 
decide which one will land the lucrative job of selling off the insurer's 
shares, a process that is being called a "re-IPO." Among those pitching are 
other bailout recipients including JP Morgan and Morgan Stanley. The first 
share sale is planned for March and may top the $21.3bn raised by the selloff 
of another government bailout recipient, General Motors.

"With today's announcement, we anticipate that we will be able to deliver on 
our promise to the American people to repay the extraordinary assistance they 
provided to AIG during the financial crisis of 2008," Robert Benmosche, AIG 
president and chief executive, said in a statement.

In addition, AIG will repay the Federal Reserve Bank of New York $21bn to 
cover the loans the bank made during the financial crisis. AIG has sold assets 
to repay the loans, including its Taiwan unit, Nan Shan Life Insurance, which 
it sold for $2.16bn in cash on Wednesday.

The $182.3bn bailout of AIG in 2008 caused widespread anger. Staff received 
death threats after revelations that executives were being paid big bonuses and 
were attending conferences at luxury resorts. Benmosche has staunchly defended 
the insurer and its staff. He thanked the American people for their support. 
"We remain grateful for their support of AIG, and we remain convinced that the 
American people will realize a profit on their investment in our company," he 
said.

Last October AIG announced that Benmosche had started treatment for cancer. 
The 66-year-old told employees last year that he expects his health will permit 
him to lead AIG until after the US treasury's exit. The company is expected to 
give more details of Benmosche's condition and any succession plans as it 
finalises the sale. AIG has said a long-term replacement will be chosen within 
the next two years.

Investors who have stuck by the company will be rewarded as part of the 
recapitalisation. Next week AIG plans to issue 75m warrants that will enable 
current shareholders to purchase common stock at price of $45. On Friday AIG 
was trading at $58.35.
 