
AIG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig> made reckless bets that nearly 
crashed our entire economy.

Beginning in 2008, the government poured billions of your taxpayer dollars 
into the insurance giant to save it from bankruptcy after it gambled on 
mortgage-backed securities. And the bailout worked – earlier this year, AIG 
reported making billions in profit.

But AIG has a funny way of showing its gratitude. This morning, reports 
indicated that AIG is considering 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/business/2013/01/09/aig-bailout-suit/1819709/>
 joining a lawsuit against the federal government because the terms of the 
bailout weren't generous enough. Can you believe it?

AIG should thank American taxpayers for their help – not bite the hand that 
fed them.

The story gets even worse: the government is still bailing out AIG. Right now 
this profitable insurance giant is getting special tax breaks to give it an 
advantage and boost its bottom line.

Today, I'm renewing my call for an end to AIG's special tax status to avoid 
paying taxes <http://my.elizabethwarren.com/page/s/aig?source=blog> – and I 
want you to join me. Enough is enough.

Every time AIG files its taxes without paying a dime, it receives another 
payment in an ongoing, stealth bailout. Those special tax giveaways give AIG a 
competitive advantage over its competitors – all while inflating AIG's profit 
numbers and compensation for its executives.

Washington shouldn't keep giving special breaks to giant corporations while 
hardworking middle-class families get stuck paying the bill – especially 
corporations that sucked up billions of dollars in bailouts after nearly 
crashing our economy.

Join the call for ending AIG's ongoing bailout and special tax status 
<http://my.elizabethwarren.com/page/s/aig?source=blog>. They've received enough 
of our help.

Everyone should have to play by the same rules and pay their fair share – even 
giant insurance companies. That's what I believed when I was chair of the 
congressional oversight panel with oversight on the bank bailout, and that's 
what I still believe now.

• This article was originally published as "Don't Bite the Hand That Fed You" 
on elizabethwarren.com 
<http://elizabethwarren.com/blog/dont-bite-the-hand-that-fed-you>
 