
The prospect of even a temporary truce in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> seemed as distant as ever on Monday, 
as violence continued unabated across much of the country with hospitals in two 
towns apparently being bombed by forces supporting Bashar al-Assad, days after 
Russia denied it was targeting civilians in its aerial campaign.

The attacks highlighted the fragility of a deal agreed last week in Munich for 
a “cessation of hostilities” and the impact on civilians of an unforgiving air 
war led by the Kremlin that has helped consolidate Assad’s position and 
exacerbated the misery of the five-year conflict, driving tens of thousands out 
of their homes towards the Turkish border.

The bombardment of a hospital is a too-frequent 'accident'. It's also a war 
crime | Bernard Kouchner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/09/kunduz-hospital-bombing-medicins-sans-frontieres-war-crime>
Assad, the Syrian president, made a televised address on Monday saying that 
any ceasefire did not mean each side had to stop using weapons.

The purpose of any agreement was to stop “terrorists from strengthening their 
positions” by gaining ground, he claimed. “Regarding a ceasefire, a halt to 
operations, if it happened, it doesn’t mean that each party will stop using 
weapons,” Assad said in Damascus.

“A ceasefire means in the first place halting the terrorists from 
strengthening their positions. Movement of weapons, equipment or terrorists, or 
fortification of positions, will not be allowed,” he said.


Meanwhile Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, backed a call from Turkey for 
a no-fly zone over parts of Syria, saying it would alleviate the situation of 
displaced Syrians.

The hospital airstrikes came a day after Barack Obama urged Moscow to halt its 
bombing campaign, illustrating the lack of leverage western powers have over 
peace negotiations aimed at ending a war that has killed nearly a third of a 
million people.


The White House on Monday condemned the bombing “in the strongest possible 
terms”. US state department spokesman John Kirby said the continuation of the 
aerial campaign “flies in the face of the unanimous calls by the ISSG 
(International Syria Support Group), including in Munich, to avoid attacks on 
civilians and casts doubt on Russia’s willingness and/or ability to help bring 
to a stop the continued brutality of the Assad regime against its own people”.

The violence risks drawing Turkey, a stalwart backer of the rebels, further 
into the conflict as it looks on with growing alarm atKurdish expansion near 
its border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/15/kurds-carve-out-new-reality-in-northern-syria>
, as Kurdish fighters take advantage of the rebels weakening and vacating 
territory under the Russian onslaught.


Turkey’s foreign ministry on Monday said the strikes amounted to Russia 
carrying out an “obvious war crime” and warned that bigger and more serious 
consequences would be inevitable if Russia did not immediately end such attacks.

The airstrikes on hospitals in two locations in northern Syria mark the latest 
in a series of attacks on medical facilities and workers, including 14 so far 
this year.
Syria map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/archive-zip/giv-27167DjDbtr9qBsLx/>
Médecins Sans Frontières 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/medecins-sans-frontieres> said seven people 
were killed when a facility it supports in Maaret al-Numan, Idlib province, was 
hit four times in two separate raids. Mego Terzian, MSF’s France president, 
told Reuters he thought that either Russia or Syrian government forces were 
responsible. Both have been engaged in an unrelenting aerial bombardment in 
Idlib.

The hospital, which has 54 staff and 30 beds, is financed by the medical 
charity, which also supplies medicine and equipment.

“The destruction of the hospital leaves the local population of about 40,000 
people without access to medical services in an active zone of conflict,” said 
Massimiliano Rebaudengo, MSF’s head of mission in Syria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fairstrike-destroys-msf-clinic-northern-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F177c69a6c0f81f17444cb62690ba148c6dec46e9%2F0_0_3207_2144%2F3207.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airstrikes%20hit%20two%20Syrian%20hospitals%2C%20with%20Turkey%20condemning%20'obvious%20war%20crime'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fairstrike-destroys-msf-clinic-northern-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airstrikes%20hit%20two%20Syrian%20hospitals%2C%20with%20Turkey%20condemning%20%27obvious%20war%20crime%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fairstrike-destroys-msf-clinic-northern-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F177c69a6c0f81f17444cb62690ba148c6dec46e9%2F0_0_3207_2144%2F3207.jpg>
 People gather around the rubble of a hospital supported by Doctors Without 
Borders near Maaret al-Numan, in Syria’s northern province of Idlib after the 
building was hit by suspected Russian air strikes. Photograph: Ghaith 
Omran/AFP/Getty Images 
In a separate incident, Syrian opposition activists said a missile struck a 
children’s hospital in the rebel-held town of Azaz, near the Turkish border, 
killing 10 people and wounding more than 30. The Turkish prime minister, Ahmet 
Davutoğlu, said a Russian ballistic missile had hit the town.

The UN’s children’s agency, Unicef, said four facilities were hit, two in Azaz 
and two in Idlib. “We at Unicef are appalled by reports of attacks against four 
medical facilities in Syria – two of which were supported by Unicef,” the 
organisation said in a statement. “One is a child and maternal hospital where 
children were reportedly killed and scores evacuated.”

Who backs whom in the Syrian conflict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/oct/09/who-backs-whom-in-the-syrian-conflict>
“Apart from compelling considerations of diplomacy and obligations under 
international humanitarian law, let us remember that these victims are 
children,” the statement added.

The Syrian National Coalition’s representative to the EU, Mouaffaq Nyrabia, 
said the hospital attacks demonstrated “Russia’s lack of commitment to ending 
this conflict” and called on the UN to investigate, alongside other attacks on 
medical facilities in Syria.

Moscow’s intense airstrike campaign has in recent months helped Assad score 
his most significant advances since the beginning of the war.

The Russian prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, issued a blanket denial over the 
weekend that his country was targeting civilians and civilian facilities in 
Syria, but several attacks on health centres have been documented since 
Russia’s intervention. In the first month of the campaign launched last 
October, NGO Physicians for Human Rights documented seven Russian attacks on 
medical facilities in Syria.

“They are targeting hospitals specifically; this is systematic,” said Zaidoun 
al-Zoabi, the head of the Union of Syrian Medical Relief Organisations, when 
asked about the Russian claim. “Who bombed the hospitals? For God’s sake, who 
bombed the hospitals today?”

Riad Hijab, the head of the opposition’s high negotiations committee and a 
former Syrian prime minister, on Sunday reiterated the opposition’s demand that 
airstrikes are halted and sieges around the country lifted, adding that Assad 
must leave for peace in Syria to take hold.

“Every day, hundreds of Syrians die from airstrikes and artillery bombardment, 
poison gas, cluster bombs, torture, starvation, cold and drowning,” said Hijab, 
speaking in Munich. “The Syrian people continue to live in terror and in utter 
despair after the international community failed to prevent even the gravest 
violations committed against them.

“The best approach to put an end to Daesh [Isis] and other extremist groups 
must start with the removal of the Assad regime.”

Russia resumed airstrikes on Monday in northern Latakia province near the 
Turkish border as well as Aleppo, bombing rebel positions to pave the way for a 
regime advance. Obama urged Russia on Sunday to halt airstrikes against 
mainstream rebels.

Meanwhile, Turkey shelled positions controlled by the YPG, a Syrian-Kurdish 
paramilitary force, for the third consecutive day on Monday near the rebel-held 
border town of Azaz. Davutoğlu said Ankara would not allow Azaz to fall to the 
Kurds and accused them of acting as a proxy for Assad and Moscow.

Turkey, which strongly backs anti-Assad rebels, is fighting an insurgency by 
the Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK) on its own territory and has viewed with 
growing alarm what it sees as Kurdish expansionism in Syria. Ankara says the 
YPG is simply the Syrian affiliate of the PKK.

Turkey’s defence minister denied, however, that Turkey had sent troops into 
northern Syria and said it had no intention of doing so, as speculation grows 
of a possible ground intervention by opponents of the Assad regime.

Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain said last week that they 
were ready to send small numbers of ground forces into the embattled country as 
part of the US-led coalition against Isis.

Merkel, the German chancellor, joined the calls from Turkey for a no-fly zone. 
“In the current situation it would be helpful, if there could be such an area, 
where none of the parties are allowed to launch aerial attacks,” she told the 
daily Stuttgarter Zeitung.

Merkel acknowledged it was impossible to negotiate with “terrorists from the 
Islamic State … but if it’s possible for the anti-Assad coalition and the 
Assad-supporters to come to an agreement, that would be helpful”.

Turkey, which is already hosting around 2.2 million Syrian refugees, has been 
calling for a secure zone within Syria where the displaced could find safe 
haven.

With Reuters and Agence France-Presse
















 