
Akon <https://www.theguardian.com/music/akon>, the Grammy-winning, 
multi-platinum-selling R&B star, has said that he will renounce his US 
citizenship and leave the country ifJohn McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/johnmccain> wins next week's presidential 
election.

The singer, producer and songwriter, speaking to The Guardian during a 
promotional visit to Britain, was born in Senegal and plans to return to Africa 
shouldBarack Obama <http://www.barackobama.com/> fail to become the United 
States' 44th President.

"If he [Obama] doesn't get into office, I'm gonna change my citizenship," he 
said. "I'm moving back to Africa. You can hold me to that. I'm afraid to live 
there if he [McCain] is President. The decisions he makes scare me: he's making 
selfish decisions, he's doing whatever it takes to get into office."

Akon cited the selection of Alaska Governor Sarah Palin 
<http://gov.state.ak.us/> as McCain's running-mate as one of the decisions that 
gave him concern. "I don't think he's going to last eight years," he said, 
referring to McCain, "so she'sdefinitely going to be president. Oh my goodness 
- that's scarier. And who would beher running mate? Joe the Plumber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/oct/30/joe-plumber-country-singer>?

"I'm very afraid," he continued. "If the people don't see [that life in 
America will deteriorate under McCain], then that's a dangerous place to be for 
the next four years. I can't even envision how bad it's gonna be. I see it now 
- like, I'm driving down the highway, and I see cars parked with their 
emergency lights on because [people] can't afford to buy gas. You've got 
families walking, carrying infants to the next exit to take a taxi, because the 
taxi will get them home cheaper than the gas."

The singer, who is unable to vote in this election due to a previous felony 
conviction, does not have a track record of speaking out on politics; but as 
one of the highest-selling black artists in the US, his views may carry some 
weight.

"I really, really hope that Obama gets in," he said, "but I don't want to jinx 
him. It's too early to say, because I don't rememberanybody voting for [George 
W] Bush's second term, and he still won."

Â· The full interview will appear in The Guardian's Film & Music section 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/filmandmusic> in November.
 