
Following on from dry-humpgate, you'd have thought Akon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/akon> would have taken his manhandling stage 
skills down a peg or two. Alas, it seems the Senegalese singer has learned 
little, if the current YouTube videos of him throwing a fan into a crowd is 
anything to go by.

Here's what happens: Akon is warming up the crowd for what's bound to be a 
scintillating performance, when a young fella throws an unidentified object at 
him. It misses, but Akon is not amused. "Who did that?" he demands, all 
diva-like. Once the culprit is identified, he orders security to bring the 
youngster to him, drags the object-thrower up on stage, and wastes no time 
picking him up WWF-style and chucking him into the crowd.

There are a few things worth noting here. One is that if ever you were 
struggling for a reason not to go to an Akon gig, you now have one. Another is 
the fact that he removes his singlet vest before throwing the kid, as if he 
might Hulk Out and tear it should he leave it on. And, thirdly, thanks to the 
proliferation of mobile phones at gigs, you can now see this tense and pretty 
weird moment from notone <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=92gK_jsnq5k> but two 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=auen-tPyu40> different angles. 

Akon's tantrum comes just weeks after the world was up in arms over footage of 
the singer aggressively grinding, banging and gyrating 
<http://theblemish.com/2007/04/the-akon-underage-dry-humping-video-is-back/comment-page-1/>
 himself against what turned out to be an underage girl onstage in Trinidad. 
The outrage caused US phone company Verizon Wireless to pull a $3m sponsorship 
deal for Gwen Stefani's The Sweet Escape tour because Akon was due to be the 
support act. It wasn't until three weeks after the incident that the singer 
offered an apology for "the embarrassment and any pain" that he may have 
caused. But how long till he learns to behave himself?
 