
As night falls across Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> 
bustling cities light up and neighbourhoods begin to buzz, fed by traffic from 
well-lit roads. In the countryside, meanwhile, villages are plunged into 
darkness, shutting down the night-time economies of rural communities as 
restaurants and shops close and children light candles to do their homework.

Eight ways to reach 100% renewable in developing countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/08/eight-ways-to-reach-100-renewable-in-developing-countries>
For Akon, the US-based rap star, the realities of living without electricity 
are a vivid memory from his youth growing up in Kaolack, southern Senegal. 
Today,600 million African people still live without access to electricity, and 
3.5 million people die each year 
<http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2014/WEO2013_EnergyForAll.pdf>
 from inhaling toxic fuels or house fires caused while trying to light their 
homes. The projectAkon Lighting Africa <http://akonlightingafrica.com/> aims to 
tackle the problem using a different approach to the usual methods of NGOs in 
Africa.


Akon and his two co-founders, Thione Niang, a Sengalese political activist and 
Samba Bathily, a Malian entrepreneur and CEO of the solar energy company
Solektra International <http://solektra-international.com/>, believe that what 
rural African communities need is not overseas charity but affordable renewable 
energy delivered by fully trained African professionals managing for-profit 
projects that bring longevity, generate jobs and build new self-sustaining 
economies. They think this initiative could mark the beginning of an African 
energy renaissance in which the continent becomes the focal point of a global 
solar power industry.


One thing I’ve realised about Africa is that only the organisations that 
involve Africans themselves are successful
Akon 
For Akon, this second venture into development (he also founded Konfidence 
<http://www.konfidence.org/>, a health and education charity) has been an 
eye-opener. “There have been a lot of issues and challenges that I honestly 
wasn’t aware of until I got involved,” says the 42-year-old rapper, who has 
just completeda Canadian tour 
<http://www.hiphopcanada.com/2015/08/anything-but-simple-akon-takes-on-five-project-album-lighting-africa-and-canadian-tour/>
 and spent the summer on a roadshow with Bathily and Niang that took him from 
theGlobal Entrepreneurship Summit <http://www.ges2015.org/> in Nairobi, through 
Rwanda, Congo-Brazzaville, Nigeria and Niger, culminating at the coastal city 
of Cotonou, Benin, where they inspected Akon Lighting Africa’s projects.


“One thing I’ve realised about Africa is that only the organisations that 
involve Africans themselves are successful. A lot of corporations that come 
with their own policies and try and implement them in Africa fail horribly. The 
advantage we had is that all three founders are African, so we were able to 
navigate through each country a lot faster.”


Niang and Bathily bring political and economic skills to the project, while 
Akon <https://www.theguardian.com/music/akon> admits that his main contribution 
is his name and the marketing opportunities it brings.

The founders have already made deals with the governments of 16 African states 
and aim to be operating in 25 by the end of next year. The deals are 
pre-financed using a $1bn credit line funded by international partners, 
including China Jiangsu International Group, and distributed by the pan-African 
bank Ecobank. A Chinese manufacturer supplies the solar panels but, crucially, 
the workers are predominantly African. The pre-financing set-up means that 
Solektra International can begin the engineering work straight away, giving 
villagers immediate electricity. Repayment plans are worked out with individual 
governments on a case-by-case basis.

Humanitarian system 'stretched to its limits' says new research
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/02/humanitarian-system-stretched-to-its-limits-says-new-research>
The deals are delivering three types of solutions for people without 
electricity: 100,000 street lamps are being installed in villages; 1,000 solar 
micro-generators will act as clean energy hubs for communities, replacing old 
generators that used fossil fuels; and 200,000 household solar electric systems 
- including devices that store energy to provide LED panel lighting at night 
and pocket-sized solar gadgets that charge phones and tablets - will be sold at 
affordable prices to families, subsidised by each African government or local 
authority. It is a for-profit business, with Solektra negotiating rates with 
each government to meet affordability targets and with payments structured to 
ease burdens on national budgets.

“Personally, I don’t think that charities in Africa really work,” says Akon. 
“I think it just holds the people down longer than it should. I think the only 
way to build Africa is to build for-profit businesses that create opportunities 
and jobs for the people locally. That’s why with Akon Lighting Africa we 
decided to take a for-profit approach. Ultimately, it’s providing empowerment 
to local people so they can start developing their own economies.”

Can technology free developing countries from light poverty?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/30/can-technology-free-developing-countries-from-light-poverty>
To that end, the organisation is a month away from launching an academy in 
Bamako,Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> where young people will 
train in construction, engineering, clerical work and project management.


“When we launched we sent 20 young people from 10 African countries to 
university in Marrakech with a scholarship fund to complete the engineering 
programme and then come back and work for us,” says Niang. “But we then 
realised this was bigger than that so we set up the academy in Mali.”


However, the project is not entirely bypassing NGOs. Niang’s non-profit 
Give1Project <http://www.give1project.org/> specialises in mentoring social 
entrepreneurs and has been key in mobilising young, enthusiastic recruits who 
carry out the legwork and receive valuable training and employment in return.


“What happens usually is that when people come to do business in Africa, they 
bring the expertise with them but they also bring the workers, and once they’re 
done they’re gone,” says Niang. “That’s why many cities in Africa have a lot of 
solar lights but after three years none of them work and nobody is there to 
maintain them. So we thought it was important to train the young Africans in 
the local areas. And it’s important to give jobs to young people.”


African governments must urgently invest in science and research
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/30/african-governments-must-invest-in-science-and-research>
Their efforts have been well received by governments seeking greater energy 
access but struggling to find reliable partners. Akon Lighting Africa holds 
direct meetings with the countries’ leaders, then with the energy ministers, 
then with finance ministers and then they set up pilot projects before 
discussions about increasing scale.


Akon Lighting Africa focuses on rural areas because that’s where the need is 
greatest. “If you want to make an impact start there,” Akon says. “My thinking 
is if you want to build Africa, you start from the rural areas because that is 
the heartbeat of Africa.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#EnergyAccess <https://twitter.com/search?src=typd&q=%23EnergyAccess>.
 