
R&B star Akon <https://www.theguardian.com/music/akon> has become a contender 
for the shortest-running DJ in 95.8 Capital FM's history, parting company with 
the London station after just one show.

The multiplatinum-selling and Grammy nominated singer joined Capital earlier 
this month <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/08/capital-fm-akon>, 
with the station's group programme director, Paul Jackson, promising "London is 
going to love him!".

However, his tenure on the Global Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio> station lasted for just one 
two-hour show, broadcast between 7pm and 9pm on 13 February. The Saturday slot 
was last week filled by its previous incumbent, Dave Kelly.

A Global Radio spokesman said Akon was unable to continue due to other 
commitments, including working on a new album.

"Due to Akon's commitments, including working on a brand new album, we won't 
be broadcasting a regular show on 95.8 Capital FM for the time being," added 
the spokesman. "Our conversations about future shows are ongoing as we 
explore other opportunities that may work for both of us."

Akon, who has worked with acts including Lady Gaga, Whitney Houston and 
Eminem, also presents a show on US radio,called Hitlab 
<http://www.hot103live.com/shows/1047046>.

Global Radio announced the show in a press statement on 8 February. At the 
time, Akon said: "I'm really excited to be joining Capital FM to host my own 
radio show. I'm a big fan of the station and I love London. Every Saturday 
night, I'm going to be playing the best tracks and I look forward to my fans 
getting to know the real me, so make sure you tune in!"

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 