
Here's a little story that Akon's people are desperately hoping will go away 
quickly and quietly. For those of you that haven't caught up with the 
Senegalese singer's "dry humping ways", Akon was recently filmed on stage at a 
Trinidad gig practicing some very carnal dance moves on a girl who is, 
allegedly, 14. (Her actual age is still the subject of speculation.) So 
controversial was the act (whichyou can watch here 
<http://theblemish.com/2007/04/the-akon-underage-dry-humping-video-is-back/comment-page-1/>
, if you must) that US phone firm Verizon Wireless has announced they are 
pulling their sponsorship from Gwen Stefani's current US tour, because the 
chipmunk-voiced singer is the support act.

Verizon's action is likely to inflict a loss of $3m on Stefani's tour. Her 
camp insists they are "just in the beginning stages of evaluating" the impact 
of the decision. While they're at it, perhaps they could also evaluate their 
choice of words over Akon's actions: "Children of all ages have been attending. 
We have had no complaints - nothing but satisfied people."

The mobile company appears to have taken their lead from the controversy that 
erupted over the incident in Trinidad & Tobago. Widespread disgust was 
immediately expressed over the incident, which took place on April 12, and the 
girl involved issued a public apology after the footage made its way onto the 
ol' world wide web (though some might suggest it shouldn't have been her who 
was saying sorry). The Trinidad and Tobago Express, meanwhile,seems far more 
concerned <http://www.trinidadexpress.com/index.pl/article?id=161129187> with 
the fact the incident took place as part of a fake competition set up by Akon 
"the con".

Twenty-one shows, one London residency slot (at what was once called the 
Millennium Dome), one very cheap ticket price. Prince is back! And ifhis 
Superbowl medley <http://video.yahoo.com/video/play?vid=228243&fr=> is anything 
to go by, you can expect a marching band, some exceptionally phallic 
guitar-playing and the odd Foo Fighters cover.

Naturally, though, Prince's bargain-priced tickets (£31.21 each excluding 
booking fee, but including a copy of his upcoming album) have prompted our fave 
showbiz columnists to make comparisons with another stage diva. "It is a price 
that shames the likes of Barbra Streisand, who charges £500 a pop," fumes the 
Sun's Victoria Newton. The Star's Joe Mott is equally excited, declaring: "Or 
see Barbra Streisand for £500? No contest", as if Prince and Streisand were the 
only two gig options around.

But there is a case that can be mounted in Babs' defence: with 21 dates to 
Streisand's six, can't Prince afford to lower prices a touch? Plus, the Purple 
may well have announced his desire to duet with Amy Winehouse, but Barbra 
Streisand might bring on Barry Gibb of the Bee Gees to perform Guilty, and 
surely that's worth remortgaging yourhouse 
<http://music.theguardian.com/news/story/0,,2059243,00.html> for alone? And who 
would you rather watch prance around on stage for an hour or so,this diva 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0AQIPh1rmHw>? Or this one 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xr-fOJdeUus>?

In other breaking international news, Amy Winehouse has been photographed 
bending over and mopping up a drink she spilled in a chemist in New York with 
some paper towels. Bet you never thought you'd see the day.
 