
So here we are in the final furlong, the home straight, as the general 
election that has to be the most important general election since the last one 
swings into view. January seems like only four months ago, but that was when I 
decided to throw my hat into the ring and run in South Thanet on the Free 
United Kingdom Party (FUKP) ticket.

Al Murray the Pub Landlord to stand against Nigel Farage in South Thanet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/14/al-murray-the-pub-landlord-to-stand-against-nigel-farage-in-south-thanet>
And what a four months it has been. We always knew it would be an uphill 
battle. Politics is meant to be showbusiness for ugly people. Well, after four 
months I think that phrase could be edited down a bit: politics is ugly. After 
all, showbusiness doesn’t have to go door to door to drum up custom. 
The time I’ve spent on the streets of South Thanet – in beautiful Broadstairs, 
rocking Ramsgate and sparkling Sandwich as well as bits of Margate – I’ve met 
people from all walks of life, all of whom had something to say about the 
election. “What are you doing here?” was the main one. “What, there’s an 
election?” was the other – even in this election frenzy it seems there are some 
who know not of the democratic sweetmeats on offer.

On the doorstep, local issues dominate. I’m not sure the Palace of Westminster 
is aware of it, but the number one thing my focus group was interested in was 
dog shit. Maybe it is my task to make this known, and if I end up in coalition 
and the kingmaker in a new parliament then my personal red, or perhaps brown, 
line will be needing to hear the Queen say: “My government will do all it can 
to do something about dog shit.” She’s a dog lover – she’d understand, though I 
expect some flunkey has to pick up the corgis’ offerings. If not, I’m not in. 
Nicola Sturgeon may have her stance on Trident – I have my stance on 
dog mess. Not actually on it. Trust me: I know which is of more urgent concern 
on the streets of the United Kingdom.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fal-murray-campaign-trail-thanet-general-election-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F4%2F1423062656043%2Fcrop_KP_85820_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Al%20Murray%20hits%20the%20campaign%20trail%20in%20Thanet%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fal-murray-campaign-trail-thanet-general-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Al%20Murray%20hits%20the%20campaign%20trail%20in%20Thanet%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fal-murray-campaign-trail-thanet-general-election-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F4%2F1423062656043%2Fcrop_KP_85820_640x360.jpeg>
 Al Murray, the Pub Landlord, on the campaign trail in South Thanet. 
What has been interesting is being on the receiving end of the TV news media. 
Never a day goes by without them happily leaping on a mistake, pulling apart 
what you may or may not have said. When I tried to parachute into the 
constituency and was thwarted for health and safety reasons, bloody EUSSR – 
apparently I was overweight – the immediate assumption was that a) I was lying 
and b) I was now someone you could call fatty. “Lying fatty boombah.” Thanks a 
lot. Truthfully, is this the best way to allow the voters to make 
their own minds up? And losing your temper and telling the reporters to shut 
up is a gaffe, apparently. I’m only human.

Of course, what everyone knows about the modern art of politics is that it 
amounts to a long and arduous series of maths-defying promises and 
counter-promises, as well as a general attempt to say what the politician 
reckons the electorate wants to hear. Pledges have been made on taxes and 
promises made on spending, and a lot of it plainly doesn’t add up.

Now, I don’t mind that necessarily – it’s not like I’d want anyone taking a 
proper look at my accounts. Always pay cash, that’s all I’m saying. It’s all 
very well offering jam tomorrow, but where is the jam going to come from? Is it 
locally sourced jam? What if it’s the wrong flavour? What if I’m diabetic and 
can’t have jam? But this shoddy accounting and general magic-money-tree 
wishing-well stuff is why we in FUKP have adopted a policy of free dogs.

That’s right, free dogs for anyone who wants one. People love dogs. Now, you 
might say that this clashes with our red/brown line demand, but in no way are 
the two policies a contradiction, no matter how much it might look like they 
obviously are. In fact, one shows how serious we are about the other, I reckon.

The polls have been interestingly stubborn since January. We’ve seen 
the big two parties neck and neck and little shift in either 
direction. In Scotland, the SNP look like they may well sweep the board in 
the biggest electoral upset since the SNP lost the indy referendum.

For a fair while, we in FUKP were polling 1%. Let the spinning commence! 
Now this is fine by FUKP. It’s been made crystal clear in the very pages of 
this newspaper and all over the world by the likes of Occupy and 
Russell Brand that the 1% are in charge, so I have no worries about 
being a member of it and representing it. Furthermore, we all know how 
dangerous populism is – and if I win only 1% of the votes then it proves I 
am not some rabble-rousing populist. Stands to reason. We are the tiny acorn. 
Eat my tiny acorn!

The Pub Landlord’s Election Night Special is on Dave at 10pm on Thursday 7 May.
 