
As a kid growing up in rural Buckinghamshire in the 1970s, I would get 
black-and-white reprints of Spider-Man every week, along witha comic called 
Captain Britain <http://marvel.com/universe/Captain_Britain_(Brian_Braddock)>. 
But it was Spider-Man I really wanted: it had an otherworldly, sci-fi glamour 
thatThe Beano <https://www.theguardian.com/books/beano> and the rest just 
didn’t have. Marvel comics were utterly exotic, like transmissions from another 
planet.

I didn’t know it as a nine-year-old, but Spider-Man was the brainchild of a 
man called Stan Lee, working with an illustrator called Jack Kirby. Lee left 
school in the late 1930s and got a job at a pulp magazine company in New York. 
He graduated to writer, and joined the publisher ofa new series called Marvel 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/reu-marvel-creator-stan-lee-continues-to-expand-his-universe/2422314.html>
. When he became editor-in-chief,he changed the world of comics for good 
<http://www.totalfilm.com/features/the-complete-history-of-marvel>.

Alhough there are debates about who exactly should take the credit 
<http://deadline.com/2014/05/marvel-jack-kirby-rights-lawsuit-supreme-court-decision-near-724520/>
, Lee was a driving force behind the creation of Hulk, Iron Man, the X-Men, 
Thor and many more. He was trying to create a new American mythology, and smart 
enough to know that you didn’t have to do it by writing the next Great American 
Novel. You could do it on the pages ofa mass-market comic read by millions 
<http://marvel.com/news/comics/2014/2/21/21996/taking_a_look_back_at_the_history_of_marvel_pt_1>
 .

The stuff I was reading in the 1960s now looks dated, so it’s easy to forget 
how cutting edge it was. Previous American comics had flawless heroes like
Superman <http://www.dccomics.com/characters/superman> and Flash, but 
Spider-Man is full of teenage angst – it’s as much about how difficult it is to 
grow up as it is about superpowers or killing baddies. There’s a famous issue,
Spider-Man No More! 
<http://spiderman.wikia.com/wiki/File:Spider-man-no-more.jpg>, where Peter 
Parker is shown walking away from it all, his costume tossed in the bin. It’s 
about his own struggles, but also a riff on the constant question for America: 
should it intervene? By the end of the 1960s, the letters page in Captain 
America was full of people arguing about whether the US should be fighting in 
Vietnam. Marvel comics may be for children, but their themes are adult.

My interest petered out as a teenager, but at university I met a massive fan 
who had piles of them in his room. He got me hooked again. As a middle-aged man 
– and theoretically a grown-up – I should probably be reading Tolstoy, but I’ve 
made my peace with that. Judge not lest ye be judged. I reckon there are worse 
interests for a middle-aged bloke to have.

And the great thing about being a father is that I can do it all again. I have 
two girls, 15 and 11, and they’re both diehard Marvel fans. They don’t like the 
Batman films – too po-faced – but Marvel ones have a brilliant lightness of 
touch. My eldest, who has cerebral palsy, loves stories likethe X-Men 
<http://marvel.com/characters/71/x-men>: she gets the allegory, the fact it’s 
about people who are different, though the films are never preachy. My youngest 
lovesScarlett Johansson as the Black Widow in Iron Man 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/marvel-black-widow-scarlett-johansson-1201104415/>
. In our house, the cunning and resourceful Black Widow reigns supreme.

The comic-book world is full of nerdy nostalgia, but I don’t really buy into 
that. I get comics to read, not keep in plastic wrappers as collectors’ items. 
I’m as happy downloading them to my iPad and taking them on tour as I am 
reading physical copies, though I do have a lingering preference for 
black-and-white. And I think we’re living through a new comics golden age – 
only these days it’s happening in film.

The Spider-Man TV movies of the 70s are hilarious 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TkI0nJLnZ7k>, a bloke in pyjamas doing 
kung-fu, but technology has finally caught up.The recent Captain America was a 
post-Wikileaks saga 
<http://www.filmdivider.com/531/captain-america-the-winter-soldier-review/>, 
while Thor is co-opting an entire mythology. Sure, the whole genre is absurd, 
but allegory often is.

Marvel in brief

Way in: The first four issues of The Amazing Spider-Man 
<http://marvel.wikia.com/Amazing_Spider-Man_Vol_1>. The universe they create is 
remarkable, but they’re still surprisingly sweet and charming. The 
black-and-white reprints are the First Folios of the comic world.

Key work: Early issues of The Avengers <http://marvel.wikia.com/Avengers>. A 
cold-war morality tale about sticking together to face the bad guy.

In three words: Make mine Marvel 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=mmm&defid=1524007>.

• Al Murray’s The Pub Landlord is touring the UK with One Man, One Guv’nor. 
Details:thepublandlord.com <http://thepublandlord.com/>
 