
Comedian Al Murray has announced he plans to stand against Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> in the seat of South Thanet 
in May’s general election.

He will stand as his comedy alter ego “the Pub Landlord” for the Free United 
Kingdom Party, or FUKP. Ina video posted to YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tADgYkAfXro> launching his bid for parliament, 
he says: “It seems to me that the UK is ready for a bloke waving a pint around 
offering common sense solutions.”


The first of his pledges is to make pints of beer cost 1p and to brick up the 
channel tunnel.

Nigel Farage, the leader of the UK Independence party, hopes to take the Kent 
constituency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/26/nigel-farage-selected-ukip-south-thanet>
 from the Conservative incumbent Laura Sandys at the general election in May. 
The seat was identified as a possible win for the party, described by one 
expert as “an economically stagnant coastal seat, where there are lots of 
older, white and angry voters”.

On his campaign website <http://thepublandlord.com/>, Murray lays out his 
“13-point common sense action plan”, which includes revaluing the pound so it 
is worth £1.10, introducing national service only for those who don’t want to 
do it, and locking up the unemployed because “unemployment causes crime”.

He proposes making Alex Salmond first minister for Norwich, “so he can get to 
understand what being ignored by the rest of the country is really like”, and a 
“new improved Street Raffle” to determine where children go to school instead 
of a postcode lottery.

The pub landlord’s foreign policy consists of just one line: “Germany has been 
too quiet for too long. Just saying.”


Murray also proposes that South Thanet be made the new capital of the UK and a 
demilitarised zone be set-up between North and South Thanet. He pledges that 
the UK will leave Europe by 2025 and the solar system by 2050.

Al Murray is said to be a distant cousin of prime minister 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/news/david-cameron-and-al-murray-are-distant-cousins-family-records-show-9093551.html>
 David Cameron through the 19th-century author of Vanity Fair William Thackeray.
 