
British soldiers have accused colleagues of abusing Iraqis they shot or 
detained after an intense gunfight with insurgents in 2004, the inquiry into 
the circumstances surrounding the incident heard on Tuesday.

The inquiry was told that a soldier fired a weapon into a "twitching" body, 
threw rocks at a prisoner's head, pushed him into a ditch where he nearly 
drowned, and hit him in the chest, stomach, and face.

The allegations were made by British army witnesses who will give evidence to 
the al-Sweady inquiry in London over claims that British soldiers killed 20 
unarmed civilians and abused others at Camp Abu Naji after what became known as 
the Battle of Danny Boy, a British military checkpoint near Majar al-Kabir, on 
14 May 2004.

It is the first official confirmation that British soldiers are among those 
making the claims.

Questioned on Tuesday at the inquiry, Stuart Henderson, at the time a sergeant 
in the 1st Battalion, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, strongly denied some 
of the allegations from British soldiers. When other claims made against him or 
soldiers directly under his command were put to him, he said he was unaware of 
them or did not personally witness them.

He described a fierce gunfight after his military convoy was ambushed. The 
soldiers left their vehicles and spread out in the surrounding countryside as 
they came under fire from insurgents.

Henderson, giving evidence by videolink from Australia where he now lives, 
described how at one point he fired his automatic rifle at two men no more than 
a foot away. "I have no doubt that if I had not opened fire I would have been 
killed. At the time I thought I was a 'goner'," he told the inquiry.

After the gun battle, he ordered his men to load 10 bodies "unceremoniously" 
into Land Rovers as quickly as possible in case they came under renewed attack.

"When the men had loaded I tried to shut the tailgate of one of the Land 
Rovers but I could not do so because the head of one of the bodies was in the 
way", he said. "I recall, I put my boot on the head of the body and pushed it 
into the Land Rover so I could shut the tailgate. I think a bit of blood may 
have come out of the mouth of the dead body but not much."

Henderson said he heard later that the bodies of 40 dead Iraqis had been taken 
to Camp Abu Naji. He said no one expressed concern to him about the way the 
bodies or detainees were treated.

But he said two of his soldiers took a photograph of the inside of a Land 
Rover. It was "very messy and there was lots of blood after the bodies had been 
removed".

Henderson added: "I think the photograph was taken because it was not a job 
they had relished and they wanted to show me how bad it was â€¦ I think people 
were excited because the adrenaline was still pumping."

He said he ordered the photo to be deleted from the camera. "I am not sure 
exactly why I told them to delete it but I think it was because I did not think 
it was appropriate to take such a photograph," Henderson told the inquiry.
 