
Alabama Shakes <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-shakes> have 
finished recording their second album. With tracking complete, the quartet are 
"experimenting with other sounds" on the follow-up to last year's surprise hit, 
Boys & Girls.

"Tonally and sonically, I think [the new album is] better," drummer Steve 
Johnson toldthe Miami New Times 
<http://blogs.miaminewtimes.com/crossfade/2013/12/alabama_shakes_interview_miami_2013.php>
. "I think a lot of people want to expect a Boys & Girls, Vol. II almost, more 
digging into Southern soul or something like that, and the songs that are 
coming out now, they're different. I feel like we've progressed in growing as 
songwriters, and while they're different in that respect, it's still not 
unbelievable that it's the same band."

While Boys & Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/08/alabama-shakes-boys-girls-review>
 was self-produced, the new LP was assembled in studio with help from an as-yet 
unrevealed producer. "Before, we would kind of have a good idea of what the 
song was going to be like whenever we were done with it," Johnson said. "In 
this case ... some of them we would kind of jumble around for hours."

Despite this "jumbling", the group has been buoyed by the success of their 
first LP. "Our management and everybody has said, 'Take your time and let it 
naturally come out,' and I feel like the songs have done just that," Johnson 
said. "Doing this for a living now, you experiment with things. And as time 
goes by, you're always going to be finding new music and experiencing [with] 
new things ... [so] your songs are always going to be changing as well."

Hailed by everyone from Adele to Robert Plant, Alabama Shakes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-shakes>shot to fame with their 2012 
debut. Boys & Girls reached No 3 on the UK albums chart and sold more than 
500,000 copies at home in the US.

Alabama Shakes - Hold On 
<http://www.muzu.tv/alabama-shakes/hold-on-music-video/1384507/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
 Reading on mobile? Click here to watch 
<http://www.muzu.tv/alabama-shakes/hold-on-music-video/1384507>
 