
The French director Alain Resnais, who had presented his most recent film The 
Life of Riley only last month at the Berlin film festival, was part of that 
remarkable New Wave generation and their associates which set the movie world 
on fire after the war: not merely film-makers but experimentalists, dazzling 
theoreticians,maîtres à penser, artists whose work proffered a critique ahead 
of any of the reviewers and writers who crowded excitably into the cinema to 
see their latest movies.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDW7z9x1OSCg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDW7z9x1OSCg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDW7z9x1OSCg&media=>
His films Night and Fog (1955), Hiroshima Mon Amour (1959) and the sensational 
Last Year in Marienbad (1961) made him one of the key figures in European 
cinema. Like many of this group, Resnais made an explosive start and carried on 
working into extreme old age, though perhaps his later work could not match the 
scintillation of that golden period of the late 50s and 60s.


 He was fascinated not merely in the possibilities of cinema but in theatre 
and theatricality — and the theatrical dimension of reality. In fact, he was 
notable as a French cultural star who took an interest in something British: he
frequently adapted the plays of Alan Ayckbourn 
<http://explore.bfi.org.uk/4ce2b7ee1405e>, in whom he savoured a surreality of 
bourgeois form; he brought out the delicious Magrittean absurdity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYs_KbJjOvxg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYs_KbJjOvxg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYs_KbJjOvxg&media=>
Like Godard, Resnais began by being fascinated — as well as agonised, and 
thrilled — by the modernist question of whether cinema, as the pre-eminent 
artistic medium, could really tackle and confront the urgent issues of the day: 
the evil of the Holocaust, the nightmare of nuclear destruction, and the toxic 
burden of empire, especially as the French were beginning to perceive it in 
Algeria.


 Certainties were being exploded, and perhaps there was a new integrity in 
experimentalism and confusion, in a cinema which challenged not merely the 
authorities who had allowed the horrors to happen, but which challenged those 
classical forms of storytelling and representation culturally licensed by the 
powers-that-be.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCIk5rejp4w0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCIk5rejp4w0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCIk5rejp4w0&media=>
Resnais’s Night and Fog, with its ironically Wagnerian title, was a 
documentary about the death camps, their liberation and their aftermath, and 
was one of the very first films to disclose to a very wide audience the 
horrible images themselves. There was diplomatic pressure from Germany to have 
the film withdrawn from the Cannes film festival that year.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv8zYjH2jS9A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv8zYjH2jS9A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv8zYjH2jS9A&media=>
His Hiroshima Mon Amour, a long and intensely realised “conversation” between 
two lovers, French and Japanese, played by Emmanuelle Riva and Eiji Okada, 
which debate the meaning of memory, perception and existence — after a section 
of the film which recounted in documentary style, the effects of the Hiroshima 
bomb. The provocative cymbal-clash of history and personal narrative, the 
refusal to offer a clear narrative meaning, the infusion of geo-political 
dismay and intense eroticism — it was all sensationally provocative.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2kOA2oT0Qqk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2kOA2oT0Qqk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2kOA2oT0Qqk&media=>
Resnais’s Last Year at Marienbad (1961) perplexed some, exasperated others, 
entranced most. It is, I think, probably his best film, para-surrealist 
masterpiece whose nightmarish scenario appears to have been absorbed from 
Buñuel and transmitted onward to Antonioni. In a colossal, eerie mansion, where 
a languid, dream-like weekend party is in progress, there is an encounter 
between a man and a woman. He knowingly alludes to his clandestine romantic 
encounter last year with the woman — but she claims never to have met this man 
before. Who is telling the truth? Violence and despair seem to linger below the 
surface. It is brilliant and commanding.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyc6n2McMAnY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyc6n2McMAnY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyc6n2McMAnY&media=>
In his later work, such as Providence (1977) with Dirk Bogarde and John 
Gielgud and My American Uncle (1980) Resnais’s style evolved into something 
more conventionally elegant and stylish: witty comedies with shrewd commentary 
on social mores, but with persistent elements of the surreal and the 
macabre.Resnais was a director who helped give a new freshness and intellectual 
sinew to postwar cinema.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhxXvuvUpjls&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhxXvuvUpjls>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhxXvuvUpjls&media=>
• Gilbert Adair interviews Resnais in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jun/22/alain-resnais-interview>

• David Thomson on Resnais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2007/jul/20/alainresnaisisoneofthegr>
 