
Great news for Garner fans, of which I am assuredly one. HarperCollins 
announced today that they've acquired 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/harpercollins-signs-garners-folk-tales.html> 
"a new collection of previously unpublished work and out-of-print folk tales" 
by the great man.

The book, which will draw from 1969's The Hamish Hamilton Book of Goblins and 
1984's Book of British Folk Tales, as well as never-before-published stories 
from Garner's archive, will be published as Collected Folk Tales this November.

For those of us who love his work, such a book promises an explication of the 
hints he's been dropping in his original fiction for years. British mythology, 
local and general, has formed the basis of Garner's glorious children's books 
since the publication of The Weirdstone of Brisingamen over half a century ago, 
providing both the engine that drives them, and the solid, stompable ground on 
which they're built. The Weirdstone of Brisingamen itself borrows heavily from 
Celtic, Arthurian and Norse mythology for its overarching plot, but also 
incorporates the profoundly local legends that are woven around the individual 
rocks and trees of Garner's own backyard of Alderley Edge, lending it a 
convincing physicality that makes the magic in it all the more believable.I 
went for a walk with him on the Edge about a year ago 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/video/2010/oct/08/alan-garner>, to mark the 
50th anniversary of the book, and the experience was like being given a guided 
tour by a craggy, grinning genius loci â€“ every stone and corner had a tale 
attached to it; he talked the thickly wooded hills and hollows into life.

This book, then , promises to be a rare treat. For anyone wondering what to 
get me for Christmas: here's your answer.
 