
Alan Pardew has received public backing from his chairman at Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace>, Steve Parish, but will go 
into the critical fixture at Hull City this weekend acutely aware he still 
faces a battle to convince the club’s investors that he is the right man to 
remain in charge.

Palace checked a run of six successive defeats with a fine win against 
Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/crystal-palace-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday to thrust them back into mid-table, three points clear of the 
relegation zone, and ease the immediate pressure on their manager of almost two 
years.

Alexis Sánchez won’t stay at Arsenal just because of money, says Arsène Wenger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-new-contract-money-arsene-wenger>
Pardew had expressed his thanks to Parish in the immediate aftermath of that 
victory, only to muddy the waters by suggesting the chairman had spent the week
defending his manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/alan-pardew-criticises-crystal-palace-owners>
in talks with his fellow “serious investors at the club who perhaps don’t know 
a lot about football”.

That was perceived to be a criticism of the American major shareholders David 
Blitzer and Josh Harris who, a year ago, eachpurchased an 18% stake in Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/12/crystal-palace-shareholding-new-jersey-devils-steve-parish>
 to match that owned by Parish. The chairman has now insisted Pardew’s 
comments, while unwise, had actually been directed at other minor shareholders 
who bought into the club in December 2015.

“We’ve got smaller shareholders and we went to a dinner with them the week 
before [last], and a lot of them kept saying to Alan: ‘We don’t know anything 
about football,’”Parish said to TalkSport 
<http://talksport.com/football/listen-crystal-palace-chairman-steve-parish-tells-talksport-alan-pardews-job-manager>
. “It wasn’t the smartest, [the] lack of differentiation between Josh and David 
who we deal with all the time and are close to everything all the time, and 
some of the other guys. I think [Pardew’s] intention was to thank me, Josh and 
David, but unfortunately that has been twisted out of shape.”

Parish admitted the co-owners “were not happy” in the buildup to Saturday’s 
game but, when asked if Pardew’s position was now assured for the short term, 
said: “Look, it’s ‘totally safe’ in that every manager is under pressure. You 
need to win football matches. It’s a very binary industry. And we’re all under 
pressure. You can’t lift that pressure from people. That’s no more constructive 
than putting it on them. We don’t have to have those conversations because Alan 
knows the game, he knows where he is and he knows what he has to do.

“The most important thing is we want him to succeed all the things around the 
club are geared towards making him succeed. He’s a positive force in everything 
around the football club. So everybody is geared towards making Alan a success 
at the club.

“Hull is an important game because we have Manchester United and Chelsea after 
that, not too easy [games], so we need to get points on the board. That’s what 
is important and everyone is behind Alan in doing that.”

Sammy Lee leaves his role as England assistant manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/sammy-lee-has-left-role-england-football-assistant-manager>
Both Blitzer and Harris, along with the minor investors, had grown alarmed by 
the club’s slide into trouble to prompt scrutiny of Pardew’s position – not 
least after thedismal recent 5-4 defeat at Swansea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/swansea-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 – and had been made aware of Sam Allardyce’s desire to return to top-flight 
management after his 67-day stint with England. It is understood the 
62-year-old, if under consideration, would want to take up the reins sooner 
rather than later to allow him to prepare properly for the January transfer 
window, when tweaks could be made to the squad.

Yet Pardew remains intent on making a success of his time at the club he 
represented as a player and, having resisted the option of adding another 
defensive coach to his back-room staff, may have to reassess the pace at which 
he wants this team to transform their style of play. Palace, with the likes of 
Damien Delaney and Joe Ledley restored to the starting lineup, had been far 
more pragmatic against Southampton, taking fewer risks going forward as they 
sought to secure a first clean sheet in the league since April.

Delaney subsequently suggested the players had met without the manager in the 
wake of the loss at the Liberty stadium and pushed to revert to a style more 
akin to the rugged approach which had secured a fourth successive season in the 
topflight. “We’ve got to find the right balance on the pitch with the squad 
we’ve got,” Parish said. “Sometimes if you turn the dial a bit too far, and try 
and go toe to toe with some of these teams, you can make it difficult for 
yourself. Albeit very exciting.

“We’ve scored 24 goals, which is the most we’ve ever scored at this stage in 
the top flight in our history. So there’s plenty [going] right. We just have to 
fix the things that are wrong … But if we’re in crisis then there are a lot of 
clubs in crisis.”
 