
Newcastle's head coach, Alan Tait, hailed his side's battling qualities after 
they snatched a late victory overHarlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> to reach the LV Cup final.

Quins dominated the first half at The Stoop but led only 13-6 at the end of 
it, after blowing four golden opportunities to add to Karl Dickson's 
first-minute try. Twice Newcastle's valiant try-line defence won penalties and 
on the other two occasions Quins knocked on.

The fly-half Jimmy Gopperth inspired a second-half comeback for Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> with a breakaway try and 
three penalties which put the Falcons ahead. Harlequins hit back and Mike 
Brown's try and Rory Clegg's touchline conversion with nine minutes remaining 
should have sealed the victory. But with time up, Gopperth and Alex Tait 
combined to send Tane Tuipolutu over in the corner and seal Newcastle's first 
appearance in a cup final since they won the Powergen Cup in 2004, beating Sale 
at Twickenham.

The Falcons will meet either Gloucester or the Newport Gwent Dragons at 
Franklin's Gardens on 20 March. If an English club wins the LV Cup they earn a 
place in the Heineken Cup.

"You can count on one hand as you go through your career the amount of times 
you win a game like that," the coach Tait said. "They had thrown everything at 
us. I had hardly sat in my seat and they were 7-0 up and Ugo Monye dropped a 
scoring opportunity as well.

"You ride your luck but I have to praise our lads for the effort they put in â€“ 
they never say die. They have really battled. I am sure this will give a 
massive lift to the club. We have to look at our main priority in the 
Premiership but it's a great honour to play in finals and we have worked really 
hard.

"I feel for the Harlequins boys because it is a hard pill to swallow. But we 
didn't win it with a penalty. We won it with a try that was worthy of winning a 
game of rugby."

Harlequins lost to Newcastle in the Premiership last week. Their director of 
rugby, Conor O'Shea, said this result had hit them hard.

"This is incredibly difficult to take," he said. "We will feel very sorry for 
ourselves for a couple of days and everyone should. It would be the wrong 
emotion not to. We are a good rugby side but we didn't finish our chances. That 
happens. From time to time you get a match like this. It is great when you win. 
It is a horrible, horrible thing to take if you lose.

"We will have to stew on this for a couple of weeks because we don't have a 
game and that will be hard. But you have to lick your wounds, take the pain and 
move on to your next job. We have five league games to go and that is a way 
into Europe."
 