
What was your favourite book as a child?
Tarzan of the Apes by Edgar Rice Burroughs. I read it 11 times because the end 
of the book was missing and I hoped would be there the next time I read it. 
And, during the war, John Masefield's The Box of Delights was serialised on the 
radio. I had to get back in time from collecting the rations to hear it. It was 
magical, in the best sense. But above all, my great educational influences were 
The Dandy, The Beano and Knockout.

Was there someone, who got you interested in reading or writing? 
 My mother read nursery rhymes to me, and my grandmother told me folk stories, 
but as a child I had no interest in writing whatsoever.

When you were growing up did you have books in your home? 
 Yes, some, but not many. However, my grandmother lived nearby and she was the 
survivor of three sisters. All three had been pupil teachers at the turn of the 
last century. She held all their books, and also her father's. My 
great-grandfather was a self-taught man and his library was extraordinary. I 
read the lot. I wasn't a gourmet - I was a gourmand.

What made you want to write when you were starting out? 
 I didn't want to write at all - I just felt I had to. I was set to be an 
academic. Then one day, I was sitting at a bus stop looking across the road at 
a wall that my great-great-grandfather had built and I realised that I had to 
do something as well as he had.

Do you find writing easy? 
 No. It's like carving in granite. The marks you make on the page are the last 
stage of the process. I'm in my 51st year of doing nothing but write and for 
me, the period of not-writing has got longer, and the period of writing has got 
shorter. My last book took ten years but it was written in five months - all at 
the end. The writing part is like tying the parcel - it is not putting the 
parcel together.

How do you write? 
 Everything I have ever written has been in the same chair, in the same room. 
I try to be there by 6am and I try to do three to four hours of work.

How do you survive being alone in your work so much of the time? 
 It's the other way around - how on earth do I put up with all the 
interruptions?

What advice was given to you when you were starting out? 
 "Who do you think you are?" sums it up. I think my family felt it was waste 
of an education. They said I could do it as a hobby - now that's a hollow joke 
if ever there was one.

What advice would you give to new writers? 
 Get on with it and don't ask for any advice. If you are going to write, 
nothing will stop you and if you are not going to write, nothing will make you.

Is there a secret to writing? 
 If there is then I don't know about it either. I find it difficult to answer 
questions about writing because I am still asking them myself. Every writer has 
their own way.

What do you need to write? 
 Dedication, without compromise. What are you working on? 
 It's the only thing I never speak about because I don't really know what I am 
working on even though I have filled hundreds of notebooks. I have got bus 
tickets dated from the 1940s stating which film I was taking my girlfriend to 
see and what I thought of the film and the girl. Nothing is ever wasted.

Â· Alan Garner <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alangarner> is the author of 
The Weirdstone of Brisingamen, Red Shift and The Owl Service along with 
numerous others for both adults and children. He was awarded an OBE for his 
services to literature in 2001.
 