
Early afternoon at Crystal Palace’s Beckenham headquarters and, as first-team 
players drift off contemplating their pre-match homework,Alan Pardew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-pardew> is talking about progress. 
He has left his analysts working out how best to customise a new computer 
program which will allow the manager to pore over previous performances with 
his squad, à la Gary Neville at his SkyPad, on a giant touchscreen television. 
The glorified tablet dominates the back wall of the main meeting room in the 
revamped complex.

Across the canteen area, in their own corner of an open-plan office, Pardew’s 
senior coaching team are sifting through scouting reports and preparing their 
summaries of Leicester City, opponents in waiting on Saturday. They are joined 
in their huddle by the sports psychologist and former England off-spinnerJeremy 
Snape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/jul/01/sports-psychologist-jeremy-snape-rugby-cricket-football>
, whose part-time role centres primarily on communication. “He’s not here to 
sit my players on a couch and ask them about their childhood,” Pardew says. 
“His job is to help me get my ideas across.”

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/21/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
There are time slots scheduled with medical and fitness staff whose mornings 
have already been spent keeping tabs on real-timedata from training to ensure 
no player exceeds his target mileage or workload, with injuries and recovery in 
mind. As for the homework, checks will be made on the central server that those 
to feature against the champions have scrutinised video clips of their 
immediate opponents, accessible via an app on their smartphones. The level of 
detail is painstaking on what would otherwise appear, to lurch into Uefa 
parlance, a run-of-the-mill “match day minus two”.

“It’s a different world to dear old Mitcham all those years ago,” says Pardew, 
reflecting fondly on Palace’s base during his playing days, when strength and 
conditioning revolved more around dreaded cross-country runs on windswept 
Farthing Downs or weights in a dingy unheated gym. “But you have to be right at 
the cutting edge. There is more knowledge out there, and you’ve got to use it 
or fall behind. That is what I’m being allowed to do here, on and off the 
pitch. I’ve been given the chance to make something special.

“When people ask me about England … well, if I was still at Newcastle, I’d be 
pretty keen on that England job. But, with all this here, I’m left thinking: 
‘Why would I really want to leave this club now?’ Obviously, I’d like to win 
trophies, and that’s very difficult even if we did come ever so close last 
season. But that isn’t the only way to measure success. Success can be a 
legacy. Maybe I can create one here so that, one day, people look back and say: 
‘When Pardew was there that was a great period for the club.’ I remember the 
chief executive at Southampton after Nicola Cortese thanking me for the 
platform I left them. That recognition is always nice. That’s like winning a 
trophy for me.”

It is 22 months since Pardew walked away from Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/29/alan-pardew-newcastle-leave-crystal-palace>
, ninth in the top flight with average gates pushing 52,000, to return to his 
native south London and a club whose exploits first caught his imagination when 
Malcolm Allison, resplendent in his lucky fedora, took Palace to the 1976 FA 
Cup semi-finals. The team loitered just beneath the relegation cut-off but, if 
there had been any doubt about accepting the chairman Steve Parish’s approach, 
a phone call with Tony Pulis offered reassurance. “He’d walked away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/14/tony-pulis-crystal-palace-leaves>
, but told me: ‘Pards, there’s a lot of growing that club could do. You can 
definitely take them forward.’ It reinforced what I’d suspected. The fans’ 
frustration with the owner [Mike Ashley] at Newcastle had turned to frustration 
with me and the owner, so the timing was right. And it wasn’t as much of a 
gamble as people thought. If I could keep Palace up, we’d be the only 
London-based Premier League team south of the river.” That was achieved with a 
10th-place finish, establishing a platform for progression.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Falan-pardew-england-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38342bedbaf8c311de9518f3acbae9437e84114b%2F0_80_3434_2287%2F3434.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Pardew%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20ask%20about%20England%20but%20why%20would%20I%20leave%20Crystal%20Palace%3F%E2%80%99%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Falan-pardew-england-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Pardew%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20ask%20about%20England%20but%20why%20would%20I%20leave%20Crystal%20Palace%3F%E2%80%99%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Falan-pardew-england-crystal-palace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38342bedbaf8c311de9518f3acbae9437e84114b%2F0_80_3434_2287%2F3434.jpg>
 The signing last summer of Steve Mandanda, a sweeper-keeper, is regarded by 
Alan Pardew as crucial business. ‘His distribution has changed the way we 
play,’ the manager says. Photograph: Matthew Childs/Reuters 
He had spent his first summer back at Palace overseeing the upgrade of the 
training complex and, aside fromthe signing of Yohan Cabaye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/10/crystal-palace-yohan-cabaye-paris-saint-germain>
, tweaking the playing squad. This time around, the changes implemented on the 
pitch have been more far-reaching. A team whose forte had been resilience and 
biting on the counterattack needed to impose themselves as they became more 
established at this level. That wretched run of league form, yielding two wins 
in 21 matches, over the second half of last season had convinced Pardew change 
was required. His mind had been made up long before theFA Cup final was lost to 
Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
. “Everyone pointed to a contrast between the first and second halves of our 
season but, while that existed in terms of results, it didn’t in terms of our 
ability to control games,” he says. “What that run showed me was we couldn’t 
properly impose control, and the depth of quality wasn’t there to cope with 
injuries.

“So we reacted, in terms of the first team but also up and down the club. You 
can point to the transfer policy, which has obviously stepped up in terms of 
the personnel we’re bringing in – Cabaye last summer,now Christian Benteke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/crystal-palace-sign-christian-benteke-liverpool>
 – but you don’t always get it right. When we finished fifth with Newcastle [in 
2012] we felt changing Danny Simpson and getting in a better right-back would 
be the way forward. He left and, a few years later, became a Premier League 
title winner with Leicester. We joke about that when we see each other. So it’s 
not just about bringing players in.

“It’s also about what we do on the training pitch, even down to the keep-balls 
being different. We’re focusing on technique more, in recruitment and training 
across the age groups. We’re close to a tie-in with a team in Spain who produce 
good young players with a view to setting up a cultural and coaching exchange 
with them, seeing what they do differently through the academy and into the 
first team. And then there are the changes to the current team’s style out on 
the pitch.

“We’ll always be a good counterattacking team, a side at our best when in the 
lead, and trying to transform the approach without taking anything away from 
that threat is a challenge. I played here under Steve Coppell and even he’d 
admit his teams were very rigid. We bashed it down the sides, we were 
uncompromising, we pushed high up the pitch and put loads of crosses in the 
box. Well, we’ve retained a bit of that because we’re still the leading 
crossers in the Premier League. But what’s wrong with asking players to use 
their imagination, their game intelligence, as well as oomph and spirit? I 
don’t just want them to do basic things. I’m asking them to do complicated 
things.”

When people ask me about England ... well, if I was still at Newcastle, I’d be 
pretty keen on that England job
Alan Pardew 
The summer signing who sets the tone is not Benteke at the team’s pinnacle, 
but Steve Mandanda at the other end. The Frenchman,secured for £1.4m from 
Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/crystal-palace-andros-townsend-alan-pardew>
, is so comfortable with the ball at his feet that Pardew could argue he, 
rather than Pep Guardiola, kickstarted the summer’s fad for sweeper-keepers in 
English football. “I can’t believe we got a free run at him: he’s a France 
international; he’s been in Ligue 1’s equivalent of the PFA team of the year 
five times; he was captain of Marseille, a legend in the eyes of their fans. 
There is no mystery to this player. I told the chairman: ‘This guy will force 
us to play. Even if one or two of our players are a bit tentative and might not 
show for the ball, he’ll give it to them anyway. So they’d best be ready.’ His 
distribution has changed the way we play.

“Trying to make radical changes to the team’s style is risky, I know. But it’s 
not a risk without reward: a fifth year in the top flight, the most this club 
has ever had in one stretch, and another bonus in terms of the money to take 
the team forward. Playing as we did would get us 14th, 15th, all being well. 
Now, we could still finish 14th, but we would still have taken the club forward 
[in terms of the style]. It becomes more about keeping this group together. If 
I can do that for two years, and add to it in January and the summer, we’ll 
have a great chance of Europe. It’s about whether I can keep them fit, and 
whether or not, for example, a Paris Saint-Germain comes knocking for Christian 
if he scores 20 goals. If that happens he’s gone and I’ve got to find another 
player within our budget. Those things can happen. But, at the moment, we’ve 
built a good ship and it’s steaming in the right direction.”

The strength of Pardew’s relationship with Parish is key. “I speak to managers 
at bigger clubs who don’t have a good time, or even the same level of 
communication, with their chairmen,” he says. But there is regular dialogue, 
too, with the American investors Josh Harris and David Blitzer, who are 
consulted on all the major decisions. They recognise the need to redevelop 
Selhurst Park, plans which are edging closer to becoming concrete. They pushed 
for Benteke’s record £27m purchase and eventually considered Mandanda’s signing 
“a no-brainer”. “Americans are analytical in their sports, which are very 
stop-start, so the numbers tend to add up,” says Pardew. “That’s why Moneyball 
works for baseball. It doesn’t work so well for football because it’s a fluid 
game.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Falan-pardew-england-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78f5c859c5cd241c2d6dc6461337492b529ac550%2F0_0_5220_3564%2F5220.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Pardew%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20ask%20about%20England%20but%20why%20would%20I%20leave%20Crystal%20Palace%3F%E2%80%99%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Falan-pardew-england-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Pardew%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20ask%20about%20England%20but%20why%20would%20I%20leave%20Crystal%20Palace%3F%E2%80%99%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Falan-pardew-england-crystal-palace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78f5c859c5cd241c2d6dc6461337492b529ac550%2F0_0_5220_3564%2F5220.jpg>
 Alan Pardew would like to coach abroad before he retires: ‘My agent is always 
going on at me to learn Spanish and have that in my locker … but the States are 
getting bigger, China’s getting bigger, the market’s getting bigger.’ 
Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
“So the stats don’t always tell the whole picture. It’s that education that I 
have to [deliver] because, if we just went on the numbers, it wouldn’t 
guarantee success. It’s about having the right numbers, the right athleticism, 
the right fit for this particular club. That’s where managers sometimes 
struggle with owners, but Steve helps me get my message across. David and Josh 
are very keen on growing the club. The redevelopment of the stadium is a big 
phase for them, and they’re big into community and producing our own talent. 
The problem we have, like most Premier League clubs, is our academy players now 
need to get past an international-standard player just to get on our bench, but 
I can still offer our youngsters a genuine route to the first-team. Luke Dreher 
trains with me almost every day. They’ve definitely got a chance, but they’ve 
got to be exceptionally good.”

Christian Benteke is all smiles at the head of Crystal Palace’s airborne attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/14/christian-benteke-crystal-palace-selhurt-park-new-boy-west-ham>
The same might apply to English coaches if they aspire to overseeing a member 
of the elite. Pardew is the most experienced of their number in the top flight 
at present, a figure who, at 55, still envisages a future coaching abroad. “My 
agent is always going on at me to learn Spanish and have that in my locker … 
but the States are getting bigger, China’s getting bigger, the market’s getting 
bigger,” he says, for all that, one day, he would clearly relish the chance to 
manage his country. For now, he is backing his friend and former club-mate, 
Gareth Southgate, as “the right man” to carry the nation’s hopes.

Palace have Leicester to contemplate, a team still struggling to cope with 
N’Golo Kanté’s summer departure but boosted by yet anotherwin in their 
Champions League group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/leicester-city-fc-copenhagen-champions-league-match-report>
. Word has filtered through from the east Midlands that the champions’ players 
have held clear-the-air team meetings, exasperated by slack league form which 
has them 13th. “It’s a tricky game for us,” says Pardew, whose team’s 
five-match unbeaten run came to a juddering haltat home to West Ham last weekend
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/crystal-palace-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
. “They’ve had a little meeting on Monday, in-house, and kicked each other up 
the backside: ‘Forget the Champions League. We’ll be up for that anyway. 
Saturday is the game.’ And we’re coming off the back of a bad defeat. So this 
is a proper match. A top Premier League game.

“I’ve got to get the balance right between guarding against Leicester’s 
reaction, and keeping things positive for us going forward. It’s about making 
sure my team know what’s coming, how we can deal with it, and how we can 
exploit it. All these processes, the reviews, the analysis, the scouting 
reports, the reams of data, the players’ homework, the training drills, the 
meetings … they’re all about getting that right. For this weekend. And then it 
all starts all over again on Monday for the next one. Liverpool.” That is said 
with the enthusiasm of a man utterly at home in his surroundings.
 