
Alan Pardew <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-pardew> believes that 
Tottenham Hotspur's involvement in the Europa League led to Andre Villas-Boas's 
downfall at White Hart Lane, and that qualifying for the tournament can only 
prove detrimental to a club's Premier League form.

Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> 
entertain Spurs at St James' Park on Wednesday night, with the visitors now 
managed by Tim Sherwood following the sacking of Villas-Boas in December, 
despite the Portuguese coach steering Tottenham to a fifth-placed finish in his 
first season at the club. The managers of the other Europa League qualifiers 
from last year, Swansea City's Michael Laudrup and Wigan Athletic's Owen Coyle, 
have also been sacked this season.

"I have sympathy for Andr√©," said a man who nearly lost his job at Newcastle 
after the strain of Europa League commitments precipitated a relegation 
dalliance last spring. "It's not surprising that the managers of teams in the 
Europa League from the Premier League and the Championship have all got sacked 
this season.

"I don't think that playing in the Premier League on the Sunday after the 
Thursday night in Europe you can get to the required level. I've been saying 
that ever since Stoke warned me about it when we went in it."

Tottenham are in fifth place again as they head to Newcastle, who are three 
places and 10 points behind, but despite a number of absences Pardew is 
targeting victory on Wednesday night.

"We're certainly not looking to limp through this, we're looking to win and 
whatever team I put out there we'd have to look to win it," he said. "I'm not 
hiding behind the fact that we have a load of injuries."

He will again be relying on the versatility of Davide Santon, who was once 
dubbed "the new Paolo Mandini" but Pardew has given his Italy international a 
new label. "Santon could be, in my opinion, the Phil Neville of this football 
club, a kind of unsung hero like Phil was at Manchester United," said 
Newcastle's manager. "When they won trophies Phil was very important."

Although Santon has largely operated at left-back since arriving from 
Internazionale in the summer of 2011, he can also play at right-back and 
impressed in a new holding midfield role against Chelsea last Saturday.

He is expected to continue in that position on Wednesday night. "The important 
thing is that Davide has got a long-term future at this club because he's still 
young and gaining experience," said Pardew. "He can play both full-back 
positions and now he has shown he can play central midfield so you are looking 
at one very important player."

Luuk de Jong hopes to become a similarly integral part of Pardew's long term 
gameplan but Newcastle's manager will take his time before deciding whether to 
activate an option to sign the Holland striker in the summer when his loan from 
Borussia Monchengladbach ends.

So far, however, the signs are promising from a player still regaining match 
fitness after struggling to get games in the Bundesliga. "He's settled in very 
well," said Newcastle's manager. "He knows Tim Krul very well and they look 
like brothers at times. I'm pleased with him. If we get the best out of the 
team around him we'll get the best out of Luuk."
 