
Labour will not get elected if it keeps rubbishing the last Labour government, 
the former home secretaryAlan Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanjohnson> has said.

Giving his backing to MP Ivan Lewis’s bid to be the Labour candidate for mayor 
of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/18/ivan-lewis-announces-greater-manchester-mayoral-bid>
, Johnson said people in the party were too often disparaging about its record 
in office.

“We’ve got to get the record straight. We won’t get a Labour government 
elected by telling people the lastLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government was rubbish, 
particularly because it’s untrue,” he said, speaking at a rally for Lewis’s 
campaign.

“When I came into parliament in 1997 there were 2.6 million pensioners living 
in abject poverty … by the time we left office the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
said that for the first time in recorded history – back through William Booth, 
back through the poor laws – being old is no longer associated with being poor.”

Alan Johnson on the EU referendum: ‘We’ve got the best lyrics, but we’re still 
struggling for a tune’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/26/alan-johnson-interview-eu-referendum-labour>
He continued: “When we came into parliament one in three children were being 
raised in poverty. By the time we left, 1.6 million had been taken out of 
relative poverty, 1.3 million out of absolute poverty. When we came in there 
was section 28, when we left there were civil partnerships. When we came in 
there was no protection for people in the workplace … by the time we left there 
was a national minimum wage, the right to paid holiday … the right to go on 
strike.”


Johnson – who has been critical of the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> – said the party needed to 
“get its act together”.

“We could have an opportunity to have a general election sooner than 
expected,” he said. “So we’re no longer talking about dawdling up to 2020 and 
having all that time. We’ve got to start thinking very quickly.”

Johnson said he was backing Lewis’s bid to be Labour’s mayoral candidate in 
Greater Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> because 
the MP for Bury South was incredibly talented, imaginative and creative. “It’s 
a very important part of politics, creativity, and I think in many ways [Lewis] 
was constrained in his creativity by being a minister,” he said. “I think the 
kind of role that mayor of Manchester would give him would allow him free rein 
to use his talents.”

Lewis served as a minister in both Tony Blair’s and Gordon Brown’s Labour 
governments. He was shadow culture secretary and then shadow Northern Ireland 
secretary under Ed Miliband’s Labour leadership.

He was removed from the frontbench after 14 years – receiving the news by text 
message – in Corbyn’s first shadow cabinet reshuffle after winning the Labour 
leadership in September. The MP had been openly critical of Corbyn during the 
leadership race, calling on him to distance himself from figures on the left 
who had expressed antisemitic views.

“I didn’t want a vote of no confidence in Jeremy Corbyn,” said Lewis on Monday 
night. “I wanted him to step aside in the interests of the country and the 
party, because when I talk to Labour people, particularly people on the 
doorstep in my constituency and other constituencies, they say to me time and 
time again: ‘Jeremy strikes us as a decent man, but he is not a credible leader 
of the opposition, nor is he a credible potential prime minister’.

“I think, given the scale of the challenges facing the country and the party 
at the moment, we cannot afford to have a leader that people feel that way 
about.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Falan-johnson-lay-off-last-labour-government-if-you-want-to-get-elected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68757bc5b728124e3bbd0429b0ca02a48d85f2cf%2F0_27_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Johnson%3A%20'Lay%20off%20last%20Labour%20government%20if%20you%20want%20to%20get%20elected'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Falan-johnson-lay-off-last-labour-government-if-you-want-to-get-elected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Johnson%3A%20%27Lay%20off%20last%20Labour%20government%20if%20you%20want%20to%20get%20elected%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Falan-johnson-lay-off-last-labour-government-if-you-want-to-get-elected%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68757bc5b728124e3bbd0429b0ca02a48d85f2cf%2F0_27_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Ivan Lewis at the Labour party conference in 2014. He said the role of Greater 
Manchester mayor offered Labour the chance to do ‘progressive, radical things’. 
Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
Lewis said if he was elected as mayor of Greater Manchester, one of his first 
tasks would be to seek to revisit the flawed devolution deal agreed by his 
predecessors, demanding at least £1bn, not £450m, to integrate health and 
social care in the region. “If that doesn’t happen, we’re being set up to 
fail,” he said.

“In an era of Tory rightwing government, this is an opportunity to do 
progressive, radical things in places like Greater Manchester and the way back 
for Labour to government is to show at a local level, at an elected mayor 
level, that we can make a difference to local authorities.

“It’s very difficult because of austerity and cuts, but the fact is that it’s 
Labour at a local level that is still being innovative and creative and still 
trying to put into practice policies that are about social justice and 
fairness.”

Lewis is standing against the shadow home secretary, Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-to-stand-for-mayor-of-greater-manchester>
, one of the few people with government experience not to resign from the 
shadow cabinet last week, and the currentGreater Manchester police and crime 
commissioner and interim mayor, Tony Lloyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/11/labour-tony-lloyd-greater-manchester-mayoral-bid-devolution>
.

All Labour party members who joined before July 2015 are eligible to vote to 
select the candidate, with ballot papers being sent out at the beginning of 
next week and polls closing on 5 August, the same timetable as the mayoral 
contest in Liverpool.
 