
Unmissable show?

Endeavour. I’m a drama man, particularly period dramas. It doesn’t matter 
whether they’re 60s-set or War And Peace-era or Dickensian. Certainly, from the 
point of view from my viewing habits, it’s British TV drama that has triumphed 
this winter. I’ve also always lovedFrasier. Great fun. My kids used to watch 
Friends and I can’t help but admire the construction and the performances and 
the timing, which is still brilliant.

Earliest TV memory?

Bill And Ben The Flowerpot Men. Rather appropriate for me, isn’t it?

Bring back…

Generally speaking, bringing back a show seems like a mistake. Because when 
they do you realise how much technology has moved on. If you were to go back to 
the original Forsyte Saga you’d notice that it’s much slower than you 
remembered. Things are very fast-paced now, but then so are we! One thing I do 
bemoan enormously is the speed of credits at the end of programmes, when they 
shrink them. I’m one of those who shouts at the television: “I want to see who 
played Third Bank Robber in that show!” And often its disrespectful to the 
people who made the programme. For goodness sake, let them have their moment.

Guilty pleasure?

I’m not a reality man. There’s an exception: Strictly Come Dancing, because 
it’s people learning a skill. But I don’t tune in at the beginning, I can’t 
cope with 16 couples. I start at 10. But I do enjoy it. I married a dancer so I 
quite like dancing. And I think the standards they reached this year were 
astonishing. Occasionally, I sit down with my youngest daughter and watch
America’s Next Top Model. I shout at them because they’re such a miserable 
bunch of ingrates and she complains about what they’re wearing. We thoroughly 
enjoy that!

Masterpiece With Alan Titchmarsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-titchmarsh> airs weekdays, 3pm, 
ITV 
 