
So Alan Garner <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alangarner> has agreed to 
answer a bunch of questions put to him by Guardian readers – in other words, 
us. It's a golden opportunity. Since he was first published in 1960, he's never 
been out of print, meaning there's more than half a century of top-rate 
material and criticism to ask him about.

Talking of more than 50 years, this is also a fine chance to ask about 
Garner's new book Boneland, and thelong-delayed completion of the trilogy begun 
with the Weirdstone of Brisingamen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/15/alan-garner-weirdstone-brisingamen-trilogy-boneland>
, back when John Lennon and Paul McCartney were playing in a band calledThe 
Silver Beatles <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zbt0hBwC190> and Elvis Presley 
was just returning from the army 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/mar/04/elvis-presley-army-rocknroll>.

I'm also keen to hear if he still thinks that the widely loved Weirdstone of 
Brisingamen is (as he declared back in 1968) "a fairly bad book". I'm keen to 
hear about his unique connection with the landscape in rural Cheshire and how 
much he thinks its changed over the years, about Red Shift's unique ability to 
divide the opinions of its readers, about the way he integrates his only family 
history into his stories, about … sadly, I'm not asking the questions, much as 
I'd love to. You are.

To do so, just post a comment here. We'll compile a list of your submissions 
and send them on to Alan Garner, who will answer as many as he can, as quickly 
as he can! If everyone is as excited as me, I imagine it's going to be quite a 
busy forum, so do try to post as soon as you can. We'll keep this thread open 
until Wednesday 22 August at midday.
 