
Last week Arts Council England (ACE) announced a new three-year, 
application-based investment process for the arts to run from 2015. As ACE 
chief Alan Daveywrote for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/jul/24/arts-council-england-funding-budget-2013>
: "We believe that a three-year approach is essential to enable organisations 
plan for the long term … the application process will result in some 
organisations not receiving funding while others may see their funding go up or 
down. We'll also be welcoming applications from new organisations."

It echoed ACE chair Sir Peter Bazalgette, who was quizzed 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=30d9e55a8d0a999e065133a746f9a9b812e8179570f9068c9744d6cad4e36030>
 about the finer details of the new investment model on Radio 4's Front Row. 
The new funding system, he said, will allow ACE to remove funding from 
organisations not performing as well as they used to, while at the same time 
bringing in new blood.

Since the comprehensive spending review – which saw arts funding cut from two 
sides: 5% directly and with a further 10% cut to local government budgets – the 
sector has been waiting patiently for direction from ACE on what the future 
holds.

Organisations will have to wait until September to hear about the ACE's 
funding programmes in full, but there are plenty of questions in the meantime 
that can be answered – about arts policy, finance and what the future holds for 
the sector in general.

Which is why we're delighted to have Alan Davey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-davey> answering some of them from 2pm 
BST on Wednesday 31 July – he'll be online for an hour so please leave your 
questions below and we'll get him to answer as many as he can.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals>.
 