
There was a touching moment at the end of Alasdair Gray's session when a young 
woman who had just finished school told him she had studiedLanark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/oct/12/fiction.alasdairgray> and Poor 
Things 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780747562283>
 for advanced higher English. "They definitely helped the class and sparked 
debate on Scottish independence," she said. When asked how he felt about his 
books helping young people form their views on the subject, Gray was typically 
funny: "I didn't expectLanark to do so well. About a year after it came out I 
started getting letters, somebody saying: 'We're going to be examined on your 
bookLanark. What's it all about?'"

He also quoted George Bernard Shaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/bernardshaw>, who refused to allow any of 
his plays to be set books because "children will end up hating me as much as 
they hate Shakespeare!".

Gray's advice was: "I don't think anybody should read anything except for fun 
because you won't learn anything unless you enjoy it. I hope you're enjoying 
it!"

Many people have, of course. When Anthony Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonyburgess> reviewed Lanark, he said 
Gray was the most important Scottish novelist sinceWalter Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sir-walter-scott>.

Gray, who turns 80 this year, was at the festival to talk about and read from 
his bookOf Me and Others 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908885401>
, a collection of essays and articles, published and unpublished, which he has 
said is as close to autobiography as he's ever going to get. He said 
he had been accused of hating the English – "I don't hate anybody" – but he 
repeated his criticism of "English administrators" being in charge of Scottish 
arts. "The idea of Scottish writers and painters in charge of their own 
institutions – impossible! It would be as bad as having teachers in charge of 
the schools!"
 