 From: A Life in Pictures by Alasdair Gray (Canongate) 
The City, 1951-55-95 (above)

First painted when I was 15, this crowded together parts of Glasgow that 
excited me. The twin-towered building was from the theological college on Park 
Circus, now converted to luxury flats. The synagogue beside it was from Hill 
Street. The tenements, church, school, railway line, public library were from 
anywhere, the factory with smoke stacks was reminiscent of Blochairn iron 
foundry nearer my home. In those days the west of Scotland's coal-burning 
industry had many factories, big and small, each with its smoke stack producing 
in mild weather an overcast grey sky of mist and soot through which the sun 
before noon often appeared a glowing red disk, bright but not dazzling. In the 
late 1950s I remember a black sun spot being visible. In cold winter weather 
this polluted cloud canopy sank as fog into the streets.

This picture was painted in weekend children's art class held in Kelvingrove 
art gallery and museum by Miss Jean Irwin. This good teacher made Saturday 
mornings my most predictably happy time between the ages of 11 and 17. She 
disappointed me only once, and this painting was the occasion. Before having it 
photographed for reproduction on the class's 1951-52 exhibition catalogue, a 
friend told her that the foundry roof could not be looked up to from beneath by 
someone looking down on roofs beside it. Miss Irwin repainted the roof in 
accordance with conventional perspective, thus spoiling the composition, which 
needed the angle of the roof to slope sunward. And of course people in nearby 
streets would feel the foundry towering above them. I was no enemy of 
conventional perspective, but knew a picture could combine several viewpoints, 
therefore as many perspectives. The view you see here is a restoration job 
carried out years later with guache, pen and ink.
 From: A Life in Pictures by Alasdair Gray (Canongate) 
Cowcaddens Streetscape in the Fifties, 1964 (above)

This was painted seven years after leaving Glasgow School of Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, but derives from many sketches 
I made when a student of mural painting there. The single most exciting work of 
art I knew was the canal across central Scotland from the Clyde to the Forth, 
with a branch that passed near my Riddrie home on the way to the Lanarkshire 
coalfields. I made many sketches for a frieze showing the whole length from the 
Maryhill viaduct to Blackhill locks, both once famous feats of engineering, but 
now neglected and forgotten. The canal excited me as the ruins of ancient Rome 
excited Piranesi, but I could not put the six miles I wanted to commemorate in 
a single picture. This oil painting shows a fragment of what I intended.

All but a few distant buildings are demolished now. They existed in 1964, and 
I have accurately shown how they were related, though the street up to the 
canal on the right and downhill on the left was one straight slope. When 
looking from one side to the other you are seeing round 180 degrees from 
Pinkston Power Station in the north to the tower of St Aloysius Church in the 
south. This bent perspective means that the distant gas lantern on the right 
and near one on the left are different views of the same. The picture also has 
a time shift, the foreground faces belong to the couple whose figures are far 
downhill to the left. I tried to show several phases of life from childhood to 
old age. The three young men were copied from a newspaper photograph of them 
leaving a Glasgow law court, and their clothing style indicates the 1950s, as 
does the street lighting. Ten years later Victorian gas lanterns no longer 
survived beside electric lamp posts. For a long time I most appreciated local 
colours in the gloaming when light was in the sky and streets were lit 
artificially.
 From: A Life in Pictures by Alasdair Gray (Canongate) 
London Road Between Templeton's Carpet Factory and Monaco Bar, 1977 (above)

From 1967 on, my picture-making was subsidised by commissions to write TV and 
radio plays. For several reasons these ended in 1976, leaving me dependent on 
rent from lodgers to whom I sublet rooms in my council house, having some to 
spare because my wife and I had separated. I also earned meals by decorating a 
wall in a local restaurant. While doing so one afternoon I was phoned there by 
Elspeth King, curator of our local history museum, the People's Palace on 
Glasgow Green. It had been built in 1898 in the city's east end as a cultural 
centre, to balance Kelvingrove art gallery and museum in the west, yet it had 
acquired no paintings of Glasgow places or people later than the early 20th 
century. Could she employ me to work for the palace as Glasgow's artist 
recorder? My Cowcaddens Streetscape (seen at a retrospective exhibition where 
only one work was sold) made her think I might like the job.

And I did. Elspeth gave me a well-lit studio space in the palace store in 
Arcadia Street, Bridgeton. My grandparents had lived in Bridgeton, my dad had 
worked in a factory here until the second world war, and I had completed my 
first big mural job in a nearby church, demolished eight or nine years later. I 
brought to the store sketches of well-known or typical Glaswegians with as much 
as possible of their everyday surroundings. I brought sketches of nearby 
streets, many of them semi-demolished because industries were being closed in 
what had once been a strong working-class district. That summer was unusually 
sunny so I worked a lot outside, drawing what I could see directly with pencil 
or Rotring pen. The drawings were pasted on to boards coated with special paint 
that sealed off acids beneath. Then I tinted them with watercolour, crayon 
pencil and in a few areas acrylic paint, though I chiefly used it as a 
background sky. I deliberately kept the colours light, to stop them distracting 
from the character of the outlines. In this way I finished 33 paintings before 
reluctantly leaving the job.

The Glasgow Museums Service had given the People's Palace no budget to employ 
a recording artist, so Elspeth had my weekly salary from the new Job Creation 
Scheme. Unluckily the wage was too small for me to pay my son's boarding-school 
fees, for which I was now in debt. So I applied for the job of writer in 
residence at Glasgow University, which paid me sufficiently more, though I 
would have preferred to go on working for years with Elspeth King and Mike 
Donnelly, her partner and assistant, who have been my friends ever since.

â€¢ Gray Stuff: Designs for Books and Posters is at the Talbot Rice Gallery, 
Edinburgh, until 11 December.
 