
On the evening of Wednesday 17 June, the playwright David Greig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/davidgreig> emailed a first draft of Lanark, 
his adaptation of Alasdair Gray’sclassic Scottish novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/30/fiction.alasdairgray>, to the 
director Graham Eatough. Here was a milestone: a theatrical version of a book 
many regard as impossible to stage. It ought to have been a moment for looking 
ahead with optimism to its world premiere. But soon after, in the early hours 
of the Thursday morning, the 80-year-old Gray wasseriously hurt in a fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/18/alasdair-gray-seriously-injured-after-fall>
 at his Glasgow home, sustaining a broken back and injuries to his legs and 
head. He remains in a critical condition. “It has,” says Eatough, “been a 
shadow hanging over the whole process.”

Lanark is itself a book of shadows. Sometimes described as Scotland’s Ulysses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/04/100-best-novels-ulysses-james-joyce-robert-mccrum>
, it was published in 1981. Its narrative is split between a realistic 
depiction of post-war Scotland – from the viewpoint of art-school student 
Duncan Thaw – and the city of Unthank, a sunless, heartless vision of a future 
Glasgow where an epidemic of uncanny illnesses afflicts the citizenry – 
including some people’s slow transformation into dragons.

While the novel remains a cultish interest in the rest of the UK, in Scotland 
its influence is immense. A generation of writers and other artists have been 
inspired by its declaration that imagination, ambition and intelligence can and 
should be brought to bear on the Scottish experience. Irvine Welsh, Ali Smith, 
Iain Banks and AL Kennedy are among those who have testified to its influence.

If we fail, we fail. But no one can accuse us of taking the easy option
David Greig 
To those names one can add Graham Eatough and David Greig. It has been a 
“long-held dream” for the pair to stage Lanark. Greig, who is Scotland’s 
leading playwright and wrote the script for Sam Mendes’s production ofCharlie 
and the Chocolate Factory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/25/charlie-and-the-chocolate-factory-review>
, first read Gray’s novel as a bookish teenager in Edinburgh in the 80s. “The 
fact that Lanark had come from Scotland was like a door opening,” he recalls. 
“It was a shock. You just didn’t think that things like that could come from 
here, and the fact that this one had was dizzying.”

Later, at Bristol University, he pressed the book on fellow drama student 
Eatough, saying: “You have to read this.” They moved to Glasgow in 1991, 
attracted by the idea of living and working in the place where Lanark was 
written, and set up the experimental theatre companySuspect Culture 
<http://www.suspectculture.com/>. Eatough found he was seeing the city through 
the novelist’s eyes. “It was cold and bleak, and I had never come across the 
grey, looming tenements before, so Alasdair’s descriptions of Unthank felt 
accurate,” he says. “It felt more like a guidebook than a fantasy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fdavid-greig-graham-eatough-adapting-lanark-alasdair-gray-edinburgh-royal-lyceum-citizens-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439890774500%2F642bfff0-6433-42c4-a834-d76973c86b63-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alasdair%20Gray's%20Lanark%20hits%20the%20stage%3A%20'it%E2%80%99s%20wild%20and%20heroic%20%E2%80%93%20if%20we%20fail%2C%20we%20fail'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fdavid-greig-graham-eatough-adapting-lanark-alasdair-gray-edinburgh-royal-lyceum-citizens-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alasdair%20Gray%27s%20Lanark%20hits%20the%20stage%3A%20%27it%E2%80%99s%20wild%20and%20heroic%20%E2%80%93%20if%20we%20fail%2C%20we%20fail%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fdavid-greig-graham-eatough-adapting-lanark-alasdair-gray-edinburgh-royal-lyceum-citizens-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439890774500%2F642bfff0-6433-42c4-a834-d76973c86b63-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘A serious work reflecting on life and death’ … director Graham Eatough with 
Sandy Grierson in rehearsals for Lanark. Photograph: Tim Morozzo 
We are talking at the Citizens theatre in Glasgow, where the play is being 
rehearsed. On stage, the company of 10 actors run through a scene in which 
Duncan Thaw celebrates winning a scholarship to art school. Sandy Grierson, an 
actor with one of those Modigliani faces that can look either very young or 
very old, has been cast in the twin roles of Thaw and his Unthank alter ego, 
Lanark.


It's one of those once-in-a-lifetime shows.
Graham Eatough 
A noise of sawing and hammering echoes from backstage – no doubt the technical 
team conjuring the spectacles that any full-on adaptation of this novel 
demands. “It’s a book in which a man falls in love with a dragon, and so I want 
to see a dragon on stage,” says Greig.


Running at three hours and 40 minutes, including two intervals, Lanark is set 
to be epic in every sense. Attempting to describe the experience of adapting 
the novel has the playwright grasping for metaphors: fighting a polar bear, 
jumping double-deckers on a motorbike, climbing Annapurna. “Whatever else it is 
to try to stage Lanark for the Edinburgh international festival, it’s wild and 
it’s heroic,” he says. “If we fail, we fail. But no one can accuse us of taking 
the easy option.”


They hope that their production will bring the novel to the attention of a 
wider audience. “If we don’t do it, nobody else will. And we have to do it 
really fucking well,” says Greig. “So there’s a little bit of ego, but also a 
sense of responsibility. Alasdair is old. His achievement needs to be 
recognised. The book is a big part of this culture and needs a moment in the 
sun. The more selfish, authorly aspect is that, if I had turned down the offer, 
my 17-year-old self would never have forgiven me.”


Gray was involved in the early stages of the production, and the intention had 
been that he would comment on the script and sit in on rehearsals. None of that 
has been possible, which has left Greig uneasy and minded to label the play as 
unauthorised. The author’s accident has had a “salutary” impact on the 
production, he says. “What you realise is that this is a serious work 
reflecting on life and death and pain … I had been inclined to be quite 
frivolous about that stuff, in the way that you are when you are in good health 
and reading it as a work of literature, and I think when Alasdair fell, the 
reflections on pain and hospitals and mortality became vivid.”


Is there any possibility that Gray might recover sufficiently in time to 
attend a performance? “I genuinely don’t know,” Greig replies. “Part of me 
would dearly love him to see it. But part of me thinks, ‘What if he thinks 
we’ve made a shit job of his masterpiece?’ I don’t want to put him through 
that. I hope he gets the chance to see it and he loves it, or even justlikes 
it, or even just – to be honest – tolerates it. That would be absolutely 
brilliant. But at the moment I just hope he gets better.”
With or without Gray’s imprimatur, whether an against-the-odds triumph or 
valiant failure, the play promises to be a landmark of Scottish theatre. “It’s 
one of those once-in-a-lifetime shows,” Eatough laughs. “There’s only one 
Lanark.”

 * Lanark is at the Royal Lyceum, Edinburgh 
<http://lyceum.org.uk/whats-on/production/lanark-edinburgh-international-festival-2015>
, 22-31 August (box office:
0131-248 4848) and Citizens theatre, Glasgow, 
<http://citz.co.uk/whatson/info/lanark/> 3-19 September (box office: 0141-429 
0022).
 