
Alberto Contador <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador> 
surrendered the leader’s jersey in the Giro d’Italia as a dramatic crash put 
Fabio Aru into pink in Jesolo.

On paper, the pan-flat 147km stage 13 from Montecchio Maggiore looked simple 
but the spill caused chaos and all but ended the hopes of Team Sky’s luckless 
Richie Porte.

While Lampre-Merida’s Sacha Modolo sprinted to victory, about 20 riders were 
left picking themselves up some 3.2km from the finish. There was initial 
confusion – time is neutralised if a crash is inside the last 3km – but it soon 
emerged that the race order had been ripped up.

Astana’s young Italian rider Aru, who started the day 17 seconds down on 
Contador in second, avoided trouble but his general classification rivals were 
not so lucky.

Contador grabbed the bike of a Tinkoff-Saxo team-mate and raced to the finish 
to limit his losses, leaving him 19 seconds down on Aru and second overall, but 
Porte –already controversially penalised two minutes for accepting a spare 
wheel from a rival team on stage 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/19/richie-porte-giro-puncture-alberto-contador>
 – surrendered more than two minutes and slipped to 16thin the standings, more 
than five minutes down on Aru.

The news for Team Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> was little 
better at the front of the race, with local boy Elia Viviani having to settle 
for third behind Modolo and Trek Factory’s Giacomo Nizzolo in the sprint, 
although he did reclaim the points leader’s red jersey.

This stage was intended to provide one last spotlight for the sprinters, with 
the general classification battle supposedly waiting for Saturday’s long time 
trial – seen as an opportunity for Porte to battle back into contention, 
although that is surely beyond the Australian now.

Instead, wet conditions created a nervous atmosphere and the worst fears were 
realised late on.

Aru, 24, conceded time to Contador on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/21/alberto-contador-giro-d-italia-phillipe-gilbert-12th-stage>
, raising concerns about his form, but ended up the big winner 24 hours later. 
His Astana team have three riders in the top three, with Mikel Landa Meana 74 
seconds down in third and Dario Cataldo fifth, one minute 49 seconds down, with 
Contador’s team-mate Roman Kreuziger between the two.

Contador was grimacing as he crossed the line, perhaps in frustration, 
although there were obvious concerns about the shoulder he dislocated on stage 
six.

Speaking through an interpreter on Eurosport, Contador said: “I don’t think I 
lost too much but of course those seconds cost a lot to get back. The thing 
that worries me most is my injury but I think I’m OK.

“I think I can make the time up … The shoulder hurts but I want to think 
positively.”
 