
An important Alberto Giacometti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/12/giacometti-portrait-exhibition-record-breaking-sale-national-portrait-gallery-sculpture>
 plaster sculpture which is considered a pivotal link between British and 
European modernism has been prevented from leaving the UK.

Ed Vaizey, the culture minister, placed a temporary export bar on the almost 
abstract work, called Femme.

It has been sold to a foreign buyer and the aim is to save it for the nation 
by allowing time for a British buyer to match the asking price of £2,083,500.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falberto-giacometti-sculpture-barred-from-leaving-uk-femme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd615c64a547c85f09efce80d9e7bc07967a72fba%2F0_0_701_1101%2F701.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alberto%20Giacometti%20sculpture%20barred%20from%20leaving%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falberto-giacometti-sculpture-barred-from-leaving-uk-femme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alberto%20Giacometti%20sculpture%20barred%20from%20leaving%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falberto-giacometti-sculpture-barred-from-leaving-uk-femme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd615c64a547c85f09efce80d9e7bc07967a72fba%2F0_0_701_1101%2F701.jpg>
 Alberto Giacometti’s Femme. Photograph: Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Giacometti made Femme in 1928-29 and it was purchased by the painter Winifred 
Nicholson in the mid-1930s just as the European modern art movement was 
beginning to influence British art. It is the only pure plaster work by the 
Swiss artist in the UK.

Vaizey said: “This Giacometti sculpture is not only a stunning example of his 
work but it also heavily influenced some our greatest artists. It is important 
that Femme is kept in the country so we can better understand and enjoy this 
pivotal period in modern British art.”

Giacometti is one of the most highly regarded and distinctive artists of the 
last century. HisWalking Man 1 sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/feb/03/giacometti-statue-breaks-auction-record>
 broke auction records when it sold at Sotheby’s London for £65m and his works 
wowed visitors toan acclaimed exhibition of his portraits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/13/giacometti-pure-presence-review-national-portrait-gallery>
 at the National Portrait Gallery last year.

In the 1930s he was a key influence for a generation of British artists 
including Henry Moore, Barbara Hepworth and Ben Nicholson.

The decision to defer the export licence was made on the advice of the 
Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural 
Interest 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/supporting-museums/cultural-property/export-controls/reviewing-committee/>
.

Committee member Richard Calvocoressi, former director of the Henry Moore 
Foundation, said: “This is one of Giacometti’s most simplified female figures – 
flat, almost abstract, its pure white forms pared down to bare essentials. 
Works such as this had a huge influence on the development of modern sculpture.”

The decision on an export licence has been deferred until 24 May and could be 
extended further if a serious intention to raise the required funds is made.
 