
Alberto Contador <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador> and 
Fabian Cancellara are a study in physical contrast but are two riders with one 
ambition – to win the 2015 Tour de France in the Yellow Jersey, the greatest 
prize in professional cycling.

The slight Spaniard is aiming to cross the finish line on the Champs Elysées 
in themaillot jaune, just as Marco Pantani did in 1998, to become only the 
eighth rider in cycling history to do the double by winning theGiro d’Italia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/31/alberto-contador-giro-ditalia-tour-de-france>
 and the Tour de France in the same season.

We couldn't be more ready, says first African team to enter Tour de France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/03/tour-de-france-african-team-mtn-qhubeka>
As he rolls down the start ramp of the 102nd Tour in Utrecht on Saturday, it 
will be 35 days since Contador won the Giro for the second time and the 
Spaniard says he has become obsessed by the need to recover from his efforts in 
Italy.

“It’s something new for me,” the 32-year-old said. “I’ve sacrificed everything 
to be totally focused on the bike.”

But there are question marks over the potential weakness of his Tinkoff-Saxo 
team, with last year’s green jersey winner,Peter Sagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/15/peter-sagan-tour-de-suisse-stage-three>
, hoping to retain his title having made the switch from Liquigas-Cannondale 
last year.

“They’re experienced and strong, and I hope they have the capacity to recover 
well from the Giro,” said Contador. “The most important thing is motivation – 
this is what you need to achieve this double. If I win just another grand tour 
it’s not going to change my career but if I achieve the double this is 
something people are going to remember. I take a lot of motivation from this.”

The winner of the 2007 and 2009 Tours added he would have preferred to be on 
the start line feeling as he did in 2014 before his race was curtailed after 
breaking his leg in a fall during the 10th stage. “It’s new to me, how my body 
will respond to the effort.”

The Spaniard believes the 2015 race is “one of the most open in Tour history”: 
“In the first nine days there are six intense stages. It will be a Tour without 
respite.”

He rates the 2014 Giro winner, Nairo Quintana of Movistar, as favourite in a 
Tour “for the climbers”. But he also sees his major challengers as last year’s 
winner, Vincenzo Nibali of Astana, citing the Italian’s consistency,and the 
2013 champion, Sky’s Chris Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2013/jul/23/chris-froome-tour-de-france-2013-video-highlights>
. “On his day he has a change of rhythm that nobody can follow,” Contador 
admitted.

While those four appear to be the main contenders to wear the yellow jersey 
into Paris, Trek Factory Racing’s Fabian Cancellara has his eyes firmly set on 
winning Saturday’s prologue in the Netherlands, in what may prove to be his 
final Tour. Nicknamed Spartacus for his aggressive riding style, the Swiss 
crashed badly in March and missed the Cobbled Classics. He battled back at the 
Tour de Suisse, narrowly losing the opening prologue to the Dutchman Tom 
Dumoulin of Giant-Alpecin, who will meanwhile carry local hopes at the Grand 
Départ in Utrecht.

“I’m looking forward to this,” Cancellara said. “I have my goals and my 
ambitions but first I will try also to enjoy the race and all the experience I 
have to put it into the race because it is a special one, a tough one.”

Among his challengers will be Tony Martin (Etixx-Quickstep), the three-time 
world time trial champion and Britain’s Alex Dowsett (Movistar) who held the 
Hour record until Sir Bradley Wiggins broke it in style in June.

After his press conference, some Dutch journalists presented Contador with a 
canary – he bred them before turning professional – and the Spaniard named it 
Yellow. He will be hoping it isn’t the only yellow he takes home from the 2015 
Tour.
 