
Albert Maysles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2008/aug/06/albert.maysles> seems to 
have just woken up. His breakfast sits untouched, his crumpled black shirt is 
undone, and he's wearing odd socks, one grey, one green. Outside his hotel 
room, the attendees of theSheffield documentary festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2011/jun/09/morgan-spurlock-sheffield-doc-fest-video>
 are in the process of paying tribute to this legendary documentary-maker, with 
screenings, masterclasses – and, last night, a party that reportedly found him 
drinking shots until 4am. Not bad for an 84-year-old.

Asked what he thinks of such reverence, he suddenly snaps into focus. "It can 
take surprising forms," he smiles, eyes fixed on mine through black-framed 
glasses. "When I got there last night, there were two dozen people with their 
arms raised, saluting, like a guard of honour. That was nice. But surprising."

Ever since he set out to make a film about Soviet mental hospitals in the 1950s
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cPL4XNxKLig>, Maysles's "direct cinema", as he 
calls his graceful, observational style, has been the bedrock of the whole 
genre. It's tempting to regard every hungry young film-maker here in Sheffield 
as one of his children. "Well, people do come up and say they started making 
films because of me – but children? Hmm."

A little after we speak, he will lead a parade of fans to an outdoor screening 
ofGrey Gardens <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xG5baCxTtgw>, his 1975 portrait 
oftwo reclusive New York socialites <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7TlscYZQ3GM>
, a mother and her daughter. There, as everywhere else at the festival, his 
every word is hung on, like aDalai Lama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dalailama> in odd socks. In fact, the Dalai 
Lama is just one of many notables to have passed in front of his camera over 
the last half-century, along with JF Kennedy, Brando, Ali, Dalí, Castro, 
Capote, the Beatles. But the interesting thing about a Maysles film is that, 
however illustrious the subject, his camera has a knack of catching the tiny 
gesture, the sideways glance, that illuminates a whole character.

His favourite work, however, isn't a document of 20th-century celebrity, but 
Salesman <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MKRKbZHA5E>, a 1968 portrait of four 
door-to-door Bible salesmen of which one, the eternally lucklessPaul Brennan 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fEJpu5LCpQ4>, emerged as one of cinema's most 
absorbing characters. "It's the most personal of the films. Much of it takes 
place in Boston, where I'm from, and it's about these four Irish guys. Growing 
up Jewish in Boston in the 30s, hardly a day went by when some Irish kid didn't 
come up to me and say, 'I'll see you outside.' So I never had the chance to get 
along with the Irish. The film gave me that. And, because he had the 
intelligence to be something better than a salesman, Paul reminded me of my 
father, who became a postal clerk when he should have been a musician."

Maysles made his documentaries with his late brother, David. Salesman 
showcases their incredible rapport with their subjects, persuading a man like 
Brennan to open up. "I never knew what to call it – until I read an essay that 
my wife, who's a psychotherapist, had on connecting with patients. It said you 
had to use the gaze. First meeting: your eyes, their eyes, the gaze. And you 
develop that with empathy. Constant empathy. And I thought, yeah, the gaze and 
empathy. That's my technique."

It's a technique that could have been used to lull unsuspecting victims into 
humiliating themselves. But the thing about Maysles films is that they are 
endlessly compassionate. To Maysles, that's the point: he believes he has a 
"duty" to "find the good" in his subjects. So could he make a film about 
someone badly flawed, even monstrous? "You have to find the humanity. Take Mr 
Bush, whose misdeeds are obvious. You can still find the human reasons. The 
most extreme example is Hitler. I've thought about this a lot, and maybe if you 
just have this figure sitting alone in a Viennese restaurant, in a kind of a 
shameful trance, that might do it. Because any psychologist will tell you: 
violence comes from shame. Always. So maybe that's how you find the humanity 
there. As humans, what else can we do?"

In December 1969, the brothers were in Altamont, California, filming what was 
to become an infamous concert by the Rolling Stones. The documentary that 
resulted,Gimme Shelter <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WLPKsbiXiW4>, featured 
the killing of black teenagerMeredith Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/may/17/woodstock-altamont-40th-anniversary-hippie-generation>
 by Hells Angels as a panickedMick Jagger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mick-jagger> stumbled through Under My Thumb 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wxarN-c-Z6U>. Maysles says there was no 
question the footage had to be included once they knew they had it. "But then 
the New York Times ran their review with the headline, 'Making murder pay.' 
Nice, huh? But had we not had that footage, we would have been criticised for 
being sloppy, or for censoring ourselves." His expression grows darker when he 
mentions the late criticPauline Kael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/sep/05/guardianobituaries.arts1>. She 
isn't the only enemy this man with the gentlest handshake in history has made: 
he has a long-running beef withMichael Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michaelmoore> over his bruising approach to 
his subjects. Even 40 years on, Kael's hostility to Gimme Shelter and Maysles 
himself, complete with comparisons to Nazi propagandistLeni Riefenstahl 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GcFuHGHfYwE&feature=fvst> and accusations of 
staging scenes, still rankles. "She made awful claims. False claims. And some 
people believed them. It was devastating." Ironically, other films now seen as 
classics were also given distinctly chilly receptions. Critics said the 
brothers should be "disgusted" with themselves after Grey Gardens, while 
Salesman could hardly find a cinema to play in. Such is the lot of the pioneer.

All around Maysles in Sheffield are new documentaries tagged with very 2011 
buzzwords: crowdfunded, promoted on Twitter, made on video. "The 
democratisation of documentaries delights me," he beams. "I'm too busy making 
my own to see as many as I should – but that they're being made is wonderful."

He's still a working film-maker, he is at pains to point out, his brownstone 
HQ inHarlem 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mocQmOihmIs&playnext=1&list=PLF970F8F938C3D018>
being a hive of activity. The project closest to his heart at the moment is In 
Transit, in which he will strike up conversations with passengers on trains all 
over the world. Not thinking about retirement, then? "Oh, there are too many 
films to be made for that," he says. "Where there are people, there are stories 
– and I want to tell them."
 