
Alberto Contador <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador> took yet 
more time out of his rivals on stage 18 of the Giro d’Italia to move a step 
closer to locking up the pink jersey.

BMC Racing’s Philippe Gilbert raced away to his second stage victory of the 
Giro but the real action was behind as Tinkoff-Saxo rider Contador added more 
than a minute to his lead to stand 5min 15sec clear of his closest rival, Mikel 
Landa Meana of Astana, with three stages to go.

Contador attacked on the ascent of Monte Ologno, the major climb of the day, 
as Landa Meana and Astana team-mate Fabio Aru were caught up behind a crash – 
giving Contador a measure of revenge for Astana’s ultimately fruitless decision 
to join a Katusha attack after he suffered a mechanical failure on Wednesday’s 
stage 17.

Contador was able to make his move pay – even as he suffered a dropped chain 
midway up the climb – as he hooked up with Cannondale-Garmin’s Ryder Hesjedal 
to push to the finish. The pair opened up an advantage of more than two minutes 
at one point.

They crossed the line a little over six minutes after Gilbert but crucially 73 
seconds clear of the main group of general classification contenders – giving 
Contador a huge dollop of insurance before two more mountain stages, and 
lifting Hesjedal into the top 10 as he slotted in to ninth place overall.

The 170km stage, largely flat before the category one Monte Ologno, saw a 
large breakaway group go clear early on and as they approached the foot of the 
mountain, it was clear the stage winner would come from the break given their 
advantage.

The group splintered on the climb, but the leading quartet squabbled over who 
should take their turn and Gilbert chose his moment to sail past them on the 
descent, immediately opening up a huge gap and the Belgian was comfortable 
enough that he began his celebrations more than two kilometres from the finish.
 