
In an era when musicians revealed their private lives to the public via 
MySpace and Twitter, when even the biggest stars were stripped of enigma by the 
paparazzi or in the pages of Heat, the idea of anonymity suddenly seemed 
powerful, if you knew how to use it. So when electronic music prodigy Burial 
released his self-titled debut album in 2006, declining even to identify 
himself, let alone submit to photographs and interviews, it certainly lent his 
soulful take on the era's key sub-genre – dubstep – extra mystique. By the time 
its successor, 2007's Untrue, won a Mercury prize nomination, andBurial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/burial> was being hyped as the next Aphex 
Twin – a whiz kid from the margins set to impact on the mainstream – the myth 
was powerful enough for one tabloid to start a campaign to name him.

In the end, Burial saved them the bother by quickly "outing" himself as 
William Bevan, a young south Londoner reared on 1990s drum'n'bass and garage. 
Untrue married the former's sense of scale with the latter's fleetness of foot, 
adding a sadness that was unique to Bevan. It was soaked in a particularly 
urban melancholy: the 3am blues of In McDonald's was instantly recognisable to 
anyone who's ever been stuck in a fast food outlet in the early hours with only 
a styrofoam cup of coffee for warmth. While other dubstep artists grew colder 
and more alienated, Bevan outstripped his peers by heading in the opposite 
direction, conjuring emotion from disembodied female vocal samples and old 
videogames. These were explicit links between rave's past and its thriving 
offspring in the present, who were still plugging away in the underground, 
occasionally yielding up something truly special.

Buy this Sunday's Observer for the full top 50 countdown, plus an interview 
with the winner.
 