
"Saturday night you have your fling at life ... and Sunday morning you face up 
to it!" ran the tagline for Karel Reisz's classic 1960 film Saturday Night and 
Sunday Morning. After watching it, Alex Turner noticed that it shared 
similarities with the record his band had just made. So much so, in fact, that 
he nicked a line from Albert Finney's character for the title: "Whatever people 
say I am, that's what I'm not."

Arctic Monkeys' debut album was located firmly in the school of kitchen-sink 
realism, sharing its DNA not just with 1960s film-makers but also Morrissey and 
Marr. Not that these Monkeys were easy to pigeonhole. The title itself railed 
against simple categorisation, whereas drummer Matt Helders was far from your 
typical indie pot-basher – instead, he spent his school years "listening to 
gangster rap and UK garage, thinking I was a DJ". It was Helders battering 
seven shades out his kit in a fashion that owed as much to Schoolly D as it did 
Keith Moon that gave the album its propulsive start with The View from the 
Afternoon, setting up another tease courtesy of Turner: "Anticipation has a 
habit to set you up/For disappointment in evening entertainment but … Tonight 
there'll be some love/Tonight there'll be a ruckus yeah, regardless of what's 
gone before." Through deftly recasting familiar tales of underage drinkers and 
lads spoiling for a fight,Arctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys> satisfied older fans while 
speaking to their own constituency. Music made for ringtones? Hardly.

Anticipation was such that the album became the fastest-selling debut in 
British history (until Leona Lewis snatched the record from them). Yet the band 
shrugged off the hype effortlessly, proof that they were as grounded in reality 
as their music.

Buy this Sunday's Observer for the full top 50 countdown, plus an interview 
with the winner
 