
A new deal has been reached to evacuate thousands of civilians still trapped 
in rebel-held areas of easternAleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>
, after the original pact broke down over demands from pro-government forces 
that two villages besieged by rebels must also be evacuated.

About 8,000 civilians had been evacuated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/syria-ambulances-on-the-move-as-aleppo-evacuation-operation-begins>
 from the small area of rebel territory in the city, but tens of thousands more 
were waiting to leave when the government of the Syrian president, Bashar 
al-Assad, suspended the pact, which was negotiated by Turkey and Russia.

Obama reflects on Syria at farewell press conference: 'I always feel 
responsible'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/obama-syria-assad-aleppo-final-press-conference>
The suspension was said to have resulted from the refusal of al-Qaida-linked 
militants to allow the evacuation of wounded civilians from Fua and Kefraya, 
two Shia villages in the Idlib province that have been besieged by Islamist 
rebels for years and whose relief was part of the agreement, offered as a 
concession to Iran. Tehran-backed militias spearheaded the assault on east 
Aleppo.


Confusion reigned on Friday when the government stopped convoys from leaving 
the city, saying rebel fighters had fired on them at a crossing point into the 
enclave. Rebels said pro-government forces had opened fire first.

The Syrian rebel official Al-Farouk Abu Bakr told the local TV channel al 
Arabiya al Hadath on Saturday that the new deal comprised an evacuation from 
the two villages, the evacuation of wounded people from two towns besieged by 
pro-government forces near the Lebanese border and the full evacuation of 
rebel-held eastern Aleppo.

The British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the evacuation from 
the villages of about 4,000 people, including the wounded, could start on 
Saturday.

The former foreign secretary David Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/09/david-miliband-interview-new-york>
 warned of “house-to-house murder” being carried out in Aleppo and expressed 
fears that the carnage could spread to Idlib. The US-based charity 
International Rescue, of which Miliband is the president, still had aid workers 
in the Syrian city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Faleppo-evacuation-to-resume-under-new-syria-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70e0ebad4afba77e0c4aea079b8c6bb0efd2250d%2F0_0_2019_1211%2F2019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aleppo%20evacuation%20to%20resume%20under%20new%20Syria%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Faleppo-evacuation-to-resume-under-new-syria-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aleppo%20evacuation%20to%20resume%20under%20new%20Syria%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Faleppo-evacuation-to-resume-under-new-syria-deal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70e0ebad4afba77e0c4aea079b8c6bb0efd2250d%2F0_0_2019_1211%2F2019.jpg>
 Residents gather near green government buses as they hold their belongings for 
evacuation from eastern Aleppo. Photograph: Uncredited/AP 
“The truth is there’s chaos, people are looking to find their families and 
people are reporting ... that the ceasefire is holding; others that there is no 
safety at all and it’s sheer terror.

“And that is the only way to describe this because people are fleeing from 
appalling bombardment and house-to-house murder that’s being documented by the 
UN, and they don’t know if it’s going to follow them from Aleppo to Idlib,” he 
told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme on Saturday.

Miliband also criticised the 2013 Commons vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/aug/30/cameron-mps-syria> that 
refused to support David Cameron’s call to back US military intervention after 
the Syrian regime used chemical weapons against its own people.

Opposition to Cameron’s stance was led by the former leader of the Labour 
party, Ed Miliband. Though the ex-foreign secretary did not mention his brother 
by name, he said the Commons decision had contributed to a vacuum of western 
leadership.

“I think that was quite important,” he said. “The red line over chemical 
weapons needed to mean something to uphold international norms, never mind 
American credibility and support.

My friends in Aleppo would rather die than face capture by Assad’s militias | 
Zaina Erhaim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/aleppo-rather-die-assad-militias-syrians>
“Secondly, I think that the vote – which, after all, 560 MPs voted to support 
military action under certain conditions, they just couldn’t agree with each 
other as to what those conditions should be – sowed a deal of confusion that I 
think undoubtedly contributed to the sense of vacuum that has been discussed 
and described this week.”


On Friday, Barack Obama, the US president, denounced the horror in Aleppo and 
called for the presence of impartial observers. He warned that Assad would not 
be able to “slaughter his way to legitimacy”.

“The world, as we speak, is united in horror at the savage assault by the 
Syrian regime and its Russian and Iranian allies on the city of Aleppo,” the US 
president told an end-of-year news conference. “This blood and these atrocities 
are on their hands.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fobama-year-end-press-conference-russia-syria-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20accuses%20pro-Assad%20forces%20of%20having%20'blood%20on%20their%20hands'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fobama-year-end-press-conference-russia-syria-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20accuses%20pro-Assad%20forces%20of%20having%20%27blood%20on%20their%20hands%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fobama-year-end-press-conference-russia-syria-video&media=>
Obama accuses pro-Assad forces of having ‘blood on their hands’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/16/obama-year-end-press-conference-russia-syria-video>
The United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> security 
council is expected to vote this weekend on a proposal drafted by France to 
ensure the operation is coordinated by international observers, with urgent 
humanitarian aid being allowed into Aleppo and hospitals receiving protection.

The US ambassador to the UN, Samantha Power, said after a closed-door council 
meeting that UN officials were ready to be sent quickly to Aleppo. “The 
presence of independent observers can deter some of the worst horrors,” she 
said.

François Delattre, France’s ambassador to the UN, said: “The immediate 
priority is to save lives, to stop the massacres and to avoid a new 
Srebrenica,” he said. referring to the massacre of Bosnian Muslims during the 
Balkan wars.
 