
Aleppo, Syria’s second city, is at risk of being “bombed into smithereens” by 
Russia unless a fresh ceasefire can be agreed with Vladimir Putin, the US 
secretary of state,John Kerry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, 
has said.


But Kerry said he still believed a ceasefire could be agreed, and revealed 
proposals were still going back and forth between Moscow and the US.

Russia denied membership of UN human rights council
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/russia-denied-membership-of-un-human-rights-council>
Speaking in London on Monday, he said the diplomatic process was delicate and 
“very dangerous” and its success or failure would come down to Moscow’s true 
priorities.

“We will see whether Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has a 
greater desire to bomb Aleppo into smithereens”, claiming they are hitting 
terrorists, rather than the accept the reality that “there is an opposition 
there prepared to live by the ceasefire,” he told the Chatham House thinktank.

“This will determine to some degree where we go in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> in the longer term.”

A ceasefire could be agreed, he said, if Russia halted its bombing campaign 
long enough to allow countries backing the legitimate Syrian opposition to 
persuade those forces in Aleppo to separate themselves from Jabhat Fateh 
al-Sham, the al-Qaida-linked group formerly known as the Nusra front.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Faleppo-syria-john-kerry-russia-diplomacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e28bcb1c828c12c00a6b3a693534932283b1144%2F0_276_4383_2630%2F4383.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aleppo%20could%20be%20'bombed%20into%20smithereens'%2C%20warns%20John%20Kerry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Faleppo-syria-john-kerry-russia-diplomacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aleppo%20could%20be%20%27bombed%20into%20smithereens%27%2C%20warns%20John%20Kerry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Faleppo-syria-john-kerry-russia-diplomacy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e28bcb1c828c12c00a6b3a693534932283b1144%2F0_276_4383_2630%2F4383.jpg>
 Displaced Syrians carry their belongings out of Aleppo on the third day of a 
rebel offensive. Photograph: Omar Haj Kadour/AFP/Getty Images 
Kerry made his remarks as Russia sent naval reinforcements to the 
Mediterranean that western observers believe could be used for a fresh 
offensive on Aleppo.

As opposition forces attempted to break the siege 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/rebel-fighters-advance-on-aleppo-in-attempt-to-break-siege>
 of rebel-held eastern Aleppo with an assaultheavily criticised by the United 
Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/syrian-rebels-aleppo-offensive-could-amount-to-war-crimes-un-envoy-warns>
, the Syrian government claimed that as many as 84 people had been killed and 
280 wounded by opposition shelling over the past three days.

Russia claims it has not bombed the city for a fortnight, but military clashes 
have persisted throughout Aleppo. Moscow has said it will respond with all 
available means if necessary.

Kerry said he would work right up to the end of Barack Obama’s presidency to 
try to find a political solution to the Syrian problem, which he described as a 
contorted web.

He implied he did not believe that a perceived power vacuum in Washington in 
the weeks after the 8 November presidential election would give Russia a chance 
to capture eastern Aleppo, and so deliver a hammer blow to the Syrian 
opposition.

Kerry was unusually frank in admitting western diplomats had been unable to 
persuade the legitimate opposition not to fight alongside Jabhat Fateh al-Sham. 
If the militant group decided to attack the regime during a ceasefire, he said, 
“then what happens is the regular opposition gets swept up with them … and then 
all of a sudden your ceasefire starts to shred”.

Aleppo ceasefire at risk after Russia says all rebels can be eliminated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/aleppo-ceasefire-at-risk-russia-all-rebels-can-be-eliminated>
Bashar al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, he said, 
also played a major role in the breakdown of ceasefires by bombing legitimate 
opposition forces while claiming to go after Jabhat Fateh al-Sham and Islamic 
State (Isis). “So the opposition then get angry and say he is not showing good 
faith, because he is not, and it spirals downwards,” Kerry said.

Syria, he argued, was “a whole bunch of wars taking place at once in the same 
place”. It was “Kurd v Kurd, Kurd v Turkey, Iran and Saudi; you have got 
Turkey, Daesh [Isis], Persian Shia versus Arab Sunni, Sunni v Shia, a lot of 
people against Assad, you have the challenge of Shia Iraqi militia coming into 
Syria and then, of course, you have Hezbollah-supporting Assad. So this is is 
about as toxic a diplomatic cocktail I can think of.”
 