
Alex Wilkinson will use his surprise call-up for the Socceroos’ vital World 
Cup qualifiers against Tajikistan and Jordan to try and lock up a position he 
was initially overlooked for.


Wilkinson was called into the Australian set-up on Tuesday by coach Ange 
Postecoglou <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> after 
first-choice centre-back Matthew Spiranovic withdrew due to a calf complaint.


Kruse back as Postecoglou bloods three new Socceroos for World Cup qualifiers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/09/kruse-back-as-postecoglou-bloods-three-new-socceroos-for-world-cup-qualifiers>
The 31-year-old said he thought the chance to add to his 16 caps in the two 
home matches had passed him by.


“I was a bit disappointed not be called up into the initial squad,” Wilkinson 
said.


“They said we’re looking at a few different options. I was focussed on playing 
well forMelbourne City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-city> 
and hopefully getting a call-up to the next camp [but] it’s great to be 
involved now.”

Spiranovic’s injury came on the weekend as he prepared to captain his Chinese 
Super League club Hangzhou Greentown. The 27-year-old suffered a minor strain 
in the warm-up and Postecoglou judged it serious enough not to risk the travel.

“It is best that he stays in China to get the injury right,” he said.


“One of the advantages of creating depth in this squad over the last two years 
is the ability to not have to take risks with players who have an injury.


“We will not lose anything by having Alex come into the squad for these two 
crucial matches.”


FFA axe Olyroos coach Aurelio Vidmar after failed Rio Olympics campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/04/ffa-axe-olyroos-coach-aurelio-vidmar-after-failed-rio-olympics-campaign>
Wilkinson, who has five starts for Melbourne City since a mid-season move to 
theA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>, said he was up to 
the challenge.


“My fitness is getting better,” he said. “I can go in and contribute if called 
upon.”

Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> host Tajikistan at 
the Adelaide Oval on 24 March, before moving to Sydney’s Allianz Stadium five 
days later for the clash with Jordan.


Wilkinson said no one in the Australian set-up was contemplating a most 
unlikely qualifying exit with two losses.


“We’re not thinking that way at all,” he said. “Our record at home is very 
good ... a lot of the Asian teams are very strong at home but tend to struggle 
a bit when they come away.”
 