
The actor Alexis Arquette, who has died aged 47, could have coasted by on her 
famous surname: she was part of an acting family that included her sisters 
Rosanna (Desperately Seeking Susan) andPatricia (who won an Oscar in 2014 for 
Boyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/23/patricia-arquette-wins-best-supporting-actress-oscar-for-her-role-in-boyhood>
), and her brotherDavid (the Scream series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2000/apr/30/features.review47>). 
Instead, this playful and likeable performer, who was born male but identified 
in the latter part of her adult life as transgender and “gender suspicious”, 
carved out a career of idiosyncratic and often uncommercial character work 
before concentrating on promoting awareness of trans issues. This included 
appearing as the subject of the documentary Alexis Arquette:She’s My Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/may/21/alexis-arquette-shes-my-brother-review>
 (2007), in which she both invited and openly questioned interest in her gender 
and sexuality.

She made a strong impression playing the transvestite Georgette in the 1989 
film ofHubert Selby Jr’s novel Last Exit to Brooklyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/16/last-exit-brooklyn-hubert-selby-review>
: the New York Times called her performance “first-rate”. In Jumpin’ at the 
Boneyard (1991), she was second-billed as Dan, the estranged, crack-addicted 
brother of Manny (Tim Roth). The siblings are reunited in unlikely 
circumstances after Dan tries to rob Manny’s apartment.

But Arquette’s impish charms were put to their best use in lighter material. 
Even when the roles were confined to one or two scenes – a wannabe criminal in 
Pulp Fiction (1994), Boy George impersonators in two Adam Sandler vehicles, The 
Wedding Singer (1998) and Blended (2014) – she delivered some memorably oddball 
moments.

Alexis Arquette: actor and activist dies aged 47
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/actor-and-activist-alexis-arquette-dies-aged-47>
Given the chance to explore a character in more detail, she could be funny and 
disarmingly tender. A notable example was Grief (1993), a bittersweet 
comedy-drama set behind the scenes on a daytime television show called Love 
Court; the film, which mixed camp humour with a storyline about Aids and 
bereavement, was made by Richard Glatzer, who went on to co-direct Still Alice. 
Arquette’s sense of humour was also evident in horror films including Bride of 
Chucky (1998), in which she played a goth murdered by a possessed doll, and 
Killer Drag Queens on Dope (2003), where she was billed under her cabaret name, 
Eva Destruction.

She was born Robert Arquette in Los Angeles, the second youngest child of 
Brenda (nee Nowak), a therapist, andthe actor Lewis Arquette 
<http://gb.imdb.com/name/nm0000794/>. “Our parents were into this religion 
thing called Subud; they basically believed in allowing children to run free,” 
Alexis said in 2000. “The whole thing was about self-expression. They didn’t 
believe in discipline. When we were little, it was great. We literally did 
anything and everything we wanted to. We smoked tobacco and pot and then moved 
on to other drugs. I got into acid. There was nothing we could do to shock our 
parents.” She came out as gay to her father at 13 before understanding that 
this wasn’t the whole story. Patricia recalls Alexis realising: “That’s not 
what’s different about me, it’s not that I’m a gay man. It’s that I’m in the 
wrong body: I am a woman.”

Through Rosanna’s connections, Alexis got a part at the age of 12 in a music 
video by the Tubes. She went on to work in various jobs, including designing 
toys for Mattel, and made her fleeting film debut in Down and Out in Beverly 
Hills (1986), an updated remake of Jean Renoir’s Boudu Saved From Drowning. 
Other film roles followed, including Of Mice and Men (1992), with John 
Malkovich, and the New Zealand horror romp Jack Be Nimble (1993).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Falexis-arquette-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad19a51155ebb79b155a097a3646a0252f79a123%2F615_0_5139_3084%2F5139.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexis%20Arquette%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Falexis-arquette-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexis%20Arquette%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Falexis-arquette-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad19a51155ebb79b155a097a3646a0252f79a123%2F615_0_5139_3084%2F5139.jpg>
 Alexis Arquette, centre, in Last Exit to Brooklyn. Photograph: 
Moviestore/REX/Shutterstock 
She was understandably angry when her role in Threesome (1994) as an openly 
gay student was turned into the butt of the movie’s jokes. “What that film says 
is: ‘If you want to be gay and you want to be respected, stay in the closet. 
Don’t let your love be known, don’t let your desires be known to anyone … But 
if you’re going to be openly gay, you’re going to have to be a mincing, 
obnoxious queen.’ That’s how I was directed, and I fought [Andrew Fleming, the 
director] all the way.” She knew she was perceived by some in the industry as a 
troublemaker. “So often I’m labelled the ‘outsider’ or the ‘bad boy’ because I 
speak my mind … I’ll walk in and say, ‘Who wrote this shit?’ I do speak my 
mind. ”

Arquette also appeared in Frisk (1995), a controversial adaptation of Dennis 
Cooper’s novel, the screwball comedy I Think I Do (1997) and the teen hit She’s 
All That (1999). In 2006, her participation in the Celebrity Big Brother-style 
reality TV show The Surreal Life was widely credited with helping to increase 
the visibility of trans people. A statement by Arquette’s family after her 
death, for which no cause was given, helped to explain why her acting work had 
became rarer in recent years: “Despite the fact that there are few parts for 
trans actors, she refused to play roles that were demeaning or stereotypical. 
She was a vanguard in the fight for understanding and acceptance for all trans 
people.”

She is survived by her siblings, Rosanna, Richmond, Patricia and David.

• Alexis Arquette <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexis-arquette>, 
actor, born 28 July 1969; died 11 September 2016
 