
It was a warm autumn day when the two Russian visitors arrived in Grosvenor 
Street, central London. Their names were Andrei Lugovoi and Dmitry Kovtun; the 
date was 16 October 2006. They had arrived that morning from Moscow carrying 
something that British customs failed to detect. Not drugs or large sums of 
cash, but something so otherworldly, it had never been seen before in the UK.

The substance was polonium, a highly radioactive isotope. It is probably the 
most toxic poison known to man when swallowed or inhaled – more than 100bn 
times more deadly than hydrogen cyanide. It had come from a Russian nuclear 
reactor. The job of Lugovoi and Kovtun was to deploy it. They had come to poison
Alexander Litvinenko <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko>, 
a Russian dissident, MI6 employee and Kremlin critic. The visiting killers had 
no personal grudge against their target. They had been sent by Russia’s FSB spy 
agency, in an operation likely to have been approved by Russia’s president, 
Vladimir Putin.

Scotland Yard has never established how the assassins transported the 
polonium. The amounts were very small and easy to disguise. There are several 
possibilities: a container with the poison administered by a pipette-style 
dropper. Or an aerosol-like spray. Even a modified fountain pen would do the 
trick. Within its container, the polonium was safe. Out of it, it was highly 
dangerous. Ingest it, and you were dead.

Lugovoi and Kovtun, it would become apparent, had no idea what they were 
carrying. Their behaviour in Britain was idiotic, verging on suicidal. Nobody 
in Moscow appears to have told them Po-210 had intensely radioactive 
properties. Or that it left a trace – placing them in specific locations and 
indicating, via telltale alpha-radiation markings, who sat where. It was 
possible to identify anything and everything these clueless assassins touched.

That morning – at 11.49 – Lugovoi called Litvinenko from Gatwick airport to 
confirm their meeting that afternoon at the intelligence firm Erinys in 
Grosvenor Street. Litvinenko thought this was a routine meeting. Lugovoi had 
offered himself as Litvinenko’s business partner, giving advice to western 
firms seeking to invest inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

The killers travelled by train to central London. They checked into the Best 
Western hotel on Shaftesbury Avenue, in the heart of Soho. The first rule of 
spycraft is not to draw attention to yourself. But from the moment they stepped 
on to UK soil, Lugovoi and Kovtun attracted attention. It wasn’t just that they 
were assassins: theylooked like assassins, a couple of stage villains from KGB 
casting.

When the pair swapped their casual clothes for “business” attire, their 
appearance prompted hotel staff to chuckle. Kovtun was wearing a silvery 
metallic polyester-type suit and Lugovoi was kitted out in checks. They had 
matched their shiny outfits with colourful shirts and ties. They wore chunky 
jewellery.

According to hotel manager Goran Krgo, the two men resembled stereotypical 
eastern European gangsters. “The colours didn’t match, the suits were either 
too big or too small. They just didn’t look like people who are used to wearing 
suits. They looked like – I think the expression is: like a donkey with a 
saddle.”

At 3pm, Litvinenko met Lugovoi and Kovtun in Grosvenor Street. Waiting for 
them was Tim Reilly, the Russian-speaking head of Erinys; he shook their hands 
and led them into the boardroom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc491275bc040a470965285d20ce7674bdaec6004%2F0_0_1591_1988%2F1591.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexander%20Litvinenko%20and%20the%20most%20radioactive%20towel%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexander%20Litvinenko%20and%20the%20most%20radioactive%20towel%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc491275bc040a470965285d20ce7674bdaec6004%2F0_0_1591_1988%2F1591.jpg>
 Alexander Litvinenko, in 2002. Photograph: Alistair Fuller/AP 
The meeting began in typically English style, with talk of the sunny weather. 
Then Lugovoi steered the conversation round to tea. He suggested they all drink 
some, joking that the English had cups of tea all the time. Reilly declined and 
told them he had just drunk water from the cooler. Lugovoi was weirdly 
persistent.

“They kept on saying to me – don’t you want any [tea], won’t you have any?” 
Reilly recalled.

Heaving with radioactive contamination

Reilly served cups of tea to his three guests. He sat to the right of 
Litvinenko, who was at the head of the table with his back facing the bay 
window; immediately across the table from Reilly was Lugovoi. Kovtun sat to 
Lugovoi’s left. He said nothing. After making tea, Reilly – fortuitously for 
the would-be assassins – went to the loo.

We don’t know how the polonium was deployed. The forensic evidence suggests 
that either Lugovoi or Kovtun slipped it into Litvinenko’s tea. For the next 30 
minutes, the tea sat in front of him, a little to his left – an invisible 
nuclear murder weapon primed to go off. Lugovoi and Kovtun must have been 
barely listening to the conversation: for them, the only question was, would 
Litvinenko drink?

Litvinenko didn’t drink. One can only imagine what must have been going 
through Lugovoi’s and Kovtun’s minds when the meeting broke up, his drink 
untouched.

When nuclear scientists examined the Erinys table, they found that, in 
Reilly’s damning words, it was “heaving” with radioactive contamination. It 
appeared there had been substantial spillage. Reilly wondered whether he, too, 
had been an intended target. One spot in front of where Litvinenko had been 
sitting showed exceptionally high alpha-radiation readings of more than 10,000 
counts a second. Scientists later identified the scene as one of “primary 
contamination”. That meant the radiation could only have come from deployed 
polonium. Other parts of the baize had readings of 2,300 counts a second. One 
chair – where either Lugovoi or Kovtun had been sitting – registered at 7,000 
counts a second.

The Russians would later claim that it was Litvinenko who had poisoned them, 
during this, their first significant encounter in Mayfair. All subsequent 
traces, they said, could be explained by this initial radioactive contact. It 
was a version they would repeat to Russian state media, which transmitted it as 
true.

This version was easily disproved when Scotland Yard reconstructed 
Litvinenko’s journey from his home to Green Park using his Oyster card. He had 
travelled on the 43 bus, getting on at Friern Barnet, then taking the tube into 
central London from Highgate station. The bus – vehicle registration LR02 BCX – 
was found and tested for contamination. There wasn’t any.

Lugovoi and Kovtun, by contrast, left a lurid nuclear stain wherever they 
went, including their hotel rooms, well before their first meeting with 
Litvinenko. After leaving Erinys, Litvinenko took the pair to his favourite 
branch of Itsu in Piccadilly Circus, close to the Ritz. They sat downstairs. 
Polonium was found here, too. The visitors took their leave of Litvinenko.

A ghostly glow on the shisha pipe

Afterwards, Lugovoi claimed that he and Kovtun strolled around Soho for an 
hour and a half. They dropped in to a bar, Dar Marrakesh in the Trocadero 
centre, where Lugovoi smoked a £9 shisa pipe on the terrace. Scotland Yard 
later retrieved the pipe. It was easy to spot: the handle gave off a ghostly 
alpha-radiation glow.

Back at home in Muswell Hill, Litvinenko felt mildly unwell. He threw up, just 
once. His vomiting spasm was due to exposure to radiation – just from being 
near the poison. Litvinenko thought little of this episode. He had unwittingly 
survived his first encounter with polonium.

At 1am, the would-be killers returned to the Best Western hotel. At some point 
that day or the next, Lugovoi handled polonium in the privacy of his room, 107. 
He appears to have transferred it here from one container to another. And to 
have disposed of it down the bathroom sink. We know this because Lugovoi’s 
plughole showed massive alpha-radiation readings of 1,500 counts a second. 
There were lower readings elsewhere in the bathroom, and in the bedroom next 
door. Kovtun’s room, 306, was also heavily contaminated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9a861d303dcdf3877f3503519a64be984ceb4fc%2F0_0_2200_1564%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexander%20Litvinenko%20and%20the%20most%20radioactive%20towel%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexander%20Litvinenko%20and%20the%20most%20radioactive%20towel%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9a861d303dcdf3877f3503519a64be984ceb4fc%2F0_0_2200_1564%2F2200.jpg>
 Andrei Lugovoi, left, and Dmitry Kovtun speak to Ekho Moskvy radio in November 
2006. Photograph: Reuters 
The two Russians had booked into the Best Western for two nights, with Lugovoi 
paying in advance. But the next day, 17 October, they abruptly checked out and 
took a taxi to the Parkes hotel in Beaufort Gardens, Knightsbridge. Lugovoi 
explained the switch by saying he “didn’t like the condition of the rooms”. The 
real reason, most probably, was to distance himself from the poison, which he 
had efficiently tipped down the bathroom U-bend.

Front office manager Giuliana Rondini was on duty when the Russians walked in. 
After chatting, Lugovoi made a request. Was there somewhere fun where he and 
Kovtun “might meet some girls”? Rondini was used to dealing tactfully with 
these kinds of inquiries. She recommended a house across the street. “It was 
well known with girls. It was a brothel,” she said. Failing that, she suggested 
an Italian restaurant. “It was a place where you could go and have a pizza but 
also have fun and pick up girls. Pizza with extras, I would say.”

About 11.30pm, Lugovoi rang Litvinenko to say that he was missing out on fun 
times. He said that he and Kovtun had hired a rickshaw and that they were going 
on an hour-long joyride through central London – two off-duty assassins 
enjoying themselves amid the bright lights of Soho. Their rickshaw driver was 
Polish. He spoke “not bad” Russian. It appears they asked again about girls. 
The driver recommended a private members’ place in Jermyn Street popular with 
big-spending Russians.

This was HeyJo, a club founded in 2005 by a former fruit-and-veg stall owner 
from Essex called Dave West. It featured mirrored walls, frilly pink cubicles, 
waitresses dressed as naughty nurses, and a bronze phallus. There was a 
dancefloor and a Russian-themed restaurant, Abracadabra, with silver tables. 
The bordello theme extended to the bathrooms, where water spouted from 
penis-shaped taps.

Lugovoi and Kovtun spent two hours at HeyJo, leaving at 3am. Detectives later 
found traces of radiation in cubicle nine – on the backrest and cushions. There 
were low levels on a bench, a table in the restaurant and on a door in the 
gents’. No polonium was found on the phallus. The floor was clean. Apparently, 
the men from Moscow didn’t dance.

They didn’t score either. The following morning, as they checked out for their 
flight back to Moscow, Rondini asked Lugovoi how they got on. His reply was 
uncharacteristically honest: “We were not lucky that night,” he told her.

Tea, from a silver pot


Lugovoi’s conversations with his FSB bosses following his first unsuccessful 
attempt to poison Litvinenko can only be imagined. In short, he had failed. The 
upshot was that, within days, Lugovoi returned to the UK, this time alone, 
bringing with him another container of radioactive poison. He flew on 25 
October from Moscow to London, on British Airways flight 875.

He sat in business class, seat 6K. He arrived shortly after midnight at the 
Sheraton Park Lane, a hotel overlooking Piccadilly, with a frontage of black 
classical pillars. Inside, the hotel was rather worn. Lugovoi stayed in room 
848, on the eighth floor.

Lugovoi met Litvinenko in the ground-floor Palm Court, an afternoon tearoom 
furnished in high art-deco style, with Chinese screen paintings, vases and 
lamps. Litvinenko produced two Orange SIM cards so that he and Lugovoi had a 
secure way of communicating. As ever, Litvinenko drank tea, from a silver 
teapot. Lugovoi ordered three glasses of red wine and a Cuban cigar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2080d81fe17fd82bb96769b0f5b47be45b9cc440%2F0_0_1788_1880%2F1788.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexander%20Litvinenko%20and%20the%20most%20radioactive%20towel%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexander%20Litvinenko%20and%20the%20most%20radioactive%20towel%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2080d81fe17fd82bb96769b0f5b47be45b9cc440%2F0_0_1788_1880%2F1788.jpg>
 Metropolitan Police’s 3D graphic showing polonium contamination on the green 
baize tablecloth in Grosvenor Square Photograph: Guardian graphics/Litvinenko 
Inquiry 
For unknown reasons, Lugovoi failed to deploy the latest vial of polonium. One 
possible explanation is that the Palm Court bar had video cameras, which 
Lugovoi would have seen. Or perhaps he suspected he was being watched. Did the 
British have him under surveillance? (The answer was no.) It’s possible he had 
got fresh orders from Moscow. Either way, Lugovoi decided to abort the 
operation.

This left him with a problem: what to do with the poison? Lugovoi’s solution 
was simple. In his hotel room, he tipped the polonium down the bathroom sink 
again, this time mopping it up with a couple of towels. He left the towels for 
the cleaner. And he appeared to have dumped the container in the white pedal 
bin next to the lavatory.

When scientists later tested Lugovoi’s hotel room they walked into a scene 
from an atomic horror story. The door to Lugovoi’s room was highly 
contaminated. It showed a reading of more than 30,000 counts a second. Inside, 
there was further contamination. The situation in the bathroom was even worse. 
The inside of the pedal bin registered what scientists called “full-scale 
deflection”, a monster reading of 30,000-plus. There was radiation everywhere: 
on the wall under the sink, the floor and bath, plus another massive result 
from the bathroom door.

The two scientists wearing protective gear gazed at their instruments 
incredulously. They asked to be withdrawn from the room. The team was stood 
down on safety grounds.

The most radioactive towel in history

Amazingly, two months later, detectives located the towels that Lugovoi had 
chucked away. They had ended up stuck in a laundry chute in the hotel’s 
basement. A 3ft by 3ft metal service tube ran the full height of the building. 
At its bottom was a mountain of unwashed sheets and towels.

Lugovoi’s bath towel was found in a green laundry bag on a shelf. His hand 
towel was discovered at the base of the chute.

The levels of radiation were so alarming that the towels were sent to the 
Atomic Weapons Establishment at Aldermaston, the UK government nuclear 
facility. The contamination was unprecedented. The bath towel gave a reading of 
6,000 counts a second, or 130,000 becquerels per sq cm.

The most extreme object, however, was Lugovoi’s white hand towel. The initial 
reading came in as full-scale deflection, greater than 10,000 counts a second. 
Re-tested at Aldermaston, it yielded an astonishing result: in excess of 17m 
becquerels per sq cm.

To put this in context, the equivalent of 10m–30m becquerels absorbed into an 
adult male’s blood would be likely to be fatal within one month. The towel was 
the single most radioactive object recovered by Scotland Yard during its 
decade-long inquiry into Litvinenko’s murder. Probably the most radioactive 
towel in history.

• Extracted from A Very Expensive Poison by Luke Harding (Guardian Faber 
£12.99). Buy a copy now for £7.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/381398/s/very-expensive-poison/>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 