
In the last week, America lost two pioneering transgender women entertainers: 
Alexis Arquette <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000793/> and The Lady Chablis 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0149288/>. Both died relatively young, Arquette at 
47 and Chablis at 59. Then again, perhaps that’s actually rather old, given the 
world they were born into: although there’s no good data on life expectancies 
for trans and gender non-conforming people in the United States,the statistics 
we do have 
<http://www.thetaskforce.org/static_html/downloads/reports/reports/ntds_full.pdf>
 suggest that they face greater health concerns with fewer resources than their 
cisgender counterparts, and that they are therefore more likely to die younger 
as well. Yet both Arquette and Chablis lived outsized lives despite their short 
durations, and along the way, they managed to break barriers for transgender 
artists everywhere.


The Lady Chablis, transgender nightclub star, dies aged 59
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/08/the-lady-chablis-transgender-nightclub-star-dies>
In the 1990s, if you wanted to see a trans actor on the big screen, you had 
remarkably few options. Despite a plethora of films with large transgender 
roles, ranging from the deplorable (Ace Ventura Pet Detective 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0109040/>), to the complicated (The Crying Game 
<http://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9E0CEED91539F935A1575AC0A964958260>), 
to the tragic (Boys Don’t Cry <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0171804/>), trans 
actors were almost entirely sidelined from major productions. Today, a small 
handful are gaining traction in mainstream film and television projects, such as
Laverne Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/14/laverne-cox-orange-new-black-transgender>
,Tom Phelan 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/fosters-transgender-tom-phelan-interview-808424>
,Mya Taylor <https://twitter.com/themyataylor?lang=en>, Jamie Clayton 
<https://twitter.com/MsJamieClayton?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 andTrace Lysette 
<http://www.advocate.com/politics/transgender/2015/04/15/after-years-hiding-hollywood-trans-actress-trace-lysette-finally-liv>
. And if a cisgender actor does play a transgender character, there’s bound to 
be some uproar,as there was when it was recently announced that Michelle 
Rodriguez would play a transgender assassin in the new Walter Hill film, 
(Re)Assignment 
<http://www.vibe.com/2016/09/michelle-rodriguez-transgender-reassignment-controversy/>
.

But that wasn’t even a conversation in the 90s, when Arquette and Chablis 
became two of the first trans actors to play trans roles in major mainstream 
films – Arquette as the gender non-conforming George (based on Boy George) in 
Adam Sandlers’sThe Wedding Singer <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120888/> 
(1998), and Chablis as herself in the 1997 docu-thriller, Midnight in the 
Garden of Good and Evil.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhB3PdPMjeIY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhB3PdPMjeIY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhB3PdPMjeIY&media=>
Both women had nuanced, complicated and shifting understandings of their own 
genders. Perhaps reflecting the time in which they grew up, over the course of 
their lives both used (or had applied to them) a wide variety of labels, from “
drag queen <http://kimwade1.com/?page_id=299>” and “female impersonator 
<http://www.tgforum.com/wordpress/index.php/the-david-de-alba-interview-the-lady-chablis/>
”, to “transgendered <http://www.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/0907/24/lkl.01.html>” and “
gender suspicious 
<http://www.etonline.com/news/182604_alexis_arquette_started_calling_herself_gender_suspicious_after_caitlyn_jenner_came_out/>
”. Yet no matter what words they used, both were always vocal advocates for 
trans people, rights and representation.

Alexis Arquette obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/12/alexis-arquette-obituary> 
Arquette had an open (and often salacious) relationship with the press. She 
was not shy about outing closeted celebrities, particularly ones taking queer 
roles or protesting other forms of discrimination but not trans/homophobia. She 
even made a documentary about her transition, 2007’s Alexis Arquette: She’s My 
Brother. Inan outtake <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hJhCJWsI0fg> posted to 
YouTube, Arquette declared “No one in my life or on the streets can say or do 
anything that’s going to persuade me from becoming … who I am.” Sadly, in the 
end, Arquette found the documentary process to be exploitative; it relied too 
much on “Hollywood types, from Psycho to the clown”,she told gossip columnist 
Michael Musto 
<http://www.out.com/entertainment/michael-musto/2015/01/19/alexis-arquette-sharon-osbourne-bruce-jenner-sex-jared-leto>
. In that same interview, she mentioned another documentary project she had 
worked on, this time with Oprah Winfrey, which floundered when Arquette 
protested their obsession with sex reassignment surgeries, saying that “if 
people want to know about that surgery, there’s plenty of things on YouTube 
they can look up ... [This is] about myself, my career, my personal side”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaT_BxSuSVVU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaT_BxSuSVVU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaT_BxSuSVVU&media=>
Arquette came to movie work early in her career, thanks in part to her famous 
family. The Lady Chablis, on the other hand, was a well-known performer in her 
hometown of Savannah, Georgia, but it wasn’t until the publication of the 
true-crime book Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil (in 1994), that she 
gained wider notoriety. After spending over 200 weeks on the New York Times’s 
bestseller list, the book was made into a film starring Kevin Spacey and a 
young Jude Law. Chablis was shocked when they asked her to audition for the 
role of herself.In an interview with NPR 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/09/09/493319054/savannah-mourns-lady-chablis-from-midnight-in-the-garden-of-good-and-evil>
, Chad Darnell, the film’s casting director, recalls that she informed him 
“there’s nobody else who can play me but me”. When he suggested Whitney 
Houston, she slapped him so hard she drew blood – and got the role.

“I thought celebrity would change the way people looked at me,” Chablis told 
Savannah Magazine 
<http://www.savannahmagazine.com/2016/09/08/a-lady-after-midnight/> in 2013. 
She was hurt when people continued to refer to her as a drag queen, even long 
after the publication of her own memoir, Hiding My Candy, in 1997. In fact, the 
only label she ever truly embraced was the one she gave herself – The Lady 
Chablis. “I just try to be who I am without all the labels people try to put on 
you,” she told the reporter at Savannah Magazine.

It was a sentiment Arquette would have agreed with. Over the course of her 
life, she used many different combinations of labels, genders and pronouns. Yet 
she was adamant that that didn’t change her worth as a human being. “Living as 
a woman is different than living as a man,”she once told Larry King on CNN 
<http://www.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/0907/24/lkl.01.html>. But regardless, “I want 
to be equal to everyone else.”

Today, we are a little further down that road to equality thanks to pioneers 
like The Lady Chablis andAlexis Arquette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexis-arquette>, but our world is also a 
little dimmer without their light. The roles they won might seem small or 
stereotypical by today’s standards, but they were exceptional 20 years ago. 
Rest in power, Goddess Chablis and Goddess Arquette.
 