
Afew years ago, Alexander Skarsgård turned up at a Hammarby football match in 
Stockholm noticeably… what’s a polite way of putting this? Worse for wear? “I 
was shitfaced,” says Skarsgård. “I went up in front of the crowd and started 
doing this chant.Someone put it on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VHbtq2C2PEQ>. I’m very drunk, going: ‘You 
fucking cunts, listen to me!’ I thought: ‘This is real embarrassing.’”

During the bleak hangover that followed, the 40-year-old Swedish actor thought 
he might have torpedoed a career that had just seen him get the part ofTarzan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tarzan> in this summer’s blockbuster. In fact 
it made him an even more perfect fit for the role. “Warner Bros had said they 
needed someone primal and animalistic,” he says. “So my agent sent them the 
video, saying: ‘Isn’t this motherfucker primal enough for you?’”

Another one of the half-million people who watched it was John Michael 
McDonagh, writer-director of The Guard and Calvary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-michael-mcdonagh>, who was on the 
lookout for a hard-drinking detective for his pitch-black buddy comedy War On 
Everyone. “He saw the video and went: ‘That’s the guy,’” says Skarsgård. “It 
got me the job. The moral of the story is: Make a fool of yourself and people 
will love you. Remember that, kids.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwhjTvW6cfd4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwhjTvW6cfd4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwhjTvW6cfd4&media=>
When we meet around midday in the lobby of the Hotel Normandy during the 
Deauville American film festival, it seems he’s taken his own lesson to heart. 
The previous night he was so smashed that he invaded the DJ booth at War On 
Everyone’s afterparty and proved that while you can take the man out of Sweden… 
“I played strictly Abba,” he says. “When in doubt, Lay All Your Love On Me. We 
closed that place down.”

As he concertinas himself into the back of a people carrier for the two-hour 
drive to Charles de Gaulle airport, sheltering his eyes behind dark shades, 
it’s somehow reassuring to know that savage hangovers afflict even movie stars 
who’ve been blessed with the sort of face that ledBen Stiller to cast him in 
Zoolander <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EMTbkfgT_jc> so he could ask him: 
“Did you ever think there’s more to life than being really, really, really 
ridiculously good-looking?”

Skarsgård has been figuring out an answer to that ever since. He starred as a 
brooding, topless vampire in HBO’s True Blood, which ran for seven years until 
2014, and made him a pin-up and earned him a legion of fans who’d approach 
wanting nothing more than to get bitten. (He never did. You bite one fan…) 
Simultaneously, the show’s success gave him the opportunity to play odd parts 
in indie films that didn’t trade on his looks. In coming-of-age-in-the-70s film
The Diary Of A Teenage Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/06/the-diary-of-a-teenage-girl-review-coming-of-age-comedy>
, he was the mustachioed creep who slept with his girlfriend’s daughter; in 
Melancholia’s dreamlike apocalypse he was an earnest, cuckolded newlywed; and 
in next year’sDuncan Jones-directed Mute 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/9/21/13010344/mute-duncan-jones-moon-science-fiction-film>
 he’ll play a silent Amish character. “It’s not about wanting to show I’m 
versatile,” he explains. “It’s just feeling that excitement of not knowing who 
a character is but figuring it out and finding him.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Falexander-skarsgard-war-on-everyone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb70b780aac06a68f839179bd4b6ac67e7088e0a5%2F264_359_2798_1679%2F2798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexander%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20wake%20up%20shivering%20in%20the%20foetal%20position%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Falexander-skarsgard-war-on-everyone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexander%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20wake%20up%20shivering%20in%20the%20foetal%20position%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Falexander-skarsgard-war-on-everyone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb70b780aac06a68f839179bd4b6ac67e7088e0a5%2F264_359_2798_1679%2F2798.jpg>
 Skarsgård in The Legend Of Tarzan. Photograph: Allstar/WARNER BROS. 
Yet he was back with his pecs out this summer for The Legend Of Tarzan, a 
blockbuster that, like many in 2016, struggled at the box office. He says he 
was drawn in by the character’s search for a place in the world and impressed 
by Harry Potter director David Yates’s ability to make a £140m film feel 
“intimate”. But it was in some ways a change of scale. “I work mostly in 
independent movies so the scope of Tarzan was definitely different,” Skarsgård 
says. “I didn’t feel pressured [by the box office demands] though. It wasn’t 
like: ‘Oh fuck, this is a big movie.’ It was an incredible experience, but it 
was also nine months of just gym, work and bed. I didn’t have a sip of alcohol. 
It was robotic.”

Which explains the appeal of War On Everyone, a film in which he both downs 
and takes shots in every direction. Skarsgård plays Terry, a perma-drunk, Glen 
Campbell-obsessed, unapologetically corrupt detective partnered with the 
lightning-witted Bob, played by The Martian’s Michael Peña. It’s the old bad 
cop/worse cop routine, but laced with fierce cleverness. Where Shane Black’s 
The Nice Guys were bumbling dunces, McDonagh’s pair trade wisecracks peppered 
with esoteric references to everyone from Simone de Beauvoir to realist painter 
Andrew Wyeth.

Their cocaine-fuelled romp takes them through an Albuquerque inexplicably 
peopled with Quaker bank robbers and burqa-wearing tennis players as the duo go 
in search of a missing million dollars and that most evil villain of all: a 
member of the English upper class. It’s wildly irreverent, the tone set by an 
opening scene in which the pair try to knock down a mime (to see if he’ll make 
a sound). Likewise, McDonagh’s script lives up to its name by making puckish 
jokes on any subject you care to think of. Skarsgård, hunching his lean frame 
into a stoop, relishes it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Falexander-skarsgard-war-on-everyone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8180bbc1e8f47cc853b578d8b3bd2f7d2a862296%2F0_0_7020_4212%2F7020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexander%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20wake%20up%20shivering%20in%20the%20foetal%20position%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Falexander-skarsgard-war-on-everyone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexander%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20wake%20up%20shivering%20in%20the%20foetal%20position%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Falexander-skarsgard-war-on-everyone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8180bbc1e8f47cc853b578d8b3bd2f7d2a862296%2F0_0_7020_4212%2F7020.jpg>
 Michael Peña and Skarsgård in War On Everyone. 
“It’s so un-PC, it’s so me,” says Skarsgård. “You could tell John didn’t give 
a fuck about anything, which I found refreshing in a script. I’d read a couple 
of comedies but nothing that was fun or intelligent enough. When I got this 
script and it was dark and twisted and weird and completely out there, I was 
excited.” And besides, he adds, “[John is] a beautiful soul, which helps when 
you insult everyone.”

He even sees some similarities between his dirty detective and the king of the 
swingers. “As with Tarzan, there’s dichotomy in the character between being a 
civilised man and a beast. That’s something we can all relate to. We live in a 
civilised society, but 12 hours ago we were beasts dancing to Abba.”

Listening to Abba is brilliant, but my life is still shit
Alexander Skarsgård 
Skarsgård has spent his life caught between different worlds: blockbusters and 
indies, Sweden and the States. During his bohemian upbringing he wanted to be 
like his friends’ dads who wore suits and drove Saabs. When Skarsgård was 20, 
his own father Stellan found international fame inLars von Trier’s Breaking The 
Waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/20/breaking-waves-trier-arthouse>, 
and they would go on to appear together for Von Trier inMelancholia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/29/melancholia-film-review>. 
However, when Alexander was growing up his father was simply an eccentric 
thespian with a penchant for walking around nude. “He was a weird Bergman 
actor. A 12-year-old kid doesn’t give a fuck about that,” says Skarsgård. “He’d 
be walking around naked or wearing weird Moroccan robes. As a teenager you’re 
just like: ‘Come on, dad!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Falexander-skarsgard-war-on-everyone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e9716075b8a70d949f4aba1064c30bb1ae80b89%2F0_65_3670_2202%2F3670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexander%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20wake%20up%20shivering%20in%20the%20foetal%20position%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Falexander-skarsgard-war-on-everyone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexander%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20wake%20up%20shivering%20in%20the%20foetal%20position%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Falexander-skarsgard-war-on-everyone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e9716075b8a70d949f4aba1064c30bb1ae80b89%2F0_65_3670_2202%2F3670.jpg>
 All eyes on Alexander. Photograph: Filip Van Roe /eyevine 
The young Skarsgård’s first taste of fame was his own. His appearance at the 
age of 12 in TV film The Dog That Smiled made him a child star, but he soon 
found he hated the attention and quit acting. “I was desperate to be normal and 
blend in,” he says. He saw his chance at a life on the straight-and-narrow by 
enrolling in the Swedish military at 19, “unheard of” in his family. “That was 
my way to rebel,” he says.

Afterwards, still in search of himself, he decided to head to university in 
the UK. But he swerved London to find a more authentic British experience, and 
enrolled at Leeds Met. “It doesn’t get more British than a northern, 
working-class town,” he says. “There was a club called the Majestic where they 
had student nights and it was a pound a pint. We lived in Headingley, near the 
pubs on the Otley Run. Uni was a bullshit excuse for being there. I was 
studying British culture. I loved it.”

True Blood to Tarzan: how Alexander Skarsgård swung into Hollywood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/02/alexander-skarsgard-interview-diary-of-a-teenage-girl>
Deciding at 20 that he may have been a little hasty quitting acting, it was 
while visiting Stellan in LA that he won his small part in Zoolander – at his 
first Hollywood audition – but it was a false dawn. It would be another seven 
years before he got a major role, and he spent the time in between shuttling 
between theatres and coffee shops. When he was cast in David Simon and Ed 
Burns’s Iraq miniseries Generation Kill, he spent a month convinced he was 
about to be sacked. “It was only after four or five weeks I realised they 
weren’t going to recast,” he says. “Before that all I could think about was how 
much it would cost them to reshoot the big fight scenes after they fired me.”

Imposter syndrome is a common feeling – although a little hard to believe from 
a handsome, 6ft 4in movie star. “That shit doesn’t change,” he assures me. “I 
felt like that on Tarzan. I was on set thinking: ‘When is the director going to 
come over and say: Dude, you can go home. We’ve got Tarzan here now.’ That was 
10 years after Generation Kill.”

Alexander Skarsgård 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alexander-skarsgard>, then: just like 
the rest of us. Fond of a pub crawl, obnoxious at sporting events, constantly 
waiting for that tap on the shoulder telling him the jig is up. So life is 
still pretty much the same when you’re really, really, really ridiculously 
good-looking?

“I mean, fuck, I still wake up shivering in the foetal position,” he says. 
“I’m incredibly grateful for the opportunities I get. Getting drunk on someone 
else’s dime listening to Abba is brilliant, but my life is still shit. I’m 
still agonising. What the fuck am I doing with my life? Where do I belong? Who 
gives a fuck? Let me assure you, it doesn’t get any better.”

War On Everyone is in cinemas from Friday
 