
In a Soho record shop, Alfie Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alfie-allen> flicks through the racks of 
vinyl with nimble fingers. He picks out punk-era favourites such as Gang of 
Four and the Slits and laments the store's lack of dance ("I'm really into 
house right now"). He happily apes poses from album covers for our 
photographer, recreating everything from Grace Jones's contortion onIsland Life 
to hip-hop producer Marley Marl's cocky pilot onIn Control. Alfie just shrugs 
at the chortles from his audience of shop assistants, publicists and even his 
own agent. "I really don't mind what I do," he says with an affable grin.

The 23-year-old actor does seem very self-possessed. Lucky, really, as he must 
suffer from being seen as son of Keith Allen and brother of Lily. But this 
autumn should establish him as a star in his own right. First up isSoulBoy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T_6NS_lLgis>, a film set in the 70s northern 
soul scene. After that, he's inThe Kid 
<http://flickfeast.co.uk/reviews/film-reviews/kid-2010/>, based on Kevin 
Lewis's bestselling autobiography, as school bully Dominic. "Kevin found it 
hard to talk to me after he saw my scenes because he hated that boy so much. I 
hope that means I did a good job. Though I've done a few bullies – maybe I've 
just got a bully's face. I do prefer playing baddies because you can push being 
horrible as far as you want."

After Jimmy McGovern's new BBC series, Accused, there's the role of Theon 
Greyjoy inGame of Thrones <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6MophfvUlfI>, the 
eagerly awaited HBO adaptation of George RR Martin's fantasy novels, which have 
sold 7m copies worldwide. "Theon's a bit of a wrong 'un, too," Alfie cheerfully 
admits. "Game of Thrones is my big break so I've got to make the most of it, 
keep acting well."

He obviously loves to act. As we talk, he drops into different characters so 
easily it's unnerving. Alfie almost disappears. Instead, he's a cockney, a 
Belfast local; at one point, he's Peter Capaldi and at another Aidan Gillen. He 
looks bashful when I compliment him on his way with an accent. "I do take pride 
in them. I think it's a gene thing. My dad's good at them and Lily's amazing – 
she does a brilliant Cheryl Cole."

Is he nervous about all that lies ahead? "I actually love pressure. I loved 
playing sport at school in front of a crowd; I love being on stage in front of 
a big audience. I buzz off that." He shrugs. "And if it goes tits up, then it's 
on to the next thing."
 