
Alfonso Cuarón has been named as head of the jury for this year’s Venice film 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival>, previously a 
happy hunting ground for the Oscar-winning Mexican director. He and his fellow 
jurors will award the Golden Lion award for best film, as well as a number of 
other prizes at the event’s 72nd edition in September.

Cuarón’s science-fiction thriller Gravity opened the 2013 edition out of 
competition before picking up seven Oscars, while both 2006’sChildren of Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/sep/22/juliannemoore.thriller> and 
2001’s Y Tu Mamá También debuted in competition prior to awards-season success.

Emmanuel Lubezki won a best cinematography prize for Children of Men at 
Venice. (He later won Oscars for Gravity and Birdman.) Children of Men also 
received Oscar nods for best adapted screenplay and best editing.Y Tu Mamá 
También <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/apr/12/1>, a 
coming-of-age-drama-cum-road-trip movie, won stars Gael García Bernal and Diego 
Luna the Marcello Mastroianni Award for best emerging actors, while Cuarón and 
his brother Carlos won the best screenplay prize. The film was later nominated 
for a best original screenplay Oscar.

Cuarón, whose other films include 2004’s Harry Potter and the Prisoner of 
Azkaban and 1998’s Great Expectations, will also help award the Grand Jury 
prize, the Silver Lion for best director, the Coppa Volpi for best male and 
female actor and the Marcello Mastroianni prize.

French composer Alexandre Desplat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/27/venice-2014-muted-film-festival-aims-to-discover-new-faces-new-subjects>
 headed the jury in 2014, a year that saw the debut of future Oscar-winner 
Birdman in competition for the Golden Lion. The 2015 Venice film festival will 
run from 2 to 12 September.
 