
The Oscar-winning director of Gravity, Alfonso Cuarón, is primed for a 
crowdpleasing return to the world of Harry Potter on the new JK Rowling fantasy 
epicFantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them>.

Former editor-in-chief of Deadline Nikki Finke <https://twitter.com/NikkiFinke>
 tweeted on Monday that Cuaron was "deep in talks" for the new film, the first 
in a trilogy set 70 years before the events at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft 
and Wizardry depicted in Rowling's books. The British author is writing the 
screenplay - her first - for the debut instalment.

"I hear Alfonso Cuaron ('Gravity', 'HP/Azkaban') deep in talks to direct JK 
Rowling's Harry Potter spinoff 'Fantastic Beasts',"tweeted Finke 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/NikkiFinke/status/468417366855278592>. "Perfect 
pick."
Nikki Finke (@NikkiFinke) 
I hear Alfonso Cuaron ('Gravity', 'HP/Azkaban') deep in talks to direct JK 
Rowling'sHarry Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> spinoff 
'Fantastic Beasts'. Perfect pick.
 <https://twitter.com/NikkiFinke/statuses/468417366855278592> May 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/NikkiFinke/statuses/468417366855278592> 
Cuarón previously directed 2004's Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, 
widely considered one of the best films in the fantasy saga. Fantastic Beasts, 
which Warner Bros and Rowling revealed in September last year, will feature the
swashbuckling adventurer Newt Scamander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2014/mar/31/newt-scamander-harry-potter-films-jk-rowling>
. The title is borrowed from the first-year textbook that Potter uses at 
Hogwarts in the novel Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone.

Rowling published the Fantastic Beasts 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408803011>
 magizoology compendium in 2001 to raise money for Comic Relief. The proposed 
new trilogy is firmly in the spotlight because the Harry Potter films represent 
the highest-grossing film franchise in history, with $7.7bn (£4.6bn) in box 
office receipts. The first film is due in cinemas in November 2016.

Mexican film-maker Cuarón won seven prizes for Gravity at the Academy Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/03/alfonso-cuaron-wins-best-director-oscar>
 in March, including best director. He has not yet confirmed plans for a 
follow-up in the wake of the space drama's gruelling three-year pre-production 
and production process.
 