
Alfonso Cuarón has denied reports 
<http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/news/agencia-efe/140525/mexicos-cuaron-says-he-has-no-new-film-projects-lined>
 he will take on JK Rowling's new film trilogy, Fantastic Beasts and Where to 
Find Them.

Speaking in the Italian town of Pietrasanta in Tuscany, Cuarón told the Efe 
newswire he had "no plans" for a follow-up to the Oscar-winning space drama 
Gravity, which took $716m (£424.9m) at the global box office. Recent reports 
have named Cuarón as afrontrunner for Rowling's project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/20/alfonso-cuaron-harry-potter-fantastic-beasts-jk-rowling-film>
, which is set 70 years before the hugely successful eight-film Harry Potter 
film series.

"My near-term plans over the coming months are to take my kids to school and 
plan what I'm going to do this summer with them. Now, I'm once again connecting 
with life, I have no plans of any kind," said the Mexican film-maker, who 
directed 2004's critically acclaimedHarry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harry-potter-and-the-prisoner-of-azkaban>.

"It was a very beautiful experience for me. I have a lot of love for that 
universe and I tremendously admireJK Rowling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling>," said Cuarón. "But today, for 
the present, projects based around lots of visual effects don't attract me. I'm 
coming out of a five-year process of doing visual effects and now I sort of 
want to clean my palate of that a little bit."

Former editor-in-chief of Deadline Nikki Finke tweeted last week that Cuarón 
was"deep in talks" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/20/alfonso-cuaron-harry-potter-fantastic-beasts-jk-rowling-film>
 for Fantastic Beasts, for which Rowling is writing her debut screenplay. The 
proposed trilogy will feature the swashbuckling adventurer Newt Scamander. Its 
title is borrowed from the first-year textbook that Potter uses at Hogwarts 
School of Witchcraft and Wizardry in the novel Harry Potter and the 
Philosopher's Stone.

Cuarón also told Efe he would not be directing a rumoured prequel to The 
Shining, Stanley Kubrick's classic 1980 chiller. The Schmoes Know blog reported 
last week that studio Warner Brothers hadoffered the film-maker the chance to 
take charge of the project 
<http://schmoesknow.com/hot-scoop-will-alfonso-cuaron-book-a-room-at-the-overlook-hotel/23609/>
, which looks set to be titled The Overlook Hotel.
 