 Alfred Brendel, arguably Britain's greatest living pianist and adored by 
classical music lovers for his rigorous yet witty and emotionally complex 
playing, is to retire from performance.
He will give his final concert in Vienna on December 18 next year, when he 
will be 77 and will have enjoyed a career spanning 60 years. The city is an 
appropriate setting for a farewell by an artist who has the traditions of 
central European pianism running through his veins and who has zeroed in on the 
great Austro-German repertory, particularly Beethoven, Haydn, Schubert and 
Mozart. His final programme will be with the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra 
conducted by Sir Charles Mackerras at the Musikverein. He will perform Mozart's 
Piano Concerto No 9 in E flat K271, nicknamed the Jeunehomme.

The straightforward manner of his departure is typical of a musician who has 
never gone in for fireworks or histrionics. According to Thomas Hull, his 
spokesman: "It has always been Mr Brendel's intention to stop performing while 
still at the peak of his powers, and he makes this decision while continuing to 
attract capacity audiences throughout the world. He dislikes the idea of 
farewell tours and concerts and prefers to just stop." Brendel's recital 
programme next season will contain a simple nod towards his retirement: he will 
perform Schubert's last, great sonata, D960 in B flat.

Andrew Clements, the Guardian's music critic, described him as "the 
pre-eminent exponent of the central European tradition; the greatest pianist 
from that tradition of our time". Brendel, who has written collections of 
poems, as well as volumes of essays, will in future concentrate on his literary 
career. He may give selected masterclasses, and has been committed to coaching 
younger pianists such as Till Fellner, Paul Lewis, Imogen Cooper and, latterly, 
Kit Armstrong. Though he is regarded as British by his fans, and has lived in 
London since the 1970s, he is an Austrian citizen, born in Wiesenberg, northern 
Moravia, in 1931. He began the piano aged six in Zagreb, where his father ran a 
cinema. Between 1958 and 1964 Brendel became the first musician to record 
Beethoven's complete piano works.

He also performed the complete sonatas for the first time, a feat that he has 
repeated several times, most recently in the 1990s. Clements said Brendel's 
decision to cease performing was typical of a man who was "intensely 
self-critical".


Â· The following clarification was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Thursday November 22 2007. In the article above we were 
right to say thatAlfred Brendel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alfred-brendel> was the first pianist to 
record Beethoven's complete works for solo piano, but wrong to say that he was 
the first pianist to perform Beethoven's complete sonatas.
 