
Where, and how, does a musician’s calling reveal itself? It can be stimulated 
by artistic activity and aesthetic leanings in the family, by the early 
opportunity to listen to concerts and opera, by being exposed to recordings and 
YouTube. In my case, there was nothing of that sort. Nor was there an 
intellectual background. Without an academic piano teacher after my 16th year, 
I became used to finding out things for myself. It helped me to keep my mind as 
independent as possible.

My first recital at the age of 17 provided a clear signal: courteously 
received, it made my pessimistic mother give in. Of course it wouldn’t be the 
solid future of a bourgeois academic – the risk was incalculable. Yet I was 
allowed to take it. For a couple of years, I had already dabbled in as many 
artistic endeavours as I could find – writing sonnets that sounded profound and 
meant nothing, studying composition, as well as drawing or painting myself, my 
friends, or whatever came to mind.

Impatience was not one of my vices. I felt I had musical talent but was 
cautious in imagining how far it would lead. And I saw it as a long-term 
proposition, hoping, at 20, that I might be an artist of stature at 50. Lofty 
musicians such asEdwin Fischer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UpyBcSAxqdQ>, 
Alfred Cortot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/may/25/artists-artist-pianists> and 
Wilhelm Kempff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/feb/14/classicalmusicandopera.artsfeatures4>
, whom I was able to hear at that time, gave me an idea of what to aim for. 
Some of their most inspired performances have stayed in my mind.

The best of Alfred Brendel on YouTube
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2011/jun/02/alfred-brendel-youtube-moments>
I was 14 when the war ended, and lucky enough never to have to join an army. 
The fact that I spent some of my school years in countries that were governed 
by Ustashi or Nazis has significantly influenced my later outlook on life. The 
experience of war, bombs, people proud to be political “believers”, the 
preposterous voices of Hitler and Goebbels on the radio, the sight of Jews 
wearing yellow stars and the experience of a war closing in on where I stayed 
with my mother left a store of information in my memory, information that told 
me in hindsight what the world should avoid being. It made me a sceptic forever.

After years of turmoil without a proper home and an available piano, 
I realised that there was a large area of compensation. The realm of aesthetics 
– art, music, literature, theatre and film – seemed to be, as Nietzsche had 
said, the sole justification of life and the world. I decided that the world 
was absurd, and that to perceive the comical side of absurdity was the proper 
strategy for survival.

Next to the wonderful sense of order I derived from music, I learned to value 
nonsense – not just the poetic territory discovered byEdward Lear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2012/may/10/archive-200th-anniversary-edward-lear>
 but the nonsensical part of reality. The pronouncement that “Dada was nothing, 
ie everything” opened up the world beyond the strictures of intellect.

As a child, I had played a lead in a children’s theatre and watched movies by 
Charlie Chaplin, Harold Lloyd and Buster Keaton. The fascination of the cinema 
has remained, culminating in a film series that I curated a few years ago under 
the heading“Between Dread and Laughter” 
<http://www.arsenal-berlin.de/en/arsenal-cinema/past-programs/single/article/4857/2804//archive/2014/june.html>
. Great acting in the theatre as well as on the screen has continued to inspire 
my urge to play roles as a musical performer, and to treat musical pieces as 
characters.

From the age of 20 onwards I had the opportunity to make recordings. I had 
already used a Swiss tape recorder, a gift from friends, and a microphone for 
my private benefit. It can take considerable time for a young player to learn 
how to listen properly to himself. One of the paradoxes for a pianist is that 
he or she has both to anticipate the sound and at the same time take in what 
happens in the moment. It was my privilege that in a recording career that 
spanned 50 years I had the chance to keep abreast of my own playing, react to 
it, decide what to improve, and which inspired moments, if possible, to retain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Falfred-brendel-impatience-was-not-a-vice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb974f03025fa4ff18b5973e878e824e3a35b0808%2F71_216_1980_2493%2F1980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alfred%20Brendel%20on%20a%20life%20in%20music%3A%20%E2%80%98Impatience%20was%C2%A0not%20a%20vice%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Falfred-brendel-impatience-was-not-a-vice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alfred%20Brendel%20on%20a%20life%20in%20music%3A%20%E2%80%98Impatience%20was%C2%A0not%20a%20vice%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Falfred-brendel-impatience-was-not-a-vice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb974f03025fa4ff18b5973e878e824e3a35b0808%2F71_216_1980_2493%2F1980.jpg>
 ‘A nice balance between the studio and the concert stage gave me the chance to 
enjoy both’ Photograph: Hulton Getty 
In the 1950s, Vienna became a hunting ground for various American record 
companies. There were fine halls to record in and young talent queueing up. 
During these postwar years, facilities in a city divided into British, 
American, French and Russian zones were relatively cheap and the wording of 
contracts suitably vague. The LP had just reached the market, and big chunks of 
music had never been recorded before. Beginning in 1956 I had a busy recording 
schedule. In the following decades, technology developed from mono to stereo to 
digital, from LPs and cassettes to CDs. Here is one of the reasons why I was 
able to repeatedly re-record parts of my repertoire. But there were other 
reasons as well: the trust my companies had placed in me and, obviously, a 
reasonable degree of commercial success.

However, all that recording didn’t prevent me from appearing with the leading 
orchestras and playing recitals. A nice balance between the studio and the 
concert stage gave me the chance to enjoy both. There were also a number of 
live recordings that Philips released – when microphones happened to be on 
stage, and the result seemed felicitous. I have particularly valued 
performances of large and demanding works such asBeethoven’s Hammerklavier 
Sonata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/jan/21/buildingaclassicallibraryseries.culture7>
 or hisDiabelli Variations that succeeded in presenting the works in one big 
arc.

Next to recordings and concerts there was a second life emerging: that of a 
writer. Essays on music, musicians and peculiarities of my pianistic trade were 
later supplemented by poetry, a surprise that revealed to me a different kind 
of self. Not that humour, comedy and the grotesque had been alien to me; but it 
was a novel experience that there was something inside my mind volunteering to 
cheer me up.

When, after a 60-year career, I stopped giving concerts in 2008 I anticipated 
what I would do: give lectures; promote my books and write some more; lend an 
ear to young pianists; and, particularly, coach string quartets. What I didn’t 
foresee were the physical annoyances of old age, of which the breakdown of my 
hearing was the most inconvenient. But there were positive surprises as well, 
such as the decision to make available a complete collection of my 
Philips/Decca recordings, a decision that stunned me because I had never 
counted the sheer number of CDs (114 in all) I seemed to be responsible for.

Looking back, I have some trouble understanding when I could have done it all: 
playing, writing, looking, living, loving. While I never managed to be bored or 
idle, I always got enough sleep. Although I loved playing, I was never driven, 
and went on stage of my own free will. At the conclusion of my concert career I 
didn’t shed a tear. How does it all add up? Life, on the whole, has remained 
rather mysterious.

Alfred Brendel: The Complete Philips Recordings is released by Decca.
 