
10.05pm GMT 

We're going to wrap up our live blog coverage of the ongoing hostage crisis in 
Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>. Here's a summary of where 
things stand:

• An unknown number of hostages and captors remain at the gas facility outside 
In Amenas. The number of those killed and wounded since Wednesday also is 
unknown. The official Algerian news service reported Friday that 12 hostages 
had been killed in all, but such tolls have fluctuated a lot since the incident 
was first reported.

• US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said the US was "deeply concerned 
about those who remain in danger." A state department spokeswoman said the 
United States would not negotiate with terrorists. The Associated Press 
reported that Americans are among the hostages who remain at the site.

• The AP reported that one American was among the dead. The French foreign 
minister said a French national had also been killed. The British prime 
minister's office has declined to discuss the number of Britons involved.

• Algerian forces have freed about 100 of the 132 foreigners who were taken 
hostage in a gas facility in the Algerian desert, a security source told 
Reuters.

• Western governments said they were in close touch with Algiers. An American 
transport plane reportedly ferried some American citizens away from the remote 
site. The nature of any future plans for a military operation at the site – 
possibly collaborative – is unclear. US defense secretary Leon Panetta said the 
militants "will have no place to hide."

• Hostages gave accounts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middle-east-live/2013/jan/18/algeria-hostage-crisis-ongoing-says-foreign-office-live-updates#block-50f96d0095cb5d055131b748>
 of the attack, saying they hid in the facility until the commotion of the 
Algerian military operation allowed them to escape. Hostages reported "many 
deaths."

9.47pm GMT 

The Associated Press names the American who died at In Amenas. He was a worker 
at the natural gas complex:

US officials identified the dead American as Frederick Buttaccio, a Texas 
resident, but said it was unclear how he died. They said U.S. officials 
recovered Buttaccio's remains on Friday and notified his family. Officials 
spoke on condition of anonymity because they weren't authorized to speak 
publicly on the matter. ...

BP evacuated one American, along with other foreign workers, to Mallorca, 
Spain, and then to London. And an American official said a U.S. military C-130 
flew a group of people, including some lightly wounded or injured, from Algiers 
to a U.S. facility in Europe on Friday. The official wasn't authorized to speak 
publicly on the matter and requested anonymity.

Updated at 9.48pm GMT

9.02pm GMT 

Quoting unnamed sources, the AP reports one American died in the In Amenas 
standoff. No further details are given.
The Associated Press (@AP) 
BREAKING: AP sources: One American dead in Algerian hostage standoff.
 <https://twitter.com/AP/status/292373327476039680> January 18, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/AP/status/292373327476039680> 
8.50pm GMT 

A Frenchman was among those killed when the Algerian military attacked 
hostage-takers at the gas facility, French foreign minister Laurent Fabius said 
Friday.

"The Algerian authorities have just informed us that one of our compatriots, 
Mr. Yann Desjeux, unfortunately lost his life during the operation to free 
hostages," Fabius said in a statement. "The lives of three others of our 
compatriots who were on the site during the terrorist attack have been saved."

8.06pm GMT 

There were many deaths in clashes at the In Amenas gas facility, an Algerian 
who was taken hostage tells the Guardian:

One Algerian hostage, originally from the city of Ouargla, who escaped during 
the army assault, said: "There were so many deaths. I was shocked. I can't say 
the exact number. Foreign hostages died, Algerian hostages died and there were 
deaths among the terrorists." He said one of the militants' leaders was among 
those killed.

... The remaining hostage-takers were holed up in the key working area of the 
gas facility. "It's very difficult for the army to stage an assault because 
everything could explode. It's dangerous," locals warned.

Read the full piece here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jan/18/algeria-siege-nightmare-deaths>. 

8.00pm GMT 

Clinton said the US will step up its counterterrorism operations in the 
Maghreb, where it already conducts clandestine surveillance flights among other 
measures.

"It is absolutely essential that we broaden and deepen our counter-terror 
cooperation going forward with Algeria and all counter-terror efforts in the 
region," Clinton said. "I made clear that we stand ready to further enhance 
counter-terror support that we have already supplied. We have been discussing 
it last year, when I traveled to Algeria in October specifically to discuss 
counter-terror issues."

If the statement has a defensive ring to it, consider the storm of controversy 
that hit the state department after the death of ambassador Chris Stevens in 
Libya. American fatalities in Algeria at the hands of Islamic militants could 
redouble criticism of the Obama administration's counter-terrorism policy in 
northAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and the Middle East.

7.51pm GMT 

Clinton: US 'deeply concerned about those who remain in danger'

Hostages remain in danger at the Algerian gas facility, US secretary of state 
Hillary Clinton said at the top of an appearance in Washington alongside the 
Japanese foreign minister.

"The United States extends our condolences to all the families who have lost 
loved ones in this brutal assault, and we remain deeply concerned about those 
who remain in danger," Clinton said.

Clinton did not say whether any Americans had died in the incident or remain 
among the hostages. Nor did she give any figures of those dead or wounded.

Calling it "very difficult situation," Clinton said she was in close touch 
with Algerian officials.

"I want to underscore again that the utmost care must be taken to preserve 
innocent life," she said.

Updated at 8.11pm GMT

7.30pm GMT 
 An Algerian guard gestures at the main entrance of a hospital in In Amenas, 
as people wait to know the fate of their relatives who were taken hostage by 
Islamist militants in a gas facility, January 18, 2013. Photograph: 
STRINGER/REUTERS 
6.56pm GMT 

Algerian engineers have taken the In Amenas gas facility offline in an attempt 
to ensure the safety of people apparently still inside, according to the energy 
minister, who isquoted by 
<http://www.algerie360.com/economie/economie-algerie/le-site-gazier-de-tiguentourine-mis-sous-depression/?utm_campaign=twitter&utm_medium=twitter&utm_source=twitter>
 the news site Algerie360.

"What's extraordinary is that the employees of [state utility] Sonatrach at 
the site decided to shut down the factory and to put the equipment in a state 
of decompression so that it doesn't present an immediate danger for the people, 
first, and for the facility second," minister Youcef Yousfi said.

The gas facility is estimated to account for 18% of Algeria's total gas 
exports.

6.43pm GMT 

The British prime minister's office has once again declined to discuss the 
number of Britons involved in the ongoing hostage crisis in Algeria.

"The Government is not in a position to comment on the number of UK nationals 
involved," a No 10 spokesman said.

Prime Minister David Cameron led an afternoon meeting of the Cobra emergency 
group, after which he spoke once again with his Algerian counterpart, the 
British Press Association reported.

6.33pm GMT 

The prompt and violent response of the Algerian military to the hostage crisis 
reflects a ruthlesscounter-terror strategy developed during the country's war 
on Islamist insurgents in the 1990s, Geoff Porterwrites 
<http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2013/01/18/the_eradicateurs_algeria_terrorists_hostages?page=0,0>
 in Foreign Policy:

During that conflict, a debate emerged within the Algerian government about 
how to deal with the violent Islamists. One side favored a negotiated solution. 
The other, known as the eradicateurs, said killing the Islamists was the only 
approach. The eradicateurswon -- and they still remain in the drivers seat in 
today's Algeria.

Although there have since been two political amnesties for participants in the 
Islamist insurgency, the eradicateurs still hold key counterterrorism posts in 
the Algerian military, some having been brought out of retirement as recently 
as last year, and eliminating terrorists is still the only Algerian 
government's only actionable policy. There was no question that it would not be 
deployed at In Amenas.

The heart of all Algerian policies is the preservation of the Algerian state 
-- maintaining the sanctity of its sovereignty, defending the viability of its 
economy, and ensuring the safety of its citizens, all with a vision not just to 
the day-to-day but to the longer run. By attacking the In Amenas facility, the 
militants struck at these core interests, provoking an overwhelming response 
from the Algerian government.

Read the full piece here 
<http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2013/01/18/the_eradicateurs_algeria_terrorists_hostages?page=0,0>
.

6.05pm GMT 

Algeria

The United States will not seek a deal with hostage-takers at the In Amenas 
facility, a state department spokeswoman said in a daily briefing.

"The United States does not negotiate with terrorists," spokeswoman Victoria 
Nuland told reporters.

Mauritania's ANI news service earlier reported that militants at the gas 
facility had offered an exchange of American hostages for inmates held in US 
prisons.

Meanwhile the Associated Press reports that the State Department has confirmed 
that American hostages are still being held at the facility.
The Associated Press (@AP) 
BREAKING: State Department confirms Americans still being held hostage in 
Algeria.
 <https://twitter.com/AP/status/292330354868621313> January 18, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/AP/status/292330354868621313> 
Updated at 6.08pm GMT

5.55pm GMT 

The AFP has published video of French troops setting up positions in the Niger 
River town of Markala, Mali.

The report refers to the expulsion of rebels from Diabaly and from Konna, a 
key city lying on the route from northern territories to the capital.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpvqsnyG-cSM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpvqsnyG-cSM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpvqsnyG-cSM&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpvqsnyG-cSM&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpvqsnyG-cSM>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpvqsnyG-cSM&media=>
close 
5.40pm GMT 

Journalist Fabien Offner in Bamako is tweeting pictures of Nigerian soldiers 
deplaning to join the fight against Islamist rebels.
Fabien Offner (@fabienoff) 
Troupes nigérianes. Ils sont chauds. twitter.com/fabienoff/stat… 
<http://t.co/DhuNnApr>
 <https://twitter.com/fabienoff/status/292324406972272641> January 18, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/fabienoff/status/292324406972272641> 
Updated at 8.57am GMT

5.27pm GMT 

For French speakers, this video produced by Le Monde mapping the political 
currents feeding the Mali conflict is recommended.

5.05pm GMT 

Algeria

My colleagues report 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jan/18/algerian-hostage-crisis-militants-gas-plant?CMP=twt_fd>
 that a smallgroup of jihadists are still holding part of the In Amenas natural 
gas plant:

Radio France's correspondent in Algeria reported that between seven and 10 
attackers armed with explosives were still in the In Amenas plant's machine 
room. Algerian forces have freed about 100 of the 132 foreigners who were taken 
hostage in a gas facility in the Algerian desert, a security source told 
Reuters.

The fate of the others - whether they remained captive or had been killed - 
remained unclear, he said, as the situation at the plant was "changing rapidly".

4.57pm GMT 

Egypt

Police fired tear gas to disperse hundreds of Muslim protesters trying to 
storm a Coptic Christian church in southern Egypt Friday, the Associated Press 
reports. The crowd gathered after word spread that a Christian man sexually 
assaulted a 6-year-old girl. Here's AP:

Witnesses in Marashda village in the province of Qena said several shops and 
cars owned by Coptic Christians were torched overnight after Muslim villagers 
accused a merchant in his sixties of molesting the young girl.
 Violence flared again after Friday prayers, with witnesses saying protesters 
surrounded the village's central Abu Fam church, hurling stones and trying to 
storm it. Some climbed the church walls and destroyed a cross atop it. Police 
fired tear gas to scatter the crowd.
 Qena security director Gen. Salah Mazid was quoted in state media as saying 
that police are investigating the accusations against the merchant, who turned 
himself in at a nearby police station.

4.55pm GMT 

Syria

A veteran French journalist was killed Thursday while covering fighting in 
Aleppo, Reporters Without Borders says:

Reporters Without Borders condemns Belgian-born French journalist Yves Debay’s 
death yesterday inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. The Syrian 
Observatory for Human Rights said he was fatally shot while covering fierce 
fighting between government forces and the rebel Free Syrian Army in Aleppo.

A former soldier who was fascinated by fighting and became a war reporter, 
Debay created the magazine Raids in 1986 and Assaut, another magazine 
specializing in military matters, in 2005.

(h/t: @@soniarolle <https://twitter.com/soniarolley>y)

Updated at 4.55pm GMT

4.43pm GMT 

Mali

McClatchy correspondent Alan Boswell reports that rebels have retreated 
"without fight" from the town of Diabaly, north of Bamako, which they captured 
at the start of the week. Diabaly falls within Niono prefecture.
Alan Boswell (@alanboswell) 
Prefect: Rebels have withdrawn from Diabaly without fight, not sure if retreat 
or tactical#Mali <https://twitter.com/search/%23Mali>
 <https://twitter.com/alanboswell/status/292306005012914177> January 18, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/alanboswell/status/292306005012914177> Alan Boswell 
(@alanboswell) 
Niono prefect says Malian army heading to empty unoccupied Diabaly tonight. 
Aren't sure what they'll find#Mali <https://twitter.com/search/%23Mali>
 <https://twitter.com/alanboswell/status/292308091347824641> January 18, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/alanboswell/status/292308091347824641> 
UPDATE: Citing "local officials," the BBC reports 
<https://twitter.com/BBCBreaking/status/292313636028960768> that rebels 
withdrew from Diabaly after a "French bombardment."

UPDATE 2: Boswell says 
<https://twitter.com/alanboswell/status/292318580811378690> Malian officials' 
story on Diabaly is changing "every 15 minutes, like clockwork."

UPDATE 3: Boswell now reports 
<https://twitter.com/alanboswell/status/292338688216662016> "the rebels left 
Diabaly under heavy French bombing."

Updated at 6.36pm GMT

4.25pm GMT 

US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta says the United States is working with 
Britain and other allies to free hostages in Algeria. He did not say whether 
the United States was considering armed intervention.

The militants will have 'no place to hide,' Panetta said. The Associated Press 
reports:

Speaking Friday at Kings College in London, Panetta said the U.S. is "working 
around the clock to ensure the safe return of our citizens."

Panetta said the terrorists should be on notice they will find no sanctuary in 
Algeria or North Africa and said anyone who looks to attack the U.S. will have 
"no place to hide."

Panetta met later Friday with British Prime Minister David Cameron. Discussion 
of Islamic militant operations in Mali and Algeria dominated the unscheduled 
meeting, senior U.S. defense officials said, though the two also discussed 
budget issues, Syria, Iran and how they can work with other countries to 
address counter-terrorism.

In Washington, the White House said President Barack Obama was being briefed 
Friday by his national security team. His top aides were in touch with Algerian 
officials as well as BP's security office in London. BP jointly operates the 
natural gas plant.

Administration officials, seeking to explain the lack of information from the 
U.S., said the situation on the ground was fluid, and officials did not want to 
put the hostages at further risk by providing real-time updates.

Updated at 4.52pm GMT

4.18pm GMT 

Algerian state TV has broadcast the first images of freed hostages. The 
broadcast includes interviews with Algerians, in Arabic, and with Turkish and 
Filipino employees at the facility, in English (beginning at 2:35, and also 
6:45). At least one of those interviewed appears to have been severely wounded. 
The footage includes the interviews with two Britons we described earlier.

The hostages describe taking cover as the military mounted an attack. Some 
were freed by the military; others appear to have run to freedom. The broadcast 
depicts the actions of the Algerian army as heroic, with repeated promptings by 
the interviewer for the former hostages to praise the military's actions.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvxBI2oDb1hQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvxBI2oDb1hQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvxBI2oDb1hQ&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvxBI2oDb1hQ&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvxBI2oDb1hQ>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvxBI2oDb1hQ&media=>
close 
(via Dernieres Nouvelles d'Algerie 
<http://www.dna-algerie.com/culture/assaut-contre-les-terroristes-60-etrangers-encore-detenus-les-premieres-images-des-otages-2>
)

3.59pm GMT 

Freed Britons

Here's some quotes from another two British workers said to have escaped the 
siege and interviewed on Algerian state TV. One said:

I feel safe at the moment but I won't feel 100% happy until I'm back in the 
UK. My heart goes out to the guys that are still there and hopefully everyone 
comes home safe because, at the end of the day, it's only work.

The other said he was "very relieved" to be out. "As much as I'm glad to be 
out my thoughts are with colleagues that are still there at the moment."

3.58pm GMT 

Islamists armed with explosives

Leila Berrato, Radio France's correspondent in Algeria, has just tweeted that 
between seven and 10 attackers armed with explosives are still in the In Amenas 
facility's machine room
Leila Beratto (@LeilaBeratto) 
Entre 7 et 10 assaillants armés et avec explosifs sont dans la salle des 
machine de l'usine de#inamenas <https://twitter.com/search/%23inamenas> #algerie
 <https://twitter.com/search/%23algerie> #otages 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23otages>
 <https://twitter.com/LeilaBeratto/status/292287842133098496> January 18, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/LeilaBeratto/status/292287842133098496> 
3.40pm GMT 

'We ran for it, all together'

Brahim, an Algerian technician employed by BP on the site, has been talking to 
France 24 TV. 
<http://observers.france24.com/fr/content/20130118-temoignage-exclusif-algerien-in-amenas-moment-assaut-algerie>

He said the Algerian workers were held separately from the foreigners from the 
start of the incident, in a different part of the compound only loosely 
controlled by the Islamists.

During Wednesday night, Brahim said, he and his colleagues helped a Philippine 
and two Turkish members of staff escape through a wire fence into the Algerian 
side of the compound:

We hid them and reassured them. The first skirmishes between the Algerian army 
and the terrorists came at about 1pm on the Thursday. Despite our fear, from 
the beginning of the shooting we decided to try our luck. We cut the wire fence 
with clippers, and ran for it, all together, 50 or so of us with the three 
foreigners. We were welcomed by the special forces who were only a few dozen 
metres from the base. I didn't look back. The only thing I saw was a plane 
overflying the site. The army frisked us and questioned us, then we were handed 
over to the gendarmes who took us to In Amenas airport.

Updated at 3.52pm GMT

3.36pm GMT 

Obama

The White House has issued a statement saying that Barack Obama is getting 
regular updates on the situation, and is in constant communication with David 
Cameron and others, CNN reports.

The US is in the process of evacuating the site of Americans, the channel says.

3.34pm GMT 

New figure from APS

Algeria's state news service has revised its figures of the numbers of foreign 
hostages freed. They are now saying 100 out of 132 have been freed – up from 
around 60 earlier.

3.32pm GMT 

White House

In the US, the White House spokesman has said the president's team are in 
constant contact with the Algerian government. Their first priority is the 
hostages' safety, he said. They are in close touch with the UK, BP's security 
office in London, and other international partners.

3.30pm GMT 

Two British hostages

Algerian TV has broadcast interviews with two unnamed British men said to have 
been in the gas facility during the siege. They seem surprisingly unruffled. 
One is quoted by the Press Association as saying:

I think they did a fantastic job. I was very impressed with the Algerian army. 
It was a very exciting episode. I feel sorry for anybody who has been hurt but, 
other than that, I enjoyed it.

The second said:

The gendarmes did a fantastic job. They kept us all nice and safe and fought 
off the bad guys. I never really felt in any danger, to be honest.

3.23pm GMT 

Sixty still missing

Both Reuters and AFP cite local sources saying some 60 foreign hostages are 
still unaccounted for. Reuters says:

It was unclear how many of those 60 foreigners were still being held directly 
under guard by the gunmen and how many might be in hiding in the sprawling 
compound. It was also not known whether some might have been killed and the 
bodies not found.

Updated at 3.23pm GMT

3.19pm GMT 

Diplomatic meetings

The French news weekly L'Express reports from Algiers 
<http://www.lexpress.fr/actualite/monde/afrique/en-direct-algerie-suivez-les-dernieres-infos-sur-la-prise-d-otages_1210983.html>
 that Algerian foreign minister Mourad Medelci has today received the 
ambassadors of the US, France, Britain, Japan, Austria, Norway, Canada and the 
EU to discuss the hostage-taking at In Amenas and its aftermath. Nothing has so 
far emerged of what was discussed.

3.01pm GMT 

'They wanted the expats'

French 24-hour news radio France Info has interviewed a number of escaped 
Algerian hostages who confirmed the Islamist militants were only interested in 
foreign workers at the In Amenas site.

They came into the bedrooms, they broke down the doors. They were shouting: 
We're only looking for the expatriates, the Algerians can leave! They rounded 
up the expats, they encircled them, they tied them up. They were all herded 
into a corner of the restaurant.

Another escaped hostage told the radio station (via Le Figaro 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/international/2013/01/17/01003-20130117LIVWWW00530-en-direct-suivez-l-assaut-de-l-armee-algerienne-contre-le-complexe-gazier.php>
):

When they saw the Algerian army taking up position, they separated the 
hostages: the expats on one side, the Algerians were taken to the foyer. Now we 
have no news of our expatriate colleagues; [the Islamists] used them as a 
shield.

Updated at 3.13pm GMT

2.42pm GMT 

Japan

Japan's PM Shinzo Abe has cut short his first foreign visit since taking 
office to focus on theAlgerian hostage crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algerian-hostage-crisis>. Abe was in 
Indonesia as part of a tour of south-east Asia.

2.35pm GMT 

Britons among wounded hostages

Youcef Yousfi, the Algerian energy minister, has visited six wounded hostages 
at the El Azhard clinic in Algiers,reports the Algerian state news agency APS 
via TSA. 
<http://www.tsa-algerie.com/divers/assaut-contre-les-terroristes-a-in-amenas-direct_23465.html>

There are a total of nine wounded hostages in the clinic, including two 
Britons, four from the Philippines, one from Japan and two Algerians. Nothing 
is known about their condition at the moment.

The minister reportedly said engineers from the Sonatrach energy company had 
now shut down the In Amenas plant in order to avoid any danger to people still 
on the site.

Updated at 2.38pm GMT

2.26pm GMT 

Cameron statement - video

Here's a clip of David Cameron's statement to the Commons on the Algerian 
hostage crisis earlier 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/video/2013/jan/18/david-cameron-terrorist-algeria-video>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-terrorist-algeria-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20tells%20MPs%20of%20terrorist%20attack%20on%20hostages%20in%20Algeria%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-terrorist-algeria-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%20tells%20MPs%20of%20terrorist%20attack%20on%20hostages%20in%20Algeria%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-terrorist-algeria-video&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-terrorist-algeria-video&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20tells%20MPs%20of%20terrorist%20attack%20on%20hostages%20in%20Algeria%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-terrorist-algeria-video>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%20tells%20MPs%20of%20terrorist%20attack%20on%20hostages%20in%20Algeria%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-terrorist-algeria-video&media=>
close 
Updated at 2.32pm GMT

2.20pm GMT 

Hostage-taker captured

The Algerian newspaper El Watan 
<http://www.elwatan.com/une/in-amenas-le-gis-capture-un-terroriste-vivant-18-01-2013-200017_108.php>
 cites unnamed security sources as saying that Algerian special forces 
succeeded in capturing one of the hostage-takers during the assault.

The paper said the man, whose name and nationality were not disclosed, said 
the group of Islamist attackers was 32 strong and belonged to the Signatories 
by Blood battalion, part of Mokhtar Belmokhtar's Mulathameen brigade.

2.10pm GMT 

Algerian state news agency

APS, the Algerian state news agency, says some of the militants remain in the 
gas facility and are still holding a number of hostages:

[The army] is still trying to achieve a "peaceful outcome" before neutralising 
the terrorist group that is holed up in the [facility] and freeing a group of 
hostages that is still being held.

The quote "peaceful outcome" comes from a security source.

As we reported earlier 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middle-east-live/2013/jan/18/algeria-hostage-crisis-ongoing-says-foreign-office-live-updates#block-50f950b2b579240893bf5200>
, the military operation rescued a total of 650 hostages, 573 of whom were 
Algerians, APS said. That would mean 77 foreigners had been rescued. 

Updated at 2.13pm GMT

2.10pm GMT 

Eyewitness report

A freelance Algerian Journalist, Yahia Bounouar, has managed to get to the 
last road block before the In Amenas complex, reports Le Figaro. 

After 20 hours on the road, with the final stages of his 1,700km journey 
interrupted by police roadblocks, Bounouar was unable to persuade the gendarmes 
to let him through the final barrier – at the crossroads from which the single 
road leads to the Tiguentourine site.

Bounouar told Le Figaro that this morning, Algerian emergency service teams 
had erected a large canvas camp near the barrier. On the road, he saw two 
trucks on their way to the town of In Amenas, each filled with 30-odd cheering 
men.

Soldiers were escorting the freed hostages, apparently to one of the garrisons 
in the town. Alongside the trucks, escorted this time by Algerian police, was a 
minibus whose drawn blinds blocked any sight of its occupants.

1.58pm GMT 

Foreign Office team arrives

A UK Foreign Office chartered plane carrying a special consular team has 
landed in the desert outpost of Hassi Messaoud, about 300 miles north-west of 
Amenas, reportsJulian Borger.

The team is now waiting for clearance from the Algerian authorities to fly to 
Amenas. The FCO said it was a contingency team, as BP is taking the lead in the 
evacuation of British gas workers from Amenas. It would step in if BP needed 
help getting them all back home. In the team there are also officials 
(presumably intelligence officials) to debrief rescued and escaped hostages.

Updated at 1.58pm GMT

1.56pm GMT 

Wounded hostages hospitalised

A number of wounded hostages have been taken by helicopter to hospitals in 
Algiers, reportsthe Algiers correspondent of the French news magazine L'Express 
<http://www.lexpress.fr/actualite/monde/afrique/en-direct-algerie-suivez-les-dernieres-infos-sur-la-prise-d-otages_1210983.html>
, who saw several hostages of different nationalities arrive at the private El 
Azhar clinic just outside the capital. Algerian police have mounted guard 
outside the clinic and the Algerian energy minister, Youcef Yousfi, has visited 
survivors.

1.52pm GMT 

Interactive map

My colleague Paddy Allen has produced this interactive map 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/interactive/2013/jan/17/algeria-amenas-gas-field-hostages-interactive>
 of how the situation unfolded.
 Interactive map of In Amenas gas field. Click here for the full version 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/interactive/2013/jan/17/algeria-amenas-gas-field-hostages-interactive>
. Photograph: Paddy Allen/guardian.co.uk 
1.43pm GMT 

"About 60" hostages remain

More on the number of foreign hostages remaining on the In Amenas site: Le 
Monde cites Algeria's official APS news service as confirming some 30 militants 
took 132 foreigners hostage of whom "more than half" have now been freed.
Le Monde (@lemondefr) 
#InAmenas <https://twitter.com/search/%23InAmenas> les chiffres de l'agence 
APS : une "trentaine de terroristes", "132 étrangers" pris en otage dont plus 
de la moitié sont libérés
 <https://twitter.com/lemondefr/status/292260505576407040> January 18, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/lemondefr/status/292260505576407040> 
Updated at 2.24pm GMT

1.40pm GMT 

Le Monde quotes Algeria's official APS news agency as saying 650 hostages have 
been freed from In Amenas site, including 573 Algerians.
Le Monde (@lemondefr) 
#InAmenas <https://twitter.com/search/%23InAmenas> selon l'agence officielle 
APS, il y a eu 650 otages libérés, dont 573 de nationalité algérienne (contexte
lemde.fr/V9RkE9 <http://t.co/A0zWK7RY>)
 <https://twitter.com/lemondefr/status/292261802438434817> January 18, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/lemondefr/status/292261802438434817> 
Updated at 1.47pm GMT

1.38pm GMT 

Algeria's official APS news agency says about 60 foreign hostages remain 
unaccounted for, AP reports.

1.33pm GMT 

UK to send intelligence team

Nick Hopkins, the Guardian's defence and security correspondent, will have a 
piece online soon about Britain's operational response to the ongoing crisis. 
Here's a taster:

The UK is flying a team of consular staff and intelligence analysts from MI6 
and MI5 to Algiers to help secure the release of the Britons involved in the 
ongoing hostage crisis.

The entourage is not understood to include members of the special forces, 
though the UK has continued to offer technical and logistical support, as well 
as experts in hostage negotiation.

Britain is believed to have advised the Algerians “to play it long”, in terms 
of dealing with the kidnappers, and to draw on all the expertise of those 
countries that can offer advice and intelligence.

But events moved quickly out of control.

“We don’t have a full picture yet, so it is too early to learn the lessons. 
But on the face of it, this is not the way we would have handled it,” said one 
source.

Updated at 1.48pm GMT

1.19pm GMT 

Japan

This from my colleague Justin McCurry, the Guardian's Tokyo correspondent:

Concern is mounting in Japan about the fate of 10 workers thought to be among 
the hostages at the In Amenas gas field. There are unconfirmed reports that two 
Japanese nationals were among those who died.

JGC, an engineering firm headquartered in Yokohama, near Tokyo, said on Friday 
it had confirmed the safety of four more employees, in addition to three it 
contacted earlier, according to public broadcaster NHK.

The prime minister, Shinzo Abe, cut short a three-nation visit to Southeast 
Asia to return to Tokyo to oversee Japan's response to the crisis.

There was irritation, bordering on anger, that the Algerian government had not 
notified Japan of the rescue attempt. Tokyo was told of the operation by 
Britain's ambassador to Algeria, local reports said. Abe told reporters he has 
asked his Algerian counterpart Abdelmalek Sellal in a phone conversation to 
refrain from any moves that could threaten the safety of the hostages.

JGC said that of the 61 non-Japanese it employs at the facility, 10 had been 
accounted for as of Friday. "There are still some Japanese nationals whose 
whereabouts are unknown," a company spokesman told reporters in Tokyo on Friday 
night."We will do as much as we can as their employer to confirm the 
whereabouts of our Japanese and foreign staff."

Updated at 1.49pm GMT

1.09pm GMT 

Belmokhtar 'offers hostage swap'

Ihab Mohamed writes: According to Mauritania's ANI news agency, which seems to 
be in contact with the Battalion of Blood, the terrorist group behind the 
hostage crisis, Mokhtar Belmokhtar, the group's leader, is offering to release 
the American hostages in exchange for the release of Egyptian SheikhOmar 
Abdel-Rahman <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omar_Abdel-Rahman> and Pakistani 
Aafia Siddiqui <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aafia_Siddiqui>, who are in jail 
in America on terrorism charges.

Belmokhtar has recorded a video message, which he is going to send to the mass 
media, in which he offers the same swap and calls on the French and Algerians 
to negotiate an end to the war in northern Mali.

We cannot independently verify this, although ANI has been broadly right in 
its reports throughout this crisis.

Updated at 1.50pm GMT

12.56pm GMT 

Syria

Syrian state TV says rebels linked to al-Qaida group detonated cars filled 
with explosives near a mosque in southern Syria, causing many casualties, 
Associated Press reports.

State-run TV says the suicide attacks occurred as worshippers were leaving a 
mosque following Friday prayers in the city of Daraa, south of Damascus. It was 
not immediately clear how many people were killed or wounded in the attacks.

Syrian TV blamed fighters with Jabhat al-Nusra, a group the US has declared a 
terrorist organisation that has also been blamed for Tuesday's attack on the 
University of Aleppo, which killed an estimated 87 people.

Updated at 1.52pm GMT

12.53pm GMT 

The slaughter in the Sahara has been a terrible shock for the countries whose 
unfortunate nationals were involved. But no one should have been surprised that 
the Algerian government adopted such an aggressive, take-no-prisoners approach 
to the deadly drama at In Amenas,writes Ian Black 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/on-the-middle-east/2013/jan/18/algeria-al-qaida-sahara>
.

12.34pm GMT 

Algerian security sources have told AFP (via Le Figaro) 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/international/2013/01/17/01003-20130117LIVWWW00530-en-direct-suivez-l-assaut-de-l-armee-algerienne-contre-le-complexe-gazier.php>
 that the In Amenas gas site's accomodation area has now been secured but that 
"between six or seven terrorists" have taken refuge in the industrial part of 
the plant, which is encircled by Algerian security forces.

The same sources told the French news agency that 18 militants out of a total 
of about 30 had been killed in the Algerian armed forces' operation.

Updated at 1.21pm GMT

12.23pm GMT 

Cameron today

Patrick Wintour, the Guardian's political editor, tells me David Cameron will 
meet Leon Panetta, the US defence secretary, now that the prime minister is 
unexpectedly in London today.

The PM will chair a second meeting of Cobra this afternoon and his spokesman 
stressed that the operation remains an entirely Algerian-led operation.

The UK ambassador to Algeria is likely to fly to the In Amenas area. 

12.17pm GMT 

Islamist operation

The Mauritanian news service ANI 
<http://www.ani.mr/anifr.php?menuLink=9bf31c7ff062936a96d3c8bd1f8f2ff3&idNews=20535>
, which has been in contact with the hostage-takers throughout the crisis, 
quotes a leader of the al Qaida-linked group that has claimed responsibility 
for the attack as saying it was planned several weeks in advance.

The spokesman for the Mulathameen brigade, whose name means "The Masked Ones", 
told the agency the group had been ready "for two months" because "we knew the 
[Algerian] regime would ally itself with France" in the Mali government's fight 
against Islamist rebels.

The spokesman warned Algerians to "stay away from sites operated by foreign 
companies because we will strike where no one is expecting us."

ANI also reported that an Islamist leader was killed in the assault by 
Algerian forces yesterday. The agency quoted a "well-informed source" as saying 
Lamine Boucheneb, head of the so-called Sons of the Sahara for Islamic Justice 
group, was killed along with two other senior militants.

The agency also cites a member of the Signatories by Blood commando forces 
that overran the complex as saying the hostage-takers came from Algeria, 
Canada, Mali, Egypt, Niger and Mauritania.

The same source told ANI the group was not trying to leave the site with its 
hostages when the Algerian army attacked on Thursday, but just to move them to 
another part of the plant.

Updated at 12.30pm GMT

12.17pm GMT 

France

Like the British, the French government had no warning before the Algerian 
assault on the kidnappers, it seems. Asked whether the government knew in 
advance, a source told Reuters: "No. We learned the same way you did what 
happened."

12.15pm GMT 

Austria

An Austrian hostage has been "released", Reuters reports.

12.13pm GMT 

Scots

Scotland's first minister Alex Salmond today said a number of Scottish 
residents who had been held captive in Algeria have been confirmed as "safe and 
well".

12.03pm GMT 

Al Qaida in the Maghreb

Philip Hammond, the defence secretary, said earlier: "This terrible incident 
of terrorism has highlighted again the threat in north Africa and the Sahel 
from international terrorism.Working with our international partners we shall 
remain our resolve to see that the threat is countered and defeated and al 
Qaida denied a foothold on Europe’s southern border."

Dr Christina Hellmich, an al Qaida expert at the University of Reading, 
rejects this. She says:

The attack, tragic as it is, is not evidence that al Qaida is gaining a 
foothold on Europe’s southern border. Such a claim takes the incident outside 
of any meaningful context and ignores the presence that al Qaida, more 
specifically al Qaida in the Maghreb (AQIM), has had in the region. There have 
been other cases of hostage takings in recent years. Maybe more importantly, 
AQIM stands out from other local groups for its focus on a local agenda, namely 
the overthrow of the Algerian government. Thus to speak of a new and urgent 
threat to Europe is an exaggeration that seems inappropriate.

Updated at 12.12pm GMT

11.55am GMT 

Summary

Here is a summary of what we know so far:

• In a statement to the House of Commons, British prime minister David Cameron 
said the Algerian mission to rescue the In Amenas hostages was an “ongoing 
operation”. The Algerian armed forces were still pursuing terrorists and 
“possibly some of the hostages” at the site. Algeria was looking at “all 
possible routes” to resolve the matter.

• He said a terrorist group led by Mokhtar Belmokhtar and affiliated with Al 
Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb had carried out the attack and hostage-taking on 
Wednesday. The group first attacked two buses en route to the Aminas airfield – 
killing two people, one of them British – and then attacked the residential 
compound and gas facility at the installation, taking an unknown number of 
hostages, some of whom were British. Cameron called it a “large, 
well-coordinated and heavily-armed assault” and said it may have been 
pre-planned.

• Cameron said the British government was not told in advance about Algeria’s 
attack on the kidnappers yesterday morning. The Algerian prime minister, 
Abdelmalek Sellal, told him that the terrorists had tried to flee and Algiers 
judged there to be an immediate threat to the lives of the hostages. This first 
operation was now “complete”. Cameron had offered technical and intelligence 
support, and implied that that this offer was not taken up.

• The PM said the number of British citizens at risk was less than 30, and is 
now “quite significantly” less than that, although he would not give further 
details.  Reuters is citing a local source as saying that 30 hostages, 
including several westerners, and 11 of their captors were killed in 
yesterday’s Algerian assault. At least 22 foreign hostages were still 
unaccounted for, the news agency reported, including 14 Japanese and eight 
Norwegians. Algeria’s state radio said 18 militants had been killed. These 
figures cannot be verified at this point.

• The US defence secretary, Leon Panetta, has said that Washington is working 
with London and Algiers to assess what is happening and ensure the safe return 
of US citizens. A US plane reportedly landed this morning near the gas facility 
to help with any evacuation.

• The former head of French intelligence, Alain Juillet, has suggested the 
truth about the raid may not be known for weeks.
 David Cameron giving his statement to the House of Commons this morning. 
Photograph: BBC 
11.54am GMT 

France

French prime minister Jean-Marc Ayrault confirms an "operation" is still 
underway in Algeria and that "several hostages" are dead, without giving 
further details, tweets Le monde.
Le Monde (@lemondefr) 
Selon Jean-Marc Ayrault, une "opération" se poursuit en Algérie, "plusieurs 
otages" sont morts (pas de précisions supplémentaires)#InAmenas 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23InAmenas>
 <https://twitter.com/lemondefr/status/292230868368498688> January 18, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/lemondefr/status/292230868368498688> 
11.51am GMT 

US working 'around the clock'

The outgoing US defence secretary, Leon Panetta, on a visit to London last 
week, said Washington was working closely with Britain and Algeria to assess 
the situation In Amenas.

Speaking at King's College London, he said the US was "working around the 
clock to ensure the safe return of our citizens", AP reports.

He added the Islamist hostage-takers would find no sanctuary in Algeria or 
north Africa, while anyone who attempted to attack the US would have "no place 
to hide".

Updated at 12.25pm GMT

11.34am GMT 

An Algerian hostage's story

An Algerian engineer, Khaled, employed by Algerian energy firm Sonatrach, has 
been recounting what happened when the hostage-takers arrived at the site on 
Wednesday morning.

The French news magazine L'Express has his account 
<http://www.lexpress.fr/actualite/monde/afrique/algerie-ce-sont-les-etrangers-qui-les-interessaient-temoigne-un-ex-otage_1211074.html>
:

I didn't see the attack on the bus. What I saw, at about 5am, was a dozen or 
pick-up trucks. I don't know exactly how they got into the site. I heard 
gunfire, sustained shooting. Then the guy who was clearly the head of the armed 
group spoke to us. He said he was called Belaouar, and he said he would let us 
go quickly. It was the foreigners who interested them, they only wanted them.

The Islamists left us our phones so we could call our families. But quite 
quickly it became impossible to contact anyone. Someone told me they had freed 
the women, but I didn't see that. The women who work on the site are mostly 
interpreters. Later in the morning there was an assault. I was in the games 
room at the time. There was a lot of pushing and shoving, some people managed 
to open the security door, and we all just ran for it.

Updated at 11.36am GMT

11.33am GMT 

He said his priority was "the safety of British nationals involved, the 
repatriation of those killed, and the evacuation of the wounded and freed 
hostages".

A rapid deployment consular team was en route to Algiers with other 
specialists and the Algerian PM has agreed to allow UK consular staff to fly 
south to support those involved.

He was also offering to help BP with evacuation plans.

Updated at 12.25pm GMT

11.31am GMT 

Cameron then explained what happened on Thursday:

Mr Speaker, during the course of Thursday morning the Algerian forces mounted 
an operation.

Mr Speaker, we were not informed of this in advance.

I was told by the Algerian prime minister while it was taking place.

He said that the terrorists had tried to flee, that they judged there to be an 
immediate threat to the lives of the hostages, and had felt obliged to respond.

When I spoke to the Algerian prime minister later last night he told me that 
this first operation was complete but this is a large and complex site and they 
are still pursuing terrorists and possibly some of the hostages in other areas 
of the site.

The Algerian prime minister has just told me this morning they are now looking 
at all possible routes to resolve this crisis.

Mr Speaker, last night the number of British citizens at risk was less than 
30. Thankfully, we now know that number has now been quite significantly 
reduced. And I'm sure the house will understand why in an ongoing operation I 
cannot say more on this at this stage.

11.27am GMT 

Cameron then went on to explain the British government's reaction:

As soon as we heard of the attack we initiated the government's 
crisis-management procedures in both London and Algeria. Our most immediate 
priority was to establish the identity and whereabouts of British nationals, to 
contact their families, and to do everything possible to secure their safe 
return.

I chaired a meeting of the government's emergency committee, Cobra, I spoke to 
the Algerian prime minister on Wednesday afternoon and then again on three 
further occasions.

From the outset I have been clear about our implacable opposition to terrorism 
and said that we will stand with the Algerians in their fight against these 
terrorist forces.

But I also emphasised the paramount importance of securing the safety of the 
hostages.

I offered UK technical and intelligence support, including from experts in 
hostage negotiation and rescue, to help find a successful resolution.

And I urged that we and other countries affected should be consulted before 
any action was taken.

He also spoke to the leaders of Norway, Japan, France and the US, the other 
countries affected.

11.25am GMT 

France

The former head of French intelligence, Alain Juillet, is quoted by Le Figaro 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/international/2013/01/17/01003-20130117LIVWWW00530-en-direct-suivez-l-assaut-de-l-armee-algerienne-contre-le-complexe-gazier.php>
 as saying that little is likely to emerge of what actually happened at the gas 
installation for several weeks:

The Algerians have a principle: when they mount an operation, they don't talk 
about it. From experience, it takes a minimum of 15 days to a month before we 
start getting a small idea of what really happened.

Juillet added that even then, the accounts of freed hostages would likely be 
the most useful source of information.

Updated at 11.37am GMT

11.23am GMT 

Here is Cameron's statement in full.

I would like to make a statement about the hostage crisis in Algeria and the 
tragic events of the last three days. The whole house will share my disgust and 
condemnation at this brutal and savage terrorist attack that has been unfolding 
in Algeria.

Our thoughts and prayers this morning are with those still caught up in this 
incident, with their families, who are waiting anxiously for news, and with 
those who have already lost loved ones.

Mr Speaker, I have this morning chaired another meeting of the Cobra emergency 
committee and just come from speaking again to the Algerian prime minister.

He then took the house through what had happened so far.

In the early hours of Wednesday morning, terrorists attacked a gas 
installation run by BP, the Norwegian company Statoil and the Algerian company 
Sonatrech in In Aminas in south-eastern Algeria near the Libyan border.

The terrorist group is believed to have been operating under Mokhtar 
Belmokhtar, a criminal terrorist and smuggler who has been operating in Mali 
and in the region for a number of years and who has been affiliated with Al 
Qaida in the Maghreb.

Mr Speaker, In Aminas is some 18 hours by road from the capital, Algiers. It 
is in the middle of the Sahara desert and one of the most remote places in the 
world. As a result it takes time to get a complete picture and the full details 
are still emerging.

But according to the information we have from the Algerian authorities, the 
terrorists first attacked two buses en route to the Aminas airfield before 
attacking the residential compound and the gas facility at the installation.

It appears to have been a large, well-coordinated and heavily-armed assault 
and it is probably that it had been pre-planned. Two of those travelling in the 
convoy to the airfield were very sadly killed, including one British national, 
and his family were informed on Wednesday.

A number of other workers were taken hostage by the terrorists in separate 
locations both at the residential compound and at the gas facility.

The precise numbers involved remain unclear at this stage but the hostages 
included British nationals, along with the nationals of at least seven other 
countries, and of course many Algerians.

11.18am GMT 

Islamist deaths

The TSA news service has tweeted a report from Algeria's state radio citing an 
official source as saying 18 militants are confirmed killed in the ongoing 
operation at In Amenas.
TSA Algérie (@TSAlgerie) 
Bilan : 18 terroristes tués, selon la radiochaîne III, qui cite une source 
officielle.tsa-algerie.com/divers/assaut-… <http://t.co/TGCNfJmJ>
 <https://twitter.com/TSAlgerie/status/292227136268402688> January 18, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/TSAlgerie/status/292227136268402688>  This image taken 
from Algerian TV, broadcast on Sunday, shows what it described as a vehicle 
destroyed during the hostage crisis at the In Amenas gas facility. Photograph: 
AP/Algérie TV 
Updated at 12.09pm GMT

11.12am GMT 

Foreign hostages

Reuters is citing a local source as saying 30 hostages, including several 
westerners, and 11 of their captors were killed in yesterday's Algerian army 
assault on the gas installation.

That would seem to tally with the information published earlier by the 
Algerian news service TSA (Tout sur l'Algerie –see 10:19 update).

At least 22 foreign hostages are still unaccounted for, including 14 Japanese 
and eight Norwegians.

11.12am GMT 

Cameron says it is vital the families get all the support possible. The police 
and BP are doing that. Three flights left Algeria yesterday carrying 11 BP 
employees.

He says he is coordinating with British and western companies about security 
at other plants.

He has "taken precautions" to ensure the security of diplomatic posts in the 
region.

He advises against all but essential travel to Algeria.

The motives of the terrorists are difficult to determine at this stage. Al 
Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb aspire to impose Islamic law in the area.

11.09am GMT 

Ed Miliband thanks Cameron for his statement and says it is appalling that 
innocent, decent people have been targeted in this way.

Britain stands united in condemnation. The hostage takers bear responsibility. 

He asks if the families of those affected will get support and care.

He says there are a number of other foreign-owned installations in the region. 
How is the government liaising with these companies?

What is the government's advice for UK nationals in the region?

What are the motives of the terrorists and what is Cameron's assessment of the 
risk of such groups?

11.06am GMT 

Cameron says it is the terrorists who are responsible for the loss of life.

He says he stands with the Algerian government.

This is a continuinng situation and he will do his best to keep parliament 
informed, he says.
 The British prime minister, David Cameron, leaves No 10 Downing Street at the 
weekend after talks on the Algerian hostage crisis. Photograph: Stefan 
Wermuth/Reuters 
Updated at 12.16pm GMT

11.05am GMT 

It is a large and complex exercise and they are still pursuing hostages, 
Cameron says.

Last night the number of British citizens at risk was less than 30 – that has 
been significantly reduced but the prime minister says he cannot say more at 
this stage.

Updated at 12.12pm GMT

11.04am GMT 

Cameron says he emphasised to Algeria the paramount importance of ensuring the 
safety of the hostages and offered armed help.

But on Thursday morning the Algerians mounted an operation – the UK had not 
been informed in advance.

Updated at 12.11pm GMT

11.02am GMT 

Early on Wednesday morning terrorists attacked the gas installation, he says.

The group is believed to be operating under Mokhter Belmokhter, who is 
affiliated with Al Qaida in the Maghreb.

It is in one of the most remote places in the world.

They first attacked two buses en route before attacking the residential 
compound.

He calls it a large and well coordinated assault. 

Two travelling in the convoy were killed, including one Briton.

A number of others were taken hostage. Precise numbers are unclear but Britons 
are among them.

11.01am GMT 

He says he has chaired Cobra and spoken to the Algerian PM this morning.

11.00am GMT 

Cameron statement

David Cameron has begun his statement to MPs. The prime minister says he is 
disgusted and condemns the terrorist attack.

Updated at 12.10pm GMT

10.55am GMT 

Syria

A UN refugee agency says 12 people have died and 20 were injured in more 
fighting in a Palestinian camp in Damascus between Syrian rebels and gunmen 
loyal to the regime.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees says 
fighting has intensified in the Yarmouk camp in recent days,AP reports via 
Lebanon's Daily Star 
<http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Middle-East/2013/Jan-18/202781-un-12-killed-in-fighting-in-damascus-refugee-camp.ashx#axzz2IK6AaP5Q>
. 

Children were among the casualties, UNRWA said.

AP said the Yarmouk camp has been the scene of heavy clashes between rebels 
and regime loyalists since mid-December, when opposition fighters moved into 
the camp during an attempt to storm the capital.

10.49am GMT 

Cameron statement

David Cameron has just set off from No 10 to the Commons to deliver his 
statement to MPs on the hostage crisis. We'll be covering it live here.

10.46am GMT 

France

The French news weekly Le Point, citing judicial cources, says on its live feed
 
<http://www.lepoint.fr/monde/en-direct-prise-d-otages-en-algerie-incertitude-sur-le-bilan-de-l-assaut-18-01-2013-1616801_24.php>
 that the Paris public prosecutor is to open a formal inquiry into the 
hostage-taking and subsequent Algerian army operation.

10.32am GMT 

Norway

As many as eight Norwegians on the site are still unaccounted for, the 
Norwegian broadcasting organisationNRK reports via Norway Post 
<http://www.norwaypost.no/index.php/news/latest-news/27993-algeria-missing-norwegian-hostage-escaped>
.

Statoil, one of the In Amenas plant's joint operators, said one Norwegian 
Statoil employee held hostage in Algeria had managed to escape and was 
receiving medical care at a local hospital. His condition was stable and he has 
been in contact with his family in Norway.

The company added that meant nine of 17 Statoil staff employed at the site 
were safe but eight Norwegian Statoil staff members were unaccounted for.

Two Statoil-chartered planes left Algeria this morning carrying 40 Norwegian 
employees from other Statoil installations in the country.

Norwegian authorities said the Algerian military action against the Islamist 
militants holding the Statoil/BP gas plant was "still not finished on Friday 
morning".

Updated at 12.10pm GMT

10.19am GMT 

The Algerian news service TSA 
<http://www.tsa-algerie.com/divers/assaut-contre-les-terroristes-a-in-amenas-direct_23465.html>
 (Tout sur l'Algérie) quotes a "well-informed local source" as saying only a 
few Islamists remain in the facility.

The same source told the agency that yesterday's operations had resulted in 
the deaths of 31 people: 20 hostages and 11 Islamists. Two further militants 
were captured alive, the source told TSA: one from Mali, and the other from 
Algeria. This information has not been independently verified.

TSA also cites a a local leader, Knaoui Sidi, as saying attempts were made to 
negotiate with the hostage-takers yesterday but no further efforts would be 
made today.

"There is no possibility of further negotiations," Sidi said, noting that the 
hostage-takers had refused to receive a delegation of local Touareg leaders 
yesterday. "Algerian special forces will mount an assault."

Updated at 11.59am GMT

10.18am GMT 

Scots

The Daily Record says 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/uk-world-news/scottish-hostages-cheat-death-in-algeria-1543022?utm_source=twitterfeed&utm_medium=twitter>
 that two Scots were freed last night from the Algerian gas plant, and names 
one as Mark Grant, 29, from Grangemouth. Another Scot was also held hostage, 
the paper reports. The two Scots it does not name are from Fife and 
Renfrewshire, it says.

10.09am GMT 

Douglas Alexander

Douglas Alexander, the British shadow foreign secretary, has suggested the 
situation may go on for days.

Alexander told Sky News he understood the situation might still be going on 
and so the PM might be "constrained" in what he is able to report to the 
Commons this morning.

He said these might be dark "hours and days" for the relatives of British 
people working in In Amenas, adding: "If this operation is not yet fully 
concluded there [may be] more developments yet to come."

Updated at 11.57am GMT

10.05am GMT 

Map

Here's a map  
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=In+Amenas,+Illizi,+Algeria&hl=en&ll=28.07198,9.580078&spn=36.190173,23.730469&sll=37.0625,-95.677068&sspn=64.409204,47.460937&oq=in+amena&t=h&hnear=In+Amenas,+Illizi,+Algeria&z=5>
showing where In Amenas gas field is.

9.53am GMT 

Energy

The Paris-based International Energy Agency warned in its monthly report  
<http://www.nasdaq.com/article/iea-forecasts-rising-oil-demand-for-2013-driven-by-growth-from-china-20130118-00036#.UPkaJb9iuIY>
on prospects for the oil and gas sector that events at Algeria's In Amenas gas 
facility are "casting a dark cloud over the outlook for the country's energy 
sector".

Algeria has some of north Africa’s biggest oil and gas reserves and is seen as 
having huge unexplored potential in its desert regions. It has larger proven 
natural gas reserves than Iraq and some 12bn barrels of oil.

Updated at 9.56am GMT

9.49am GMT 

Algerian view

I may have missed this earlier, but the Algerian communications minister, 
Mohamed Said Belaid, has given some description of the raid and its 
consequences. He said the military operation succeeded in "neutralising a large 
number of terrorists and freeing a large number of hostages ... But 
unfortunately, we are sorry to say, there were some deaths and injuries."

Updated at 11.56am GMT

9.38am GMT 

Commons statement

It will be David Cameron making this morning's Commons statement, which will 
be at 11am.

9.36am GMT 

Diplomatic tensions

Algeria's apparently unilateral decision to storm the gas plant is straining 
diplomatic relations with some of the countries whose nationals were held 
hostage:AFP reports 
<http://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/world/2013/01/18/japan-summons-algerian-ambassador-over-rescue/>
 that Japan’s foreign ministry has summoned the Algerian ambassador to demand 
answers over the operation.

A foreign ministry official confirmed Sid Ali Ketrandji had been called in to 
see the foreign minister’s deputy: “The meeting was over the incident,” he 
said, without revealing what was said.

Updated at 9.36am GMT

9.36am GMT 

Irish hostage

Stephen McFaul, the Irish engineer from Belfast who escaped the hostage 
crisis, has said he saw four Jeeps full of hostages blown up by Algerian troops,
according to the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/breaking/2013/0118/breaking2.html>. He 
also said he had had explosives tied around his neck and had been bound and 
gagged. His brother, Brian McFaul, said:

[The gunmen] were moving five Jeeploads of hostages from one part of the 
compound.

At that stage, they were intercepted by the Algerian army.

The army bombed four out of five of the trucks and four of them were destroyed 
... He presumed everyone else in the other trucks was killed ... The truck my 
brother was in crashed and at that stage Stephen was able to make a break for 
his freedom.

Brian McFaul said it was unclear whether the vehicles had been struck by 
missiles fired from helicopters or by ground forces.
 A family photo of Stephen McFaul with his sons Dylan (left) and Jake. 
Photograph: PA 
9.29am GMT 

Japan

At least a dozen Japanese citizens remain unaccounted for and Japan's prime 
minister, Shinzo Abe, is cutting short his first foreign visit since taking 
office to focus on the crisis, AP reports. 

Abe will return home immediately after holding talks and news conference with 
Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono today.

Reuters quoted Japan's senior government spokesman, Yoshihide Suga, as saying: 
"The action of Algerian forces was regrettable."

Updated at 9.30am GMT

9.20am GMT 

American plane

Reuters is reporting that an American plane has landed in In Amenas airport, 
about 30 miles from the gas complex, to pick up American hostages.

9.19am GMT 

David Cameron video

Here's David Cameron on the situation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/video/2013/jan/17/cameron-british-hostage-dead-algerian-gas-complex-video>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcameron-british-hostage-dead-algerian-gas-complex-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20confirms%20one%20British%20hostage%20dead%20at%20Algerian%20gas%20complex%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcameron-british-hostage-dead-algerian-gas-complex-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%20confirms%20one%20British%20hostage%20dead%20at%20Algerian%20gas%20complex%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcameron-british-hostage-dead-algerian-gas-complex-video&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcameron-british-hostage-dead-algerian-gas-complex-video&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20confirms%20one%20British%20hostage%20dead%20at%20Algerian%20gas%20complex%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcameron-british-hostage-dead-algerian-gas-complex-video>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%20confirms%20one%20British%20hostage%20dead%20at%20Algerian%20gas%20complex%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcameron-british-hostage-dead-algerian-gas-complex-video&media=>
close 
8.57am GMT 

France

France, with its history of colonial rule in Algeria, is being less critical 
of Algiers than the UK. Interior minister Manuel Valls advised against 
criticising the north African state and hailed its efforts to end the stan-off.

Updated at 11.55am GMT

8.54am GMT 

Hague comments

Speaking from Australia, William Hague, the British foreign secretary, told 
Sky News:

This remains a fluid and evolving situation and many details are still 
unclear, but the responsibility for the tragic events of the last two days 
squarely rests with terrorists who chose to attack innocent workers, murdering 
some and holding others hostage.

Our priority remains at the moment to identify exactly what has happened to 
each British national caught up in this incident and, indeed, to help other 
countries determine what has happened to their nationals.

8.53am GMT 

Commons statement

The Commons statement will be made at 11am, Patrick Wintour tells me.

Ian Lucas, the shadow foreign minister, has tweeted: "In Commons awaiting 11am 
Govt Statement on dreadful Algerian hostage
 crisis. A sombre, grey morning."

8.51am GMT 

French hostages

France's interior minister, Manuel Vallis, has said Paris is in contact with 
two French hostages who have left the gas facility. Vallis told RTL radio 
information from In Amenas was patchy and he could not say if the operation was 
over.

One French hostage, Alexandre Berceaux, an employee of a French catering 
company, told Europe 1 radio he had remained hidden for nearly 40 hours, eating 
supplies brought to him by Algerian colleagues. He said:

When the military came to get me, I did not know whether it was over. They 
arrived with colleagues [Algerians who worked with him], otherwise I would 
never have opened the door.

Berceaux said Algerian military forces were still combing the enormous gas 
site for hostages when he was escorted to a nearby military base. "They are 
still counting them up." He expected to be taken home to France soon.

He said there could be other hostages still hidden on the site.

Angelique Chrisafis reports from Paris that the “living quarters” at the In 
Amenas site have reportedly been secured, with a total death-toll that has not 
yet been officially released. But the Algerian special forces are still 
surrounding the working area of the gas facility where hostage-takers remain.

Updated at 11.45am GMT

8.38am GMT 

British reaction

The Press Association reports that No 10 was "dismayed" when the Algerians 
launched their assault on the gas complex yesterday. The news agency says David 
Cameron was informed it was under way when he telephoned his Algerian 
counterpart, Abdelmalek Sellal, yesterday morning, despite having asked to be 
kept fully updated. Offers of British help had been declined. BBC Radio 4 
reported this morning went further than "dismay", describing "anger" at No 10 
over the sequence of events.

8.35am GMT 

Escaped Irishman

The Press Association has more on Stephen McFaul, the Irishman who has escaped 
the kidnappers. He fled after the vehicle he had been travelling in crashed 
after coming under attack from Algerian forces. He was able to run off and make 
it to safety. His sister said he was currently with officials in Algeria in a 
debriefing exercise.

The BBC is reporting that up to 20 Britons may be among the hostages. Their 
current situation is unknown.

8.24am GMT 

Here’s a round-up from the Middle East and north Africa this morning:

Algeria

• The violent end to this standoff is only the start of a new chapter in the 
country's savage history,writes Nabila Ramdani 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jan/17/hostage-siege-algeria-bloody-chapter-history>
.

• Details of offensive emerging slowly, but fears are growing that early 
estimates of casualty numbers will rise dramatically,write Angelique Chrisafis 
in Paris and Julian Borger 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jan/17/algeria-hostage-crisis-offensive>.

Syria

• A schism is developing in northern Syria between jihadists and Free Syrian 
Army units, which threatens to pitch both groups against each other and open a 
new phase in the Syrian civil war,reports Martin Chulov from Aleppo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jan/17/syria-crisis-alqaida-fighters-true-colours>
.

Israel

• Facebook is increasingly being used as a political tool, and a group of 
Israelis are using the social networking 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/socialnetworking> site to challenge 
conventional democracy in next week's election,reports Harriet Sherwood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jan/17/israelis-facebook-poke-democracy-elections>
. The initiative, called Real Democracy 
<http://www.facebook.com/ElectoralRebellion?ref=stream>, has allowed hundreds 
of Israelis to "donate" their votes to Palestinians as a symbolic protest at 
what they perceive as a lack of democracy.

• PM Binyamin Netanyahu's right-wing Likud party, allied with the nationalist 
Yisrael Beiteinu party, continues to lead opinion polls ahead of Tuesday’s 
election. A Yedioth poll today gave Likud-Beiteinu 32 seats in the 120-seat 
Knesset, with Labour on 17 and the ultra-nationalist Jewish Home on 12. A 
Haaretz poll gave Likud 32, Labour 17 and Jewish Home 14.

8.12am GMT 

Summary

Welcome to today’s continuing coverage of the Algerian hostage crisis, and 
events across the Middle East and north Africa.

Here is the latest:

• The British Foreign Office says the crisis at the In Amenas gas field in 
Algeria “remains ongoing”. BBC reporters suggested this meant the military 
attack on the kidnappers had ended but Algerian forces were now searching the 
site.

• Up to 30 hostages are feared dead following the raid by Algerian troops, 
including at least two Britons. Amid conflicting, contradictory and incomplete 
information, David Cameron, the British prime minister, warned of further bad 
news to come. It is currently unclear how many hostages have been killed, how 
many escaped, and how many had been freed, and what has happened to the 
kidnappers. Irishman Stephen McFaul, 36, from Belfast, one of the hostages, 
made contact with his wife to say he was free and safe yesterday.

• Cameron cancelled a long-awaited speech on his attitude towards the EU and 
will chair a meeting of the UK’s Cobra emergency committee this morning. 
William Hague, the foreign secretary, cut short a visit to Australia and there 
is expected to be a statement to the Commons this morning.

• The Battalion of Blood or Signed in Blood Islamist group attacked the In 
Amenas gas facility operated by BP, Norway’s Statoil and Algeria’s state firm 
on Wednesday, kidnapping dozens of foreigners and perhaps hundreds of Algerian 
workers. They said the hostage crisis was in response to France’s military 
intervention in neighbouring Mali. One Briton and one Algerian died in the 
initial attack.

Here is this morning’s Foreign Office statement:

The terrorist incident in Algeria remains ongoing. The prime minister spoke 
twice to his Algerian counterpart, prime minister Abdelmalek Sellal, on 
Thursday.

He chaired Cobra twice on Thursday, and will chair another meeting on Friday 
morning; Cobra will continue to meet as long as the crisis lasts.

As the prime minister and foreign secretary have said, to the best of our 
knowledge on the information given to us by the Algerian government, one 
British national has sadly been killed.

We are not in a position to give further information at this time. But the 
prime minister has advised we should be prepared for bad news.

Our priority will remain the safety of British nationals and their co-workers. 
We cannot provide any details that might endanger their lives. But we are 
working round the clock to resolve this crisis.

You can read all yesterday’s developments as they happened here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middle-east-live/2013/jan/17/algerian-islamists-hostages-standoff-live>
.

And we’ll be covering today’s events as they happen in Algeria and across the 
region here.

Updated at 11.54am GMT
 