
Politicians and the media have raised the prospect of a "decades-long" struggle
 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/intelligence-chiefs-and-special-forces-plot-sahara-mission-8458964.html>
 against Islamist extremism in northern Africa. Faced with the information 
vacuum from Algeria, it's unsurprising that we've heard so much about the 
supposedly pathological history of a country of which little else is known, and 
of the threat apparently posed by al-Qaida-linked Islamism, growing in a 
propitiously violent environment, to the region and to Europe.

But this latest episode has nothing to do with Algeria's war of independence, 
and little to do with its crisis in the 1990s.

In Amenas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/20/algeria-siege-death-toll-rise> 
was the latest and most spectacular of a series of terrorist atrocities 
perpetrated over the past decade by Islamist guerrillas in Algeria: the most 
high-profile, because it involved foreigners, and the most audacious, because 
it was the first time that a serious assault had been mounted on the oil and 
gas facilities in the Algerian south that are economically vital, heavily 
guarded and very remote. Throughout the insurgency and civil war that consumed 
Algeria for a terrible decade from 1992 onwards, attacks on civilians, 
intellectuals, security forces, "immodest" women, journalists and state 
facilities occurred overwhelmingly in the north, in the major towns and cities 
and in isolated rural communities. Foreigners largely fled the country – and 
those who came back, especially to work in the oil sector, were heavily 
protected in Saharan camps which the insurgents ignored. This was a struggle 
waged within Algerian society, between factions in the regime, and among the 
Islamists themselves.

The 1990s' jihadi Islamists were isolated and exhausted – and perhaps, as many 
in and outsideAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> now believe, 
infiltrated and manipulated to some degree – by the uncompromising war waged 
against them by the army and security forces, a war that also involved 
disappearances, torture, extrajudicial killings, and a "privatisation" of 
violence such that the real perpetrators of many incidents will never be known. 
They became politically irrelevant; many were co-opted or amnestied, and the 
remnant became a small, active, but isolated fringe, "contained" in a few 
mountain regions – and more recently in the Sahara.

They have been able to mount occasional major attacks, suicide-bombing the 
prime minister's office and theoffices of the UN development programme in 
Algiers <> in 2007. But they have lacked a real presence on the Algerian 
political scene, let alone in the global media spotlight. While the militants 
claimed that the In Amenas attack was retaliation for French intervention in 
Mali (and for Algeria's co-operation in opening its airspace), the scale and 
planning involved suggest that this was a late-coming pretext for an operation 
prepared some time in advance to return the limping Maghribi jihad to 
prominence.

Outdone by Afghanistan, Iraq and Pakistan, Algeria's militant Islamists have 
been struggling to remain relevant. They have long lost whatever political 
significance they had as real opponents of the Algerian regime, which 
comprehensively defeated them a decade ago. They have no social constituency in 
Algeria; Islamists in the Algerian parliament (generally labelled "moderate") – 
as with the Moroccan Justice and Development party or the Tunisian Nahda 
movement, both of whom are now getting to grips with the practicalities of 
government in the wake of the Arab spring – are more important and have a very 
different agenda. The war that ravaged northern Algeria in the 1990s is over.

The overspill of the Libyan uprising and civil war, particularly in northern 
Mali, has given Algeria's militants a new opportunity. But the conflict in Mali 
– however severe, and albeit now expressed in a handy language of jihad that 
gives it global currency – is also about local dynamics: longstanding northern 
resentment of the south, local economic networks protected by and serving local 
interests, useful local alliances. Algeria's multinational Islamists, adopting 
the style and the acronyms of the global jihadi brand, are no doubt keen to get 
in on the act.

But today's conflict is the result of recent pressures and circumstances: the 
instability caused by Gaddafi's collapse, the impasse in Algerian politics as 
everyone waits for the ageing generation at the top to die, responses to the 
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, to the "global war on terror", to 9/11. Any 
future conflict, like all those of the past, will have its own specific causes 
– and only to that extent will it bear a relation to the struggles of Algeria's 
history.
 