
The price of gas has just become horribly more expensive, not in treasure but 
in blood. The death toll of captives killed in the jihadist atrocity at the In 
Amenas gas plant in eastern Algeria hasjumped from 23 to 48 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-21114512>. Everything about this story 
is bleak: the loss of life; the hatred jihadists from a splinter group of
al-Qaida in the Islamic Magreb 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Qaeda_in_the_Islamic_Maghreb> have for 
westerners; the ferocity of the attack; the ferocity of the counter-attack by 
Algerian special forces; the reported presence of jihadists who spoke excellent 
English; the consequences for the fight against Islamist extremism in Mali,the 
Sahel <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sahel> and across the world; the 
bewildering lack of information; and the death toll of the jihadists.

Stay with me on the last point. Officially the Algerian regime first announced 
that 32 jihadists had been killed in their successful counter-terrorism 
operation. There were no survivors. There is something immediately and 
obviously wrong about that statistic. Wars, battles and counter-insurgency 
operations are always messy. Not every shot fired is a clean kill; not every 
blast from a grenade is fatal. On an ordinary battlefield you expect the 
injured to outnumber the dead by three to one. In Iraq and Afghanistan, the 
Americans are now so good at emergency first aid that the ratio of dead to 
wounded is something like one to six.

But the "ninjas" – the balaclava-clad Algerian special forces – killed 32 
kidnappers. There is a grim tradition in Algeria's history of civil wars of 
killing the other side's wounded so that there are no witnesses. You can debate 
the rights and wrongs of this policy, but David Cameron has set out the British 
position clearly: that our response to this kind of terrorism should be "tough 
but intelligent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/20/algerian-hostage-crisis-terrorism>
".

Leads to knowing where the AQIM splinter group (loosely translated as "the 
signatories in blood") was based, where it got its money from, and whether it 
did have English-speaking members, died with those men. The latest news is that 
the authorities caught three jihadists who had been hiding, so the ratio of 
dead jihadists to injured is 32:3, and that again feels wrong. On the evidence, 
the priority of the Algerian security forces seems to have been to kill the 
jihadists, with securing the hostages coming a poor second and gathering 
intelligence nowhere.

Algeria is nothing like a western democracy. In the 90s a democratic uprising, 
fuelled by frustration over corruption, lack of equity and, in some quarters, 
Islamist leanings, was crushed in acivil war 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algerian_Civil_War> that left 100,000 dead, 
including many of the country's bravest journalists. Today, the security 
establishment still calls the shots, relying on gas and oil for about 98% of 
the country's income; that wealth is apparently controlled by a small clique. 
The rule of law and civil authority are sickly – and some critics go further, 
saying the regime is more akin to Assad's Syria.

In the 90s I went to Algeria and reported on a series of massacres of 
civilians which happened very close to army barracks and were blamed on the 
security forces. The evidence that the state tortured dissidents was 
overwhelming. Even now, Algeria will not allow the UNspecial rapporteur for 
torture 
<http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/refworld/rwmain?page=search&skip=0&advsearch=y&process=y&allwords=&exactphrase=&atleastone=&without=&title=special+rapporteur+torture&category=&publisher=&type=&monthfrom=&yearfrom=&monthto=&yearto=&coi=&coa=&language=&citation=&x=8&y=12>
 to visit the country.

So great care is needed before western politicians assume everything the 
Algerian state does against the jihadists is for the best. The UK defence 
secretary, Philip Hammond, said of the hostage crisis: "it is the terrorists 
that bear the sole responsibility for it". True, but the Algerian security 
forces and their commanders bear some responsibility for the scale of the loss 
of life. If, as reported, Hind helicopters blew up a convoy of jihadists and 
hostages as they left the gas facility, the actions of the security forces fail 
the PM's test of "tough but intelligent" action.

This matters because since the Arab spring, public opinion in this part of the 
world bites. Muslims across North Africa and the Middle East can hear western 
politicians attack Assad for mass murder and torture; if they observe them 
silent about the abuses of, say, the Algerian state then this may undermine the 
war for hearts and minds against al-Qaida. And no one who believes in free 
speech, democracy, and civil rights could possibly want that.
 