
A week after being cast  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/28/alicia-vikander-lara-croft-tomb-raider-reboot-movie>
as Lara Croft in a Tomb Raider reboot, Alicia Vikander has announced plans to 
launch her own production company.


Alicia Vikander to play Lara Croft in Tomb Raider reboot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/28/alicia-vikander-lara-croft-tomb-raider-reboot-movie>
The outfit, named Vikarious Productions, will be led by the Swedish actor and 
her London-based agent Charles Collier, according toVariety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/global/alicia-vikander-charles-collier-vikarious-1201768013/>
.

The company’s first film, Euphoria, is set to start shooting this autumn in 
the German Alps, with Vikander and Eva Green starring as duelling sisters 
travelling through Europe. The film marks the English-language debut of Swedish 
film-maker Lisa Langseth, who previously directed Vikander in Pure and Hotel.


Vikander, who won an Oscar for The Danish Girl, said of the project: “It is a 
profound story about the journey of two estranged sisters, full of suffering 
but also full of joy, and squaring up to very important subject matter. It also 
has compelling female voices and is packed to the rafters with female talent 
both sides of the camera.”


Variety reports that the company plans to produce a further two titles within 
the next two years. As an actor, Vikander has three films due for release this 
year: the historical drama Tulip Fever; a romantic picture with Michael 
Fassbender, The Light Between Oceans; and this summer’sJason Bourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/22/jason-bourne-trailer-things-we-learned-matt-damon-julia-stiles>
.

News of Vikarious forming comes shortly after Jessica Chastain launched 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/jessica-chastain-freckle-films-production-company-1201709557/>
 her own production company, Freckle Films, where she will serve as president. 
Vikander and Chastain join a line of other female actors who’ve formed 
production companies with varying degrees of success.

Alicia Vikander: ‘I made five films in a row before I had a scene with another 
woman’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/13/alicia-vikander-danish-girl-interview-ex-machina>
Following her second Oscar win for Million Dollar Baby, Hilary Swank created 
2S Films in 2008, which has since only been responsible for the tepidly 
received romantic comedy You’re Not You and the Kate Hudson-starring turkey 
Something Borrowed. Others, like Jennifer Love Hewitt and Katherine Heigl, used 
their outfits to launch TV vehicles for themselves.


Drew Barrymore has been busy since 1999 heading Flower Films, with a slew of 
successes including the two Charlie’s Angels films, Donnie Darko and romantic 
comedies 50 First Dates and How to Be Single.Reese Witherspoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/reesewitherspoon>, meanwhile, had a banner 
year in 2014, after seeing her company, Pacific Standard, score major hits with 
both Gone Girl and Wild.

 