
Many words and slideshows are devoted to what the stars wore in the days after 
any major awards show, but the biggest fashion story coming out of the 
weekend’s MTV Video Music Awards is about what someone chose not to sport:
Alicia Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aliciakeys> went makeup-free.

Earlier this year, since publishing a piece in Lena Dunham’s Lenny Letter 
<http://www.lennyletter.com/style/a410/alicia-keys-time-to-uncover/> about 
being ‘sick’ of wearing makeup, Keys briefly became the conspicuous face of a 
movement that she’s hashtagged #nomakeup. But in the aftermath of the VMAs, her 
most high-profile barefaced appearance, Keys has resisted pressure to reinforce 
a strongly anti-makeup stance, tweeting: “Y’all, choosing to be makeup free 
doesn’t mean I’m anti-makeup. Do you! 
<https://twitter.com/aliciakeys/status/770327503495958528>”

#nomakeup: would you go au naturel like Adele?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/27/makeup-free-adele-alicia-keys> 
Criticism ensued: from people who wanted her to be making 
<https://twitter.com/RotterWrites/status/770337535704780800> a broader 
<https://twitter.com/LeSassateDiEli/status/770715986551078917> anti-makeup 
statement. From people whogot mad 
<https://twitter.com/itsmedarlando/status/770049608848384004> at her for making 
a broader anti-makeup statement. How dare a woman – a famous one, at that – 
make a choice about her physical appearance while refusing to proselytize about 
it?

The truth is that many of us dare to do that every day: whether we’re stroking 
multiple layers of mascara onto our eyelashes or going out in the world with 
nothing between our skin and the air.Makeup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/makeup> is not the enemy or the necessity: 
pressure to conform is.

Makeup is not the enemy or the necessity: pressure to conform is

I would be sad if I felt pressured not to wear makeup: it’s a kind of 
self-expression, and in some contexts it feels like a level of defense between 
myself and people who are going to consume my appearance. But I would also feel 
sad if anyone thought that my choice about what I do with my face should 
pressure them to do the same.

Unlike Keys, I’m an enthused and unashamed wearer of makeup. My real 
indoctrination came at a friend’s birthday party. We were 12 and her 
grandmother, a purveyor of Mary Kay, came to give us a makeup lesson. To this 
day, some 23 years later, I recall her instructions many a morning when I apply 
products designed to even my skin tone or make me look like I did, in fact, do 
some sleeping: upward strokes to counteract aging. Purse lips to apply blush in 
order to give the impression of cheekbones. Smile. Feel good about yourself, or 
at least just fine.

Sometimes when I’m stumbling through a branch of Sephora, I wonder if my 
relationship with cosmetics would be different if I hadn’t been exposed to them 
in this context – if I’d grown up in a different community or at a different 
time. It’s a relationship that has certainly changed: the caked-on foundation 
of my youth swapped for something lighter. Matte lipstick instead of that 
sticky gloss that attracts strands of hair. Some days I wear a lot of makeup, 
and others I wear none at all, because some days I feel like looking sleepy and 
freckled.

Alicia Keys’ experience with makeup has no doubt been very different from 
mine. “I don’t want to cover up any more. Not my face, not my mind, not my 
soul, not my thoughts, not my dreams, not my struggles, not my emotional 
growth. Nothing,” she wrote in her Lenny Letter essay. I can only imagine that 
after years of shellac-thick makeup designed to look good on camera it would be 
very refreshing to face the world with a product-free face.

But neither of us is using (or not using) makeup for the opinions or 
expectations of others: applying products to your face or body to change its 
appearance does not have to be an implicit insistence that other people do the 
same, or that you’re criticizing those who make different choices from you. Not 
if you’re an obscure Guardian contributor. Not even if you’re famous.

 