
Award-winning poet Alice Oswald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-oswald> has pulled out of prestigious 
poetry award the TS Eliot prize in protest over its sponsorship by an 
investment company.

Oswald's new collection Memorial, a retelling of the Iliad focusing on the 
200-plus ordinary soldiers who died rather than on the quarrel between 
Agamemnon and Achilles, was shortlisted for the £15,000 TS Eliot prize 
alongside nine other books in October. The Poetry Book Society, which runs the 
award and loses its Arts Council funding next year,a decision which was 
protested by more than 100 poets in April 
<http://www.poetrybooks.co.uk/news/106/poets_letter_sent_to_ace_4_april_2011/>, 
announced a new three-year sponsorship for the prize from private investment 
management firmAurum Funds <http://www.aurum.com/> at the same time as it 
revealed its shortlist in October.

But Oswald, who won the TS Eliot award in 2002 for her collection Dart, said 
today in a statement released by her publisher Faber & Faber that she was 
withdrawing from the running for this year's prize.

"I'm uncomfortable about the fact that Aurum Funds, an investment company 
which exclusively manages funds of hedge funds, is sponsoring the 
administration of the Eliot Prize; I think poetry should be questioning not 
endorsing such institutions and for that reason I'm withdrawing from the Eliot 
shortlist," said the Devon-based poet.

Aurum, which the Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> Book 
Society said in October manages assets worth over £1.5bn "in a thoughtful and 
stable manner" for investors including charities, is not the first financial 
institution to sponsor a literary award. The Booker prize is sponsored by the 
Man Group, an alternative investment management business, while the Sunday 
Times short story award is supported by EFG Private Bank.

And Oswald is not the first author to protest a prize's sponsorship. In 2003, 
Hari Kunzru rejected the John Llewellyn Rhys prize over its sponsorship by the 
Mail on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/nov/22/immigration.pressandpublishing>: 
"By accepting, I would have been giving legitimacy to a publication that has, 
over many years, shown itself to be extremely xenophobic," he said. John 
Berger, meanwhile, donated half of his Booker prize winnings to the Black 
Panther movement in protest against the involvement of Booker – the award's 
original sponsor – in Caribbean trade, whileJanet and Allan Ahlberg asked not 
to be entered for the Nestlé Children's Book Prize over its controversial 
sponsorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jan/24/thedemiseofthenestleprize>
.

Both Aurum and the Poetry Book Society declined to comment on Oswald's 
decision. Chris Holifield, director of the Poetry Book Society, said Oswald 
would not be replaced on the shortlist with another contender. "It's too late 
to do that, which is unfortunate as there were other good people who would have 
liked to be on the shortlist," she said.

The remaining nine poets in the running for the award are John Burnside, Carol 
Ann Duffy, Leontia Flynn, David Harsent, John Kinsella, Esther Morgan, Daljit 
Nagra, Sean O'Brien and Bernard O'Donoghue. The winner will be announced on 16 
January.
 