
She's survived wave after wave of redundancies. But finally this week, 
BlackBerry's grim reaper caught up withAlicia Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aliciakeys> - and axed her job as Global 
Creative Director.

The appointment in January 20134 of Keys - better known as a singer and 
songwriter who has won multiple Grammy awards - at the launch of the Z10 phone, 
puzzled many. Was she getting paid? Almost certainly. Was she a fantastic 
advertisement for BlackBerry? Well, given that soon after being appointed, she 
tweeted from an iPhone - the horror! - it looked for a few minutes as though 
things would come to an embarrassing end. Butshe blamed it on hackers 
<http://mashable.com/2013/02/13/alicia-keys-iphone-hackers/>, so that made it 
all right, and she got on with.. whatdid she do again?

According to BlackBerry, it certainly wasn't a sinecure - not at all. 
BlackBerry told us: "We thank Alicia for her many contributions including 
providing creative direction for the BlackBerry Keep Moving Project which 
attracted more than 40 million visits, advocating for women in STEM [science, 
technology, engineering and mathematics] and launching theBlackBerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blackberry> Scholars Program. We have 
enjoyed the opportunity to work with such an incredibly talented and passionate 
individual."

And was she paid? "We cannot disclose specific details on the terms of the 
contract."

Since Keys took up the previously nonexistent reins of Global Creative 
Director, to globally creatively direct things, BlackBerry's staff numbers have 
shrunk from around 12,300 in January 2013 to 11,500 by September 2013 - at 
which point management said that another 4,500 jobs would go over the next few 
quarters, taking the company down to 7,000 staff worldwide.

At that point someone seems to have noticed "Keys, Alicia" on a staffing form 
somewhere and said "What has she creatively directed for us globally lately?"

Well, not quite. Keys's departure is really about the death of the "BlackBerry 
Keep Moving <http://keepmoving.blackberry.com/desktop/en/us/home.html>" 
project, a formless idea which aimed to get writers (Neil Gaiman), filmmakers 
(Robert Rodriguez) and musicians (Keys) to bandy the BlackBerry name around and 
bring young people to the company site, where they could be enthused with the 
benefits of new phones.

As you could predict, it didn't work, especially given BlackBerry's woeful 
financial position. Although it used the "Keep moving" tagline on its 
advertising, the fact that there was a whole scheme behind it passed almost 
everyone by.

There is some inside scoop offered by the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/earshot/alicia-keys-ends-one-year-668304>, 
which says that Keys had originally signed up to "develop ideas and content for 
the Keep Moving project, which got some stage presence during her US tour early 
in 2013, and then effectively vanished. There were weekly discussions on the 
phone, it says - but all the BlackBerry executives who were on the Keep Moving 
project have now gone. "She got on a sinking ship," it quotes "a source close 
to Keys" as saying.

Judging by the tweets from the BlackBerry account using the #KeepMoving 
hashtag on BlackBerry's site, the Keep Moving project hasn't, well, moved since 
August.
 BlackBerry's Keep Moving page shows no sign of movement since August 2013. 
Photograph: /public domain 
We've previously examined the question of quite what it is that celebrities 
bring to tech companies, or vice-versa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2013/jan/31/alicia-keys-blackberry-celebrities-tech>
. The answer seems to be: not much either way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F03%2Falicia-keys-blackberry-and-how-the-keepmoving-project-stopped%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F3%2F1388771876678%2F820d8e89-bc36-41b5-bcb0-6b573d848c11-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alicia%20Keys%2C%20BlackBerry%20and%20how%20the%20%23KeepMoving%20project%20stopped&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F03%2Falicia-keys-blackberry-and-how-the-keepmoving-project-stopped%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alicia%20Keys%2C%20BlackBerry%20and%20how%20the%20%23KeepMoving%20project%20stopped&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F03%2Falicia-keys-blackberry-and-how-the-keepmoving-project-stopped%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F3%2F1388771876678%2F820d8e89-bc36-41b5-bcb0-6b573d848c11-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Will.i.am with Intel CEO Paul Otellini at CES in Las Vegas in January 2012. He 
played a song on his Ultrabook. Photograph: Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images 
The list of participants isn't short. Besides Keys, there's 
spinning-chair-torch-Olympian Will.i.am, who in January 2011 became director of 
creative innovation at Intel 
<http://newsroom.intel.com/community/intel_newsroom/blog/2011/01/25/intel-teams-with-william-black-eyed-peas-front-man>
 (raising the question of whether Intel also has someone in charge of 
uncreative innovation, and/or creative copying). Is his name synonymous with 
Intel? Has it sold more ultrabooks? We'll leave that to the marketing 
specialists.
 iPhone user Jessica Alba explains to Microsoft's Joe Belfiore why she's going 
to use Windows Phone 8. A few months later, she went back to her iPhone. 
Photograph: Stephen Lam/Getty Images 
Then there's Jessica Alba, who helped Microsoft launch Windows Phone 8 in 
October 2012 - and I think we can all agree that it was her presence on a stage 
looming over Joe Belfiore which has helped it to a double-digit market share in 
countries such as Mexico.

Alba, who waxed lyrical about the benefits of parent-friendly elements of the 
new OS such as Kids Corner, went back to using an iPhone only seven months later
 
<http://www.geekwire.com/2013/windows-phone-spokesperson-jessica-alba-spotted-iphone/>
 , as evidenced by her tweets <http://twitter.com/jessicaalba>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F03%2Falicia-keys-blackberry-and-how-the-keepmoving-project-stopped%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F3%2F1388774606982%2F558b61ed-e711-4390-89bb-b0b2c4c96aaa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alicia%20Keys%2C%20BlackBerry%20and%20how%20the%20%23KeepMoving%20project%20stopped&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F03%2Falicia-keys-blackberry-and-how-the-keepmoving-project-stopped%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alicia%20Keys%2C%20BlackBerry%20and%20how%20the%20%23KeepMoving%20project%20stopped&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F03%2Falicia-keys-blackberry-and-how-the-keepmoving-project-stopped%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F3%2F1388774606982%2F558b61ed-e711-4390-89bb-b0b2c4c96aaa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Lady Gaga appears with Polaroid's chief operating officer John Pollock to 
announce their design partnership. Photograph: Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images 
Nor should we forget Polaroid and Lady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jan/08/lady-gaga-polaroid-creative-director>
. She, too, became its Creative Director, appearing at CES in 2010 to launch 
camere glasses. Their names have of course become as intertwined and 
interchangeable as chalk and cheese - principally because Polaroid was heading 
for bankruptcy, and couldn't afford to follow through.
 Just the jobs? … Ashton Kutcher in his role as Steve Jobs for the film Jobs. 
But the job he took is with Lenovo. Photograph: Glen Wilson/AP 
A so-far unknown in terms of his impact on a company is the actor Ashton 
Kutcher,hired - apparently - by Lenovo in October to be a product engineer 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2013/10/29/ashton-kutcher-joins-lenovo-as-newest-product-engineer/3306987/>
. On what? Here's what USA Today was told: 

"This partnership goes beyond traditional bounds by deeply integrating him 
into our organization as a product engineer," said David Roman, chief marketing 
officer at Lenovo. "Ashton will help us break new ground by challenging 
assumptions, bringing new perspective and contributing his technical expertise 
to Yoga Tablet and other devices."

We'll have to wait for news of precisely what part of former chemical 
engineering undergraduate Kutcher's expertise is being brought to bear on the 
Tablet (which was already on sale before his hiring).

Meanwhile, Keys's departure does leave the door open for BlackBerry to take up 
the offer from another Canadian to help it out. Justin Bieber offered in 2007 
to be a "brand ambassador" for the company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/05/why-blackberry-turned-down-justin-bieber-brand-ambassador>
, but was turned down flat by marketing executives. Maybe it's the only thing 
that could tempt him out of retirement.
 