
Alicia Vikander <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alicia-vikander> is booting 
up to play video game heroine Lara Croft in a new Tomb Raider movie.

The Swedish actor, who won an Oscar for best supporting actress for her 
performance in The Danish Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/alicia-vikander-wins-best-supporting-actress-oscar-for-the-danish-girl>
, is following in the footsteps of Angelina Jolie, who accepted the role 
shortly after winning her best supporting actress Oscar for Girl, Interrupted 
in 1999. Jolie starred as the action heroine inLara Croft: Tomb Raider 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0146316/reference>, and its sequel, Lara Croft 
Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0325703/reference>.

The movie, which will be directed by Roar Uthaug (whose last film was action 
movieThe Wave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/04/the-wave-review-impending-doom-dull-ride-roar-uthaug>
), will star Vikander as a young and untested Croft, in whatthe Hollywood 
Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/alicia-vikander-star-as-lara-888593>
 describes as an origin story that tracks Croft’s first adventure.

Star Wars: The Force Awakens star Daisy Ridley had been rumored 
<https://deadline.com/2016/03/daisy-ridley-lara-croft-tomb-raider-star-wars-force-awakens-1201717660/>
 to be in contention for the part.

Oscar-winner Alicia Vikander: 'I never thought I'd do films in English'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/oscar-winner-alicia-vikander-danish-girl>
Lara Croft will be Vikander’s most high-profile role to date. The actor is also
reportedly 
<http://www.thewrap.com/alicia-vikander-early-favorite-to-replace-rooney-mara-in-girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo-sequel-exclusive/>
 being considered to replace Rooney Mara as The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo’s 
heroine Lisbeth Salander in Sony’s forthcoming adaptation of The Girl in the 
Spider’s Web.

Based on the long-running video game franchise, Tomb Raider follows the 
English archaeologist Lara Croft through a series of adventures heavily 
inspired by Indiana Jones. The video game series was recently rebooted by game 
developer Square Enix with 2013’s Tomb Raider, which depicted Croft’s first 
adventure as an archaeology student, and its follow-up Rise Of The Tomb Raider.

Vikander has three films due for release this year: the historical drama Tulip 
Fever; her romance with Michael Fassbender, The Light Between Oceans; and this 
summer’sJason Bourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/22/jason-bourne-trailer-things-we-learned-matt-damon-julia-stiles>
.
 