
Though she's just 32, Alicia Keys <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/aliciakeys> 
has sold more than 30m albums, picked up 14 Grammy awards,sung at the Super Bowl
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z09nFDey07w>, become a committed charity 
fundraiser and, bizarrely, the"creative director" of a mobile phone company 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/shortcuts/2013/jan/31/alicia-keys-blackberry-celebrities-tech>
. Somewhere inside this labyrinth of personas remains the consummate musician 
who started playing classical piano in primary school and landed a record deal 
when she was 16.

Here, she flicks through musical personas, too, as if they are the pages of a 
magazine. She's old-school soul piano thumper (Tears Always Win 
<http://www.muzu.tv/aliciakeys/tears-always-win-music-video/1875673/>), sincere 
balladeer (Un-Thinkable), percussionist (Girl on Fire 
<http://www.muzu.tv/aliciakeys/girl-on-fire-music-video/1584675>) and 
synth-playing hip-hop bump'n'grinder (101). Whatever her mood, though, the 
performance is all about the voice; she must be the finest female soul/R&B 
singer since Whitney Houston.

This is a slick, high-energy show, in which everything is choreographed to the 
minutest detail, from the hammy fake phone call in which Keys adopts the 
persona of a waitress arranging a date, to the breathless dance moves – which 
are rather unsuccessfully replicated in row P by beery geordie men.

There are plenty of big numbers, and her reappearance in a ballgown for the 
multi-Grammy-winning worldwide hitEmpire State of Mind 
<http://www.muzu.tv/jay-z/jayz-feat-alicia-keys-empire-state-of-mind-music-video/503853/>
 – with her duet partner Jay-Z joining in on the giant video screens – is 
simply stunning, but some of the best moments are the most intimate, when it's 
just Keys, her voice and her beautiful piano playing. She puts palpable feeling 
into reinvention anthem Brand New Me, and knows precisely when to hold back so 
the crowd sing along withFallin' 
<http://www.muzu.tv/aliciakeys/fallin-music-video/54184/>.

However, for all the textbook emotion about "journeys", yells of "New-cassle" 
and one untypically cringeworthy moment when she asks the crowd to "Put your 
cellphones in the air, help me celebrate life", there's not always that much 
sign of spontaneity.

It's almost a comical relief when a platform begins its descent through the 
floor with Keys still on it, juddering to an awkward halt so she can leap off. 
It's somehow reassuring to know the all-singing, all-dancing, all-conquering 
Keysatron is a human being after all.

• What have you been to see lately? Tell us about it on Twitter using #GdnGig
 