
Alice Munro, winner of this year's Nobel prize in literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/10/alice-munro-wins-nobel-prize-in-literature>
, has said that she is unable to travel to Sweden to give the traditional 
victory lecture and to accept the £780,000 prize in person, citing health 
reasons.

Munro, who is 82 years old, said earlier this year that she wanted to retire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jun/21/author-alice-munro-retiring>
, after a glittering career in which she has written 14 acclaimed short-story 
collections.

In June, she told Canada's National Post 
<http://arts.nationalpost.com/2013/06/19/alice-munro-its-nice-to-go-out-with-a-bang/>
: "[It's] not that I didn't love writing, but I think you do get to a stage 
where you sort of think about your life in a different way. And perhaps, when 
you're my age, you don't wish to be alone as much as a writer has to be. It's 
like, at the wrong end of life, sort of becoming very sociable."

Munro's most recent collection, Dear Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/25/dear-life-alice-munro-review> 
(2012), included four autobiographical pieces which the author described as 
"not quite stories … the first and last – and the closest – things I have to 
say about my own life".

Swedish Academy permanent secretary Peter Englund confirmed on Friday that 
Munro has declined an invitation to the prize-giving, and said it is not yet 
known who will represent her at the ceremony on 10 December.

The winner of the Nobel prize in literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/nobel-prize-literature> traditionally gives 
a lecture in Stockholm before accepting the award, but Munro joins a string of 
past winners unable to attend for health reasons.

Doris Lessing, who was 87 when she won the prize in 2007, was advised by 
doctors not to travel, because of back trouble, and the Nobel Foundation came 
to London to award the prize instead.

Harold Pinter, then 75, didn't go in 2005, citing poor health, and Austria's 
Elfriede Jelinek <http://www.elfriedejelinek.com/> declined the year before 
that, saying that she was "not in a mental state to withstand such ceremonies".

Announcing the award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2013/oct/10/alice-munro-canadian-short-story-nobel-prize-literature-video>
, Englund described Munro as the "master of the contemporary short story", with 
a "power of observation that is almost uncanny" and an "intelligence and power 
of observation that could be a bit problematic, because she sees through 
people".
 