
Alice Munro <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-munro>, after announcing 
her retirement from the writing career which has earned her a Nobel prize this 
month, has conceded that the ideas keep coming for new stories â€“ and that she 
is ambivalent about putting a final full stop on her work.

Munro, 82, told the Canada's National Post in definite terms earlier this year 
that she wanted to retire, saying thatshe had "very much" come to terms with 
the decision 
<http://arts.nationalpost.com/2013/06/19/alice-munro-its-nice-to-go-out-with-a-bang>
. However, the revered short-story writer appeared wobble inan interview with 
the Wall Street Journal following her Nobel win 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/speakeasy/2013/10/22/will-nobelist-alice-munro-come-out-of-retirement>
. In it the author, who is suffering from flu, dictated answers to her 
daughter, Jenny Munro, who forwarded them by email. She said: "Every day I have 
mixed messages to myself over whether I will retire. I have promised to retire 
but now and then I get an idea."

Fans hoping for more may take comfort from the fact that she hinted in 2006 
that she was poised to give up, telling an interviewer: "I don't know if I have 
the energy to do this any more", and then continuing much as usual, publishing 
a new collection, Dear Life, in 2012 to great acclaim.

The author spoke about ageing, saying that her memory has suffered, and that 
she believed that with the ageing experience came empathy, "because you 
understand more". Munro's work focuses on the rural communities of southwestern 
Ontario, "and I find it endlessly interesting, and more new things still come 
to me about it," she said.

Novelist Philip Roth announced his decision to retire a year ago at the age of 
79, inan interview with French magazine Les Inrocks 
<http://www.lesinrocks.com/2012/10/07/livres/philip-roth-nemesis-sera-mon-dernier-livre-11310126>
. So far, he has not reversed his decision. "Enough is enough! I no longer feel 
this fanaticism to write that I have experienced in my life," he said.

Munro's most recent collection, Dear Life, reached number one in the New York 
Times paperback trade fiction bestseller list this week, ahead of David 
Baldacci's The Hit, EL James's Fifty Shades of Grey and The Casual Vacancy by 
JK Rowling.

Asked what she wanted to happen to any unpublished or draft manuscripts after 
she died, Munro said: "Destroy them."
 