
In a squeaky clean lecture room at the top of London’s Southbank Centre, Alice 
Oswald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-oswald> pokes and prods with 
words at a rotting swan, a road-kill badger. “What dirt shall we visit today / 
what dirt shall we re-visit?” hum the flies in another poem from her new 
collection,Falling Awake, which has been shortlisted for the Forward poetry 
prize.

“I frequently get told I’m a nature poet living in a rural idyll, but just 
like the city, the country is full of anxious, savage people,” she tells the 
audience. “The hedges seem so much stronger than the humans that you feel 
slightly imperilled and exposed, as if, if you stopped moving for a minute the 
nettles would just move in.”

When I visit her cottage in south Devon a few days later, the nettles have 
indeed moved in: they bristle from the hedgerows, over lanes trampled deep into 
the landscape by centuries of rural industry. The village where she lives with 
her husband and three teenage children sits in a crook of the river Dart, which 
was the subject of her second, name-making book, and in which she likes to swim 
all year round.

Dart, a book-length poem which won the TS Eliot prize in 2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jan/21/tseliotprizeforpoetry.awardsandprizes>
, followed the river from its source – “A trickle coming out of a bank, a foal 
of a river” – to the sea, where a seal-watcher sees it meet “caves / horrible 
to enter alone / the fur, the hair, the fingernails, the bones”.Dart was both 
lyrical and determinedly anti-romantic, tuning into the voices of the people 
who make a living along the river’s length: a poacher, a millworker, a water 
abstractor, doing his best to skim and measure and “countervail against decay”.

Falling Awake by Alice Oswald review – encounters with nature that defy 
language
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/24/falling-awake-alice-oswald-review-nature-notes-from-frontier-of-language>
Among those to recognise that she was doing something a bit special was 
Jeanette Winterson <http://www.jeanettewinterson.com/journalism/alice-oswald/>. 
“Alice Oswald is making a new kind of poetry,” she wrote. “There is nothing 
fancy about it – she is doing the job, simple and enormous, of reworking the 
model for the 21st century … She turns the countryside into an inner landscape, 
a place not at odds with the more fashionable beats of the city, or a cliched 
antidote to it, but as something which I can only call authentic desire.”

Then in 2011, after five collections centred on nature, Oswald did something 
that appeared to be completely different: she published another book-length 
poem,Memorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/02/memorial-alice-oswald-review>, 
which was billed as a version of Homer’sIliad. In fact, it was a palimpsest of 
the epic, which turned the tablet on the heroic struggle of Achilles and 
Agamemnon in order to focus once more on the little people – warriors like 
Harpalion “not quite ready for life / not quite solid always shifting from foot 
to foot”, or Euchenor, “a kind of suicide” who “carried the darkness inside him 
of a dud choice”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Falice-oswald-interview-falling-awake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca149e4052bb9b0d65bf2d7a402b08a58caba5f1%2F0_309_4721_2833%2F4721.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20Oswald%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20like%20the%20way%20that%20the%20death%20of%20one%20thing%20is%20the%20beginning%20of%20something%20else%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Falice-oswald-interview-falling-awake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20Oswald%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20like%20the%20way%20that%20the%20death%20of%20one%20thing%20is%20the%20beginning%20of%20something%20else%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Falice-oswald-interview-falling-awake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca149e4052bb9b0d65bf2d7a402b08a58caba5f1%2F0_309_4721_2833%2F4721.jpg>
 Alice Oswald pictured at her home near Totnes, South Devon. Photograph: Jim 
Wileman for the Guardian 
The woman who has excavated these minor characters from millennia of cultural 
sediment is quiet and serious, determinedly unstarry. “I feel like I’m getting 
more anonymous,” she says. At her launch, her editor Robin Robertson praised 
the patience, diligence and attentiveness of her work, but also an “alchemical, 
shamanistic power” which is rooted in oral tradition.

“Patience is my muse,” agreed Oswald, who described Falling Awake as a “rather 
neurotically measured and metered book”. She instructed her audience to put 
away their books, as she would be speaking by heart. “Forget the fixed text, 
because I like the idea of poems being these melting ice shapes that vanish and 
are only there in the moment.”

The last time I read my poem Dunt, someone had an asthma attack because she 
forgot to breathe

There’s a lot of melting, vanishing, dying in her work – whether of warriors, 
badgers or swans. In one poem, “Severed Head Floating Downriver”, Orpheus’s 
skull drifts along the Hebron after he has been torn to pieces by the Maenads, 
“no more myself but a colander / draining the sound from this 
never-to-be-mentioned wound”. Is her poetry getting darker? “Oh dear, that’s 
what my husband says,” she briefly frets, before flipping the thought on its 
head. “I’m mostly interested in life and vitality, but you can only see that by 
seeing its opposite. I love erosion: I like the way that the death of one thing 
is the beginning of something else.”

On a purely practical level, there is a lot of death to observe in the lanes 
around her house. “I’m quite interested in the corpses you see around here. I 
really like having something physical that’s not myself.” But her poems 
constantly tow you from the physical to the metaphysical. Her swan marvels at 
its own disintegration in much the same way as, in ancient myth, Orpheus’s head 
continues to sing.

One key to her work is an often-told anecdote about the night she decided to 
become a poet. She was eight years old and had found herself alone and 
terrified through the night in “this scary room”. “I saw the dawn coming up and 
I realised I couldn’t describe it other than in a different language,” she 
recalls. “I still remember the white clouds in the blue sky and the fact that 
they weren’t saying anything about what I’d been through, though their 
actuality was very communicative.”

Born in 1966, the third of four children, Oswald had an itinerant childhood, 
dictated by her mother Mary Keen’s work as a leading garden designer, which 
took the family from house to house. “I felt I grew up in a series of gardens,” 
she says. Along with her two sisters and her younger brother, she went from 
grammar school to Oxford, where she read classics. All three sisters were at 
university at the same time and were very close. “We would leave notes for each 
other in the drain outside the Bodleian library.”

She met her husband, the playwright Peter Oswald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/jul/11/theatre1>, when he cast her and 
one of her sisters as soldiers in a student production ofJulius Caesar, 
thinking they were twins. “I discovered then that I wasn’t an actor,” she says, 
though theatricality rings through her work.

She left Oxford intent on a day job as a gardener and enrolled for a course 
with the Royal Horticultural Society at Wisley. “My dream was to be a jobbing 
gardener in a park or something, to allow time for writing, but because my 
mother was quite a well-known gardener I kept being put into these high-powered 
jobs. I’m not as good a gardener as people think.”

Her own garden is a study in horticultural insouciance, in which bindweed 
tangles with fuchsia above a tussocky lawn strewn with fallen apples and 
dominated by an ancient badminton net. In a corner is her study – an unheated 
shed in which she works surrounded by cobwebs and dead moths. She hates being 
called a nature poet, though “pastoral” is worse: “That’s an urban approach”. 
But Winterson’s claim, back in 2004, that Oswald is “Ted Hughes’ rightful heir 
… a Nature poet, a spiritual poet” appears to be at least partially legitimised 
by the otter skin slung across a beam in her shed: it was sent to her after his 
death by his widow, Carol.

The job of poetry is to change the aesthetic rather than to challenge the 
system

At her book launch she explained that she had begun to envisage her work not 
as poems so much as “sound carvings”. “I like the idea that sound carving 
suggests there’s something there already.” In her shed the concept of a sound 
carving begins to take shape. A volume of the major plays of Chikamatsu, an 
18th-century Japanese dramatist, sits beside a paperweight made from 
grasshoppers and huge sheets of paper scrawled with charcoal hieroglyphics. 
Strung along the walls are roughly drawn diagrams of stars and ellipses. One 
corner of the floor is strewn with scrunched-up drafts, and just outside the 
door is a brazier, in which her son – at her request – has been incinerating 
her old work. A constant search for vitality has led to a technique of 
“scribbling something down on a piece of paper and just walking and writing the 
image. Today there’s a dead page between you and the world, which the Greek 
poets didn’t have.”

One of the most memorable poems in Falling Awake is among the oldest. “Dunt: A 
Poem for a Dried-up River,” which took the Forward prize for best single poem 
in 2007, was written when the family found themselves briefly living with her 
parents in Gloucestershire after being priced out of the rental market in 
Devon. It unfolds like a cry of environmental despair, in which “a water nymph 
made of bone / tries to summon a river out of limestone”. Was it intentionally 
political?

The question takes her back to the “polyphonic democracy” of Homer, which she 
feels has been stifled by centuries of “public school readings”. “I like to 
think my work is political on that level, rather than making a plea for the 
planet. The job of poetry is to change the aesthetic rather than to challenge 
the system.”

But she points out that the water nymph is also a physical entity – a small, 
ancient artefact in a local museum. “The Greeks called anything they didn’t 
understand a nymph. It could be a tree or a river. I don’t think it meant a 
picturesque woman at all. They lived on this hypothetical level.”

Though Oswald is moored to reality by school runs and by working a day a week 
at a local plant nursery, she too appears to live partly on a hypothetical 
level, sitting through all weathers in her shed, obsessively revisiting Homer, 
Dante, Milton – reconceiving the way they imagined and wrote for the 21st 
century.

The creation of one long piece in Falling Awake, “Tithonus”, involved getting 
up at 4am for days on end to record the dawn, in her own words, written in real 
time. She wouldn’t be reading it, she told her Southbank audience, because it 
had to be performed over exactly 46 minutes with a musician and a stopwatch.

Memorial by Alice Oswald – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/02/memorial-alice-oswald-review> 
When I remark that it’s a challenging piece, since the words are only a small 
part of a text that unfolds between pages of metronomic dots, she smiles and 
says she would be very happy never to have to read it again. It’s no surprise 
that Samuel Beckett is one of her literary heroes: “Tithonus” resembles 
Beckett’s “dramaticules”, except that whileFootfalls or Breath are conceived as 
play texts, this is presented as part of a book of poems.

Her attitude to textual impermanence is linked to a philosophy of forgetting. 
“It’s good to remember how to forget. I’m interested in the oral tradition: 
what keeps the poems alive is a little forgetting. In Homer you get the sense 
that anything could happen because the poet might not remember.”

Such intensity can have physical effects. At her reading she warned her 
audience to remember to breathe when she read “Dunt”. “The last time I read it 
someone had an asthma attack because she forgot to breathe.”

When her children were small, such concentration came at a cost. “When I look 
back now I can’t understand how I managed: I was very lucky in that Peter was 
very good at sharing the work, but I still have a note my son slid under the 
door saying ‘Dear Als I have a tume ache a tooth ache and a everythig ache’.”

But now her family is growing up, she is free to move inexorably deeper into 
herself. “I’m interested in how many layers you can excavate in personality,” 
she says. “At the top it’s all quite named. But you go down through the animal 
and the vegetable and then you get to the mineral. At that level of 
concentration you can respond to the non-human by half turning into it.”

Just as a tree can be a nymph, a poet can be a rotten swan. “Poetry,” she 
says, “is not about language but about what happens when language gets 
impossible.”

• Falling Awake is published by Jonathan Cape. To order a copy for £8.20 (RRP 
£10), go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/falling-awake-414467.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 