Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEgKC_SDhOKk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEgKC_SDhOKk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEgKC_SDhOKk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Short story writer Alice Munro has said "I just love the honour" of winning 
the Nobel prize in literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/10/alice-munro-wins-nobel-prize-in-literature>
, an award which is to be collected on her behalf by daughter Jenny at a lavish 
ceremony in Stockholm in a few hours' time.

Munro, who at 82 is too frail to fly, shared her joy at receiving the $1.3m 
(£790,000) prize, and thoughts on being the 13th woman to win it, in avideo 
interview on the Nobel Prize website 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/2013/munro-lecture.html>
. Traditionally,Nobel winners accept their prize with a grand formal lecture 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/video_lectures.html>, some 
of which have become literary landmarks in their own right, but her response 
was in the form of a 30-minute interview. "Oh, no, no! I was a woman! But there 
are women who have won it, I know. I just love the honour, I love it, but I 
just didn't think that way, because most writers probably underestimate their 
work, especially after it's done. You don't go around and tell your friends 
that 'I will probably win the Nobel prize'.

Munro was acclaimed as a "master of the short story" by Swedish academy 
permanent secretary Peter Englund whenshe won the prize in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2013/oct/10/alice-munro-canadian-short-story-nobel-prize-literature-video>
.

As a young girl in southwestern Ontario, Munro said, she was inspired by Hans 
Christian Andersen's The Little Mermaid to imagine her own story with a happier 
ending, and continued to make up stories. "I had a long walk to school, and 
during that walk I would generally make up stories. As I got older the stories 
would be more and more about myself, as a heroine in some situation or other … "

At first, she was secretive about her literary aspirations. "The people around 
me didn't know that I wanted to be a writer, 'cause I didn't let them find out 
– it would have seemed to most people ridiculous." But later, as a housewife 
bringing up two daughters in British Columbia in the early 1950s, Munro began 
to establish her ground as a writer.

"You know, this is kind of a special thing with growing up as I did. If 
anybody read, it was the women, if anybody had the education it was often the 
woman; it would have been a school teacher or something like that, and far from 
being closed to women, the world of reading and writing was widely more open to 
women than it was to men, men being farmers or doing different kinds of work." 
She went on to say that women writers today "have a much, I wouldn't say easier 
time, but it's much more OK now for women to be doing something important, not 
just fooling around with 'a little game that she does while everybody else is 
out of the house', but to be really serious about writing, as a man would 
write."

Munro's stories set in small town rural communities have led her work to be 
dismissed by some as boring and domestic. Novelist Bret Easton Ellis decried 
her as "so completely overrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/14/bret-easton-ellis-alice-munro-twitter>
". But asked what is so interesting about life in rural Canada, Munro said in 
her Nobel interview: "You just have to be there."

In June this year, Munro said she would give up writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jun/21/author-alice-munro-retiring>
, and now she has explained why: "Well, I gave up writing, when was it, maybe a 
year ago, but that was a decision, that was not wanting to write and not being 
able to, a decision that I wanted to behave like the rest of the world. Because 
when you are writing you are doing something that other people don't know you 
are doing, and you can't really talk about it, you are always finding your way 
in this secret world, and then you are doing something else in the normal 
world. And I am sort of getting tired of that – I have done it all my life, 
absolutely all my life."
 