
A dazed Jonny Brownlee <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-brownlee> was 
helped over the line by his brother Alistair, who shunned the chance to win the 
race to come to the aid of his younger sibling in a dramatic end to the World 
Triathlon Series in Cozumel, Mexico.

Jonny went into the final race of the season in second place in the standings 
behind the Spaniard Mario Mola, withthe Olympic champion Alistair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/alistair-brownlee-jonny-triathlon-ollympics-rio-2016-gold-silver>
 out of contention having missed earlier races.

Brownlee brotherly moment underlines why they are world’s best triathletes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/19/alistair-jonny-brownlee-brotherly-moment-world-best-triathletes>
The younger Brownlee needed to win the race and Mola finish no higher than 
fourth, and that was exactly what looked set to happen after the brothers had 
again pushed the pace hard on the swim and bike legs.

Jonny was leading comfortably heading into the final kilometre of the 10km run 
but then the heat began to take its toll and he started to weave across the 
course. The South African Henri Schoeman, who won bronze behind the Brownlees 
in Rio, overtook Jonny to win the race.

Jonny stopped at the side of the road but Alistair, who had been running 
comfortably in third, put his arm around his brother and all but carried him 
along the final few hundred metres and then pushed him across the line. There 
was a protest against the Brownlees’ finish, but under triathlon rules 
assistance from other competitors is allowed and by finishing second with Mola 
in fifth, it was the Spaniard who took the title by only four points.

Alistair suffered similar drama in Hyde Park in 2010, and he told the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/triathlon/37402716>: “If it happened to anyone I 
would have helped them across the line because it’s an awful position to be in. 
If he’d conked out before the finish line and there wasn’t medical support it 
could have been really dangerous. It was a natural human reaction to my brother 
but for anyone I would have done the same thing. I think it’s as close to death 
as you can be in sport.”

The brothers provided one of the lasting images of the Rio 2016 Olympics – 
Alistair pulling away from Jonny in the final kilometre of the race to take 
gold before the pair collapsed to the floor and embraced beyond the finishing 
line.

Not that Alistair was all sympathy in Cozumel, with the two-times Olympic 
champion adding: “I wish the flipping idiot had just paced it right and won the 
race. He could have jogged the last 2km.”

Jonny later tweeted from his hospital bed 
<https://twitter.com/jonny_brownlee/status/777710637229215744>: “Not how I 
wanted to end the season, but gave it everything. Thanks @AliBrownleetri, your 
loyalty is incredible.”
World Triathlon (@worldtriathlon) 
The 2016 WTS season ends in a dramatic fashion. What. A. Year. #WTS2016 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/WTS2016?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/nvqNrrI13D 
<https://t.co/nvqNrrI13D>
 <https://twitter.com/worldtriathlon/status/777695949426753537> September 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/worldtriathlon/status/777695949426753537> 
An appeal by the Spanish Triathlon Federation to disqualify Jonny Brownlee for 
accepting assistance to get over the line was dismissed by the International
Triathlon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/triathlon> Union, citing a rule 
which states athletes may accept help.

And in an interview on the ITU website, newly-crowned champion Mola admitted 
the dramatic circumstances of his victory took some of the shine off his 
success.

Mola said: “First of all this was not how I wanted to win the world 
championship. Luckily I was able to be in the top five considering Jonny didn’t 
win the race.

“To be honest I was already considering that the role of AIistair was to help 
Jonny. Considering that, I thought, well, I’m going to be second again, but at 
least I will fight to the end.

“And when I heard Jonny isn’t feeling well, I thought, ‘I need to fight to the 
end’. We want everyone to be safe after the finish line. It’s not the way I 
wanted it, but that’s triathlon.”
 