
First Alistair Brownlee <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee> 
slumped to the floor, drained but elated, after defying the broiling midday sun 
and a chronic ankle injury to become the first triathlete to retain an Olympic 
title. Then, six seconds later, Jonny Brownlee joined him, crashed out on the 
finish line. They exchanged just three words – “We’ve done it” – before 
grabbing each other’s hands.

The pair had just created a moment of jaw-dropping history, becoming the first 
British brothers to win gold and silver at the same event at an Olympics; now 
came the embrace that could have been scripted by Hollywood.

Yet along the Avenido Atlantica minutes earlier there had been no brotherly 
love. Having struck clear of the Frenchman Vincent Luis, the Brownlees both 
knew that with four kilometres remaining the gold medal was a straight fight 
between the two of them. Jonny looked strong. Alistair, less so, kept emptying 
bottles of water over himself to stay cool. As the duel in the sun grew more 
tense, the younger brother made a catastrophic error.

Rio 2016 Olympics: Bolt eyes double, athletics medals, badminton, more – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/18/rio-2016-olympics-day-13-usain-bolt-200m-triathlon-sailing-diving-live>
As Alistair explained: “In the first bit of the run we worked together. I saw 
Luis was starting to get gapped so I told Jonny: ‘Push it on now.’ We got that 
gap, stabilised – we knew it was hot and didn’t want to push it on too early 
and risk the heat.

“I got on to that second lap and started pushing it on – and then Jonny said 
‘relax’.”

It was at that moment Alistair realised his brother had shown his hand and was 
struggling more than he was letting on. That ruthless big-brother instinct 
kicked in – the instinct that has helped him to establish a 17‑7 career record 
over his sibling. And so he attacked hard. Soon he was 10 seconds ahead, then 
20 seconds, then he was out of sight.

“I just thought: ‘If he’s telling me to relax, he’s probably finding this 
quite hard,” Alistair said. “So I pushed it on a bit more and I was really 
surprised to get that gap.”

This time last year Alistair was about to undergo surgery on an injured ankle, 
while Jonny was on crutches because of a stress fracture in a foot. Some had 
written them off. But Alistair always believed he could get back to his 
imperious London 2012 form – despite a few bumps along the way.

“My ankle only began to be pain-free when I ran in the new year and I had put 
on quite a lot of weight,” he admitted. “After that there was a lot of hard 
training, with Jonny pushing me on. Those sessions, which have been harder than 
races, a few times a week, absolutely killing myself.

“Going to bed not being able to sleep because my legs hurt so much. Getting up 
in the morning and not being able to walk because my ankles were so stiff I 
could hardly move. It’s been like that literally for the last six months, with 
a few bumps and injuries along the way.”

The weather forecast before the race had suggested lower temperatures and the 
possibility of showers. The reality was altogether harsher.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fbrownlee-brothers-gold-silver-olympic-triathlon-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20GB's%20Brownlee%20brothers%20take%20gold%20and%20silver%20in%20triathlon%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fbrownlee-brothers-gold-silver-olympic-triathlon-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20GB%27s%20Brownlee%20brothers%20take%20gold%20and%20silver%20in%20triathlon%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fbrownlee-brothers-gold-silver-olympic-triathlon-video&media=>
Team GB’s Brownlee brothers take gold and silver in triathlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/18/brownlee-brothers-gold-silver-olympic-triathlon-video>
By the time it began, at 11am local time, the temperature was already 26C or 
so as the 56 competitors ran towards the sea off Copacabana.

The Brownlees’ plan was simple: take it out hard on the 1.5km swim, attack 
repeatedly on the hilly 40km bike ride and then make the 10km run a battle 
between themselves. It worked to a tee.

They were out of the water in the leading pack of 15 swimmers, with Jonny 
fourth and Alistair sixth, and soon pushing hard over eight laps of the bike 
course as they whittled the leading pack down to 10. Crucially the dangerous 
runners among the field – the Spaniard Mario Mola and the South African Richard 
Murray – were now estranged and out of the medal hunt.

As the run began Alistair, Jonny and Luis were out on their own, foraging for 
gold, but after 2km the Frenchman was unable to handle the pace and slipped 
back. It meant that for the next 4km the two Brownlees ran shoulder to 
shoulder, taking it in turns to lead, watching and wondering until Alistair 
sensed a weakness – and struck.

As Jonny admitted: “I said ‘Relax, take it easy,’ and he sped off.” Even then, 
he wondered whether his older brother had gone off too hard. But Alistair had 
timed his race – just like his comeback from ankle surgery – with Swiss 
precision.

Once Alistair understood that gold was secure, he slowed to a trot, 
grabbedUnion and Yorkshire Rose flags and then began to walk the final 40 
metres to the finish. He wanted to savour this because he knew his body, so 
prone to breaking down, might never allow him another day like this again. So 
he stood by the line, waving to the crowd, basking in their adulation.

And then, as Jonny approached, he made the victory official by stepping over 
the line and falling to the finish. As he did so the clock showed 1:45.01, six 
seconds clear of Jonny and 36 ahead of the South African Henri Schoeman, who 
took bronze.

As Jonny admitted: “It was emotional, lying on the floor. We just said: ‘We’ve 
done it, we’ve done it,’ and then hugged each other. Afterwards Al was pouring 
water and making sure I wasn’t going to collapse at the finish line like I had 
done in London four years ago.”

A few minutes earlier they had been warring for their sport’s ultimate prize. 
Now they were smiling, holding hands, brothers in arms.
RioRun <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/marathon-promo-full/>  