
The Olympic champion Alistair Brownlee will lead England’s triathlon team at 
theCommonwealth Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/commonwealth-games> in 
Glasgow. Jonny Brownlee, who won bronze behind his brother at London 2012, and 
the newcomer Aaron Harris make up the men’s team while Jodie Stimpson, the 
world No2, leads the women.

Stimpson finished second in the World Triathlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/triathlon> Series last year and won the 
opening two races of this season in Auckland and Cape Town.

She will be joined by Vicky Holland and Lucy Hall, who both supported Helen 
Jenkins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/helen-jenkins> in her fifth-placed 
finish in the Olympic race in Hyde Park.

The individual races will be held in Strathclyde Country Park on 24 July with 
the mixed relay, featuring two men and two women, making its Commonwealth Games 
debut two days later.

Following the withdrawal of Swansea’s reigning world champion, Non Stanford, 
with a stress fracture in her left ankle, Jenkins will lead the Wales team.

The Australians should also provide strong competition in all three races 
while the world No4 Richard Murray from South Africa looks to be the main 
danger to the Brownlees in the men’s event.

Alistair Brownlee <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee> said: 
“To win a medal at a home games is something every athlete wants to achieve and 
I feel very lucky to have this opportunity again just two years on from London.

“Having the crowd behind you provides a huge boost and I can’t wait to get to 
Strathclyde Park and give it my best.”

Stimpson was devastated to miss out on the British team for the Olympics and 
has made big strides over the past two years.

She said: “The closer it gets to the Commonwealth Games the more excited I’m 
getting. It’s a major home games and it will be brilliant to represent Team 
England in front of my friends and family in Strathclyde Park.

“Having missed out on the Olympics I’m doubly determined to be up there and 
fighting for a medal in Glasgow.”
 