
In the context of Al Murray’s comedy career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/al-murray>, today’s news that the Pub 
Landlord is tostand against Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/14/al-murray-the-pub-landlord-to-stand-against-nigel-farage-in-south-thanet>
 in the South Thanet constituency is thrilling – and fascinating. While no one 
questions Murray’s talent – the Pub Landlord is a brilliant creation – that’s 
no longer what he symbolises in comedy circles. Instead, the ex-Perrier champ 
(who won the award in 1999 after overturning a temporary disqualificationon 
grounds of popularity 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/special_report/1999/08/99/edinburgh_festival_99/432734.stm>
) represents a slightly dispiriting creative drift, from satirising Little 
Englishness to seeming to celebrate it.

His old mucker Stewart Lee is the highest-profile Murray-baiter, joking 
onstage that “I wouldn’t want racists laughing at my jokes because that’s Al 
Murray’s audience.” To those who’ve marked down Murray as an old-school 
chauvinist, his aristocratic ancestry and a bizarre recent interview in whichhe 
claimed comedians shouldn’t have political opinions 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/comedy/news/al-murray-comedys-role-is-to-lampoon-politics-not-to-champion-it-8642353.html>
, add grist to the mill. Likewise the gay Nazi character he unveiled,to loud 
criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/feb/27/gay-rights-television>, 
in his 2009 ITV sketch show.

There’s a bloody-mindedness at play here. The more the right-on lefties 
(“snobs”,he would call them 
<http://www.spiked-online.com/newsite/article/al-murray-my-audience-isnt-thick/15625#.VLat9nvuLIU>
) carp at Murray, the more gleeful and chauvinist his Pub Landlord becomes. 
Having seen him live on many occasions, I’ve sometimes found Murray’s act 
two-dimensional, lacking in creative ambition, and certainly subject to the law 
of diminishing returns. It’s usually two parts affectionate to one part 
critical of the Landlord’s boorish attitudes. But it’s almost always redeemed 
by Murray’s prodigious comic skills: his repartee with the audience is the best 
in the business, and the character can soar to dizzy heights of clownish 
knuckle-headedness.

That’s why today’s news is exciting. When in 2013 Murray campaigned in defence 
of persecuted Twitter joker Paul Chambers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/jun/27/twitter-joke-appeal>, I wondered 
whether this high-mindedness and campaigning spirit would ever surface in his 
comedy. Clearly, the Landlord could be great again, if only Murray would do 
something new and surprising with him. And now, he’s doing so – pitching him 
four-square against his real-world alter ego, the black mirror in which all 
Murray’s jokes are reflected, but without a twinkle in the eye. South Thanet 
2015 promises to be funny, weird, combative – it might even do the nation a 
good turn. And it spits in the eye of everyone who’s ever accused Murray of 
chauvinism. We can hardly call him a Little Englander now he’s pitted himself 
directly against Little England’s would-be champion.

More comedy coverage

Vote for Partridge: the characters who should follow the Pub Landlord into 
politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/15/vote-pub-landlord-politics-al-murray-nigel-farage>

Adrienne Truscott: nudity is a very inexpensive and effective costume 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/14/adrienne-truscott-nuditys-a-very-inexpensive-and-effective-costume>

Richard Pryor: meltdown at the Hollywood Bowl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/11/richard-pryor-great-meltdown-racist-hollywood-bowl>

Mock the Week’s knob gags just don’t stand up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/06/mock-the-week-knob-gags-dara-o-briain>

This week’s new live comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/03/this-weeks-new-comedy>

Josie Long: ‘I’m a 12-year-old bully trapped in an adult’s body’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/11/josie-long-comedian-standup-interview-cara-josephine>

US comedian Aziz Ansari condemns Rupert Murdoch ‘jihadist cancer’ tweet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/12/aziz-ansari-rupert-murdoch-tweet>
 