
On 1 January, All Saints <https://www.theguardian.com/music/all-saints> 
announced on Twitter – a promotional tool that was six months old when the band 
last had a record out in 2006 – that they would soon be releasing new material. 
The news did not exactly break the internet, but it did cause a modest 
kerfuffle, more than the fortysomething foursome were anticipating. Last month 
tickets for a one-off gig, at Koko in London on 4 April, sold out in a day. One 
Strike, their comeback single, was unveiled and the interest only intensified. 
The tone of thousands of online comments could be summed up with a baffled: 
“Hang on, this is actually quite good.” When the new albumRed Flag arrives next 
month, it might provoke even more surprise.

“We didn’t even think we had fans,” admits Melanie Blatt, 40, who with Shaznay 
Lewis, also 40, and Simone Rainford formed the band – then called All Saints 
1.9.7.5. after All Saints Road in west London where they met in a recording 
studio – in 1993. The other Saints nod their agreement. Nicole Appleton, a 
school friend of Blatt, who joined the group in the mid-90s with her sister 
Natalie – as Rainford departed and the band name was streamlined – describes it 
as “overwhelming”. “A little bit strange,” adds Lewis. Natalie Appleton says, 
“It’s like, ‘Really?’ We just didn’t expect it.” Blatt continues: “It’s not 
that I didn’t expect it, because One Strike and the new album are, in my eyes, 
some of the strongest music we’ve put out. But because we had a reputation that 
was built up – and we were definitely part of building that reputation – I 
think we were just so used to negative things being said about us all the time. 
And in general when a band comes back after however-many years, you’re going to 
get bashed.” She exhales, part relief, part excitement. “It made us realise 
that actually we were right to think this is OK to do.”

That All Saints have a well of affection to draw from isn’t really that odd. 
Their 1997 self-titled debut album – which featured the singles I Know Where 
It’s At and Never Ever – sold more than 1.5m copies. The follow-up in 2000,
Saints & Sinners, driven by the single Pure Shores, went to No 1. They managed 
to fuse pop with just enough R&B and hip-hop sophistication to capture an 
audience much beyond the teenage mainstream. And, crucially, they were actually 
responsible for their music, with Lewis co-writing most of the songs and no 
svengali behind them pulling the strings. “We’re not manufactured” was a 
recurring refrain and sly dig at rivals such as the Spice Girls who, of course, 
they did not really consider rivals at all. But Blatt is right that the band 
were not universally adored. The Appleton sisters attracted much of the 
negative attention; endless tabloid coverage suggesting they were more likely 
to be found in the Met Bar than a recording studio. Nicole, now 41, went out 
with Robbie Williams and thenLiam Gallagher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/liam-gallagher> (the pair divorced in 2014 
when she found out he was expecting a child with another woman); Natalie, 42, 
is married to the Prodigy’s Liam Howlett.

We never played the game … sometimes that was wrong. But we were never fake 
and I’m still proud of that
Melanie Appleton 
It wasn’t only the newspapers that went after All Saints; they had myriad and 
bizarre self-destructive tendencies of their own devising. The band first split 
in 2001 after an argument between Natalie Appleton and Lewis about who would 
wear a combat jacket for a photo shoot. They reformed in 2006, long enough to 
make the albumStudio 1, but disintegrated soon after its release. Blatt later 
conceded that her main motivation for coming back then was the money.

So, here we are, a decade on, with All Saints 3.0. They are older and, they 
insist, wiser; all of them are mothers, with six children between them aged 
from six (Lewis) to 23 (Natalie Appleton). They still clearly have a 
mischievous streak: when I excuse myself to use the bathroom beside our cosy 
interview room, one of them – my money’s on Blatt – shouts: “We’re listening!” 
All Saints were never boring and the good news is that hasn’t changed, but 
their edges are softer perhaps, and they are quick to make self-deprecating 
comments. They are also clearly, unfakeably affectionate and protective towards 
one another. Whether that lasts remains to be seen, but they seem to know that 
if they break up again, people might really start to lose patience, so this one 
needs to stick…

Let’s get this out the way: do you have a response for people who attribute 
cynical motivations for your return?

Shaznay: Can’t change that. We know our reasons and top of the agenda is to 
have fun.

Melanie: There’s definitely a different sense about the music now. It feels 
like we’re comfortable with our sound. I think we’re confident, more confident 
than ever before. We’ve made this album ourselves: before there was always a 
third party or a second party, someone who would help to produce the album or 
put us with this person or that person, but this time the whole thing was 
pretty much done and then we started to look for investors or a label. That’s a 
little bit scary as well because it means whatever happens it’s on us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fall-saints-interview-album-red-flag-one-strike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004a3524deb7273dfce053c7d45cee1cd22b5b75%2F0_118_2880_1730%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20Saints%3A%20%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20more%20confident%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fall-saints-interview-album-red-flag-one-strike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20Saints%3A%20%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20more%20confident%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fall-saints-interview-album-red-flag-one-strike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004a3524deb7273dfce053c7d45cee1cd22b5b75%2F0_118_2880_1730%2F2880.jpg>
 Back in the day … All Saints at the 1998 Brits. Photograph: Brian Rasic/Getty 
Nicole has said you are “addicted” to each other. Does that describe the 
positive and negative aspects of your relationships?

Natalie: That’s a really good way of putting it actually.

Melanie: Yeah, we’ve got to the point now where the love is beyond anything. 
Whereas before, if someone had a weakness, that weakness would definitely get 
picked on and straight away taken out of context. But now we can just love each 
other, and whatever’s annoying it’s fine ’cause I just love you anyway.

Nicole: We’ve learnt to accept everything.

Natalie: And love our flaws, each other’s flaws you know. When you say the 
word “addicted”, I’ll leave here and I’ve been with them all day and I’ll 
probably call them tonight. I’ve got to give them a break but I have to just 
talk about one more thing.

Shaznay: We speak our own language. And it’s been the same language over the 
past 20 years, even if we’ve gone off for a few years. I don’t have it with any 
of my other friends and I’m sure the girls don’t. Our other friendships are 
amazing and meaningful but it’s just not this.

Nicole: It’s weird. We’re weird. But it’s great.

But you’re also the band that broke up over who got to wear a jacket for a 
photo shoot. One that demanded separate dressing rooms and limousines …

Melanie: It was intense for at least 10, 12 years. These were my best friends, 
they were my work, they were my family. It was everything. And sometimes you 
need to have something else to appreciate what you’ve got at home. I think we 
were quite indulged as well. If I was managing us, if I was managing four 
girls, I would not let that happen.

Never say never ever as All Saints return with divorce-court single
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/jan/29/never-say-never-ever-as-all-saints-return-with-divorce-court-single>
You started playing live shows again in 2014. How did that happen?

Shaznay: The Backstreet Boys contacted a friend of mine who’s a producer and 
asked if we’d be interested in supporting them. Mel was living in Ibiza so Nat 
and I nominated Nic to call Mel. So she Facetimed Mel, Mel sat there, fag in 
mouth …

Natalie: [Inhales deeply] One drag per cigarette.

Nicole: It was like throwing a grenade and running away: 
“We’vebeenaskedtosupporttheBackstreetBoys …”

Natalie: We were waiting for the explosion of Mel: “Nevvveerrrr!”

Melanie: Haha, I’m the laziest. I never say “yes” first, I always say “no”.

Nicole: And she dragged it out for so long. She was like that [mimes taking a 
long draw on a cigarette] … Like X Factor. Come on, give me a little bit of 
something! But ultimately she said yes.

Melanie: Well, I said no and then I’m still bloody here now.

Do you still live in Ibiza now, Mel?

Melanie: Yeah, but I’ve had to move in with Nic now …

Nicole: Which was our other dream. Eleven years old we said we’re going to 
live together one day and we are.

Melanie: With our children.

Nicole: Perfect. We like the same TV. The same food. We like the same 
everything.

Shaznay: When you Facetime, they’re sat there like Joey and Chandler.

We’re old enough to know that life’s not perfect … you understand it and own 
it and you’re not afraid to talk about it
Shaznay Lewis 
Your children are mostly older now. Did that contribute to the feeling that 
you were ready to fully throw yourselves back into music?

Natalie: I don’t think we would have done it if we weren’t. I think we all 
felt that we were up for doing it.

Melanie: Well, Shaz has still got two little ones.

Shaznay: So yeah, I’m juggling balls.

Melanie: The main motto at the moment is: just keep swimming.

Shaznay: Yeah, I’m swimming. But my children are happy because obviously first 
and foremost I’m mum. After this interview, as long as I make it back before my 
daughter goes to bed, job done. I get to see her off to school and I get to see 
her before she goes to bed and sit in the bed with her and read stories.

Nicole: And also the beauty of us now is that we can actually work around our 
kids. We’re not dictated to by our job.

Melanie: [laughs] And we try not to work more than two days a week.

Natalie: It’s so true. They’re perfect for each other! Perfect. When I go to 
their house I’m like “What are you watching?” They’re like, “Natalie! How dare 
you even have that tone.”

Melanie: You’re lucky we let you in.

What programmes are we talking about?

Natalie: All the Housewives …

Melanie: Whatever is the worst TV you can imagine – we watch worse than that 
[laughs]. I like fighting, swearing …

Nicole: She likes fighting, swearing, drinking. A lot of sex. Mel actually got 
me into a few that I didn’t even know … Dinner Date.

Melanie: That’s a good one.

Sorry, what’s Dinner Date?


Melanie: Whaaaaat!

Nicole: It’s amazing. It’s like Come Dine With Me crossed with Blind Date in 
someone’s house.

Melanie: There’s no sex on that one though. That’s like a daytime one.

That answers my question about what you’ve been up to these past few years …


Natalie: That’s Mel and Nic’s daytime.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fall-saints-interview-album-red-flag-one-strike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7db136b9409f91c7a21bd9851844c9d065bb6bf9%2F0_0_5129_3543%2F5129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20Saints%3A%20%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20more%20confident%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fall-saints-interview-album-red-flag-one-strike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20Saints%3A%20%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20more%20confident%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fall-saints-interview-album-red-flag-one-strike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7db136b9409f91c7a21bd9851844c9d065bb6bf9%2F0_0_5129_3543%2F5129.jpg>
 All Saints on stage in Ibiza in 2001. Photograph: Martyn Goodacre/Getty Images 
Looking back at the coverage of the band from the nineties, a lot of it was 
quite negative, even vitriolic. You were often described as “the bitches” …

Melanie: Well, we never played the game. We never turned up, smiles and 
professional: “Hi, lovely to meet you.” We never did that and sometimes it was 
the wrong thing to do, but we were never fake and we never pretended to be 
anybody that we weren’t. I’m still proud of that about us and I think that’s 
what set us apart ’ from everyone else as wellcause we just turned up and did 
whatever the fuck we wanted.

So you deserved some of your reputation for being difficult?

Melanie: I think we thought we knew best a lot of the time. And we didn’t have 
this thing where we wanted to be the best, the biggest band or sell a million …

Shaznay: Yeah, we weren’t a shiny, shiny band.

Melanie: Yeah, if you’re not really bothered about the end process, you just 
want to release music and have a good time … I think that’s a lot of where [we 
got] our reputation for being a bit, you know, not always the easiest to manage.

Between you, you had some high-profile relationships. Did you enjoy that 
period when you first became famous?

Shaznay: Yeah, it’s fun and then it turns into something where there’s so much 
going on you can’t actually keep up with it all. The circle gets bigger and 
crazier, the entourage gets bigger and we then become a lot more fragmented and 
detached.

Natalie: We were very naive. No one can teach you and prepare you for what 
you’re about to be going through. We had to learn it new and be doing it at the 
same time. We weren’t prepared for what we went through. People say, “What 
advice would you give to certain other bands?” I can’t, you can’t give advice.

This is the album I’ve always wanted us to make. We never cared so much
Melanie Blatt 
Nicole, can I ask about your socks?


Nicole: Yes, you can.

What do they say?


Nicole: They say “Fuck”.

Anything else underneath the boot?


Nicole: No, it just says that.

Where do you get those?


Nicole: Urban Outfitters. They do them in white as well. Got ’em in white. 
They’re good for the kids. Great for Christmas stocking fillers. With a 
satsuma. Or even a satsuma in a “Fuck” sock. Our kids are so lucky.

Who wrote the new album?

Natalie, Nicole, Melanie [together]: Shaz.

Shaznay: The girls said, “Go in and see what you come up with.” So I did.

You’ve said that One Strike was inspired by conversations you had with Nicole 
over the break-up of her marriage to Liam Gallagher. Is there more of a 
personal angle to the lyrics on the album than before?

Shaznay: Yeah, lyrically a lot of the stuff is very personal. Stuff that’s 
going on.

Nicole: Just real-life situations that we’ve experienced.

Shaznay: Yeah, just whatever’s going on in the head at the time. Obviously One 
Strike came out of conversations with Nicole and about other things as well. 
Quite a few things happened throughout the last year that made us look at life 
in a different way because we’ve seen things really come along and change just 
like that. So, that’s how One Strike came about.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq6c4JyUmVSc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq6c4JyUmVSc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq6c4JyUmVSc&media=>
 One Strike video 
These aren’t songs you could have written aged 20 then?

Shaznay: Yeah, it’s funny. Whatever we were singing about at twentysomething 
is completely different to what we’re kind of singing about now. It’s all about 
understanding that at the age we are, hey, shit happens. You understand it and 
you own it and you’re not afraid to talk about it, to be honest. Because we’re 
old enough to know that hey, life’s not perfect, and it’s not like: “I’m in 
love and nothing bad will ever happen to me …” No. Shit happens.

Melanie: That’s what we should have called the album.

What are you listening to at the moment?

Melanie: The last album I listened to start to finish that I was excited to 
hear and blown away by was by Kendrick Lamar.

Nicole: I like Bruno Mars. And we like Coldplay, don’t we. Chris Martin 
recently stopped an interview with Jo Whiley to say ‘I just want to go publicly 
on record to say I’m so happy that All Saints are back’. That was nice of him.

Shaznay: How lovely was that? So cool. I was so chuffed because Coldplay are 
my son’s favourite band, so as soon as I got home I couldn’t wait to play that 
to him. Actually, that’s sort of our benchmark with the band. If our kids think 
it’s cool, we’re like, ‘Yes, we’ve done something good!’

Will history be kind to All Saints?

Shaznay: I hope so. I hope, like Mel always says, that we’re seen as being our 
true selves and honest and exactly how we are.

Melanie: You know: This is it, take it or leave it. Not in an arrogant way, 
but you can’t hide and pretend you’re someone else. It’s a shame with so many 
artists nowadays, I don’t know who they are, they are so politically correct, 
they are scared to say anything in case a word gets misconstrued. But it’s 
like, “Really? Are you actually supposed to give a shit about stuff like that?” 
The important thing is the music that you’re making.

Welcome back, All Saints: leaders of an understated girl power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/23/all-saints-girl-band-back-new-single-one-strike>
Random one: do any of you have strong feelings on Britain leaving the European 
Union?

Melanie: I don’t want us to leave, but to be honest I don’t know the ins and 
outs.

Nicole: Me neither. Too busy watching Dinner Date. The news is not one we take.

Does it feel like there’s a lot of pressure on this album? If it doesn’t work, 
it would be hard for you to make another comeback …

Melanie: It has worked. The fact that we made this album, that’s it, that’s 
the main thing. Who’d have thought after 20 years we’d make this album? From 
even where we were four years ago. It’s incomprehensible.

Shaznay: Yeah, we all love it, so it’s worked. Everything else is a welcome, 
happy bonus.

Melanie: It’s exactly the album that I’ve always wanted us to make. It’s just 
nice to feel like that after years of being in the industry and not really 
loving it too much. This is just perfect.

Nicole: Every time we walked out of the studio, we kept saying, “It’s a wrap!” 
And we’d all cheer and everything and then the next day we’d be back in there 
and I’d be like, “I knew we weren’t finished …”

Natalie: That’s never happened before. We didn’t want to let it go.

Shaznay: We’ve never fine-tuned anything so much.

Melanie: I don’t think we’ve ever cared so much.

Red Flag (London Recordings) is released on 8 April
 