
ATP Festivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/02/all-tomorrows-parties-festival-pontins-stewart-lee>
 has announced its administration. As well as the cancellation of its 
forthcoming strand in Iceland owing to a lack of funds, the festival and events 
company has confirmed that its entire live division will now be shut down.

Founded in 2001 by Barry Hogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/nov/25/all-tomorrows-parties>
, All Tomorrow’s Parties survival has long been shaky. In 2012 the company was 
put into liquidation, leading to its directors setting up a new firm, which 
similarly faced financial difficulties and accrued significant debts. Most 
recently, Drive Like Jehu’s ATP festival was cancelled, with Grizzly Bear and 
sister festival Jabberwocky each being axed at the last minute. There was also
confusion surrounding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/02/all-tomorrows-parties-festival-pontins-stewart-lee>
Stewart Lee’s recent stint as festival curator.

All Tomorrow's Parties: where did it all go wrong for the beloved indie 
festival?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/06/all-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong>
A post on ATP’s Facebook group reads: 


It is with deep sadness we are announcing that ATP Festivals and live 
promotions are closing down. After months of speculation, our funding for 
Iceland has been pulled and we are no longer able to continue so will be 
closing down the entire live side of ATPFestivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/festivals> and live promotions with 
immediate effect and going into administration.

ATP Iceland festival is no longer happening, but all our other UK shows will 
have new promoters appointed and tickets transferred (all purchased tickets 
remain valid with the new promoter). We will post details of the administrators 
and what to do for festival ticket refunds over the next week.

We are very sorry we could not make this work and have tried to survive 
throughout all our recent losses but we are no longer able to trade and have to 
accept we cannot go on.


Thank you to all our loyal customers who have supported us and incredible 
artists who have performed or curated for us over the years and made ATP so 
special while it lasted.

The festival, named after the Velvet Underground song, quickly cultivated a 
cult following throughout the 00s for its avant garde lineups curated by 
music’s most discerning artists. Inspired by the Bowlie Weekender, an event 
organised byBelle and Sebastian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/28/all-tomorrows-parties-festival-belle-and-sebastian>
 at the Camber Sands Pontins in Sussex in 1999, ATP hosted its first festival, 
curated by Mogwai, at the same venue.

Speaking to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/06/all-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong>
 in May, Stuart Braithwaite of the rock group said the festival “arrived at a 
time when festivals were becoming increasingly corporate and sterile and I 
believe that they have provided a fantastic alternative to that world”.
 