
This is my 42nd column and it’s also my last. Today, after 10 months of 
writing about environmental issues big and small – everything from analysing 
the gendered issue ofoverpopulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/31/climate-change-women-reproductive-rights-birth-control>
 to how to makeDIY green cleaners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/10/green-home-make-your-own-all-purpose-cleaner>
 – the All You Need Is Less series draws to a close. It’s been a fantastic 
experience and one for which I feel immensely grateful.

When I first began writing this column, the comment section filled me with 
dread. It was a bit nerve-wracking to leave the supportive embrace of my blog 
and stand up here week after week rambling on about mybaking soda shampoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/22/problem-sanctimonious-environmentalists-baking-soda>
 orsecondhand shopping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/05/all-you-need-is-less-new-years-resolutions-do-good-save-money>
 and wondering if I was going to be summarily mocked – or worse, dismissed – 
for doing so. More often than not, however, I’d spend each Tuesday morning 
reading through pages of thoughtful, considered, and insightful comments 
written by both those who supported my beliefs and also those who vigorously 
challenged them.

Much has been said about online comment sections lately, and it’s an issue 
that deserves every ounce of the scrutiny it receives. Yet the debates that 
developed on this column were the best part of this experience. It was 
fascinating to see what motivated people to chime in.

The two articles which attracted the most responses were December’s column 
about the environmental benefits of avegetarian diet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/15/new-year-resolution-stop-eating-meat-vegetarian>
 and last week’sno-shower challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/14/why-we-should-shower-less-hygiene-water-preservation>
. The former drew 700 fewer comments than the latter – perhaps indicating that 
for many, the idea of giving up showers is a great deal more controversial than 
giving up steaks.


Out of over 10,000 total comments, a handful of memorable ones still stick out 
in my mind.

Like the individual who suggested that the only good use for root vegetables 
was fashioning them intoorganic sex toys 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/73117142>, for example. 
Or the person who, after a few criticisms about my bastardised dialect – a 
blend of American and British English (typically mixing British spelling with 
American terms like apartment instead of flat, zucchini instead of courgette) – 
kindly stepped in to the comments and replied for me, explaining, “She’s 
Canadian!” (thank you, and – sorry).

My all-time favourite comment was one that said simply, “It’s a pity this 
article isn’t any good.”

My all-time favourite comment 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/73116367>, however, and I 
say this without a single trace of sarcasm, was one that said simply: “What a 
pity this article isn’t any good.”

It was just so cutting, so British. I imagined its author typing it 
absent-mindedly while he or she sipped a cup of tea, as though the column 
wasn’t even important enough to warrant anger or outrage, just a vague sense of 
dismay. I felt like I’d disappointed my mother, or the Queen herself. I can’t 
help but admire that. I may make a cross-stitch out of it.

It wasn’t just the comments on my columns that I loved, though, it was also 
how much you shared them. 429,466 times, in fact. This number does far more 
than bolster my fragile writer’s ego, it proves to me that the conversations 
we’ve been having areworth having and what’s more, that there’s a significant 
audience for them. These topics – how much we consume, why we do so, and the 
impact of this voracious appetite on the very environment we rely on for our 
survival – are ripe for discussion, debate and discourse.

The idea of voluntarily reducing our possessions and mitigating our impact on 
the environment hasn’t quite reached its tipping point yet, but the five 
columns you shared most – aboutoverconsumption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/20/consumption-consumerism-americans-buying-stuff>
, limitingchildren’s toys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/sep/01/depriving-your-kids-of-toys-great-idea>
, giving upmeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/15/new-year-resolution-stop-eating-meat-vegetarian>
, choosing toreduce before recycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/19/eco-friendly-living-sustainability-recycling-reducing-saving-the-planet>
, and thechallenges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/05/environmentally-friendly-green-living-ideas>
 inherent in balancing a real life with an environmentally friendly one – 
suggest that we are, at the very least, dipping our toes into the concept of a 
life with less.

I’ve thoroughly enjoyed writing this column and I’d like to extend my 
wholehearted thanks for your measured criticisms, your engaged dialogue, and 
your rich, dry senses of humour. For someone who advocates collecting 
experiences instead of stuff, I truly couldn’t have asked for a better one.
 