
A British director and his all-black South African acting company have been 
thrown out of their theatre after less than a year, amid claims of poor box 
office takings and "financial irregularities".

The Isango Portobello <http://www.portobellopictures.com/Isango-Portobello> 
group, which grew from a township to perform award-winning interpretations of 
Mozart's The Magic Flute (Impempe Yomlingo) and The Mysteries (Yiimimangaliso) 
in London, and its directorMark Dornford-May 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Dornford-May> arrived at the Fugard Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/feb/15/isango-portobello-district-six-fugard>
 in Cape Town yesterday to find the doors locked against them.

A statement from Isango, which has around 40 actors, compared the eviction 
with the apartheid government'sforced removals of black people from Cape Town's 
District Six 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/apr/03/fugard-theatre-justin-cartwright>
, which is home to the new theatre, named after leadingSouth African playwright 
Athol Fugard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/30/fugard-attacks-modern-dramatists>
 .

But Eric Abraham <http://www.portobellopictures.com/About/Eric-Abraham>, the 
theatre owner and Isango's patron, said he was left with no choice because the 
company's shows played to near-empty houses and made losses that were 
unsustainable.

The Fugard Theatre, redeveloped from two warehouses and a church, opened with 
great fanfare last February 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-dance/features/a-dramatic-rebirth-theatre-in-cape-town-1906253.html>
 at a gala attended by government ministers, director Sean Mathias, actors Alan 
Rickman and Janet Suzman and Fugard himself.

Abraham, a film and West End theatre producer in Britain, spoke to the 
audience about Isango's rise and secure future 
<http://www.portobellopictures.com/News/Fugard-Theatre-Opening-Eric-Abraham-Speech>
: "From Khayelitsha to London's West End twice – an Olivier Award – to standing 
ovations in Dublin, Tokyo, Paris and elsewhere. All out of a church hall in 
Athlone and steel containers. Well now your homeless days are over."

But the relationship between South African-born Abraham and artistic director 
Dornford-May, from Goole in the East Riding, has soured in the past nine months.

Having been locked out of the premises yesterday, Isango then issued a 
statement entitled: "Isango acting company forcibly removed from District Six 
home." It said: "Shamila Rahim, the theatre manager who was in the office, was 
escorted out of the building by a security guard and her keys taken.

"Shamila has been working on the creation of a theatre for District Six since 
2003. Her grandmother was one of the many who were evicted from District Six 
during the clearances. She is sad and shocked at the way history has repeated 
itself once again."

The statement added: "Recently Eric Abraham has severed links with the 
company's co-founders Mark Dornford-May and Pauline Malefane. He says he is 
concerned about the company's financial dependency on him."

Abraham said today the decision was made "following the discovery of certain 
financial irregularities that have taken place and which are currently being 
investigated," though he declined to elaborate.

He told the Guardian: "It's enormously regrettable. It was a decision I took 
as a last resort after months of attempts to negotiate which have ended in 
stalemate. It's tragic really. I feel for the cast because they have been 
misled and given one version of the story."

Abraham – who with his wife Sigrid Rausing co-founded Portobello Books – said 
he has been Isango's sole benefactor over the past four years, putting in more 
than 30m rand (£2.6m), and underwrote the FugardTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> at a cost of around 20m rand 
(£1.8m).

"I embarked on this as an affirmation. It was an act of cultural philanthropy. 
But it was predicated on them building a sustainable model. I now feel I am to 
blame for creating a culture of entitlement."

He insisted that the theatre had never been intended for Isango's use alone, 
and had enjoyed hits with Waiting for Godot, starring Sir Ian McKellen, and 
Fugard's The Train Driver, which transferred to the Hampstead Theatre in 
London. But Abraham said box office sales for Isango's past two productions, 
Aesop's Fables and The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists, were just 20% of 
capacity.

The latter show, which closed on Saturday night, cost upwards of 600,000 rand 
(£53,405) to stage and brought in a return of just 143,000 rand (£12,728).

Abraham, a former foreign correspondent for the BBC and Guardian, said Isango 
had failed to grow the black audience needed to make the financial model 
viable. "The box office reality of their productions has not been encouraging. 
There is no way one can sustain it with figures of 20%. The group may well be 
successful abroad but there is a fair way to go at home.

"Theatre is still a peripheral white activity in South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>. The reality of the Fugard 
Theatre is that 97% of audience members have been white in spite of the 
enormous efforts we have made."
 