
All Tomorrow’s Parties’s latest festival has been thrown into confusion after 
the venue said it had been cancelled,reports Billboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/business/6897203/all-tomorrows-parties-2-spring-festivals-confusion>
.

ATP’s 2.0 events are currently booked to take place at Pontins holiday camp in 
Prestatyn, north Wales, on 15-17 and 22-24 April. However, ATP said a 
“miscommunication” had occurred between them and Pontins. This year’s event is 
curated by the comedianStewart Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stewart-lee> and the American band Drive 
Like Jehu.

Ticket holders noticed that the venue was still taking “family bookings” on 
the dates the festival is scheduled, and were reportedly told by Pontins: “ATP 
has been cancelled by the organiser.”

However, ATP have released a statement saying: “For clarity, and to reassure 
customers who have purchased tickets or travel for the upcoming festivals, 
these events will go ahead as scheduled: at Pontins Prestatyn, on 15th-17th 
April & 22nd-24th April.”

They added: “We would like to apologise for our silence today, and for not 
getting back to all of your questions individually. We have been working with 
Pontins Management to release a full statement confirming this within the next 
24 hours.”

A booking agent for Pontins told Billboard that the holiday company were yet 
to receive payment from festival organisers but as far as they knew, the events 
had not been cancelled.

It’s a confusing scenario not just for fans but also for the curators, notes 
Billboard. Stewart Lee – who was also due to perform – toldthe Quietus 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/19809-stewart-lee-interview-atp-cancellation> 
he was struggling to find out what was happening, too: “At the moment, of 
course it’s terrifying for people. It’s not great for me either, to be honest. 
You know, I’ve got a babysitter, I’ve made plans, so in that respect I’m in the 
same boat as everyone else. I didn’t sleep last night, I thought I was gonna 
have a stroke or something.”

In recent years, All Tomorrow’s Parties have had difficulty putting on events. 
In 2012, ATP Concerts Limited was placed involuntary liquidation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/aug/13/jabberwocky-atp-music-festival-cancelled-no-surprise>
. The same year, a dispute with Butlins holiday camp ended with a termination 
of their six-year relationship. Two years later, the company’s London-based 
Jabberwocky festival – scheduled to have appearances by Neutral Milk Hotel, 
Caribou and James Blake – was cancelled days before it was due to take place.
 