
Few festivals have a legacy like that of All Tomorrow’s Parties 
<https://www.atpfestival.com/>. For 15 years ATP drew the likes of Nick Cave, 
Patti Smith, Belle and Sebastian, Iggy Pop and Mogwai to Pontins holiday camp 
for weekends that became the stuff of indie legend. And at the heart of it all 
was Barry Hogan, the straight-talking promoter whose goal was to stage a 
festival that was “without the bullshit egos, shit bands, Ticketmaster or 
corporate sponsors”.

Yet in April, for the second time in 18 months, ATP was forced to cancel a 
weekend festival <https://www.atpfestival.com/newsview/1604180819> with just a 
few days’ notice, leaving fans and musicians out of pocket and a trail of 
disappointment, anger and legal threats.

Why Jabberwocky's cancellation was not a complete surprise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/aug/13/jabberwocky-atp-music-festival-cancelled-no-surprise>
The two-day event, which was to be curated by cult hardcore band Drive Like 
Jehu, had beendogged with problems from the off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/02/all-tomorrows-parties-festival-pontins-stewart-lee>
. First it had to move venues, from Pontins at Prestatyn in Wales to a 
warehouse in Manchester. It then emerged the festival had failed to pay for any 
of the promised flights to get musicians to the festival and the Manchester 
venue had still received no down payment. Indeed, Hogan was so short of cash he 
even asked John Reis, singer of Drive Like Jehu, for a short-term credit card 
loan to pay the deposit on the warehouse just over a week before the festival.

The Guardian has talked to several of the 30 bands who were due to play, and 
they spoke openly of about the “months of chaos” in the buildup to the 
festival. After waiting months for ATP to buy their plane tickets, during which 
prices increased by the day, bands such as El Vez “gave in” and purchased their 
own at a cost of more than $5,000 (£3,400), with promises from Hogan they would 
be immediately reimbursed. The money never arrived, and following the festival 
cancellation, El Vez singer Robert Lopez told the Guardian he is now planning 
legal action against Hogan to get the money back.

Chris Coole, from band the Clawhammer, also due to play, said it was “a 
disaster from the get-go”.

“People really love ATP and I think Barry sincerely cares about music, which 
is why he put these festivals on in the first place,” he said. “But in the end 
he was gambling with literally thousands of people’s plans and money, and 
that’s just incredibly irresponsible, it’s almost sociopathic.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fall-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9933f12463dabbe31d75400a18beec5fdf39c921%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20Tomorrow's%20Parties%3A%20where%20did%20it%20all%20go%20wrong%20for%20the%20beloved%20indie%20festival%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fall-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20Tomorrow%27s%20Parties%3A%20where%20did%20it%20all%20go%20wrong%20for%20the%20beloved%20indie%20festival%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fall-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9933f12463dabbe31d75400a18beec5fdf39c921%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Portishead performing at Butlins, Minehead, in 2008. Photograph: Stefan 
Jeremiah/WireImage 
To add insult to injury, Hogan did not email any of the bands to inform them 
ATP was cancelled, ensuring most found out via Twitter or the lengthystatement 
released by Drive Like Jehu on their Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=506504536213757&id=230463693817844&substory_index=0>
, which was adorned with a picture of a toilet roll with the letters ATP 
written on it.


End of an Era: Mogwai's Stuart Braithwaite on ATP's final curtain call
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/dec/03/end-era-final-atp-weekender-mogwai>
The fiasco mirrored ATP’s London festival Jabberwocky, which was due to be 
held in August 2014 but was cancelled with just three days’ notice, many bands 
having already travelled from the US. Then, fans hastily organised shows for 
the groups at other venues around London, so their financial losses were 
reduced. But there was no one to compensate the fans: two years down the line, 
some say they are still waiting for ticket refunds.

“It’s like Barry has a sickness, he’s addicted to putting on these ambitious 
festivals but doesn’t have the business knowledge or funds to back it up – and 
everyone else has suffered,” said Mike Blaha of the Blind Shake, who were on 
Drive Like Jehu’s ATP lineup.

Speaking to the Guardian, Hogan admitted that ATP “are clearly not good 
money-makers and businesspeople; for that we are terribly sorry”.

He added: “We did everything in our power to make Manchester happen. We tried 
to borrow the money and were prepared to just work to pay it off over time, but 
the deficit was so large that we just couldn’t get the credit to get it to go 
ahead.”

So how did it all go so wrong for indie’s most beloved festival? 

From Bowlie to Butlins: the story of the All Tomorrow's Parties weekender
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/28/all-tomorrows-parties-festival-belle-and-sebastian>
For many music fans in the early 2000s, All Tomorrow’s Parties - named after 
the Velvet Underground song – was revolutionary. It was inspired by the Bowlie 
Weekender, the festival organised by Belle and Sebastian at the Camber Sands 
Pontins in Sussex, in April 1999. Two years later, ATP put on its first 
festival, at the same venue, curated by Mogwai. Stuart Braithwaite of Mogwai 
said the festival “arrived at a time when festivals were becoming increasingly 
corporate and sterile and I believe that they have provided a fantastic 
alternative to that world.”

He went on: “By having bands curate, they have created bills where fans can 
see the musicians that influenced and excited the curators. The removal of 
separation between the artists and the fans was refreshing.”

It was this unique setup that inspired a ferocious loyalty among both fans and 
musicians, pulling in acts as varied as Sonic Youth, Iggy and the Stooges, 
Vampire Weekend and even Yoko Ono, who, over the course of a weekend, turned 
Pontins into a fleeting indie utopia. It was the subject of an acclaimed 
documentary in 2009.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fall-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68351a4f408f12510a5aa3d07e1d8a444ed9dd90%2F0_169_3008_1805%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20Tomorrow's%20Parties%3A%20where%20did%20it%20all%20go%20wrong%20for%20the%20beloved%20indie%20festival%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fall-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20Tomorrow%27s%20Parties%3A%20where%20did%20it%20all%20go%20wrong%20for%20the%20beloved%20indie%20festival%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fall-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68351a4f408f12510a5aa3d07e1d8a444ed9dd90%2F0_169_3008_1805%2F3008.jpg>
 Aphex Twin performs in 2004. Photograph: David Pearson / Rex Features 
Yet even at its peak, ATP and Hogan were battling financial difficulties. 
Company reports going back to 2007 show that ATP Concerts was grappling with 
liabilities that started off as £171,213 in 2008, rising to £1.5m in 2010 and 
£2.1m in 2011. While most of the British ATP parties were sellout successes, 
the burdens of hosting some of the world’s most famous musicians, expanding 
into the US and the recession all took their toll. Even their UK festivals did 
not always break even; one curated by Matt Groening, the Simpsons’ creator, 
lost £500,000.

Hogan conceded that balancing the books was not always easy: “Yeah, that is 
always a tough one,” he said inan interview 
<http://www.clashmusic.com/feature/atp-week-a-brief-history-with-barry-hogan> 
in 2009. “I get tempted and want to go crazy on the budget so we can have these 
insane lineups that I know will blow people’s minds.”

In July 2012, after threats from one of ATP’s 63 creditors, Hogan was forced 
to dissolve his company, which had around £2m in unpaid debts to everyone from 
Butlins to the band Portishead. It also had an outstanding tax bill of £26,080.

Ask the indie professor: Is All Tomorrow's Parties really different?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/apr/27/indie-professor-all-tomorrows-parties>
This was not to be the end of the festivals, however. Days after the 
liquidation, Hogan announced on ATP’s website that he had established another 
company, Willwal Ltd, which would continue the running of the festivals. He 
purchased the ATP name from the liquidators for an agreed price of £70,000 – 
though it was reduced to £50,000 last year after Hogan could not keep up the 
payments due to “severe financial difficulties”.

For devoted fans of the ATP brand it appeared that little had changed. Weekend 
festivals at Pontins, curated by bands such as the National, Deerhunter, Yeah 
Yeah Yeahs and TV on the Radio, continued throughout 2012 and 2013, though 
Mogwai’s event in late 2013 was billed as the last ever holiday camp weekender.

In 2014, ATP announced Jabberwocky, which was due to take place in August. ATP 
had expanded into London weekenders before, with its I’ll Be Your Mirror events 
at Alexandra Palace in 2011 and 2012, and Jabberwocky seemed like one of its 
strongest events yet, with Neutral Milk Hotel, James Blake and Caribou 
headlining.

But the cracks soon began to show. Tickets were originally sold on the basis 
it would take place at the Olympic Park in east London, but the mayor’s office 
claims it never received a booking. The event was later moved to the Docklands 
ExCel Conference centre, to the disgruntlement of fans, who mocked Hogan for 
responding to complaints about the new venue by saying the toilets had good 
hand-dryers. Then, three days before it was due to happen, the event was 
cancelled, with Hogan bluntly stating: “If we had gone ahead, it would have 
100% been the end of ATP.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fall-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2b7fab9570324445baa3e35d7be0f6ded6c95c%2F0_281_2832_3539%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20Tomorrow's%20Parties%3A%20where%20did%20it%20all%20go%20wrong%20for%20the%20beloved%20indie%20festival%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fall-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20Tomorrow%27s%20Parties%3A%20where%20did%20it%20all%20go%20wrong%20for%20the%20beloved%20indie%20festival%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fall-tomorrows-parties-where-did-it-all-go-wrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2b7fab9570324445baa3e35d7be0f6ded6c95c%2F0_281_2832_3539%2F2832.jpg>
 Jean-Herve Peron on stage in 2010. Photograph: Gary Wolstenholme/Redferns 
Many saw this as the swansong for ATP. It had angered loyal fans, musicians 
and even its PR company, Zeitgeist, which claimed Hogan failed to pay it. Yet 
ATP still had its defenders and Hogan announced last year that 2016 would see 
the return of ATP’s Pontins weekenders – the first curated by comedian Stewart 
Lee and the second by Drive Like Jehu.

Stewart Lee’s weekender did eventually take place on 15-17 April this year to 
mixed reviews (theGuardian gave it four stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/18/stewart-lee-all-tomorrows-parties-review-fall-sleaford-mods-roky-erikson>
), and the comedian admitted he had been unsure whether it would go ahead. 
Several musicians, such as folk singer Olivia Chaney, did not turn up for fear 
they would not be paid. More damagingly, John Cale – who had been due to play 
at both Lee’s and Drive Like Jehu’s events – pulled out of the shows. “We did 
our best to believe in the organisers,” he tweeted. “In the end, they let us 
all down.”



Unresolved debts saw Hogan taken to court eight times between 2013 and 2016 
and at least two equipment-hire companies told the Guardian they had sent 
bailiffs to ATP’s offices last year due to unpaid bills – but there were “no 
assets to take”. Adding to this, the cost of moving Drive Like Jehu’s ATP from 
Prestatyn to Manchester, coupled with poor ticket sales, left Hogan in further 
dire financial straits, with a deficit of around £300,000.

However, it was only after Hogan asked Drive Like Jehu’s singer John Reis for 
a loan to help pay for the venue – and admitted that he had no accommodation 
for the ticketholders who had purchased a Pontins chalet – that the band took 
matters into their own hands. The band forced Hogan’s hand, releasing a 
statement.

All Tomorrow's Parties: a chalet with an en-suite festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/30/all-tomorrows-parties-belle-sebastian-interview>
“After four months of a long and bumpy ride, the wheels finally fell off the 
wagon and crashed and burned,” wrote Reis. “We were so committed to seeing this 
through that we remained hopeful (blind, in retrospect) amongst the ritualistic 
turmoil and crisis and trusted their solutions that would ensure that the show 
would definitely go on and the attendees would be treated fairly and the bands 
would be respected and celebrated.”

He added: “Forty-eight hours ago word started to trickle in that Barry hadn’t 
honoured his agreement with many of the bands … ATP is out of funds.”

Yet it took another eight hours for ATP to admit it was over – during which 
time tickets still remained on sale. “We have had to accept defeat due to its 
lack of financial viability,”its eventual statement said 
<https://www.atpfestival.com/newsview/1604180819>. ATP has pledged full refunds 
to all ticket holders, a promise Hogan reiterated to the Guardian.

“We realise now that doing things for the love of music alone is not enough,” 
Hogan told the Guardian. “The last thing we ever intended to do is hurt fellow 
fans and will work to make it up to them. We have put everything we possibly 
could into this … We really are devastated we couldn’t make it work.”

Nonetheless, Hogan is determined that this should not be the end of the road 
for his beloved festival, though he admitted he had been forced to face some 
hard truths. ATP will no longer be self-financing its larger shows and 
festivals, and instead will license out its name to outside investors and 
promoters.

Yet many in the music industry, bands and fans alike, felt that this time 
there was no resurrecting the good name of ATP.

 “I feel certain that this incident signals the end of what was once a 
beautiful, brilliant festival,” said Martin Quintron, another musician left 
disappointed last weekend. “We played one of the earliest ones in Camber Sands 
and it was life-changing – but that was long ago.”
 