
US regulators have widened their investigation into the alleged fraud at Allen 
Stanford's banking group, and are now looking at brokers who worked with the 
bank as well as the bank's top executives.

The Financial Times reported 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/29508d14-070b-11e0-94f1-00144feabdc0.html#axzz184QDsMEP>
 this morning that the Securities and Exchange Commission had notified several 
brokers, as well as the head of Stanford International Bank's brokerage 
operations, that it intends to file civil fraud charges against them.

Investigators allege that Stanford's banking operation was in fact an $8bn 
(£5bn) Ponzi scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2009/feb/18/allen-stanford-cricket> 
– an investment in which returns to investors are funded either through their 
own payments or through those of subsequent investors rather than any genuine 
investment returns.

The FT said that Danny Bogar, head of SIB's brokerage operations, had been 
notified of the SEC's move by means of a Wells notice, a process used to alert 
individuals that they might face civil charges. Bogar's lawyer said his client 
knew nothing about the alleged fraud.

Patrick Cruickshank, a broker who worked in Stanford's office in Austin, Texas 
from 2006 to 2009, also received a Wells notice, the paper said, citing US 
regulatory filings. His lawyer said Cruickshank had "done nothing wrong" and 
"was a victim of the Stanford fraud".

Until now only Stanford, four senior executives at the bank and an Antiguan 
regulator had been charged in connection with the scheme.

Stanford, who has been held in custody since his arrest in June 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/19/allen-stanford-arrested>, denies 
the allegations. His trial is due to begin in January, although defence lawyers 
argued last week that the businessman was too heavily medicated to prepare for 
the proceedings.

Former chief financial officer James Davis has pleaded guilty and is 
co-operating with the probe. Others accused have denied wrongdoing.
 