
The former billionaire and one-time cricket mogul Allen Stanford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford> is mentally fit to stand 
trial, a US judge has ruled. The Texan businessman will now go on trial next 
month on charges of swindling investors out of more than $7bn, or Â£4.5bn.

Prosecutors had argued Stanford, 61, was trying to escape trial by faking 
amnesia. His defence argued that head injuries he received in a 2009 prison 
assault, and powerful anxiety medication prescribed after the beating, left him 
suicidal and incapable of defending himself in court. "I've found by a 
preponderance of the evidence Stanford is competent to stand trial," said judge 
David Hittner in Houston.

He is accused of defrauding investors in his Antigua-based Stanford 
International Bank. Once one of the most influential men in cricket, known as 
"Sir Allen" after being knighted, he has been in prison since his arrest in 
2009, on the grounds he would otherwise try to flee justice.

Stanford's trial was due in January, but three doctors testified he was 
incapable of assisting in his defence due to "extensive retrograde amnesia" 
caused by the assault and exacerbated by over-medication. In court papers the 
fallen financier claimed family members had to "educate" him on his previous 
life, and being "completely amnestic to his life prior to the assault", 59 
years had been "stolen" from him.

Prosecutors cited more than 16 neuropsychological tests and a brain scan as 
evidence he is faking. Two prison doctors found Stanford's test scores worse 
than subjects with advanced dementia. Robert Cochrane, a psychologist, told the 
court Stanford had failed every test designed to expose fakers. Ralph Lilly, a 
neurologist testifying for Stanford, said he was not fit to stand trial: "His 
memory is like a crossword puzzle that's fallen to the ground and doesn't come 
together anymore."

Prosecutors claim Stanford skimmed money from investor funds to finance a 
lavish lifestyle: his own private island, jets and yachts, mansions, and cash 
for his estranged wife, girlfriend, mistresses, and their children. He denies 
wrongdoing.
 