
A lot of things caused Susie pain: scented products, pesticides, plastic, 
synthetic fabrics, smoke, electronic radiation – the list went on. Back in “the 
regular world”, car exhaust made her feel sick for days. Perfume gave her 
seizures.


Then she uprooted to Snowflake, Arizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona>.

“I got out of the car and didn’t need my oxygen tank,” she said, grinning at 
me in the rearview mirror. “I could walk.”

There are about 20 households where she now lives. Like Susie, most of the 
residents in Snowflake have what they call “environmental illness”, a 
controversial diagnosis that attributes otherwise unexplained symptoms to 
pollution.

My knees knocked together as she swerved on to another dirt road. Mae, a 
Guardian film-maker, was busy shooting scenery from the front seat. We’d come 
for four days to find out why dozens of people chose to make their homes here, 
and Susie had agreed to host us only if we did not seek outside opinion from 
psychiatrists regarding their condition.

“He’s got it bad,” she said, nodding at a neighbor’s driveway. The sign out 
front read: “NO UNINVITEDS”.

My eyes darted on barbed wire cattle fences and dead Juniper trees. White 
mountains swam in the distance. We stopped, and Susie motioned for Mae to open 
a gate decorated in yellow Christmas tinsel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c6517cfa284eb1932c6daa080fc69c3b6ae867%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20'sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20%27sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c6517cfa284eb1932c6daa080fc69c3b6ae867%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Deb Schmeltzer has been living out of her truck for the past five years. She 
says the aluminum in the truck is preferable to homes with Wi-Fi and 
electricity. Photograph: Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
The idea that modern conveniences cause pain dates to the mid-19th century. In 
1869, doctorGeorge Beard 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/evan-osnos/americanitis-vs-chinitis> published 
several papers blaming modern civilization and steam power for ailments such as 
“drowsiness, cerebral irritation, pain, pressure and heaviness in the head”.

According to him, other indications of chemical sensitivity included “fear of 
society, fear of being alone, fear of contamination … fear of fears … fear of 
everything”.

He called the illness neurasthenia <http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/179/6/550>. 
Susie called it being “sensitive to the whole world”.

Susie had warned us that Deb, a sort-of-roommate who lived in her driveway, 
was extremely sensitive to scents. In order to protect her, we’d agreed to 
various terms: we would not a get rental car or stay at a motel, because those 
were places where chemical cleaners were used. We would wear Susie’s clothes, 
and sleep at Susie’s house. She also made us swear not to get any perms before 
we came, which made me think she had been in the desert for a long time.

For weeks, Mae and I avoided makeup, lotion, perfume, hair products, scented 
detergent, fabric softener, dryer sheets. We used fragrance-free soap and 
shampoo, as well as a natural deodorant, which, according to the description on 
the box, was basically a rock picked off the ground with a cap on it.


Despite our best efforts, Deb’s sensitive nose picked up our body odors. For 
her, we reeked like a Bath and Body Works store flooded with vodka – or as she 
put it, “floral, with chemical solvents. You’re fragrant.”

Snowflake was not easy to get to. I’d risen at dawn, vomited on a tiny 
six-passenger plane, and walked one mile down a busy highway in a town called 
Show Low (160 miles from Phoenix) to get to Susie’s car.

“We’ll do our best to get you cleaned,” Susie promised us. “I got lots of 
hydrogen peroxide.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15df733be9aa80b788bdac0dcc35ed3a412dbcbd%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20'sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20%27sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15df733be9aa80b788bdac0dcc35ed3a412dbcbd%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 In order to wear sunscreen without fragrances, Kathleen Hale was given a 
mixture of zinc oxide and safflower oil by Susie Molloy to avoid the sun. 
Photograph: Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
It was decided that the best way to get us straight from the car into the 
shower, where we could wash the outside world’s chemicals away, was to enter 
the house completely naked. So we took off our clothes and marched without 
dignity across the gravel driveway.

“You can have first shower,” Mae said, wrapping herself in a towel. We had 
only known each other for a few hours.

Susie’s bathroom, like the rest of her one-room, off-grid house, was 
wallpapered in heavy duty Reynolds wrap. Above the toilet, a small, sealed 
window looked out at the desert. I scrubbed off with a bar of olive oil soap 
and inhaled the metallic scent of hard water. It was the only thing I could 
smell.

Someone knocked. Mae reluctantly asked if I wore underwear. “We’re playing 
dress-up!” Susie shouted from the other room.

I realized what Mae actually meant was, Did I wear Susie’s underwear? I 
hesitated for a moment, considering the alternative: going commando in a sandy 
environment.

“Hey, Kathleen!” Susie yelled. “Do you?”

“I wear underwear,” I called.

Later, we gathered in the kitchen. Deb is sensitive to grains, GMO foods, 
preservatives and all artificial flavoring and coloring, so we ate cabbage soup 
for dinner.

Afterward, Mae and I ducked behind a curtained-off partition to consider our 
sleeping arrangements: two metal cots, one broken, and zero blankets, (because 
blankets are absorbent and, according to local logic, our pores were still 
“off-gassing” dangerous chemicals). Nighttime in the desert is freezing, and 
Susie’s house did not have heating. I wanted to be unconscious and regretted my 
semi-recent decision to start weaning off sedatives.

Asked whether she might at least have some padding to cover the iron springs, 
Susie retreated outside, shouting over her shoulder, “FYI, the rats here are 
aggressive.” She returned with dirt-caked bathmats. “There,” she said, turning 
off the lights. “Comfy.”

That night Mae and I, who were complete strangers just the day before, had to 
hold each other for warmth. I reminded myself that whatever discomfort we felt 
paled in comparison to how Susie and Deb had suffered in the regular world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30e38f38f6c862d99024f716f4f7645475fbc8f0%2F0_0_5685_3790%2F5685.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20'sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20%27sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30e38f38f6c862d99024f716f4f7645475fbc8f0%2F0_0_5685_3790%2F5685.jpg>
 Susie Molloy collects Native American pottery that fills the Arizona landscape 
near her home in Snowflake. Photograph: Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
Susie grew up in forested northern California, and spent most of the 1970s in 
the Bay Area, working odd jobs and traveling with her boyfriend. As friends 
started dropping like flies from an illness nobody could understand, Susie 
endured respiratory, gastrointestinal and neurological symptoms. It hurt her 
feelings when doctors suggested she might just have anxiety.

While the Aids epidemic kicked into crisis mode, Susie’s symptoms got worse, 
intensifying whenever she smelled smoke or saw power lines. Unable to function, 
she moved back home, where, through an autodidactic game of trial and error, 
she identified what triggered her worst symptoms. She slept on her parents’ 
porch, or on the bathroom floor, because those were the only places she could 
breathe. Her mother collected rain for her to drink.

Now using a wheelchair, she returned to San Francisco to pursue a master’s 
degree in disability policy. She launched the Reactor, an environmental illness 
advocacy newsletter, which circulated via an underground network of 
hypersensitive people throughout the country. An environmentally ill reader 
told Susie the air where he lived was “clean enough for him to manage” and in 
1994, Susie followed him to Snowflake, where the tiny community (only a handful 
of people at the time) immediately rallied around her. Within a year, her 
father and neighbors pooled their resources to build her a house – “a little, 
safe place”.

Meanwhile, across the country, Deb’s life had never felt more dangerous.

Like Susie, her initial thought was Aids. After ruling that out, she juggled 
endless skepticism. Even those who believed she felt ill wrote it off, saying 
she’d bounce back.

Deb had always been strong. As a child living on Lake Michigan, she sailed and 
played sports. After attending Michigan Technological University, she worked 
for nine years as the only female metallurgical engineer at Bendix aircraft; 
her specialty was failure analysis.
Snowflake <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/06/snowflake-az-map/> 
When she and her husband became pregnant, Deb kept working, inhaling zinc and 
cadmium – nobody told her not to – but all she could smell were her co-worker’s 
cologne and aftershave. Scented products sent her body into crisis. She vomited 
a lot.

After giving birth in 1992, Deb left work to parent full time. She lived in a 
moldy house with a smoky furnace. Infections blow-torched her sinuses, turning 
into migraines that hit her like an ax. Her weight plummeted to 75lbs. Doctors 
said she was anorexic.

Finally, Deb couldn’t take it anymore. She left Michigan when her daughter was 
16 and became itinerant, sleeping in her truck, because unlike plastic or 
drywall, metal emitted no chemical fumes and was safe.

The same word-of-mouth network eventually led Deb to Snowflake, where she 
performed chores for the environmentally sick in exchange for food. By the time 
Susie spotted her boiling out clothes for a neighbor, Deb had been living in 
her truck for five years and needed a place to park. The two women became a 
domestic duo. Deb cooked “clean food” for Susie on the hot plate. They made 
each other laugh, and protected one another. Susie remained compassionately 
straight-faced when Deb finally admitted she hadn’t seen her daughter in seven 
years.

By the age of 67, Susie had finally put her master’s degree to use, although 
not in the way she had originally intended. She had become Snowflake’s 
unofficial welcome wagon, local therapist and advocate. She sat with men and 
women who were sick with something no one else believed in, and she believed 
them. She fielded at least five long phone calls a night from the bedridden and 
lonely, talking to them for as long as they needed company. She helped people 
with the arduous paperwork involved in collecting government aid. She reassured 
them that their illness wouldn’t kill them – it would only “hurt, a lot”.

Everyone we met loved her, and got tears in their eyes when they said so.

Historically speaking, settlers’ reasons for uprooting typically establish the 
hierarchy of wherever they resettle. Puritans relocated for religious reasons, 
so the devout became popular. Forty-niners rushed in search of gold, and those 
that struck it gained status.


But people came to Snowflake to nurture disease, and so, here, illness acts 
like a social currency. Being “normies”– a mostly derogative term meaning that 
chemical fragrances and electricity didn’t (yet) cause us debilitating pain – 
not only dropped Mae and I into a category of people who had historically hurt, 
abandoned, and misdiagnosed everyone we were about to meet, it also ranked us 
as lepers.

Luckily, I was about to become very sick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4383077e65a9e53ef36510eea589a65b0848bbc2%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20'sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20%27sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4383077e65a9e53ef36510eea589a65b0848bbc2%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Mae Ryan with Kathleen Hale: ‘They wanted to know how they could be sure that 
we weren’t just another pair of journalists here to play games.’ Photograph: 
Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
On day two, I woke with a headache, and Mae’s hair in my mouth. My headache 
was snowballing into nausea. I was starting to feel familiar, flu-like symptoms 
which pave the way for emotional darkness.

I had begged to write about Snowflake because I identified with the idea of 
sick people retreating to the middle of nowhere to find peace. Almost two years 
earlier, I had a mental breakdown and retreated to a psychiatric hospital for 
two weeks. Medication and therapy brought me back to reality. I felt I 
recognized the urge to leave everything behind.

In the almost two years since my mental breakdown, sticking to the to-do list 
they gave us at the psychiatric hospital (sleep; eat; take medication) had, at 
the very least, made me feel in control.

Now, each item had been compromised thanks to our sleeping arrangements, the 
unsatisfying house staple (cabbage), and my personal desire to, at some point, 
become pregnant with a baby that did not resemble an octopus.

“I’m starting to think now might not have been the best time to start tapering 
off psychotropic drugs,” I said to Mae, who barely heard me.

“There’s a situation,” she replied.

In the kitchen, Susie and Deb revealed that trust issues had developed between 
us. The night before, Mae and I decided to charge her camera battery, and 
apparently it had kept Susie awake.

“But we could hear her snoring,” I said.

“You hurt her,” Deb said.

They wanted to know how they could be sure that we weren’t just another pair 
of journalists here to play games – to test their disease with shenanigans, and 
make fun of them?

Deb said we couldn’t fool her.

As proof, she relayed a story about how, once, when her daughter was “10 or 
12” they’d gone together to the grocery store.

“I lost track of her and her friend,” Deb said, smirking proudly, “and then I 
found them, and I could smell it. They claimed, ‘No, no, no,’ but I knew they’d 
gone and done perfume samples. So, we’re in the car, and they’re giggling to 
themselves, and I told them to get out.”

That was the end of the story.

“Did you make them get out of the car?” I said

“Well, yeah,” she said, looking confused. “We were only about three miles from 
home.” She turned the car around “eventually”. But I couldn’t help seeing it 
from the daughter’s point of view: a friend had come over, they’d been left on 
the highway.

I worried we were about to get kicked out, too.

Deb said, in order to trust us going forward, we had to promise we weren’t 
going to write anything but a positive piece that would clearly inform readers 
of the clinical validity of environmental illness.

“We can’t promise that,” Mae said.

A general silence fell over the aluminum foil room. Deb, who had been pretty 
emotionless up until now, looked like she might cry. Our chance at writing a 
story seemed to be disintegrating. So I cleared my throat and prepared to 
overshare in order to hopefully diffuse things.

“I’ll tell you a secret,” I said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b3573811e5619105e5939338a043d36c5aa89ce%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20'sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20%27sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b3573811e5619105e5939338a043d36c5aa89ce%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 The walls in Susie Molloy’s home are covered in aluminum foil to mask any 
fragrances that may emit from the building materials. Photograph: Mae Ryan for 
the Guardian 
I told Susie and Deb that I knew how it felt, at least a little bit, “to be 
sick, and have nobody believe you”, I explained how, four or five years 
earlier, my hair started falling out, and I had this awful, burning sensation 
on the back of my scalp that was so intense I used a bag of ice as a pillow, 
and how I felt nauseous all the time, and tired, and cried a lot. The word 
“diarrhea” had already been introduced a number of times by Susie and Deb to 
describe their own symptoms, so I plugged that in, too.


They softened. When I got to the part about how every other doctor I saw that 
year said I was fine, physically speaking, and had referred me to a 
psychiatrist, they scoffed knowingly and protectively. They asked what my 
environment had been like; I thought they meant emotionally so I told them how 
I moved to New York for this guy, James, and we signed a lease together, broke 
up after one month – then I lost my job, and had no savings – “la-la-la”.

Susie cut me short: “No, your physical environment.” I remembered, with a 
lurch, that our apartment had been downwind from a dry cleaners. I used to go 
stand next to its vents because the detergent smelled great compared to the 
chicken slaughter plant down the street.

Susie and Deb looked like they wanted to high-five. My depression had been a 
symptom of environmental illness.

“They use all sorts of chemical agents to clean slaughterhouses,” Deb said 
excitedly. “When you left, did the symptoms go away?”

“No, but they started to, a little, when this doctor friend of mine said to 
try eliminating gluten.”

“The gluten, that’s what happened with me!” Susie said. “That’s one of the 
things I found I was sensitive to. It’s commoner than people think.”

“For me, personally, it was a placebo,” I said carefully, clocking their 
disappointed looks. They cringed even more when I used the word “psychosomatic”.

“The gluten-free thing helped for a long time, especially with the shitting my 
pants problem – I think just controlling my environment probably helped. But 
the scalp burning didn’t go away until a dermatologist prescribed me 
antidepressants.”

“That’s not me saying the symptoms weren’t real,” I continued – and in my 
nervousness that I’d once again offended them, I then farted so shrilly that 
Mae laughed in shock.

Susie just shrugged and Deb remained completely impassive, as if maybe she 
hadn’t heard, which was not possible. Chemicals bothered them, but bodily 
functions were fine.

Given the progress made by discussing my medical history, I publicized my 
current headache. Susie scrambled to get me Tylenol, and Deb graciously 
explained that this was yet another sign my body was dumping toxins from the 
regular world.

My illness had immediately elevated my status in the household. “Here you go,” 
Deb said, handing me a mug. Susie tapped pills into my palm.

After almost 24 hours of being told I stank and generally being treated like a 
contagious freak, I was so grateful for these ministrations that I went to hug 
them. Susie acquiesced, but Deb said I was still too fragrant for us to embrace.

“But I changed my mind,” she said to Mae. “I’ll let you film me, if you want.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9805ed1aa6cc1ff57d4a855dd823fd7273750423%2F0_0_5659_3773%2F5659.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20'sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20%27sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9805ed1aa6cc1ff57d4a855dd823fd7273750423%2F0_0_5659_3773%2F5659.jpg>
 Steen, a neighbor, says he is allergic to computers, Wi-Fi, electricity and 
ink on paper so he must print off his emails, air them out to dry for 24 hours 
and then read them. He only responds to emails via handwritten letters. 
Photograph: Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
Susie and Deb, like most of their neighbors, receive disability checks. But 
welfare has not made them complacent. It isn’t easy to apply for disability 
when you suffer from an illness that most refuse to recognize. And even if you 
do receive some aid, the checks could stop at any moment. All it takes is one 
Arizona bureaucrat looking at your file and deciding that your sickness is made 
up.


Over and over again, residents emphasized to me that they wanted to work, they 
missed working – they had no identity now, they said, no sense of self worth. 
Many, like Deb, were former chemical engineers. They were smart, easily bored, 
and embarrassed by what they worried some might misconstrue as laziness, or 
mooching. I believed them when they said they wanted jobs. I also believed that 
they were far too sick to work. Many spent entire days in bed, eyes cinched 
against the blinding pain caused by their illness.

“People here suicide themselves,” Susie said, as we trudged around the desert, 
collecting rocks. Our boots crunched on petrified rabbit shit. Susie told us 
about a friend with environmental illness who had killed himself a few months 
prior.

Green Bank: the town that banned Wi-Fi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/21/the-town-that-banned-wi-fi> 
“He wasn’t depressed or anything, he just couldn’t take it anymore, so he 
starved himself,” she said. Apparently it was common, around Snowflake, for 
people to kill themselves. Susie estimated that it happened around twice a 
year, which, given the shifting population, I pointed out as an epidemic.

“We bury our own dead,” she said.

“I’m so sorry,” I said.

Many of the people we met had finally found doctors who believed them. Before, 
in the regular world, after enduring years of humiliating check-ups and stints 
in the emergency room, they relegated the medical profession to enemy status. 
Now, they spoke adoringly of their physicians, most of whom practiced 
integrative health – a blend of western science, holistic healing and 
one-on-one therapy. As long as I framed environmental illness as a physical 
phenomenon, Snowflakers were happy, even eager, to communicate. But they got 
angry if I broached their illness, even obliquely, as a psychological 
phenomenon. They had spent years feeling sick and battling skeptics. The last 
thing they wanted was to be told by an outsider, who had just met them, that 
they were crazy.

I didn’t blame them. Later, breathing through another stomachache, I scanned 
my notes, rereading scrawled concerns based on various conversations about the 
potential that everyone we met had some form of extreme PTSD, either from being 
sick, witnessing a nationwide health crisis, or – as had cropped up in one or 
two of the conversations – from being sexually assaulted.

When I asked Susie whether she took any medications for her environmental 
illness, she cackled, at first, like a little girl, and said, “None of your 
business!”

“I do, though,” she continued after a pause. “For seizures.”

Certain psychiatric drugs double as anti-seizure medications, so I rattled off 
a few familiar brand names. Susie nodded at one I took. I wondered if we had 
the same thing, whatever that was.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01aefa0602682b303d2d087816e314e634fe9413%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20'sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allergic%20to%20life%3A%20the%20Arizona%20residents%20%27sensitive%20to%20the%20whole%20world%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsnowflake-arizona-environmental-illness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01aefa0602682b303d2d087816e314e634fe9413%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Susie Molloy hangs up her clothes to dry after washing them in fragrance-free 
detergent. Molloy was one of the first people to move to Snowflake. Photograph: 
Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
On our last morning in town, Deb intercepted me in the driveway to explain how 
fragile I was. She had been thinking about my symptoms – the headache, my 
history of so-called depression and my menstrual cycle which started two weeks 
early on our second day there.

“My therapist says it’s just stress,” I said. “I feel like maybe we recognize 
something in each other. We just want to call it different things.”

She shook her head. “You have environmental illness, I can sense it.”

In a quiet, tentative voice, she explained to me that there was, in fact, an 
objective, scientific way to test me for environmental illness; she could do it 
right then and there.

The procedure would be relatively painless, but I couldn’t mention the 
specifics in my piece.

“I feel like this will sound more ominous than it is if I leave out the 
details,” I said as we went through with it.

“People will think we’re crazy,” she said.

“I am crazy,” I said.

“No,” she said.

After we finished, I lingered in the doorway while Deb searched the dark house 
for her glasses. I was no longer permitted indoors because I had changed back 
into my own clothes, and the scents emanating from my regular world apparel had 
already caused Deb’s ears to swell, making it hard for her to hear. It was time 
to go, but Deb said the apparatus she used to diagnose environmental illness 
wasn’t working, so she would have to be in touch. I wrote down my phone number 
and email address.

“Can I give you a hug goodbye?” I said.

“Not in those clothes,” she said.

As Susie ferried us back into society, beef cattle glared at us from the 
ditches, and calves stumbled in the road. Susie told us she didn’t see any 
overlap between mental and environmental illness. Certain substances were 
physically poisonous, and that was the end of it.

“If someone is reckless or careless about exposures that will cause issues for 
you, that is, to some measure, assaultive,” Susie said.

“Assault, that’s a strong word,” Mae said.

“Yep,” Susie said. “That’s why I say it.”

At the airport gate, I remembered the emergency Valium in my bag, and all of 
my stress went away. But it wore off on the flight, and by the time I got home, 
I felt the sadness in my blood. I almost hoped Deb’s test would work – that she 
would find something scientific to substantiate how shitty I sometimes felt.

A few days later, Deb and Susie put me on speakerphone, because holding the 
receiver to their head triggered neurological problems. Once again, they wanted 
me to tell them exactly what I would write about them. They worried I might 
make fun of them. I told them that wasn’t my intention, but that I tended to 
tell the truth, at which point Deb told me that my test results had shown her 
that I was sick.

“But I can help you.”

“We can help you shave off a couple years of fruitless effort,” Susie added.

“What’s wrong with me?” I said.

Deb promised she would tell me, eventually. But only after she read this piece.

“Isn’t that, like, blackmail?” I said.

Susie and Deb started to laugh, softly and shrewdly.

I’m still waiting for my results.

 * This article was amended on 12 July 2016 to reflect that the Arizona town 
of Show Low is formatted as two words, not one, and is pronounced phonetically.  