

Reading on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.muzu.tv/altj/something-good-music-video/1671961/>

Alt-J <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alt-j> have debuted a pioneering new 
piece of gig technology that aims to stop people recording shows on their 
phones.

Following their album award win at the Ivor Novellos 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/may/16/emeli-sande-winner-ivor-novello-awards>
 on Thursday, the band became the first act to utilise the Soundhalo video app 
at their Brixton Academy show, allowing fans to download tracks to their 
smartphones immediately after they were performed. It's hoped the new app will 
deter audiences from holding their phones in the air to record tracks at gigs – 
a practiseYeah Yeah Yeahs recently banned 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/shortcuts/2013/apr/10/yeah-yeah-yeahs-phones-gigs>
.

The beta version of Soundhalo launched on Android platforms on Thursday and 
will soon be made available elsewhere. A production crew at the venue combines 
footage with audio taken directly from the sound desk and delivers a fully 
mixed and mastered video MP4 straight to a cloud directly after the song has 
finished. Fans can then pay to download the files, one song at a time. The app 
is available viasoundhalo.com <http://soundhalo.com>.

Alt-J's drummer, Thom Green, said: "I think it's amazing that the whole show 
was streamed live on the internet. I'm glad they chose us to kick the whole 
thing off, it's a real honour. It's one of those things that you can't really 
believe doesn't already exist, it's just so perfect. I can't wait to see how 
far it goes and to watch it back myself and watch my own highlights on my 
phone."

The band can now add the Ivor Novello to the Mercury prize already won by 
their acclaimed albumAn Awesome Wave 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2012/dec/06/guardian-best-albums-2012-alt-j>
. And Green said that the latest win was even sweeter. "We've probably had the 
best day in our career so far," he said. "And it was overwhelming almost to 
play to that amount of people; it felt really special. When I look at the four 
of us together it's quite emotional actually and I'm just really proud of us. 
Joe lost his voice today and I really felt for him when he started singing – 
everything suddenly really hit home. The crowd's response to Joe, singing with 
him and supporting him through, was amazing. It's just a very, very proud day."

Alt-J will return to Brixton Academy <http://www.o2academybrixton.co.uk/> 
tonight.
 