
Alt-J <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alt-j> are cheerfully recounting the 
time they were hired to play a corporate awayday for a Russian telecoms company 
in Iceland. “The guy who organised it was a big fan of ours, but no one else 
knew who we were,” explains keyboardist Gus Unger-Hamilton. “The theme was an 
authentic Viking feast in a Viking long hall, so they were all dressed as 
Vikings, eating roast ox and getting drunk on mead.” Singer and guitarist Joe 
Newman goes on: “We were hours out of Reykjavik. Night was creeping in and the 
temperature was dropping, so you couldn’t leave the hall without blistering 
from the cold. There was a point when they were getting quite rowdy and I 
thought, ‘Is this gonna turn?’”

It’s not the only time Joe has feared for the future of Alt-J. In January of 
this year, guitarist and founding memberGwil Sainsbury quit the band 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/jan/14/alt-j-bland-band-anonymous-member>
, having decided that the life of a professional touring musician was not for 
him. Today, Joe admits, his voice wavering for a moment, that the departure of 
the band’s “silent leader” was almost fatal. “I didn’t think we were going to 
pick ourselves up,” he says.

It’s fair to say that, until that point, things had been going almost too well 
for this band of inherent worriers. An Awesome Wave, the album of intimate 
folktronica they conceived in their Leeds student digs, scooped the 2012Mercury 
prize <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mercuryprize> on its way to selling a 
million copies worldwide. Alt-J never really had to slog to promote it, and 
were able to hide behind a faintly enigmatic non-image while the music did the 
talking, propagating via word-of-mouth both online and off. Last month, they 
sold out Alexandra Palace in less than 10 minutes. And yet you’d still struggle 
to identify a single member of the band if they accidentally barged your 
trolley in Waitrose. They appeared to have found the holy grail for indie 
bands: success without the fame.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk_EhHcZzUoE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk_EhHcZzUoE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk_EhHcZzUoE&media=>
But success brings its own pressures, especially if you’re not prepared for 
it. Even at the time, one of the words Alt-J used to described their Mercury 
prize win was “traumatic”; amid the celebrations, they were keenly aware that 
their lives had just changed forever. “It’s quite a funny feeling, being on top 
of the world,” says Gus, “because at what point are you going to topple off?” 
Pretty soon, as it turned out. The backlash has been harsh, with Alt-J 
routinely called out in the press for being boring and geeky – the “bland 
band”, as one Guardian headline put it. EvenBryan Ferry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bryanferry> had a pop when interviewed for 
Noisey <http://noisey.vice.com/en_uk/>, deriding Alt-J’s “celebration of 
normality”. The scrutiny clearly rocked these sensitive fellows; Joe stopped 
doing interviews soon after the Mercury win and is still feeling his way back. 
When Gwil left, it only intensified the pressure on the reluctant frontman. “I 
thought it would all fall on my shoulders and I wouldn’t be able to carry the 
weight,” he says quietly. “But we dug our heels in.”

Forced to regroup, Alt-J’s forthcoming second album This Is All Yours leans 
more heavily on drummer Thom Green’s mastery of Ableton and other sample-based 
technologies; as a result the songs are less fussy, more expansive and direct. 
While they have chosen not to replace Gwil, slow-burning lead single Hunger Of 
The Pine introduces an unofficial new fourth member. And the female voice you 
can hear as the song gathers momentum is none other than that of twerking 
controversy-magnet and underrated ballad-belterMiley Cyrus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/miley-cyrus>.

“She’s a fan of Alt-J <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alt-j>,” beams Thom. 
“She uses a snippet of Fitzpleasure in her live show, so I sent her a message 
on Twitter asking if she wanted a remix.
 She emailed me the stems to her song 4x4 and we noticed one of her parts 
fitted perfectly over a guitar riff Joe was playing. It was a bit like, ‘What 
are we doing?’ But we all warmed to it. It’s not so much that it’s Miley Cyrus, 
it just sounds good.”

“It’s funny, because I’m not such a big fan of the original song,” confides 
Gus. “It’s this bouncy, jaunty pop song. But when you take that line out of 
context – ‘I’m a female rebel’ – it sounds amazing. When you hear her vocal by 
itself, it’s got a real purity and punchiness to it.” And he’s right: in this 
new context, Miley sounds defiant, imperious.

Not everyone was so thrilled about Hunger Of The Pine. Another hazard of 
success is that the suits start sticking their oars in, and Alt-J’s American 
label didn’t view the song as a “big single”, apparently ignoring the fact that 
An Awesome Wave did pretty well without one. Hackles (mildly) raised, Alt-J 
resolved to write “the least Alt-J song ever”, taking a “joke riff” Joe had 
been playing in rehearsals and fleshing it out with the most perfunctory chords 
and rhythm imaginable. Whereas the band typically spend weeks agonising over 
every note, Left Hand Free was written “in about 20 minutes”. Needless to say, 
the US label loved it.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F05%2Falt-j-mercury-prize-this-is-all-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F3%2F1404384473368%2F44e80c45-eaed-4450-b2d5-2a29f812af9c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alt-J%3A%20'All%20the%20coolest%20bands%20are%20completely%20normal'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F05%2Falt-j-mercury-prize-this-is-all-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alt-J%3A%20%27All%20the%20coolest%20bands%20are%20completely%20normal%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F05%2Falt-j-mercury-prize-this-is-all-yours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F3%2F1404384473368%2F44e80c45-eaed-4450-b2d5-2a29f812af9c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alt-J perform at The ALTimate Rooftop Christmas Party, 2013. Photograph: 
Christopher Polk 
Thom: “I tried to make the drums as cliched as possible, there’s none of my 
personality in it.”

Gus: “I’m doing some kind of organ solo. I don’t know where ‘baby’ came from.”

Joe: “And I say, ‘Gee whizz,’ which I’m not sure is a phrase I’ve ever uttered 
before. I can imagine it appealing to American truckers with Good Riddance To 
Bin Laden stickers!”

“Oh God…” says Gus, a worrying realisation dawning. “Someone’s going to walk 
onstage to it at an NRA convention.”

In truth, Left Hand Free sounds rather more like Odelay-era Beck than Ted 
Nugent, but it’s undeniably catchy. If it turns Alt-J into accidental one-hit 
wonders in the red states, then they’re ready for it. Kind of.

“Let’s see if it becomes a hit first,” cautions Gus. “We might be no-hit 
wonders.”

While the lyrical tricksiness of the first album has been toned down, you may 
still struggle to glean any obvious narratives from Joe’s jumble of esoteric 
references. With regard to The Gospel Of John Hurt, which concerns the 
emotional impact of watching the memorable stomach-bursting scene from Alien 
for the first time, Joe says, “That scene has stayed with me. As a writer, 
you’re meant to sift through all of things you’ve remembered in your life and 
pinpoint the things you’ve been moved by. Why not write about those moments 
you’re moved by the most?”

Clearly, he’s uncomfortable with the idea that rock singers are expected to 
bare their souls, although his typically English anxiety becomes a telling 
feature of the music itself. At first, Alt-J were able to hide behind their 
delta symbol, the band’s anonymity adding to their mystique. But there came a 
point, says Joe, when “we started losing the ability to say no without coming 
across like twats”. The irony being that as soon as Alt-J relented to the photo 
requests, they were slated for looking like biology students.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F05%2Falt-j-mercury-prize-this-is-all-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F3%2F1404384273948%2F5295caa1-6e86-4ffc-b3e8-1ca039bc1f32-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alt-J%3A%20'All%20the%20coolest%20bands%20are%20completely%20normal'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F05%2Falt-j-mercury-prize-this-is-all-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alt-J%3A%20%27All%20the%20coolest%20bands%20are%20completely%20normal%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fjul%2F05%2Falt-j-mercury-prize-this-is-all-yours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F3%2F1404384273948%2F5295caa1-6e86-4ffc-b3e8-1ca039bc1f32-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Sarah Lee 
“We’re not deliberately being an anti-rock band,” protests Gus. “If you came 
on tour with us, you’d see us get drunk and do a lot of silly stuff. We’re not 
literally reading aloud from The River Cottage Year and knitting cardigans – we 
just don’t turn up in leather jackets and sunglasses and get the shots in for a 
lunchtime interview with the Guardian.”

Joe, it should be pointed out, has just followed a mojito with an espresso 
martini. “That’s only because I didn’t want to appear normcore, I want to have 
anedge!” he yells.

“I quite like people thinking that we’re normal, cos we are,” decides Thom, 
whose leg is currently in a brace, not as a result of any rock’n’roll hi-jinks 
but because he fractured his ankle running for a taxi on Regent Street. “I 
think we do make interesting music, and I’d rather have that than make average 
music and have to compensate by being ridiculous people. To me, the coolest 
bands are Portishead and Radiohead, who are completely normal.”

Adds Gus, “You’re never going to have ‘My crazy three days on the road in 
America with Alt-J’ where I’m on drugs and Joe’s in prison because he bottled 
someone.”

To be fair, though, bands haven’t really acted like that since the 80s. Kids 
don’t buy the escapist rock’n’roll fantasy any more, they know it’s a lie. They 
want their bands to embody their own anxieties and reduced expectations. They 
want a band just like them – and Alt-J fit the bill.

“Take Jimmy Page,” says Joe, downing the last of his cocktail while resisting 
the urge to smash the empty glass on the floor. “He led a disgustingly 
rock’n’roll lifestyle, but for every good story he probably upset a lot of 
people, and I couldn’t do that. If I throw a TV out of a window, I know 
someone’s going to have to clear it up. And also it could land on someone! If I 
wasn’t in a band I wouldn’t do that. So why does it have to change because I 
write music?”

This Is All Yours is out in the UK on 22 Sep
 