
Alt-J have announced their second album, This Is All Yours. The follow-up to 
2012'sAn Awesome Wave <http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/reviews/mvm5>, which won the 
Mercury music prize, will be released on 22 September by Canvasback and 
Infectious Music.


The band's 13-track collection will be their first release since shrinking 
from a four-piece to a trio. Gwil Sainsbury, who co-founded the group in Leeds, 
left the groupin January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/jan/14/alt-j-bland-band-anonymous-member>
.Alt-J wrote <https://twitter.com/alt_J/status/422021422069055489> at the time 
that it was "purely a personal decision, and as our best friend we support him 
completely".

Together with the new album, Alt-J <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alt-j> 
have also unveiled a string of tour-dates for this autumn. They have booked six 
concerts in the UK and Ireland, including a show at London's Alexandra Palace, 
plus another 22 gigs in France, Canada and the United States.


Although This Is All Yours is already available to pre-order, Alt-J haven't 
revealed any creative details behind the record. Apart froma recent interview 
about 
<http://www.gq-magazine.co.uk/entertainment/articles/2014-02-/18/miley-bangerz-tour-uk-alt-j>
 who might possibly be their most unlikely celebrity fan –Miley Cyrus 
<https://twitter.com/MileyCyrus/status/422245872915587072> – band members Thom 
Sonny Green, Gus Unger-Hamilton and Joe Newman haven't announced where or what 
they're recording. They've been almost as coy on Twitter, too, making a rare 
comment in April: "Dusting off an old song we've wanted to work on forever," 
they wrote. "It's like seeing an old friend after three years, but he's got a 
beard and cool tattoos."

Alt-J have sold more than 1m copies of An Awesome Wave, netting three Brit 
nominations and an Ivor Novello award for album of the year.

This Is All Yours tracklist

 * IntroArrival In Nara 
 * Nara

 * Every Other Freckle

 * Left Hand Free

 * Garden Of England

 * Choice Kingdom

 * Hunger Of The Pine

 * Warm Foothills

 * The Gospel Of John Hurt

 * Pusher

 * Bloodflood pt.II

 * Leaving Nara

Alt-J tour dates

18 September – Glasgow, Academy


19 September – Manchester, Apollo 

22 September – Wolverhampton, Civic Hall

23 September – Brighton Centre 

24 September – London, Alexandra Palace 

27 September – Dublin, O2 Arena 

29 September – Paris, Casino de Paris

14 October – Vancouver, BC, Orpheum theatre

15 October – Seattle, WA, Paramount theatre

16 October – Portland, OR, Roseland Ballroom

20 October – Los Angeles, CA, Greek theatre


21 October – Pomona, CA, Fox theatre


24 October – San Diego, CA, Soma

27 October – Salt Lake City, UT, the Complex

28 October – Denver, CO, Fillmore Auditorium

31 October – Minneapolis, MN, Myth

2 November, Chicago, IL, Riviera theatre

4 November – Tulsa, OK, Cain's Ballroom

5 November – Dallas, TX, Southside Ballroom 

6 November – Houston, TX - Bayou Music Center

7-9 November – Austin, TX - Fun Fun Fun Fest

10 November – Detroit, MI - The Filllmore

11 November – Toronto, ON - Kool Haus

12 November – Montreal, QC, Métropolis

14 November – Philadelphia, PA, Tower theatre

16 November – New York, NY, Beacon theatre

18 November – Boston, MA, Orpheum theatre

19 November – Washington, DC, Echostage
 