
The rise of alternative finance has been well documented 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/publications/understanding-alternative-finance-uk-alternative-finance-industry-report-2014>
 – the total market (made up of new models like crowdfunding) was set to grow 
to £1.74bn by the end of 2014.


But, how viable is it and should charities be including these models, such as 
social impact bonds and social investment, in their strategies for the future? 
Inour recent Q&A on the future of charity money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/dec/05/charity-money-future-austerity-survive-income-liveqa>
 our experts shared their thoughts.


Panel

Danyal Sattar, development director – Big Society Capital 
<http://www.bigsocietycapital.com/>
Alice Casey, senior development manager – Nesta <http://www.nesta.org.uk/>
Jack Sheldon, team lead – Yimby <https://www.justgiving.com/yimby>
Stephen Mallinson, chief executive – Localgiving <http://localgiving.com/>
Jess Ratty, brand communications manager – Crowdfunder 
<http://www.crowdfunder.co.uk/>
Ben Eyre, advisory manager – Charities Aid Foundation 
<https://www.cafonline.org/>
Rosie Olliver, policy officer – Acevo <https://www.acevo.org.uk/>

What role are social impact bonds going to play? 

Ben Eyre: Social impact bonds can be fantastic and innovative, and my 
colleagues at CAF Venturesome (our social investment arm) have invested in a 
number of great SIBs such as Street Impact with St Mungo’s and Teens and 
Toddlers, but they are a lot of work and not a panacea. They represent one end 
of the spectrum that is unlikely to be relevant to huge numbers of 
organisations.

What does the future of crowdfunding look like?

Alice Casey: The main thing to note is crowdfunding is just one new tool in 
the box for charities - it isn’t right for every project or charity. If you 
have a project that is clearly bounded, easy to communicate and already has 
some network of interest (if not financial support) then you are likely to get 
much more out of crowdfunding. Matching funds with crowdfunded donations is a 
trend that we are seeing more of and which could be very interesting in future 
for funders and charities alike.

Steve Mallinson: I think we’ve barely scratched the surface of what might be 
possible by linking campaigns to matchfunds. Our experience suggests that you 
can deploy matchfund resources to encourage donations or pledges in different 
ways and they can achieve quite impressive returns which help everyone – 
charity, online supporters and matchfund donor.

Where do you start with crowdfunding if you’re new to it? 

Jess Ratty: A target is crucial – and clear and concise messaging. For 
rewards-based crowdfunding we advise that charities gather rewards that are a 
mix of non-geographical (open to everyone) and a variety of costs – from £5 to 
corporate sponsorship levels. You could also ask local businesses to provide 
items that can be put up for pledgers/donors.

Is this just a new way to collect old money? 

Ben Eyre: For me it provides the opportunity to engage with different people, 
and more of them in new ways.For example, take the interactive video Disaster 
Island <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D8erCX8pkqs>. Made by a (then) 14 year 
old film-maker for the British Red Cross, it turns viewers into players as they 
choose a character (i.e. fisherman /farmer /city dweller), suffer the 
consequences of their choices, and find ways to overcome the hardship. In doing 
so it hopes to turn players into supporters.

Are investments likely to be a big source of future income? 

Rosie Olliver: Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> raise 
around £3.5bn annually from their investments. As they grow as a market force, 
and work together to get the kinds of investment opportunities and funds that 
they need, then they can open up new avenues for fundraising that are 
appropriate to them. By working in collaboration charities can advocate for the 
kinds of products they want to see in the investment market.

Danyal Sattar: There are real limits to what social investment can do. It is 
useful in its own right, but not when you need real income money for delivering 
services.

Is the increasingly important role of social media going to make it harder for 
smaller charities to raise money?


Jack Sheldon: We see over two thirds of our projects hitting or exceeding 
their [crowdfunding] target, and none of them are large organisations. We’re 
trying to level the playing field for these smaller causes by giving them 
access to JustGiving’s huge audience. Soon when you visit JustGiving, you will 
see Yimby projects that we think you might be interested in supporting, whether 
they’re local to you, or for causes you care about.

If you work in the charity sector, you might like to join our free network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for charity professionals.
 