
Amélie, the whimsical French film that received five Oscar nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/89588/amelie>, is set to become a stage 
musical.

According to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/amelie-become-broadway-musical-612354>, 
composer Dan Messé of the indie band Hem announced on Facebook that he is 
working on a stage adaptation of Jean-Pierre Jeunet's 2001 film with an eye to 
its appearing on Broadway. However, no further details – such as a production 
timeline or even development workshops – have been announced.

"So not the best kept secret, but still I'm happy to announce that I've been 
commissioned to adapt the film Amélie for Broadway," Messé wrote. Playwright 
Craig Lucas, whose Prelude to a Kiss was nominated for both a Tony award and a 
Pulitzer prize, will write the book, with lyrics also contributed by 
Brooklyn-based songwriter Nathan Tysen. Pam MacKinnon, who picked up a best 
director Tony this year for Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf, is down to direct,
according to Playbill.com 
<http://www.playbill.com/news/article/181375-Dan-Mess-Craig-Lucas-and-Nathan-Tysen-Adapting-Amlie-as-Stage-Musical-Pam-MacKinnon-at-the-Helm>
.

Jeunet's film grossed $173.9m worldwide and made an international star of its 
lead, Audrey Tautou. It isnotable for its score by Yann Tiersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/feb/08/artsfeatures5>, which Messé 
describedin a recent interview with Paste magazine 
<http://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2013/08/hems-dan-messe-commissioned-to-adapt-amelie-for-br.html?utm_source=PANL&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=130820>
 as "one of the best movie scores there is".

He continued: "It's one of the reasons why I love the film. But, it's not what 
I do. He's a very different sort of composer than I am. And I'm not interested 
in doing Parisian music. I don't think I'm even going to use accordion in my 
score. The music sounds like mine. But certainly, I'm not playing up the 
Americana elements either. I'm not having pedal steel and fiddle, but it'll be 
hyper-romantic and playful more than anything."
 