
Egypt’s president must pardon Australian journalist Peter Greste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/peter-greste> and his al-Jazeera colleagues 
to stem the damage to his country’s reputation, human rights lawyer Amal 
Clooney said.

A Cairo court has handed three-year jail terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/egyptian-court-sentences-3-al-jazeera-english-journalists-to-3-years-in-prison>
 to Greste, Canadian Mohamed Fahmy and Egyptian Baher Mohamed for broadcasting 
false news that harmed Egypt following the 2013 military coup.

The case, widely condemned by the international community, has become an 
embarrassment for Egyptian president Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, and Clooney, who 
acts for Fahmy, says he must pardon the men.

'Devastated' Peter Greste calls on Egypt's president to pardon trio
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/30/devastated-peter-greste-calls-on-egypts-president-to-pardon-trio>
“It’s ironic that the conviction was for tarnishing Egypt’s reputation when 
... this [case] is what’s tarnished Egypt’s image,” Clooney told BBC News. “I 
do think he’s aware of that and he has a way to fix it.”

She said pardoning the men would tell the international community that Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> accepted they had not committed a 
crime and that the president had an opportunity to act now, before the trio 
launched any legal appeals.

“There’s a break now in the judicial proceedings,” she said. “Similarly there 
was a break in the judicial proceedings when Peter Greste was deported and that 
was considered sufficient to allow the executive to intervene then.”

Greste was sentenced in absentia on Saturday after being deported from Egypt 
in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/02/in-the-end-peter-greste-became-an-irritant-for-the-egyptian-government>
on the orders of the president. But his two colleagues remained in Egypt for 
the retrial and are now back behind bars.

Al-Jazeera journalists sentenced to three years in prison by Egyptian court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/egyptian-court-sentences-3-al-jazeera-english-journalists-to-3-years-in-prison>
Greste said his conviction could end his career as a foreign correspondent, 
but he was more concerned about his colleagues.

The three spent more than a year in jail together before their retrial was 
ordered.
“President al-Sisi now has an opportunity to undo that injustice, to correct 
that injustice,” he said.

“The eyes of the world are on Egypt.”

The foreign affairs minister, Julie Bishop, has promised to continue to pursue 
all diplomatic avenues with her Egyptian counterpart to clear Greste’s name.

The men have always denied spreading false news and supporting the blacklisted 
Muslim Brotherhood of president Sisi’s predecessor Mohamed Morsi.

 