
The international human rights lawyer Amal Clooney has met with the jailed 
former president of the Maldives,Mohamed Nasheed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-nasheed> – who was convicted of 
terrorism in a case that has drawn international criticism – a day before a key 
high court hearing.


 Nasheed, the Maldives’ first democratically elected leader, was ousted in 
2012 for ordering the arrest of a judge. He is a serving a 13-year jail term 
after a rapid trial in March.

 The United Nations, the US and human rights groups have said President 
Abdullah Yameen’s government failed to follow due process and that the case 
against Nasheed was politically motivated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Famal-clooney-in-maldives-meets-jailed-former-president-mohamed-nasheed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441769360018%2F36235958-4e66-4443-bbda-592ec891097d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amal%20Clooney%20in%20Maldives%20meets%20jailed%20former%20president%20Mohamed%20Nasheed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Famal-clooney-in-maldives-meets-jailed-former-president-mohamed-nasheed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amal%20Clooney%20in%20Maldives%20meets%20jailed%20former%20president%20Mohamed%20Nasheed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Famal-clooney-in-maldives-meets-jailed-former-president-mohamed-nasheed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441769360018%2F36235958-4e66-4443-bbda-592ec891097d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mohamed Nasheed on his way to jail in March after a court appearance. 
Photograph: Mohamed Sharuhaan/AP 
 Clooney, who is married to the actor George Clooney, travelled to a prison on 
Maafushi Island where Nasheed was taken on 23 August from house arrest. She was 
checked by two prison officials before the 90-minute discussion with Nasheed.

“Well, President Nasheed is in a remarkably good spirits,” Clooney said soon 
after the meeting. “He wanted me to convey to the people of theMaldives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/maldives> that they should remain hopeful 
that things will improve and that he is pleased that I will be attending 
meetings with him on behalf of the government.”

 The meeting came a day before a high court hearing on an appeal by the 
prosecutor general’s office, which had found some procedural irregularities, to 
review Nasheed’s legal case.

The prosecutor, General Muhthaz Muhusin, told Reuters that a high court 
decision to review the case would help Nasheed appeal against his sentence.

The UN rights chief Zeid Ra’ad Al-Hussein last week called on Yameen’s 
government to release Nasheed. He also called for a review of criminal cases 
against several hundred of Nasheed’s party supporters who have been arrested in 
protests since May in the Maldives.
 