
Egyptian experts warned human rights barrister Amal Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amal-alamuddin> that she risked arrest in 
February 2014 after identifying serious flaws in its judicial system.

 The same flaws subsequently contributed to the conviction of three al-Jazeera 
journalists now jailed in Cairo.

In an interview with the Guardian after their appeal hearing this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/01/al-jazeera-peter-greste-mohamed-fahmy-apply-deportation-egypt>
, Clooney, a lawyer for one of the trio, said they were victims of the same 
legal irregularities that she earmarked in her February 2014 report about 
Egyptian courts.

Written before Clooney became involved in the al-Jazeera case, the report was 
deemed so controversial that her team was warned they could be arrested should 
they have tried to present its findings insideEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>.

“When I went to launch the report, first of all they stopped us from doing it 
in Cairo,” Clooney told the Guardian. “They said: ‘Does the report criticise 
the army, the judiciary, or the government?’ We said: ‘Well, yes.’ They said: 
‘Well then, you’re risking arrest.’”

The report, compiled on behalf of the International Bar Association 
<http://www.ibanet.org/Article/Detail.aspx?ArticleUid=B30A63AE-8066-4B49-8758-C1684BE5E9B9>
, said Egypt’s judicial system was not as independent as it could be. It 
pointed out that officials in the ministry of justice have wide powers over 
nominally independent judges, and highlighted the control the government can 
exert over state prosecutors.

Among other recommendations, Clooney and her co-authors suggested 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lpavo6HbYAY> ending the practice that allows 
Egyptian officials to handpick judges for certain politicised cases. “That 
recommendation wasn’t followed, and we’ve seen the results of that in this 
particular case where you had a handpicked panel led by a judge who is known 
for dispensing brutal verdicts,”Clooney 
<http://www.doughtystreet.co.uk/static/amal-clooney.html>. said “And this one 
was no different.”

The three journalists – Peter Greste, Baher Mohamed, and Mohamed Fahmy, whom 
Clooney represents – were initially sentenced to between seven and 10 years in 
jaillast June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/23/al-jazeera-journalists-sentences-international-condemnation-egypt>
 by the controversial Egyptian judge Mohamed Nagy Shehata.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fegypt-amal-clooney-arrest-al-jazeera-three%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F2%2F1420217084919%2Ff0351fa7-98a6-4489-b3de-fd8da0c184d7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amal%20Clooney%20warned%20that%20she%20risked%20arrest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fegypt-amal-clooney-arrest-al-jazeera-three%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amal%20Clooney%20warned%20that%20she%20risked%20arrest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fegypt-amal-clooney-arrest-al-jazeera-three%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F2%2F1420217084919%2Ff0351fa7-98a6-4489-b3de-fd8da0c184d7-1020x612.jpeg>
 Baher Mohamed, Mohamed Fahmy and Peter Greste in court in Cairo in March. 
Photograph: Heba Elkholy/AP 
Shehata became notorious during the trial for rarely taking off his aviator 
sunglasses <https://twitter.com/PatrickKingsley/status/458531915788976128>, 
mocking Fahmy’s fiancee, and for cracking a joke aboutWorld Press Freedom day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/03/egypt-al-jazeera-world-press-freedom-day-trial>
. A few months later, he alsosentenced to death 188 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/02/egypt-condemns-188-death-attack-police-station>
, Clooney said, “in one mass trial which didn’t distinguish between each 
defendant’s criminal responsibility”. Shehata failed to respond to several 
requests for interview.

At the trio’s appeal on New Year’s Day, a new judge refused to throw out the 
case, but agreed to a retrial, after recognising problems with the initial 
process. But Clooney fears those flaws – which included the presentation of a
Gotye song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/22/australian-journalist-al-jazeera-egyptian-prosecutors-unbelievable-inefficiency>
,footage of a trotting horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/10/peter-greste-al-jazeera-egypt-trial-journalists-footage>
, and pictures of Greste’s parents as evidence of the trio’s guilt – are so 
serious that they will compromise the integrity of any second hearing.

“If the idea is: well, there were errors and now there’s going to be a 
retrial, but then the retrial operates on the same basis as the original one, 
that doesn’t really mean much,” Clooney said. She has waived most of her usual 
fees, and is paid directly byFahmy <http://www.gofundme.com/fjflds> without the 
support of al-Jazeera. “I don’t see how the prosecution can proceed again in a 
trial process even if the judges were to be constituted properly this time 
around. I don’t see how they could fix the lack of evidence.”

As a result, Clooney has concluded “that we have to continue and double our 
efforts to achieve his release in other ways. Unfortunately we have to conclude 
that we can’t rely on these Egyptian court processes to achieve a fair or swift 
result.”

For Baher Mohamed <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-27943387>, the 
third detainee who holds only an Egyptian passport, his fate largely depends on 
those court processes, with the prospect of a presidential pardon dwindling. 
But Clooney’s client, Fahmy, a Canadian citizen, and his Australian colleague 
Greste, have another option: deportation to their home countries.

Fahmy and Greste have applied to Egypt’s chief prosecutor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/01/al-jazeera-peter-greste-mohamed-fahmy-apply-deportation-egypt>
 to demand they be sent to Canada and Australia respectively under the terms of 
anew presidential decree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/13/egypt-decree-jailed-al-jazeera-journalist-peter-greste>
 that provides foreign detainees with such a route, and which seems to have 
been tailored for their case.

The vague and unprecedented nature of the decree has led to doubts about how 
it would be used in practice. But based on her communication with relevant 
officials in Egypt and Canada, and on her experience of international law, 
Clooney is hopeful that deportation is a real option. “There are many different 
ways in which the transfer from Egypt to Canada can occur, and as long as there 
is a genuine commitment on both sides, I see no reason why a transfer can’t 
happen in fairly quick terms.”

Inside Egypt, Fahmy’s appeals team was led by an Egyptian lawyer, Negad 
Boraie, with contributions from Clooney that related to international law. But 
outside Egypt, it is Clooney who is spearheading attempts to secure Fahmy’s 
deportation, and hopes next week to meet the Canadian foreign minister, John 
Baird, to try to convince him to expedite the process.

“We are very much hoping that the Canadian and Egyptian officials we have 
contacted will engage with us fully to ensure that Mohamed is involved – 
through his counsel – in the discussions and that a fair outcome can be 
achieved as soon as possible.”

Responding to the allegation that Clooney was told she risked arrest in 2014 
if she presented her report in Egypt, a spokesman for Egypt’s police, Hany 
Abdellatif, later said that she was not listed for arrest.

“There is nothing against Mrs Amal,” Police general Hany Abdellatif told the 
Guardian. “Maybe someone deceived her. Maybe members of the Muslim Brotherhood 
[an Egyptian opposition group] or others to delude her that there are no 
freedoms in Egypt.”

• This article was amended on 2 January and 5 January 2015. Due to editing 
errors, the headline and text in an earlier version gave the impression that 
Amal Clooney risked arrest in connection with her representation of one of the 
al-Jazeera journalists. In fact she was warned in February 2014, before her 
involvement in the case, that she risked arrest as a result of a report in 
which she earmarked flaws in the country’s judicial system. This has been 
corrected. The article and headlines were further amended on 6 January 2015 to 
make clear that Clooney was warned by experts in Egyptian affairs. An earlier 
version said she was warned by officials. The article was also amended on 4 
January 2015 to include comments from the Egyptian police.
 