
Amanda Knox, who was last week cleared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/meredith-kercher-amanda-knox-and-raffaele-sollecito-acquitted>
 of two convictions for murder after more than seven years with charges hanging 
over her head, has promised to “give voice to others who have been wrongfully 
convicted”.

Meredith Kercher murder: Amanda Knox and Raffaele Sollecito acquitted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/meredith-kercher-amanda-knox-and-raffaele-sollecito-acquitted>
In a letter published on Friday in the Seattle Times 
<http://www.seattletimes.com/opinion/amanda-knox-moving-forward-with-gratitude-and-a-purpose/>
, a week afterItaly’s highest court acquitted her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/meredith-kercher-amanda-knox-and-raffaele-sollecito-acquitted>
 in the 2007 murder of Briton Meredith Kercher, Knox thanked her supporters for 
years of donations and activism and said she intends “to pay forward all 
everyone has done for me”.

“Countless other wrongfully convicted persons do not have such support,” she 
wrote on Friday. “I will work to give a voice to those individuals. I will do 
this because I know how a wrongful conviction can destroy one’s life and 
because we best honor crime victims by ensuring that the actual perpetrators 
are brought to justice.”


Knox and her former boyfriend Raffaele Sollecito served four years in prison 
before their 2009 convictions were overturned on appeal. Knox returned to the 
US but that decision was vacated and in 2014 the pair were again found guilty 
of murder.

Besides frequently appearing with signs in hand at court dates and rallying 
near her Seattle home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/27/amanda-knox-acquittal-west-seattle-verdict-meredith-kercher-murder>
, Knox’s supporters provided financial assistance and contacts to DNA experts 
and former law enforcement investigators.

Since her return to the US in 2011, Knox has attempted to carve out a normal 
life despite the persistence of the paparazzi and the tortuous workings of the 
Italian courts. She becameengaged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/13/amanda-knox-to-marry-musician> 
to musician Colin Sutherland and beganworking as a freelance reporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/05/amanda-knox-working-as-reporter-for-west-seattle-herald>
 for a small west Seattle newspaper.

Knox, 27, said she was “grateful to have my life back” after her acquittal, a 
sentiment repeated many timesby friends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/29/amanda-knox-supporters-seattle-verdict>
 of her family in Seattle.

She did not specify how she means to pursue her advocacy for the wrongfully 
convicted.

Sollecito, 31, was also acquitted. He has also suggested he wants to restore 
normalcy to his life, saying on Monday: “I’ll be ready to defend my dignity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/raffaele-sollecito-defiant-that-he-is-not-a-and-will-defend-his-dignity>
.”

Who is Amanda Knox?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/08/who-is-amanda-knox-interview> 
In her letter, Knox acknowledged that “this story does not have a happy 
ending”.

“Unlike a wrongful conviction, which can be overturned, nothing will ever 
bring Meredith Kercher back to her family and loved ones,” she wrote.

After the verdict, Kercher’s family said the Italian justice system had failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/28/knox-verdict-italian-justice-system-has-failed-says-meredith-kerchers-family>
.

One man, Rudy Guede, remains in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/28/meredith-kercher-amanda-knox-raffaele-sollecito-italy-case>
 for the crime.
 