
The convictions of Amanda Knox and Raffaele Sollecito 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/raffaele-sollecito> for the murder of 
Meredith Kercher have been annulled, bringing to a close a seven-year legal 
saga. Here are the key events in the case:


2 November 2007: Kercher, 21, is found dead in the Perugia apartment she 
shared with Knox <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/nov/03/italy.ukcrime>. 
Investigators say she was killed the night before.

Amanda Knox murder conviction annulled - live coverage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2015/mar/27/amanda-knox-murder-trial-italy-court-decision-live-updates>
6 November 2007: Knox is arrested with then-boyfriend Sollecito and Diya 
“Patrick” Lumumba, the Congolese owner of pub where Knox occasionally worked.

20 November 2007: Lumumba, implicated by Knox, is released for lack of 
evidence.

6 December 2007: Ivory Coast national Rudy Hermann Guede is extradited from 
Germany.

28 October 2008: Judge indicts Knox and Sollecito on charges of murder and 
sexual assault.

Guede, in a fast-track trial, is convicted of murder and sexual assault and 
sentenced to 30 years in prison.

4 December 2009: Court finds Knox guilty of murder, sexual assault and 
slander; sentences her to 26 years in prison. Sollecito is convicted of murder 
and sexual assault, sentenced to 25 years.

22 December 2009: Appeals court upholds Guede’s conviction, cuts sentence to 
16 years.

24 November 2010: Appeals trial for Knox and Sollecito opens in Perugia.

29 June 2011: Independent forensic report ordered by the appeals court finds 
much of the DNA evidence used to convict Knox and Sollecito is unreliable.

3 October 2011: Appeals court clears Knox and Sollecito of murder conviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/04/amanda-knox-freed-four-case> and 
orders them to be freed immediately.

26 March 2013: Italy’s highest court overturns the acquittal and orders a new 
appeals trial.

30 September 2013: Florence appeals court opens third trial of Knox and 
Sollecito.

30 January 2014: Appeals court upholds murder convictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/30/amanda-knox-raffaele-sollecito-lose-meredith-kercher-murder-appeal>
, sentencing Knox to 28 1/2 years and Sollecito to 25 years. Lawyers say they 
will take the case to Italy’s highest appeals court.


27 March 2015: The court annulled the convictions of Knox and Sollecito and 
declined to order another retrial.
 