
Not much to laugh about in today's top story, as Amanda Holden writes in her 
autobiography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2011/may/01/amanda-holden-shrek-britain-talent>
 that she was onceassaulted by "a famous comedian" 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2458350/Amanda-Holden-I-sexually-assaulted-celebrity-says-Britains-Got-Talent-judge.html>
. The Britain's Got Talent judge claims she was cornered by the unnamed comic 
at a public event, during a period when she was patching up her marriage to Les 
Dennis after an affair with Men Behaving Badly star Neil Morrissey. "[Dennis 
and I] went to an event together," Holden writes, "and on my way back from the 
loo, I was cornered by a famous comedian, who tried to kiss me and put his 
hands in places they shouldn't have been. I was scared and tried to push him 
away … but he wasn't put off … My body went limp, and I just stood there as he 
groped and nuzzled me." The attack, says Holden, former star of the 
hairdressing drama Cutting It, left her feeling "cheap and worthless".

A series has been commissioned of the new Danny Boyle-directed comedy Babylon 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2013-10-13/james-nesbitt-to-star-in-police-comedy-drama-babylon-from-peep-show-writers-and-danny-boyle>
 – a sitcom about modern policing from the pens ofPeep Show duo Jesse Armstrong 
and Sam Bain <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/peep-show>. Speaking at Radio 
Times event at the Cheltenham literature festival, Bain and Armstrong revealed 
that the six-part comedy-drama will be set in London, and will "focus on police 
from all levels of the force and will feature documentary-style elements".

"As soon as there's any incident [in real-life policing] now, there's 20 
camera phones out," says Bain, "and the cops are filming the public back, so 
it's quite a screen- and filming-rich environment out on the streets, and I 
think that interests [Boyle] to try and convey … We've been writing it for a 
few years since we had the first meeting. Mainly because of availability. 
Danny, last year, was doing something in the Olympic Park … he was quite busy."

The writers also revealed that the show's cast will include James Nesbitt 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Nesbitt>, Peep Show's Paterson Joseph 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paterson_Joseph> and the standup (and star of Sky 
TV's Chickens)Jonny Sweet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/12/jonny-sweet-review>.

On the subject of Peep Show, the Independent speculates that the new BBC 
sitcom, Ambassadors, isbeing used by the Foreign Office to improve its image 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/can-new-mitchell--webb-comedy-help-the-foreign-office-improve-its-image-8866984.html>
. The show's writers – which include James Wood,the co-creator of Rev 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0178fhq> – were given access to senior FO 
officials and spent time with the British ambassador to Kazakhastan. The former 
ambassador to Uzbekistan, Craig Murray – who claims the show is based on his 
experiences – criticises Ambassadors as "pro-government propaganda, a 
state-sponsored satire". Murray is critical of the series' sympathetic portrait 
of British government activity overseas. "It is disgraceful and not based on 
anything the Foreign Office would do in real life," he claims. "[In reality], 
human rights always have a very low priority compared to military 
considerations."

Elsewhere in comedy, Jo Brand has defended Lee Mack 
<http://www.beyondthejoke.co.uk/content/news-jo-brand-defends-lee-mack> over 
"unfair" charges that he was dismissive of female comedians on hisrecent Desert 
Island Discs appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/01/lee-mack-comedy-sexism-hello-ladies>
. Miranda Hart has taken to Twitter to beg for the return of her laptop,burgled 
from her home in Shepherds Bush last Friday night 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/celebritynews/miranda-hart-offers-reward-for-laptop-stolen-in-burglary-containing-new-comedy-material-8878455.html>
. "Please please please return," Hart writes. "Precious creative projects all 
lost. Will reward." And the creators of BBC Scotland's hit sitcom Still Game, 
Ford Kiernan and Greg Hemphill, have ended their six-year feud andwill bring 
back the show's characters in a new stage show 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/entertainment/celebrity/scotlands-best-loved-comedy-stars-ford-2372494>
.

In screen news, Jennifer Saunders has stoked speculation about the Ab Fab 
movie, whichshe told Radio 4 is still a going concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/10/absolutely-fabulous-movie-jennifer-saunders>
; Eddie Izzard is to play the inventor of radar,Sir Robert Watson-Watt, in a 
new drama, Castles in the Sky 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2013/10/09/18825/izzard_to_play_radars_inventor>
; and the standup Humphrey Ker – best newcomer on the 2011 Edinburgh Fringe – 
hassold his autobiographical sitcom to the American network ABC 
<http://splitsider.com/2013/10/humphrey-ker-sells-a-sitcom-to-abc/>. BBC Three 
is developing a new topical comedy format, meanwhile, offering "commentary from 
the best new talent", entitled The Three Show; and Ghostbusters star Dan 
Aykroyd has flounced off an Aussie chat show after being told hewasn't allowed 
to flog his own vodka brand 
<http://nypost.com/2013/10/13/dan-aykroyd-throws-tv-tantrum/>.

Best of the Guardian's comedy coverage

• As Open All Hours threatens a return to our screens – we ask, is it ever 
worth reviving classic sitcoms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/09/open-all-hours-reviving-classic-sitcom>
?

• And speaking of classic sitcoms, here's how the pilot of Fawlty Towers was 
greeted by the Beeb's then comedy script editor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/interactive/2013/oct/12/fawlty-towers-bbc-rejection-letter>
. (Spoiler alert: he didn't love it).

• "He may be small, overweight and dorky in his tastes, but having such a fine 
mind gives him the authority to […] attack big targets" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/10/patton-oswalt-comedy-gold> – Leo 
Benedictus on Patton Oswalt in this week's Comedy Gold.

• You never thought you'd see Frank Skinner lecturing you about the Russian 
constructivists and the Fluxus artworks of Yoko Ono, did you?You can now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2013/oct/14/frank-skinner-performance-art-unlock-video>
.

• Life of Brian. Duck Soup. Dr Strangelove. The Guardian rounds up its top 10 
comedy movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/11/top-10-comedy-movies>.

• "It's great to see arena-level standup that asks us to think as well as 
laugh" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/09/russell-brand-birmingham-symphony-hall-review>
 – my review of Russell Brand's Messiah Complex.

• And here's the review you didn't get. I was booked in to see Robin Ince and 
Josie Long last Friday night at Stratford Circus. Then my ticket was withdrawn, 
and I was told critics weren't welcome on this tour.Here – according to Ince 
himself – is why 
<https://robinince.wordpress.com/2013/10/12/i-am-my-own-worst-critic-i-often-walk-out-on-myself/>
.

Worth a look

Two items to catch the eye. The first is an article by Tom Crawshaw, author of 
a play about the Monty Python star Graham Chapman,on how 21st-century comedy 
treats homosexuality 
<http://www.thegayuk.com/#/magazine/4574334751/OPINION-Don%E2%80%99t-Take-It-The-Wrong-Way-Homosexuality-in-Comedy/6742443>
. "Isn't laughing at a situation predicated on homosexuality saying, in some 
way, that to be gay is somehow slightly ridiculous – not wrong or evil – but 
somehow lesser, not ordinary, not completely sensible? There is a hint," writes 
Crawshaw, "of macho culture at work, where the jokes of the playground are 
rejected but their underlying narrative is accepted and played on."

And here – for UK audiences curious to know what Simon Amstell is up to in the 
US – is the ex-Grandma's House star'sdebut standup set on The Late Show with 
David Letterman 
<http://splitsider.com/2013/10/simon-amstell-did-his-first-us-late-night-spot-on-letterman/>
.

Best of our readers' comments

Two of the world's most celebrated (and hated) comedians were under discussion 
this week. AfterStephanie Merritt's Observer review of Russell Brand's Messiah 
Complex show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/13/russell-brand-messiah-complex-review>
,Rickyee369 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27901241> pays 
Brand a compliment with which it's hard to disagree:
 For a very naughty boy … Brand is very good. People may whine at his 
wankiness regarding meditation, Hinduism and general good love for fellow 
humanity, but I find him refreshing in an age where celebrity needs to remain 
empty to be constant. Much like the Beatles in the 60s, Brand is trying to find 
the light in a world of sleepwalking, passive night-dwelling insignificants … 
There is much to take with a shedful of salt, but much to admire in his 
attempts to educate those who first heard of him after he made anill-considered 
call to Manuel <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sachsgate>. 

People wish this guy ill at their own risk … Do we really want vacuous and 
dire entertainers? Or is there room for someone who provokes thought, even if 
it is against some imagined grain?

You'll lament the lanky toerag when he's gone … 
And on Monday night I reviewed David Brent's debut stage show with his backing 
band, Foregone Conclusion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/15/ricky-gervais-david-brent-foregone-conclusion-review>
 – and the comments below the line suggest Gervais will have to do better to 
win (back?) the hearts of Guardian readers.Petsound 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27952537> had this to say:
 Gervais still has Brent nailed perfectly, but it just isn't the same outside 
of the context of The Office. I used to really believe I was watching David 
Brent, whereas now I only see Gervais acting as David Brent. Maybe it's the 
fact that he's visibly aged, or the fact that at the end of The Office there 
was at least a glimmer of hope that Brent was evolving and changing, and now 
we're supposed to believe he's like this, 10 years later? He's not a living 
character any more, just an animated mummy. Either way, it's a bit like Paul 
McCartney writing songs that sound like the Beatles – on paper it ticks all the 
boxes, but it just lacks the magic that was there the first time around.

And Risibilis <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27946247> 
followed up with this jab to Gervais's ribs:
 Gervais' alter ego has always been a 'rock star'. After establishing a public 
profile via self-deprecating comic personas he's now relaunching his pop 
career. In doing this in the guise of it being a comedy turn he's given himself 
a safety net if the music isn't well-received. He's certainly brash – but 
brave? I think not so much or he'd not need to perform as a 'character'.  