
Italy’s highest court acquitted Amanda Knox and her former boyfriend Raffaele 
Sollecitoof the 2007 murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/nov/03/italy.ukcrime> of the British 
university student Meredith Kercher, because there were “stunning flaws” in the 
investigation that led to their convictions, according to judges’ legal 
reasoning.

A panel of judges at the court of cassation in Rome found that the state’s 
case against the pair, who weredefinitively cleared of murder in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/meredith-kercher-amanda-knox-and-raffaele-sollecito-acquitted>
, lacked enough evidence to prove their wrongdoing beyond reasonable doubt, and 
cited a complete lack of “biological traces” in connection to the crime.

Meredith Kercher murder: Amanda Knox and Raffaele Sollecito acquitted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/meredith-kercher-amanda-knox-and-raffaele-sollecito-acquitted>
The 52-page legal motivazioni, published on Monday, detailed the reasons for 
the acquittal of Knox, a US exchange student, and Sollecito, who each served 
four years in prison for Kercher’s murder before they were released and then 
retried.

Releasing the details involved in a court decision months after a verdict has 
been announced is common practice in Italy’s highest court.

“The trial had oscillations which were the result of stunning flaws, or 
amnesia, in the investigation and omissions in the investigative activity,” the 
judges wrote.

They also said that the murder investigation was ultimately hindered by the 
fact that investigators were under pressure to come up with answers once the 
case was prominently covered in media around the world.

“The international spotlight on the case in fact resulted in the investigation 
undergoing a sudden acceleration, that, in the frantic search for one or more 
guilty parties to consign to international public opinion, certainly didn’t 
help the search for substantial truth,” the judges wrote.

They also criticised prosecutors and lower court judges for failing to 
establish a clear theory on what would have prompted Knox, who is now 28, and 
Sollecito, 31, to commit the murder, and that they instead had bought into a 
“theory of complicity” – suggesting, for instance, that Knox had been resentful 
of her flatmate – with few facts to back them up.

The judges denounced the prosecutors’ argument that there was not more 
physical evidence linking Knox and Sollecito to the crime because they had 
selectively cleaned the crime scene as illogical. Such an act would have been 
impossible, they said.

Who is Amanda Knox?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/08/who-is-amanda-knox-interview> 
Instead of being wary of the lack of evidence, the judges said the lower court 
in Perugia that initially found Knox and Sollecito guilty in 2009 had ignored 
experts who had “clearly demonstrated possible contamination”. The lower court 
had also misinterpreted evidence about the knife that prosecutors argued was 
the murder weapon.

They said evidence pointed to the guilt of one man – Rudy Guede, a drifter 
from Ivory Coast, who receiveda 16-year prison sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/dec/22/rudy-guede-sentence-kercher-murder>
 for Kercher’s murder following a fast-track trial in 2008. At the time of his 
conviction, it was stated that he did not act alone. In their decision, the 
judges said Guede may have had accomplices but that prosecutors had not proven 
them to have been Knox or Sollecito.


The judges added that the only crime of which Knox was guilty was the false 
accusation she made to police days after her roommate was killed, in which she 
blamed her boss, Diya “Patrick” Lumumba, a bar owner, for the crime. Lumumba 
spent two weeks in jail before he was exonerated. Although the charge carried a 
three-year sentence, it was deemed moot because of the time Knox had already 
spent in prison.


On Monday Carlo Dalla Vedova, one of Knox’s lawyers, said the judges’ 
explanation was tantamount to a “great censure, a note of solemn censure of all 
the investigators”. Speaking about his client, the lawyer told AP: “She is very 
satisfied and happy to read this decision. At the same time, it’s a very sad 
story. It’s a sad story becauseMeredith Kercher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/meredithkercher> is no longer with us, and 
this is a tragedy nobody can forget,” he added.

The Knox case became a media circus in Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> and was the subject of intense 
attention in the world press, which nicknamed the young American “Foxy Knoxy”. 
A native of Washington state, she was portrayed both as a harmless innocent and 
a sex-crazed killer.

The case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/28/meredith-kercher-amanda-knox-raffaele-sollecito-italy-case>
 began on 2 November 2007, when the body of Kercher, a 21-year-old Leeds 
University student from Surrey, was found in the bedroom of the flat she shared 
with Knox in Perugia, central Italy, where both were studying. Her throat had 
been cut and she had been sexually assaulted.

Kercher family have a bitter pill to swallow after verdict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/kercher-family-knox-sollecito-verdict-hard>
Kercher’s family expressed profound dismay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/kercher-family-knox-sollecito-verdict-hard>
 when Knox and Sollecito were acquitted in March. At the time, the family’s 
lawyer, Francesco Maresca, called the decision a “defeat for the Italian 
justice system”.

Today, the case itself – and the fact that Knox and Sollecito were found 
guilty, not guilty and then guilty again before finally seeing their case 
thrown out – is seen by many as an indictment of the Italian court system.

The case continues to captivate people’s interest, but the court said there 
was no possibility that Kercher’s murder would be investigated again. It would 
be impossible to offer, at this late stage, any more “answers of certainty”.



 