
Amazon has launched Amazon Music Unlimited, a competitor to Spotify and Apple 
Music <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music>, as part of the 
company’s push into music streaming.

Amazon Music Unlimited, which will initially only be available in the US, is a 
head-to-head competitor withSpotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify>, charging the same $9.99 
(£8.15) monthly fee as that service. But Amazon is attempting to beat the 
streaming service on price when it comes to certain target markets. Amazon 
Prime customers, for instance, can pick up their subscription for $7.99, a $2 a 
month saving on competitors.

More interesting is the discounted version for owners of the Amazon Echo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/amazon-echo-voice-controlled-speaker-alexa-assistant-uk>
, the company’s smart speaker family. For $3.99 a month, they can get an Amazon 
Music Unlimited subscription which will only work through their Echo devices.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Famazon-music-unlimited-launch-spotify-apple-streaming-competitor-echo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6432e1e9c4dcc5036ff30041cbf9bedf8e62c96f%2F0_74_1242_745%2F1242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amazon%20launches%20Spotify%20and%20Apple%20Music%20competitor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Famazon-music-unlimited-launch-spotify-apple-streaming-competitor-echo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amazon%20launches%20Spotify%20and%20Apple%20Music%20competitor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Famazon-music-unlimited-launch-spotify-apple-streaming-competitor-echo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6432e1e9c4dcc5036ff30041cbf9bedf8e62c96f%2F0_74_1242_745%2F1242.jpg>
 Amazon is hoping that some AI features in the new service will mean that 
customers will switch to Amazon Music Unlimited. Photograph: AP 
That tier gives away why Amazon is making this new push into the space. While 
the first generation of music streaming was focused on the desktop, and the 
second on mobile devices, the company sees the home as the site of the third 
battle. On that turf,Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> has 
an advantage over both Spotify and Apple, neither of which have standalone 
hardware which competes with the Echo.

Spotify does integrate with the Echo, while Apple Music works through some 
dedicated devices such as the Apple TV, but Amazon is hoping that some AI 
features in the new service will mean that customers will switch. Users can ask 
their Echo speakers – or their smartphones running the Music Unlimited app – to 
play songs by simply quoting lyrics (“play me that song that goes ‘scuse me 
while I kiss the sky’”), songs from a specific time in an artists’ career 
(“play me Oasis songs from before 1997”) or songs described by a particular 
adjective (“Play me happy songs”). It’s a world away from the simplistic 
integration that Spotify has with the Echo, and from the extent to which Siri 
can control Apple Music on iPhones or TVs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Famazon-music-unlimited-launch-spotify-apple-streaming-competitor-echo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a648e2527b52341911cd9e0fbeaa7bc400ed10e%2F0_0_3392_2036%2F3392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amazon%20launches%20Spotify%20and%20Apple%20Music%20competitor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Famazon-music-unlimited-launch-spotify-apple-streaming-competitor-echo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amazon%20launches%20Spotify%20and%20Apple%20Music%20competitor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Famazon-music-unlimited-launch-spotify-apple-streaming-competitor-echo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a648e2527b52341911cd9e0fbeaa7bc400ed10e%2F0_0_3392_2036%2F3392.jpg>
 Similar to Amazon Echo, Google Home ties into the search company’s Google Play 
All Access streaming service. Photograph: Google 
The features are more squarely aimed at Google, which just released its own 
Echo competitor, the Google Home. That is capable of similar functionalities, 
and ties into the company’s Google Play All Access streaming service.

Of course, Amazon customers might be feeling slight deja vu at the idea of an 
Amazon music service. The company already has an unlimited streaming product, 
Amazon Prime Music, which is included for free with Amazon Prime. It advertises 
“a million songs”, and “hundreds of hand-built playlists”, and is already the 
default service for the Echo when it ships. Amazon Music Unlimited promises 
more songs.

It’s not the first time Amazon has competed with itself in this way. The 
company offers two unlimited reading services with a similar divide: the Kindle 
Owners’ Lending Library, bundled free with Prime, lets Kindle owners borrow one 
book for free every month, while the Kindle Unlimited service is a $10 a month 
feature that lets users read as many books as they want.

There is as yet no date for a worldwide roll out of Amazon Music Unlimited.

 * Google Home starts battle with Amazon for living rooms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/04/google-home-launch-amazon-echo-voice-recognition-uk-living-rooms>
 