
Thousands of stalkers who torment their victims but whom the police do not 
have enough evidence to charge are to face asbo-style bans, the home secretary 
will announce on Wednesday.

Amber Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd> is to introduce 
new stalking prevention orders that will give the courts fresh powers to order 
offenders at an early stage not to go anywhere near someone they have been 
compulsively pursuing, especially in cases involving strangers.

Ministers say that as many as 1.5 million women and 830,000 men are victims of 
stalkers every year, yet the police recorded only 4,168 stalking offences in 
the 12 months to June. Even fewer – 1,102 cases – were prosecuted in the courts 
in 2015-16.

Stalking victims backed in challenge to ‘disturbing’ lenient court sentences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/15/stalking-victims-challenge-lenient-sentences-emily-maitlis>
The introduction of the new civil stalking protection orders will enable the 
courts to impose restrictions on suspected stalkers, including staying away 
from their target, restricting their internet use, attending a rehabilitation 
programme or seeking treatment for mental health issues.

Breaching the conditions will be a criminal offence with a maximum sentence of 
five years in jail. Introducing the new orders will require legislation that 
ministers say they will table as soon as possible.

The Home Office said the new orders would offer additional protection at an 
early stage for anyone who has not been in an intimate relationship with their 
stalker, helping those targeted by strangers, acquaintances or colleagues, as 
well as professionals such as doctors who may be targeted by patients.

“Stranger stalkers” are believed to account for as many as 50% of cases, while 
those cases involving ex-partners are already covered by domestic violence 
protection orders. TheNational Stalking Helpline 
<http://www.suzylamplugh.org/Pages/Category/national-stalking-helpline> has 
responded to 3,550 calls so far this year.

Stalkers often delude themselves that they are in a relationship with their 
victim, causing distress and fear by persistently intruding on their lives 
through unwanted phone calls, text messages, emails or letters. This can extend 
in a pattern of behaviour to loitering, following and spying on their victim, 
ordering goods and services, as well as threats and violence.

In one extreme case, a stalker had Googled the name of his victim 40,000 times 
over the course of a year and had persisted in his attempts to contact his 
victim despite being handed three restraining orders.

However, critics fear that the orders will be used as a substitute for 
pursuing criminal prosecutions by poorly trained police and prosecutors unable 
to gather evidence. They also voiced concerns that breaches would not be 
rigorously enforced.

Rudd said: “Stalking can have devastating consequences, and I am determined 
that we do all we can to protect victims from these prolonged and terrifying 
campaigns of abuse that can last years, leaving many people too afraid to leave 
their homes and unable to get on with their lives.

 “Four years ago this government created specific stalking offences to ensure 
those responsible face justice. Today I want to go even further and offer 
protection at the first signs of stalking, stopping offenders in their tracks.”

Garry Shewan, Greater Manchester police’s assistant chief constable and the 
National Police Chiefs’ Council lead for stalking and harassment, said: “We 
want to stop stalkers in their tracks. In the last year, police have recorded 
32% more stalking offences and more perpetrators are now being prosecuted. The 
launch of stalking protection orders will help us intervene earlier and place 
controls on perpetrators to prevent their behaviour escalating while the crime 
is investigated.”

But Harry Fletcher, director of Voice4Victims <http://www.voice4victims.co.uk/>
, said the orders were only an interim measure to tide victims over while the 
police decided whether to press ahead with a prosecution. “The real issue is 
why there are so few prosecutions so far under the stalkings laws and why it 
takes so long for the police to secure evidence to prosecute,” he said. There 
have been just over 2,000 prosecutions since the new law came into effect in 
2012.

Fletcher said what was needed was proper training for the police and 
prosecutors and he said the orders might become a substitute for prosecutions.
 