
Amelia Bullmore <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/amelia-bullmore> looks 
small and stranded as she waits for me outside the Royal Academy, with its vast 
stone quad spread out before her. She shoots out a hand from her mackintosh 
pocket to greet me and we scurry off to the cafe. Once seated, a neighbouring 
customer attempts to disentangle his bag from Bullmore’s similar-looking one. 
“Yes, do take it,” she tells him cheerily. “Let’s not have a sitcom-style 
mix-up!”

The 49-year-old actor and writer has enjoyed an astonishingly eclectic career. 
In 1990, she started out as a regular onCoronation Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/coronation-street>, branched out into 
scriptwriting (including This Life), moved on to comic acting (with the likes 
of Chris Morris andSteve Coogan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6mZn-jDxrVc>), 
became a staple of TV drama (State of Play, Ashes to Ashes, Sherlock), and 
managed to keep her toe in with radio comedy (the spoof phone-in Down the 
Line). Even when she was playing Kay Hope, head of sustainability in the 
Olympics sitcomTwenty Twelve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/apr/04/twenty-twelve-bbc4>
, she still found time to be Detective Chief Inspector Gill Murray in ITV’s 
exceptional police dramaScott & Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/11/scott-and-bailey-review-top-notch-british-telly>
. Naturally, she now co-writes it.

Somewhere in there, she picked up a husband (Paul Higgins, AKA Jamie the other 
rancid spin-doctor inThe Thick of It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-thick-of-it>) and two teenage 
daughters – though with her schedule, no one would think poorly of her had she 
mislaid them. “They’re all accidents!” she protests, referring to the jobs 
rather than the offspring. What connects them is sincerity: whether playing the 
wise but occasionally wobbly Gill Murray, or a transport minister (in sketch 
show Big Train <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MXEgkM9eBts>) who doesn’t 
understand that the maps and models in her office are to scale, she gives her 
all. “You’re just trying to make it sound like a person,” she says. “That 
insane conversation about a train and a map needs to sound like that is reality 
for that person.”

Di and Viv and Rose – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/24/di-and-viv-and-rose-review> 
It is a whole other strand of her career that has occasioned our meeting, 
though.Di and Viv and Rose 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/54b6619ae4b065ee6d813578> – her 
heartwarming play about the survival, for more than 20 years, of friendships 
forged at university – is transferring to London’s West End after sell-out runs 
at the Hampstead theatre. It’s a peach of a play, warm and fruity but with a 
hard centre, and it captures poignantly the passing of time. “How everything is 
the same but different,” says Bullmore, stirring her coffee. “That’s what 
ageing is, right?”

Watching the play – about free-spirited Rose, industrious Viv and robust yet 
wounded Di – can still take her aback. “It’s not that I don’t see an audience 
reaction coming. It’s more that you hope things will be funny and then it’s 
startling when it turns out other people find them funny too, even though that 
was your plan.” Her knack for an arresting turn of phrase, or a switch from 
comic to tragic and back again, makes the writing fizz. As in Scott & Bailey, 
she celebrates female solidarity without sentimentalising it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Famelia-bullmore-interview-di-and-viv-and-rose-play-writer-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421251120163%2F28f3013e-766a-4056-8c7a-a62ffd295ad7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amelia%20Bullmore%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20love%20choppy%20waters%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Famelia-bullmore-interview-di-and-viv-and-rose-play-writer-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amelia%20Bullmore%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20love%20choppy%20waters%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Famelia-bullmore-interview-di-and-viv-and-rose-play-writer-actor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421251120163%2F28f3013e-766a-4056-8c7a-a62ffd295ad7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The original Hampstead cast of Di and Viv and Rose: (from left) Tamzin 
Outhwaite, Anna Maxwell Martin and Gina McKee. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton/Guardian 
Bullmore is a good eavesdropper. “I’ve got a busy ear,” she says. “I’ve always 
loved listening to people talk. How they talk, hearing how they sound. I love 
it if the character I’m playing doesn’t talk like me.” She grew up in Chelsea 
with parents who were no slouches at expressing themselves. Her mother, Pamela, 
writes a jaunty gardening column. “She tells a good yarn. I think she is in 
everything I write, actually.” Only when her niece pointed it out did Bullmore 
realise that Rose was inspired by her mother. “That appetite, that sensual 
delight in beauty, that unforced childlike quality. Mum has it in spades.”

Her father, who has a sideline giving employment advice in this newspaper (“
Dear Jeremy <https://www.theguardian.com/money/series/dearjeremy>”), is a big 
name in advertising. As a child, she would see his colleagues drop by. “They 
had magic markers, they looked cool. I could see he had a great job working 
with playful, sparky people.”

I throw her a question that Di asks Viv in the play: “Have you just got 
exactly what you wanted? By working hard and wanting it?” She looks bashful. “I 
didn’t have a step-by-step plan,” she says. “Viv probably has a notebook where 
she set out her entire future. But it’s amazing I’m able to do these things I 
love.” She seems bemused by the shape her career has taken. It was only a few 
years after leaving Manchester University that she was tottering down the 
cobblestones of Coronation Street as the tendril-haired Steph Barnes, whose 
feisty marriage got off to a rum start when her husband Des banged her head 
carrying her over the threshold.

“I was 26,” she says. “I’d been knocking around in a Transit van doing 
feminist cabaret before that.” She remembers it as a hoot. The pace was brisk, 
the writers (including Paul Abbott) dazzling. She left after 18 months. “The 
whole thing with this job is you wear as many different shoes as possible. 
Maybe if you hit a soap late, you think, ‘Thank God, a safe harbour.’ I wanted 
choppy waters.”

She got them. She starred in Brass Eye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/03/the-10-most-politically-controversial-tv-shows-of-all-time>
, Chris Morris’s controversial spoof current affairs series, and has fond 
memories of his experimental radio sketch show Blue Jam, and its TV counterpart 
Jam. “We just laughed our heads off in a basement the whole time. There was one 
sketch about a necromancer: Mark Heap had to hack at this turnip all afternoon 
with a little axe. The studio stank of pulverised vegetable. We were 
hysterical.” She gives a happy sigh. “Good times.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Famelia-bullmore-interview-di-and-viv-and-rose-play-writer-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421251309217%2Fe7f2ec4c-3941-45f6-9a5b-1d0d5681b1d6-2060x1398.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amelia%20Bullmore%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20love%20choppy%20waters%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Famelia-bullmore-interview-di-and-viv-and-rose-play-writer-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amelia%20Bullmore%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20love%20choppy%20waters%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Famelia-bullmore-interview-di-and-viv-and-rose-play-writer-actor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421251309217%2Fe7f2ec4c-3941-45f6-9a5b-1d0d5681b1d6-2060x1398.jpeg>
 Amelia Bullmore, left, with Suranne Jones and Lesley Sharp in Scott & Bailey. 
Photograph: ITV 
Scott & Bailey, which recently finished its fourth series, has placed her 
indelibly in the public’s affections. Writing it seems to have intensified her 
approach as an actor (“You still have to ask the director, ‘What does this 
scene mean?’”). But she says her confidence as a writer comes and goes. “It’s a 
movable feast. You can be cocky at 11 and racked with doubt by teatime.”

Providing delicious material for her co-stars Suranne Jones and Lesley Sharp 
makes her visibly gleeful. “I write something and I think, ‘She’ll smash that’ 
or ‘I can’t wait to see what she’ll do with that.’” Does she ever think the 
same when writing her own role? This thoughtful talker, who can keep you 
waiting 30 seconds for the right answer, responds immediately: “More like, ‘I 
hope I smash that.’” She laughs wildly. “Or, ‘I’d better bloody smash that.’”

We muse over the show’s appeal and decide that a distinctly northern tartness 
in the writing is a crucial element. She has it to burn. But, I point out, 
you’re not northern. “No,” she says wistfully. “I wish I was.”

• Di and Viv and Rose is at the Vaudeville theatre, London, 22 January to 23 
May <http://www.vaudeville-theatre.co.uk/Di-And-Viv-And-Rose.html>.
 