
Screenwriter Max Landis has spoken out on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Uptomyknees> about the box office failure of his new film 
American Ultra, claiming it might be the result of a remake and sequel-focused 
industry.

American Ultra: should the amnesiac spy trope be forgotten?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/19/american-ultra-amnesiac-spy-trope-total-recall>
The action comedy, which stars Jesse Eisenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jesse-eisenberg> as a stoner who finds out 
he’s a sleeper agent, made just $5.6m in its first weekend in the US, despite 
heavy promotion. In response, Landis asked: “Are original ideas over?”

The film was beaten by new releases such as horror sequel Sinister 2 and 
action reboot Hitman: Agent 47 as well as the reigning number one, hip-hop 
biopic Straight Outta Compton.

“I’m left with an odd thing here, which is that American Ultra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-ultra> lost to a sequel, a sequel 
reboot, a biopic, a sequel and a reboot,” he said on Twitter. “It seems the 
reviews didn’t even matter, the MOVIE didn’t matter. The argument that can/will 
be made is: big-level original ideas don’t $.”

He went on to ask: “Is trying to make original movies in a big way just not a 
valid career path anymore for anyone but Tarantino and Nolan?”

American Ultra received mixed reviews, with just a 46% rating on Rotten 
Tomatoes. Many critics compared the plot to that of The Bourne Identity. 
“American Ultra feels like a lackadaisical rehash of every stoner comedy that 
came before it while simultaneously cramming elements from all four Bourne 
films into a measly hour and a half,” said Chris Sawin atExaminer.com 
<http://www.examiner.com/review/american-ultra-review-strung-out-action-half-cocked-comedy>
.

Jim Tudor at Twitch 
<http://twitchfilm.com/2015/08/review-american-ultra-ultra-violent-yet-ultra-forgettable.html>
 said: “American Ultra is essentially The Bourne Identity meets True Romance 
with comedy, sans the vibrancy or immediacy of not just Tarantino or 
Greengrass, but Tony Scott and Doug Liman as well.”

Landis first broke out with the found-footage superhero thriller Chronicle. 
This year will also see his reboot of Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, starring 
Daniel Radcliffe, and action comedy Mr Right, about a woman who falls for a guy 
who happens to be a hitman. He is also working on two TV shows, both of which 
he has referred to as “adaptations”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbLGFwkRx2HA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbLGFwkRx2HA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbLGFwkRx2HA&media=> 