
British director Andrea Arnold explores American terrain for the first time in 
her fourth feature, American Honey, which opens this autumn, having premieredat 
Cannes in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold-mislays-map-but-us-roadtrip-still-sweetly-intriguing>
. Although it lost out to Ken Loach’sI, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
 for the festival’s top honour, the Palme d’Or, American Honey made Arnold a 
three-times winner of the event’s jury award – having previously won for her 
feature debutRed Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/oct/27/thriller>, 
as well asFish Tank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/14/cannes-film-festival-andrea-arnold-fish-tank-review>
.

American Honey review: Andrea Arnold mislays map on sweet, indelible roadtrip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold-mislays-map-but-us-roadtrip-still-sweetly-intriguing>
Like all of her output, American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-honey> is defiantly experimental: 
shot in her confining ratio of choice, 4:3, it uses its 152 minutes to immerse 
you in the whirlwind life of Star (newcomer Sasha Lane), a teenage girl who 
runs away from a troubled home to join a traveling sales crew driving across 
the American midwest. Shia LaBeouf appears as a hot-headed love interest who 
works alongside her, selling magazine subscriptions door-to-door. Riley Keough 
also stars, playing the group’s selfish boss.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc&media=>
Arnold described the gang as “a small potted version of the American dream,” 
whilediscussing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/andrea-arnold-in-cannes-i-was-shocked-and-upset-by-the-poverty-i-saw-in-the-us>
 the film at Cannes. “They’re working hard at selling themselves, which is what 
capitalism is all about.”

The film’s formal audacity makes it a long-shot for the major awards, but that 
hasn’t stopped specialty distributor A24 from securing an autumn release date 
for the picture.

The company found great success in 2012 with Harmony Korine’s neon-coloured 
teen satireSpring Breakers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spring-breakers> – 
a film many reviews have compared American Honey to. The first trailer released 
for the film teases a similarly rebellious spirit.

 * American Honey will be in UK cinemas from 14 October with a US date to 
follow  