
Everybody wants to be a secret agent. That’s the draw behind American Ultra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-ultra>, in which small-town stoner 
loser Mike Howell (Jesse Eisenberg) discovers that he’s a sleeper agent with 
amazing assassin powers of destruction. The trailer is a series of comic set 
pieces in which Mike, much to his own surprise, kills people with a spoon, 
frying pan and other sundries. “These sleeper agents live among us. They could 
be your friend. Your family. Or the person you least expect.” Awesome, dude.

American Ultra review: bong ho action comedy puts Jesse Eisenberg and Kristen 
Stewart in a stupor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/18/american-ultra-review-jesse-eisenberg-kristen-stewart>
American Ultra isn’t the only film which thinks this is awesome. At least 
since Robert Ludlum’s 1980 spy thriller The Bourne Identity was published, the 
spy genre has gleefully distributed fancy martial arts abilities to 
unsuspecting amnesiacs. The 2002 Bourne Identity film and the 1990 sci-fi/spy 
flick Total Recall (based very loosely on a 1972 Philip K Dick short story) are 
two high-profile examples.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Famerican-ultra-amnesiac-spy-trope-total-recall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439989871833%2F91c88f08-b953-4523-8c45-85042e7c23fd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Ultra%3A%20should%20the%20amnesiac%20spy%20trope%20be%20forgotten%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Famerican-ultra-amnesiac-spy-trope-total-recall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Ultra%3A%20should%20the%20amnesiac%20spy%20trope%20be%20forgotten%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Famerican-ultra-amnesiac-spy-trope-total-recall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439989871833%2F91c88f08-b953-4523-8c45-85042e7c23fd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 I’ll be back … where am I again? Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
But the most direct precursor for American Ultra in the incongruous 
everyperson superspy sub-genre may be the The Long Kiss Goodnight. In the 1996 
film, Geena Davis plays suburban housewife Sam. Sam is an amnesiac, and as she 
recovers her memory, she discovers that she is actually sexy superspy bad girl 
Charly Baltimore.

The double identity is played in the film mostly for angst – but it’s also, 
clearly, an attraction. Sam is gleeful as she suddenly realizes that she can 
wield a brutally efficient knife while cutting vegetables in the kitchen – and 
what middle-class dull bourgeois, of whatever gender, wouldn’t like to take a 
week off to smoke cigarettes, change hairstyles, look hot and shoot some bad 
guys?

This is the central fantasy of all spy action thrillers. James Bond, Mission 
Impossible – whatever your franchise of choice, the pleasure is in identifying 
with some mysterious, ultra-competent , ultra-slick protagonist, whose body is 
a weapon.
 Geena Davis in The Long Kiss Goodnight, Renny Harlin’s 1996 thriller about a 
teacher waking up to her assassin past. Photograph: Allstar 
The brilliance of the amnesiac spy trope is that it makes that identification 
the quietly meta center of the story. In The Bourne Identity, Jason Bourne 
wakes up not knowing who he is or where he came from. His position, in other 
words, is exactly the position of the reader, who opens a book (or starts 
watching a movie) without any information about the fictional world (trailers 
excepted.) Bourne is the reader; he has to move forward page by page, 
discovering not just the plot, but the backstory as he goes.

Total Recall - a remake to forget
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/25/total-recall-remake-forget-it> 
And part of what he discovers is that he is mutliple identities; Jason Bourne 
is also agent Cain and, somewhere down there, a guy named David. In amnesiac 
stories, the multiple-identity double and triple agents of spy novels become a 
metaphor for the audience, all of whom get to change identities, too. In The 
Long Kiss Goodnight, Sam the schoolteacher was originally a cover story for 
Charly; Jason Bourne was originally a cover story for David. Similarly, Charly 
is a cover story for every audience member. You, the viewer, may in your daily 
life take your kids to the ice-skating rink or sell stuff at a convenience 
store. But when you dim the lights you know that your real identity is up 
there, on the screen, killing people with a spoon.

The dynamic is similar to superhero comics: Clark Kent exists so you can 
imagine that anyone can be Superman. But the amnesiac spy trope is both bolder 
and sneakier. It makes you, in the audience, the secret identity. Like the 
trailer says, everyone is a potential sleeper agent, drifting in the dark just 
waiting to pick up that cigarette and that sniper rifle.
 