
Seven miles east of McAllen’s palm-studded city streets, the interstate off 
ramp slides past the sprawling branch of a popular Texas supermarket – HEB 
(Here Everything’s Better) – and a drive-in bank. Swinging under the highway 
and heading north on Alamo Road, the shopping malls and car showrooms recede at 
the first traces of thecolonias – the ramshackle but largely unseen towns that 
are home to hundreds of thousands of Latinos across the Rio Grande valley of 
southernTexas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>.

A mechanic’s sign declares “credit no problem”. Vibrant green fields of 
coriander orcilantro, a staple of Mexican cooking, accentuate the dilapidation 
of the road. A small square building with a corrugated iron awning marks the 
corner with East Trenton Street. A wooden, hand-painted sign is nailed to one 
of its walls: “Trenton’s Second Hand Store”. Doors, sinks, windows and mosquito 
screens are propped in a jumble on the grass in front. Buyers stop by to pick 
up the parts for colonia houses, constructed piecemeal as their owners find the 
money.
factbox 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/factbox_muniz/giv-31114WQL9dRYITbRR/>
East Trenton Street leads to only one place, Colonia Muñiz, the poorest Latino 
community in the country and among the lowest-income towns in the US. It is 
home to a little more than 1,100 people who live on a rectangle grid of six 
streets surrounded by fields. None of the houses are large. Some are simple 
wooden structures; others were made with cement. The limits of their territory 
are marked out by chain-link fences, except for a handful evidently owned by 
more prosperous families, which include one property with Roman-style columns 
guarding the front door and a decorative wall around the garden.

It is in Colonia Muñiz that Theresa Azuara, 64, landed 22 years ago after 
dragging her seven young children fromMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> and across the Rio Grande river, 15 
miles to the south. Among them was Maria, who made the journey at just seven 
years old and still recalls it with horror. “It was very bad crossing the 
river. It was raining. I was saying ‘I don’t want to go, Mom.’ The mud was up 
to my chest. Big mosquitoes. I was really scared. I was crying ‘ I don’t want 
to walk, Mom.’ And so she carried me,” said Maria, now 29.

The family settled into the colonia that became a haven and a trap. “The US 
has been good to me,” said Azuara. “It has been good for my children. It has 
not been as good as if we were American, but better for them than Mexico. 
That’s why I came. For my children. We are poor, but it is better to be poor 
here than in Mexico. But it is not better to be Mexican here.”

Colonia Muñiz is the third stop for a series of Guardian dispatches about the 
lives of people trying to make a life in places that seem the most remote from 
the American Dream. According to one measure, the US Census Bureau’s American 
community survey 2008-2012 of communities of more than 1,000 people – the 
latest statistics available at the time of reporting – the median household 
income was just $11,711 a year, putting it among the four lowest income towns 
in the country, and has since fallen to $11,111. Nationally it was $53,915 in 
2012.

In Colonia Muñiz, more than 60% of households fall below the poverty line, 
including all of those headed by single mothers with children at home. About a 
third of the workforce is unemployed, although even for those with jobs their 
work is often seasonal and fails to provide a steady income.

The town is in Hidalgo County <http://tx-hidalgocounty.civicplus.com/> which, 
according to Texas official statistics, has a poverty rate six times the state 
average. Hidalgo also has a high number of children living without health 
insurance and failing to complete a high-school education. The town is not very 
different from the hundreds of othercolonias where about one in four of the 1.3 
million residents of the Rio Grande valley live in what one civic rights group 
described as “third-world conditions”. But it is distinguished from America’s 
other lowest income communities by a good proportion of its residents lacking 
the legal right to live in the US.
income map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/archive-zip/giv-311143UmvmFkvJXCX/>
This lack of papers has left one generation after another unable to take a 
shot at that American Dream, because it is almost impossible for those without 
legal residency to find anything but low-paid and insecure work. That was until 
Barack Obama changed the future for Azuara’s children in an instant three years 
ago, with a presidential order that is transforming lives throughout thecolonias
.

The colonias

The colonias – the name derives from the Mexican Spanish for the residential 
area of a town – are a creation of mid-20th century developers who bought up 
cheap land of little use for agriculture, sometimes because it was sitting on a 
flood plain, and carved out plots for housing. The great bulk are in Texas 
where more than 2,000colonias, home to about 400,000 people, are stretched 
along the state’s 1,200-mile border with Mexico. Almost half of those are to be 
found in Hidalgo County. But the scale of their population has not prevented 
their marginalisation to the point of near invisibility.

Because few in authority wanted responsibility for colonias populated mostly 
by poor Latinos, many without the right to vote, they largely went unregulated. 
The Texas state government took little interest as the plots were sold off 
without access to clean water or electricity, with no paved roads or sewerage 
systems. Mostly they were sold to Mexican migrants working as crop pickers. The 
buyers were in no position to complain. Too poor to be of interest to the 
banks, their only sources of financing were the developers themselves. Lenders 
operated a system of selling land and sometimes rudimentary housing at interest 
rates of up to 25%, but with a twist. The buyers had no title to the property 
until years later, when all payments had been made. If they missed a payment 
they could, and often did, lose everything: the land, the house and the money 
already paid.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc2589dd3e9ac9a55ecd6c377903607555f954fd%2F0_0_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc2589dd3e9ac9a55ecd6c377903607555f954fd%2F0_0_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
 Theresa and Emilio Azuara outside their home in Colonia Muñiz where Theresa 
arrived with her young children 22 years ago. Photograph: Sean Smith for the 
Guardian 
That practice has been outlawed in recent years but large numbers of colonia 
residents still live with thelegacy of exploitation 
<https://riograndeguardian.com/concerned-about-flooding-hidalgo-county-to-tighten-model-subdivision-rules/>
. For some the only source of drinking water is to buy it by the drum or 
bucket. Half of all homes do not have clean water from a tap or connection to 
the sewage service. Even where sewage systems exist, the local authorities 
often refuse to hook up homes that do not meet building standards because the 
owners are too poor to make the necessary improvements. Texas health department 
figures show that thecolonias have a higher rate of diseases such as hepatitis 
A, dysentery and cholera. Tuberculosis is twice as common along the border as 
it is in the state as a whole.

Theresa Azuara, a short woman with thick dark hair and a perpetual smile, was 
born in Veracruz, a port city on Mexico’s east coast. When she came to the US 
she left behind her eldest daughter, who was already married, and three 
children she had buried after their deaths in infancy. Azuara was keen to 
underline that her family had survived entirely through their own labour. As 
undocumented immigrants or “illegals”, as they are derisively called by many of 
those who advocate mass deportation, they do not qualify for the benefits 
available to US citizens and legal residents in low-income families.

America's poorest white town: abandoned by coal, swallowed by drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/12/beattyville-kentucky-and-americas-poorest-towns>
She has neighbours who claim food stamps and housing grants but there are 
others in the street who share her struggle. A good number of families in the
colonias are a mix of undocumented and legal residents or citizens. Sometimes 
the divide is across a marriage or between parents who came from Mexico and 
their children born in the US (giving them automatic citizenship), meaning at 
least one person in the household qualifies for benefits. But Azuara has had 
nothing from the state. She has worked at two of the few jobs she can get 
without papers, although both are dependent on demand. About half of the year 
has been spent in the fields picking crops. Once they were old enough to work, 
her children joined her.

“I started working in the fields when I was 12 years old,” said Maria Azuara. 
“It’s hard. A lot of dirt. You get really tired. You start early. You wake up 
early. You work at night. It’s the ugliest job you could ever have and my mom 
has 20 years working in the fields.”

When there is no picking to be done, Theresa does piece work in a laundry. 
She’s paid $3 for folding 100 stacks of clothes. Most days she works from 7am 
to 4pm, bringing home a bit more than $200 a week, with her husband, Emilio, if 
they’re both working. But the previous few weeks had been lean and she had 
earned $60 on average doing a bit of cutting in the fields.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9387f2b1859a6003ed593746e5d5702888312da3%2F0_339_5211_3129%2F5211.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9387f2b1859a6003ed593746e5d5702888312da3%2F0_339_5211_3129%2F5211.jpg>
 Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
There is no public transport to the colonia and for years Theresa had no car 
so she trekked to work. “Here we have the freedom to walk,” she said with a 
mocking laugh. Now her daughter has a car. But Texas does not issue driving 
licences to undocumented immigrants. “God is my licence. My insurance too,” 
Theresa said.

Theresa, who does not speak English, tries to pick her employers with care 
after being ripped off by a few who refused to pay for her work because they 
calculated she would not go to the authorities for fear of being deported. 
“Over in McAllen two years ago, some men took us to a field to cut papaya. But 
they used us. They took advantage. They didn’t give us money for petrol. They 
didn’t pay us for the work. Nothing. It was two weeks’ work,” she said. She 
said she accepted exploitation as part of the price of being in the US 
illegally until she started to attend meetings ofLa Union del Pueblo Entero 
<http://lupenet.org/> (Lupe), a group founded by César Chávez, the renowned 
farmer, worker, organiser and cofounder of theUnited Farm Workers of America 
<http://www.ufw.org/> union.

Juanita Valdez-Cox established Lupe in the Rio Grande valley, a short drive 
from Colonia Muñiz, and is its executive director. She said the organisation 
saw a steady stream of people exploited by unscrupulous employers. “There are 
cases and cases of people, undocumented mainly, who are not paid for their 
work. It’s not just farm workers. We get restaurant workers. We get hotel 
workers. A lot of the cleaning in the hotels is done by undocumented [people]. 
A lot of the cooks and dishwashers in restaurants. A lot of construction hires 
– undocumented. The roofers and cabinet makers,” she said. “So many times they 
can work up to a month and the owners of the construction business then just 
refuse to pay them. We had one against a church which didn’t pay construction 
workers. They didn’t get paid by the priest.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87096c16fe3f5644e667f1556a27a7f08875329e%2F0_0_5976_3588%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87096c16fe3f5644e667f1556a27a7f08875329e%2F0_0_5976_3588%2F5976.jpg>
 Workers are frequently the target of immigration patrols while picking crops. 
Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
Working in the fields carries other dangers. Theresa Azuara is ever alert to 
the sound of theborder patrol 
<http://www.cbp.gov/border-security/along-us-borders/overview>’s approach. “I 
get so scared my blood pressure goes up and down. When I see immigration coming 
to the fields I freeze and pray they won’t come near me,” she said. “They ask 
me, do you have papers? I would say, no, and they would say, get on the truck. 
The last time was 2011. December. They dropped me off over the border at 11am. 
I was back in the US by 3am [the next day].”

She was not always deported. Sometimes border patrol officers applied their 
own criteria. “Three or four times I was able to save myself because I told 
them I work hard and I’m not a criminal. Six or seven years ago, immigration 
stopped and asked me, what do you ask the government to give you? I said, 
nothing. I don’t make the government give me anything. No food stamps, no 
cheques, nothing. I said I get my money with sweat. He didn’t take me,” she 
said. “The ‘Anglo’ officers are sometimes more considerate. The Mexicans born 
here are more strict. I think it’s because they consider us an embarrassment.”

Theresa has been deported 10 times and has always made it back to the US 
within days and sometimes hours. This ritual is not without its complications, 
including the loss of work. “When we got home from school there would be a 
little note on the door,” said Maria. “The border patrol took your parents. Go 
inside. Don’t come out.” Theresa smiled and said: “I have very good neighbours. 
They would tell the children that they took your mother to Mexico and now we’ll 
take care of you guys. And they did.” Maria did not smile. “It was scary. You 
go to school thinking maybe your parents won’t be there when you come home and 
maybe they won’t come back,” she said.

Living in poverty

Proyecto Azteca <http://www.proyectoazteca.org/>, a housing organisation 
founded by the United Farm Workers of America union and rights groups, describes
colonias as having “third-world conditions”. “Every community in the United 
States has pockets of poverty. When you look at thecolonia community it’s 
different from the rest of the US because there are so many people,” said its 
director, Ann Cass.

You go to school thinking maybe your parents won't be there when you come 
home, and maybe they won't come back
Maria Azuara 
“We don’t have public transportation. We do not have a [state-subsidised] 
public hospital. The closest hospital we had was up in Galveston, but they 
closed their doors after hurricane Ike. In the 1980s we pushed to have the 
county and the state help us with infrastructure because most all of thecolonias
 were not on the grid; they didn’t have potable water; they had outhouses for 
the most part; the streets weren’t paved. Kids couldn’t go to school if it 
rained because the buses wouldn’t go down the roads.”

Things began to shift two decades ago after the Texas state legislature 
dedicated funds to upgrading thecolonias, but required any new development to 
provide infrastructure. Change did not come swiftly. Colonia Muñiz struggled 
for years to get street lighting. It was finally installed just two years ago. 
Othercolonias are still waiting. Cass said that planning laws in McAllen, the 
largest city in Hidalgo County with 136,000 people, were for a long time 
intended to keep poor people confined to thecolonias, where they could be 
ignored.

“McAllen at one time zoned for low-income people, back in the 70s. They want 
low-income people to maintain their municipal buildings and their golf courses 
and to work in their hotels and restaurants, but they do not want them living 
in their city. So where else are people going to go but to thecolonias to 
purchase land and to build a home?” she said.

Poorest town in poorest state: segregation is gone but so are the jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/15/poorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs>
“One of the cities to the west of McAllen, you’re not allowed to build a house 
if it’s under 2,500 sq ft. Essentially it’s a way of saying we do not want 
low-income people living in our community.” Valdez-Cox lived in Georgia, a 
former Confederate state with a history of brutal racism, before she moved to 
Texas. “I moved here from Atlanta in 1980 and I found the systemic racism here 
far worse than what I had ever experienced in Atlanta, but it’s very subtle,” 
she said.

Cass said attitudes had improved, but only up to a point. The local housing 
authority ran into resistance when it tried to move low-income families out of 
thecolonias and into northern McAllen. “The commissioner in McAllen said he did 
not want ‘those people’ living in north McAllen and those children going to 
‘our schools’ in north McAllen,” she said.

Prejudice against Latinos in general and the undocumented in particular is 
alive and well, asDonald Trump has so ably demonstrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
. But it has also evolved. “In the 70s, kids were not allowed to bring tacos to 
school for lunch,” said Cass. “McAllen was run by Anglos. The mayor, the police 
chief, the council were all Anglos. Now it’s all Latinos. But still only two 
out of 10 people here vote. Austin [the seat of the Texas legislature] is not 
going to pay any attention to us until we can change that.” The Democratic 
party has long rued the low turnout among Latino voters in 
Republican-controlled Texas. Cass thinks it is in part tied to asense of 
alienation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/24/hispanics-midterm-colorado-arizona-immigration-udall-gardner>
 and being unable to change their circumstances. “I named it ‘learned 
helplessness’: ‘It’s always been this way, I shouldn’t expect anything 
different’,” she said.

The piecemeal improvement in physical conditions in the colonias is welcome 
but it does not alleviate the other burdens of poverty, particularly for the 
undocumented. Census figures show that more than 40% of the residents of 
Colonia Muñiz are covered by public health insurance because of low income or 
age. But only US citizens and legal residents receive that benefit or qualify 
for subsidised insurance under Obama’s health reforms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8911e0c7849b0383ddd20b87b741fd66bad1c87b%2F2119_1132_856_1285%2F856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8911e0c7849b0383ddd20b87b741fd66bad1c87b%2F2119_1132_856_1285%2F856.jpg>
 Theresa Azuara. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
Theresa Azuara is left out. She cannot afford insurance and so must pay up 
front for treatment along with 36% of the other people in Colonia Muñiz, 
according to the census. Even a simple visit to the doctor costs about a week’s 
earnings from the fields. “When I get sick I have to go on working,” she said. 
“I went to the doctor once. He just made me lie down. He never gave me pills. 
But when I got the bill I freaked out because it was a lot of money. I was 
thinking, what did the doctor do for this money? Did he dress me in gold? So 
now I don’t go to the doctor even if I get sick. I just wait it out.

When I get sick I have to go on working
Theresa Azuara 
Azuara is coping with high blood pressure for which she is not receiving 
treatment. Although hospitals do not ask immigration status,some people risk 
arrest by using false identification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/14/mexican-woman-arrest-clinic-undocumented-migrants-health>
, such as social security numbers, which medical establishments require. Cass, 
who cofounded the Family Health and Resource Center in McAllen to provide 
medical and mental health services with volunteer staff, said Theresa’s 
experience was typical. “We have 300,000 adults in this county who do not have 
health insurance. They’re the undocumented,” she said.

What happens if they get sick with a chronic disease? “You end up dying,” said 
Cass. “We had a family member of someone here who had stomach cancer. He 
liquidated all of his assets. He got chemotherapy for a certain amount of time 
and then he ran out of money and his treatment stopped. He lived without 
treatment for maybe two months. He got really, really sick. Now the hospital 
regards him as an emergency and the law says it must treat him. He goes into 
ICU for two weeks and he dies. I’m angry because that two weeks in ICU cost a 
hell of a lot of money that if they had spent it on his treatments, maybe he 
would have lived.”

Yet the US medical system is a paradox for the poor. The legal obligation on 
hospitals to treat people in an emergency, whether or not they have health 
insurance or money to pay, prompted Venicia Vallejo to make the difficult 
journey across the Rio Grande with young children, 24 years ago. “I crossed 
with my three kids without my husband. My seven-year-old son couldn’t walk 
because he was sick. I decided to cross the river because they told me the kid 
would die. He had something very wrong with him. I don’t know what it was,” she 
said. “People told me if I came to the US they wouldn’t let him die. Here they 
operated and saved him.”

Vallejo settled in Colonia Muñiz. “I worked in construction and in the fields. 
They don’t ask for your papers. They don’t ask you to speak English. 
Construction work you do from 7am to 7pm, seven days a week,” she said. “It has 
been difficult. The US, this is poverty. I don’t have the same benefits as 
other people here because I don’t have papers, but in Mexico it’s much worse. 
In Mexico, if I had soup and beans to feed my kids it was awesome. The kids 
went hungry some days. We didn’t have enough money for food because of the 
bills. Here the kids do not go hungry. Here there is a lot of clothes they 
throw away and in Mexico people didn’t have enough clothes. It’s worse in 
Mexico but still difficult here.”

One of the difficulties is the medical system that saved her son but will not 
save her sight from glaucoma. “The pay is so low, it doesn’t cover the medical 
stuff. I need an operation on my eyes. The doctor told me if I don’t have the 
operation I will go blind. Because I don’t have insurance I can’t do it. It’s 
$2,500 for each eye,” she said. It used to be that Mexico was part of the 
survival strategy for the poor and undocumented living near the border. 
Medicines were cheaper on the other side. So was seeing a doctor, buying 
cigarettes and fuel, and shopping for price-controlled foods.

“Ten years ago we were like one community, back and forth,” said Cass. “Then 
[the authorities introduced] the requirement you had to have a passport. Then 
it was the border wall. And now it’s the [drug cartel] violence in Mexico. We 
had a lot of people –gringos, winter visitors included – who would utilise the 
Mexican healthcare system because it was cheaper. Prescriptions are less 
expensive. You walk across the bridge, there’s dentists lined up to take care 
of you. But now people are afraid to go. Now we’re finding medications being 
sold under the table at the flea markets here. There are doctors, dentists 
moved across the border and operating out of their homes but they’re practising 
without a licence. They’ve been threatened. The cartels are working very much 
like the mafia did. You have to pay someone to be protected.”

According to the census, about half of the residents of Colonia Muñiz were 
born outside the US. It doesn’t say where, but anywhere other than Mexico is 
exceptional in thecolonias. Neither does the census show how many of the 
foreign-born residents are undocumented but Valdez-Cox said her organisation 
estimated that about one-third of people living in thecolonias did not have 
legal residency.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc750a26a5fd294be9f24c18558670e18f27e7a54%2F0_0_5976_3588%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc750a26a5fd294be9f24c18558670e18f27e7a54%2F0_0_5976_3588%2F5976.jpg>
 Guillermo dropped out of school at 17 to work picking crops, but has recently 
passed vital exams. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
All of Theresa’s children are “illegals” and, without residency papers, they 
faced a future similar to their parents, struggling to find regular well-paid 
work, with no social benefits and limited expectations. It was a prospect that 
ate away at their motivation to work in school. What was the point in an 
education if they couldn’t use it? Maria said it was a common sentiment among 
students in schools across southern Texas, who were acutely aware that they did 
not have the same opportunities as their classmates, no matter how hard they 
worked. She said her children lost the heart to work for qualifications they 
could not use. “They lost interest because people would tell them, ‘Why would 
you graduate if you can’t even get a job because you don’t have papers?’ I 
would have to force them to school but still they didn’t want to go,” she said.

Maria, who stopped going to school at 15, said it started with her older 
brother who worked hard, passed his exams but was then blocked from a 
university scholarship because he was not a legal resident. “When he went to 
get the scholarship, they asked him for the social [security number]. He didn’t 
have it so they stopped the scholarship,” she said. “My older sister was like, 
what are we going to do? We’re never going to be someone in this country. So we 
dropped out of school, me and her. We went to work in the fields. She got 
married.”


Cass said lack of opportunity was a major contributor to a kind of educational 
apartheid in which students with citizenship or legal residency in thecolonias 
had greater opportunities than in the past – but those without papers got left 
behind. “We’re finding more and more going to college. However, the statistics 
remain that one out of two kids out of kindergarten will not graduate high 
school,” she said. According to the census, 75% of the population of Colonia 
Muñiz has less than a high-school education.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e0a2049212fb1b6013cd7b8fe2f9249d3e55a9f%2F1859_0_2339_3510%2F2339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e0a2049212fb1b6013cd7b8fe2f9249d3e55a9f%2F1859_0_2339_3510%2F2339.jpg>
 Maria Azuara. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
In her 20s, Maria worked for a family, caring for their children and helping 
with the homework. She was paid $50 a week. “Then they started treating me like 
the maid, asking me to make food and do the cleaning and washing. I didn’t have 
a choice. If I didn’t do that I’d have to go back to working in the fields,” 
she said. “That was my future. We never imagined Obama was going to do 
something about it. Never. We used to wonder what we were going to do with our 
lives. Just take care of kids.”

In June 2012, President Obama issued an executive order allowing undocumented 
immigrants who arrived in the US before they were 16 to stay and be given a 
work permit. The measure,Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals 
<http://www.immigrationequality.org/get-legal-help/our-legal-resources/path-to-status-in-the-u-s/daca-deferred-action-for-childhood-arrivals/>
, popularly known as Daca, does not provide permanent residence or a path to US 
citizenship but it does remove the threat of deportation, at least so long as 
Obama is president and his successor or the courts do not overturn the order. 
Just as importantly, the president’s order gives Maria and an estimated 2 
million other people the right to work in the US, opening a path out of the 
fields and low-paid, insecure jobs. “Obama changed all of our lives just like 
that,” said Maria.

Approval under Daca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/aug/06/undocumented-immigration-daca-government-program-problems-cost>
 is not automatic. Applicants have to have lived in the US continuously since 
2007 and have no criminal record. They also require a high-school diploma or 
its equivalent. That set off a stampede back to the classroom. Maria returned 
to study part-time while working, and passed her high-school equivalency exam 
on her third attempt. There was only one remaining obstacle.

“You have to prove you were here in 2007. My sisters have kids so they could 
prove they were here. I was thinking, what can I do? I had a phone but it was 
pay-as-you-go. The only thing I had to prove I was here was a police ticket. 
Then they wanted to know what the ticket was for. That it wasn’t for drugs or 
something like that. It was a ticket for driving without a licence. I proved 
that and then I got my permit in two weeks,” she said. “I have a social 
security number. I have my [driving] licence. I have my ID. I have my credit 
card. Right now the border patrol can come over here and I’m cool.”

Daca has been life-changing for Azuara’s children. Today, one of her daughters 
is an English teacher and two others work for charities. One of her sons has a 
job as a bus driver in Florida. The last child still living at home, Guillermo, 
recently passed his high-school equivalency exam at the age of 23. He had 
dropped out of school at 17 to work picking crops. “I just thought all my life 
I’m going to work in the fields. That was going to be life. I didn’t think I 
could do anything. If you don’t have social security you don’t qualify for 
nothing. A lot of my friends were in the same situation. Right now they’re back 
in the school,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F391ef52783330cee056a19d23d838358fd4d4513%2F0_207_5976_3588%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F391ef52783330cee056a19d23d838358fd4d4513%2F0_207_5976_3588%2F5976.jpg>
 Guillermo, Theresa and Emillio’s son, counts the day’s earnings with his 
parents. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
For Guillermo, who speaks good English, along with the rest of his siblings, 
the lack of residency papers meant he did not feel American even though he has 
lived in the US almost all of his life. “I saw myself as Mexican because of the 
situation. I went to school since pre-kinder here but I came from there. I saw 
my friends go up north to work and come back with money and I’m like, if I had 
my papers I could go too and work but I can’t,” he said. “I would like to go 
work on the oil rigs or for college and study electricity. Now I can apply to 
college to get a degree and a better life. I have friends working in Utah 
building playgrounds for schools and parks. I told them I qualify [for Daca]. 
They’re like, get it and come work for us. You’ll get work with us.”

A block to the north, the Cardenas siblings, who live in a clapboard house, 
faced the same obstacles but remained in school. Elizabeth, the eldest at 24, 
started studying to become a registered nurse even though she would not have 
been able to work in the US. She thought she might have to seek work overseas 
but that would have meant leaving her mother and risking not being able to 
return. “If I don’t have my social security number, there’s nothing for me. But 
it’s hard to leave. We belong here together.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fcfbce8d94bc65e8297330a197211304b2cab88%2F0_401_5976_3588%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fcfbce8d94bc65e8297330a197211304b2cab88%2F0_401_5976_3588%2F5976.jpg>
 The Cardenas family are photographed in their home. Three of the siblings work 
in the fields with their parents, picking oranges from October to June. 
Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
Her sister Veronica, 22, is training to become a dentist. Their younger 
brother, 18-year-old Louis, wants to be an engineer. They all stuck through 
high school but getting a higher education has been a financial struggle. Under 
Texas law, as undocumented residents they qualify for the minimum state aid to 
go to college but no federal loans or grants. All three work in the fields with 
their parents, picking oranges from October to June. The money goes to pay off 
the cost of the land and the house. There’s not much left for college. There 
are also the practical issues, such as not being able to open a bank account. 
Now all three qualify for Daca. “I came here when I was four years old,” said 
Louis. “This is the only place I know. The American Dream is to become someone 
and I think we have a shot at it.”

The American Dream is to become someone, and I think we have a shot at it
Louis Cardenas, 18 
Vallejo is grateful to the president because her family had been divided by 
the right to live and work in the US. “I have five children, three from Mexico 
and two from here. The two from here are free. They applied for college. The 
ones from Mexico couldn’t do what they wanted,” she said.


The president’s order unleashed a wave of people seeking help from Lupe, which 
offers free assistance with immigration applications. “Obama brought out a huge 
number of young people who are now able to continue their college education,” 
said Valdez-Cox. “We have young people who have their bachelors and their 
masters but couldn’t get employment because they didn’t have a social security 
[number] so they couldn’t contribute to the economy.

“We were amazed at the number of people who came here to apply who have not 
one master’s but two master’s who couldn’t work. Now they have employment and 
they have an opportunity for the family because they can contribute good wages 
to the family and help the parents. It has changed things completely. The 
parents are still in the same situation but there’s income coming into the 
family that they didn’t have.”

There is always a crowd at Lupe seeking legal advice or help with immigration 
issues. The offices of Proyecto Azteca, which helps people in the colonias to 
build and own their homes, are close by. The housing programme brings groups of 
people together to work constructing each other’s houses, providing oversight 
and finance. Proyecto Azteca provided the financing to build Theresa and Emilio 
Azuara’s home, a clapboard structure in lime green that feels more spacious on 
the inside than it looks from the front. The Azuaras pay $230 to finance the 
mortgage from Proyecto Azteca, half of the rent they previously paid. The 
organisation has built more than 700 homes in 130colonias.

The proliferation of civic groups is a striking feature of the colonias, 
compared with other poor areas. There is a solidarity rooted in common 
struggles for farm workers’ rights, over immigration and against racism. Cass 
said there was also a greater sense of family unity than was found in some 
other places. “You won’t find people living on the streets like you do in other 
communities. That’s just a horrifying thing for them to think that they have a 
relative who has not got a roof over their head. Consequently we see three or 
four generations all living in a small house because they’re not going to let 
their loved ones on to the street.

“I think that’s very positive but unfortunately it adds to other emotional and 
physical challenges. Incest is up because of the concentration of people living 
in the same house,” she said. “Here in the valley we have the highest rate of 
teenage pregnancies in the US and multiple teenage pregnancies, but the 
contrast is we have the best outcomes of babies born to teen mothers than any 
other place. The babies are born healthier. The moms are healthier. My only 
explanation is that the family rallies around the girl and keeps her healthy.”

Infant mortality is about half of the rate in poor white areas of eastern 
Kentucky and one third of some black towns in Mississippi. Close family ties 
make the separation of the border even harder. Theresa dare not visit her 
ageing mother in Mexico for fear of not being able to return. The frontier is 
less porous these days and she is older and less agile at getting across the 
river. Vallejo is also unwilling to risk the journey in case she cannot get 
back. “I have family in Mexico. That’s the sad part, that we cannot go there,” 
she said.

Azuara judges her life in the colonias by comparing it with how the past two 
decades would have been in Mexico. For all the hardships, she said the US had 
been good to her. Above all, it had provided a better life for her children – 
the reason she carried them across the Rio Grande in the first place. Maria and 
her siblings say they regard themselves as Mexican but do not know Mexico. They 
cannot imagine living there yet neither are they fully part of the country they 
have lived in most of their lives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a67cb0fcdb837fc1836d12f519c9e8ad2a62d7e%2F0_324_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20poorest%20border%20town%3A%20no%20immigration%20papers%2C%20no%20American%20Dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Famericas-poorest-border-town-no-immigration-papers-no-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a67cb0fcdb837fc1836d12f519c9e8ad2a62d7e%2F0_324_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 Young people in Hidalgo County order nachos and cheese. For many the American 
Dream is a reminder of their complicated relationship with the US. Photograph: 
The Washington Post/Getty Images 
In much of the US, the American Dream is often regarded as a birthright. For 
many who live in Colonia Muñiz, it is a symbol of hope but also a reminder of 
their second-class status and their complicated relationship with the US. “As a 
child I didn’t feel good because I wished I was an American but I’m not,” said 
Maria. “What Obama has done is good and I’m proud the United States has helped 
us. It is a good country. But I want it for my parents too.”

That may yet happen. Under a more recent presidential executive order, 
undocumented parents of US citizens and legal residents can now also apply for 
protection from deportation and a work permit. That includes Vallejo, who has 
two children who were born in the US. The order does not cover the parents of 
those who have applied under the earlier order, such as Maria. But her brother 
in Florida now has permanent residence, a green card. That should open the path 
for Theresa and Emilio if politics doesn’t get in the way.

The programme is on hold after Texas and 25 other states launched a legal 
action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/26/obama-immigration-plan-appeals-court>
 to challenge the president’s authority to issue the order, although more than 
100,000 permits were already issued before the legal intervention. Theresa is 
waiting. She has a wood burning oven in her backyard on which she cooks Mexican 
food. “I want to be able to put up a sign in front of my house:tamales 
<http://allrecipes.com/recipe/34512/real-homemade-tamales/> for sale,” she 
said. “I cannot do it now. Immigration may see it and come and ask questions. 
But one day I will do that, thanks to Obama.”
 