
Superstar singer and actor Jennifer Lopez and Aerosmith frontman Steven Tyler 
were todaynamed as the new judges for American Idol 
<http://hollywoodinsider.ew.com/2010/09/22/american-idol-judge/>, America's 
top-rated television show, ending months of speculation over who would fill the 
empty seat of acid-mouthed Simon Cowell.

Lopez and Tyler will join Randy Jackson for American Idol's tenth season, with 
the judging panel shrunk to three members following the departure of Cowell, 
Ellen DeGeneres and Kara DioGuardi

The announcement may have come as little surprise to the show's fans, since 
Lopez and Tyler were repeatedly touted as joining the judging panel. But 
reports that Lopez was insisting on holding out for a bigger deal were denied 
at the first appearance by the new judges today in California.

"There was so much rubbish out there, we heard she only liked yellow M&Ms," 
said executive producer Nigel Lythgoe. Lopez is reported to be receiving $12m 
for her work onAmerican Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol> and a special deal 
with Fox Films and Fox Broadcasting for other projects.

Steven Tyler, aged 62, may be better known to viewers under the age of 40 as 
the father of actor Liv Tyler, but theAerosmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aerosmith> lead singer said he had trouble 
from his fellow band members when they heard he might be joining the talent 
show:

At first, they were jealous. They heard it through the press and not from me. 
But four months ago they were looking for another lead singer. I spent a stint 
in Betty Ford. They have been judging me every day, and sometimes it hurt, but 
most times I came out through the worm hole a stronger person. It's a real 
journey with those guys. And they would say the same about me. I'm sure they 
are real happy for me.

Asked how the show would change without the cutting critiques of Cowell, Lopez 
said: "I believe in tough love but I don't think I can ever be cruel to another 
artist. There are definitely better ways to say things."

In another change to the format, the show confirmed that music producer Jimmy 
Iovine 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/showtracker/2010/08/music-producer-jimmy-iovine-to-be-part-of-american-idol-next-season.html>
, chariman of Interscope Geffen A&M Records, has joined the programme as an 
in-house mentor. Gone will be the "one-off" mentors and evenings devoted to 
different musical genres, such as Elvis Night.
 