
It is a simple fact that climate change has a much smaller presence in 
contemporary literary fiction than it does even in public discussion. As proof 
of this, we need only glance through the pages of literary journals and book 
reviews. When the subject of climate change occurs, it is almost always in 
relation to nonfiction; novels and short stories are very rarely to be glimpsed 
within this horizon. Indeed, it could even be said that fiction that deals with 
climate change is almost by definition not of the kind that is taken seriously: 
the mere mention of the subject is often enough to relegate a novel or a short 
story to the genre ofscience fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/science-fiction>. It is as though in the 
literary imagination climate change were somehow akin to extraterrestrials or 
interplanetary travel.

There is something confounding about this peculiar feedback loop. It is very 
difficult, surely, to imagine a conception of seriousness that is blind to 
potentially life-changing threats. And if the urgency of a subject were indeed 
a criterion of its seriousness, then, considering what climate change actually 
portends for the future of the Earth, it should surely follow that this would 
be the principal preoccupation of writers the world over – and this, I think, 
is very far from being the case. But why?

It is as though, in the literary imagination, climate change were akin to 
extraterrestrials or interplanetary travel

Why does climate change cast a much smaller shadow on literature than it does 
on the world? Is it perhaps too wild a stream to be navigated in the accustomed 
barques of narration? But the truth, as is now widely acknowledged, is that we 
have entered a time when the wild has become the norm: if certain literary 
forms are unable to negotiate these waters, then they will have failed – and 
their failures will have to be counted as an aspect of the broader imaginative 
and cultural failure that lies at the heart of the climate crisis.

Clearly, the problem does not arise out of a lack of information: there are 
surely very few writers today who are oblivious to the current disturbances in 
climate systems the world over. Yet, it is a striking fact that when novelists 
do choose to write about climate change it is almost always outside fiction. A 
case in point is the work ofArundhati Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/arundhati-roy>: not only is she one of the 
finest prose stylists of our time, she is passionate and deeply informed about 
climate change. Yet all her writings on these subjects are in various forms of 
nonfiction.

When I try to think of writers whose imaginative work has communicated a more 
specific sense of the accelerating changes in our environment, I find myself at 
a loss; of literary novelists writing in English only a handful of names come 
to mind:Margaret Atwood <https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood>, 
Kurt Vonnegut Jr, Barbara Kingsolver, Doris Lessing, Cormac McCarthy,Ian McEwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/mar/14/solar-ian-mcewan> and T 
Coraghessan Boyle. No doubt many other names could be added to this list, but 
even if it were to be expanded to 100, or more, it would remain true, I think, 
that the literary mainstream, even as it has become moreengagé on many fronts, 
remains just as unaware of the crisis on our doorstep as the population at 
large.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ccdc1dcfc4df2d20bf8ea3110f4d01accddb290%2F0_42_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amitav%20Ghosh%3A%20where%20is%20the%20fiction%20about%20climate%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amitav%20Ghosh%3A%20where%20is%20the%20fiction%20about%20climate%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ccdc1dcfc4df2d20bf8ea3110f4d01accddb290%2F0_42_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 Viggo Mortensen, left, and Kodi Smit-McPhee in the 2009 film adaptation of 
Cormac McCarthy’s The Road. 
I have been preoccupied with climate change for a long time, but it is true of 
my own work as well, that this subject figures only obliquely in my fiction. I 
have come to be convinced that this discrepancy is not the result of personal 
predilections: it arises out of the peculiar forms of resistance that climate 
change presents to what is now regarded as serious fiction.

...

In his seminal essay “The Climate of History”, Dipesh Chakrabarty observes 
that historians will have to revise many of their fundamental assumptions and 
procedures in this era of the Anthropocene, in which “humans have become 
geological agents, changing the most basic physical processes of the Earth”. I 
would go further and add that the Anthropocene presents a challenge not only to 
the arts and humanities, but also to our common sense understandings and beyond 
that to contemporary culture in general.

A Farewell to Ice by Peter Wadhams review – climate change writ large
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/21/farewell-to-ice-peter-wadhams-review-climate-change>
There can be no doubt, of course, that this challenge arises in part from the 
complexities of the technical language that serves as our primary view of 
climate change. But neither can there be any doubt that it derives also from 
the practices and assumptions that guide the arts and humanities. To identify 
how this happens is, I think, a task of the utmost urgency: it may well be the 
key to understanding why today’s culture finds it so hard to deal with climate 
change. Indeed, this is perhaps the most important question ever to confront 
culture in the broadest sense – for let us make no mistake: the climate crisis 
is also a crisis of culture, and thus of the imagination.

Culture generates desires – for vehicles and appliances, for certain kinds of 
gardens and dwellings – that are among the principal drivers of the carbon 
economy. A speedy convertible excites us neither because of any love for metal 
and chrome, nor because of an abstract understanding of its engineering. It 
excites us because it evokes an image of a road arrowing through a pristine 
landscape; we think of freedom and the wind in our hair; we envisionJames Dean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesdean> and Peter Fonda racing toward the 
horizon; we think also ofJack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac> and Vladimir Nabokov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/vladimirnabokov>. When we see an 
advertisement that links a picture of a tropical island to the word paradise, 
the longings that are kindled in us have a chain of transmission that stretches 
back to Daniel Defoe and Jean-Jacques Rousseau: the flight that will transport 
us to the island is merely an ember in that fire. When we see a green lawn that 
has been watered with desalinated water, in Abu Dhabi or southern California or 
some other environment where people had once been content to spend their water 
thriftily in nurturing a single vine or shrub, we are looking at an expression 
of a yearning that may have been sparked by the novels ofJane Austen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten>. The artefacts and commodities 
that are conjured up by these desires are, in a sense, at once expressions and 
concealments of the cultural matrix that brought them into being.

This culture is, of course, intimately linked with the wider histories of 
imperialism and capitalism that have shaped the world. But to know this is 
still to know very little about the specific ways in which the matrix interacts 
with different modes of cultural activity: poetry, art, architecture, theatre, 
prose fiction and so on. Throughout history these branches of culture have 
responded to war, ecological calamity and crises of many sorts: why, then, 
should climate change prove so peculiarly resistant to their practices?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcad99e8eaf17ca7a9717c581de56b0da9731bd9%2F79_0_1843_1106%2F1843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amitav%20Ghosh%3A%20where%20is%20the%20fiction%20about%20climate%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amitav%20Ghosh%3A%20where%20is%20the%20fiction%20about%20climate%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcad99e8eaf17ca7a9717c581de56b0da9731bd9%2F79_0_1843_1106%2F1843.jpg>
 New York freezes in director Roland Emmerich’s The Day After Tomorrow. 
From this perspective, the questions that confront writers and artists today 
are not just those of the politics of the carbon economy; many of them have to 
do also with our own practices and the ways in which they make us complicit in 
the concealments of the broader culture. For instance, if contemporary trends 
in architecture, even in this period of accelerating carbon emissions, favour 
shiny, glass-and-metal-plated towers, do we not have to ask, what are the 
patterns of desire that are fed by these gestures? If I, as a novelist, choose 
to use brand names as elements in the depiction of character, do I not need to 
ask myself about the degree to which this makes me complicit in the 
manipulations of the marketplace?

In the same spirit, I think it also needs to be asked, what is it about 
climate change that the mention of it should lead to banishment from the 
preserves of serious fiction? And what does this tell us about culture writ 
large and its patterns of evasion?

In a substantially altered world, when sea-level rise has swallowed the 
Sundarbans and made cities such as Kolkata, New York and Bangkok uninhabitable, 
when readers and museum-goers turn to the art and literature of our time, will 
they not look, first and most urgently, for traces and portents of the altered 
world of their inheritance? And when they fail to find them, what can they do 
other than to conclude that ours was a time when most forms of art and 
literature were drawn into the modes of concealment that prevented people from 
recognising the realities of their plight? Quite possibly, then, this era, 
which so congratulates itself on its self-awareness, will come to be known as 
the time of the Great Derangement.

...

On the afternoon of March 17, 1978, when I was 21, I was stuck in the middle 
of the first tornado to hit Delhi in recorded meteorological history. As is 
often the case with people who are waylaid by unpredictable events, for years 
afterwards my mind kept returning to my encounter with the tornado. Why had I 
walked down a road that I almost never took, just before it was struck by a 
phenomenon that was without historical precedent? To think of it in terms of 
chance and coincidence seemed only to impoverish the experience: it was like 
trying to understand a poem by counting the words. I found myself reaching 
instead for the opposite end of the spectrum of meaning –for the extraordinary, 
the inexplicable, the confounding. Yet these too did not do justice to my 
memory of the event.

Novelists inevitably mine their own experience when they write. No less than 
any other writer have I dug into my own past while writing fiction. It is 
certainly true that storms, floods and unusual weather events do recur in my 
books, and this may well be a legacy of the tornado. Yet oddly enough, no 
tornado has ever figured in my novels. Nor is this due to any lack of effort on 
my part. Indeed, I have returned to the experience often over the years, hoping 
to put it to use in a novel, only to meet with failure at every attempt.

I was stuck in the middle of the first tornado to hit Delhi – but no tornado 
has ever featured in my novels
Amitav Ghosh 
On the face of it there is no reason why such an event should be difficult to 
translate into fiction; after all, many novels are filled with strange 
happenings. Why then did I fail, despite my best efforts, to send a character 
down a road that is imminently to be struck by a tornado?

In reflecting on this, I find myself asking, what would I make of such a scene 
were I to come across it in a novel written by someone else? I suspect that my 
response would be one of incredulity; I would be inclined to think that the 
scene was a contrivance of last resort. Surely only a writer whose imaginative 
resources were utterly depleted would fall back on a situation of such extreme 
improbability?

Before the birth of the modern novel, wherever stories were told, fiction 
delighted in the unheard-of and the unlikely. Narratives such as those ofThe 
Arabian Nights, Journey to the West and The Decameron 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/decameron-8.html> proceed by leaping blithely 
from one exceptional event to another. Novels too proceed in this fashion, but 
what is distinctive about the form is precisely the concealment of those 
exceptional moments that serve as the motor of narrative. This is achieved 
through the insertion of what Franco Moretti, the literary theorist, calls 
“fillers”. According to Moretti, “fillers function very much like the good 
manners so important in Austen: they are both mechanisms designed to keep the 
‘narrativity’ of life under control – to give a regularity, a ‘style’ to 
existence”. It is through this mechanism that worlds are conjured up, through 
everyday details, which function “as the opposite of narrative”.

It is thus that the novel takes its modern form, through “the relocation of 
the unheard-of toward the background ... while the everyday moves into the 
foreground”. As Moretti puts it, “fillers are an attempt at rationalising the 
novelistic universe: turning it into a world of few surprises, fewer 
adventures, and no miracles at all”.

This regime of thought imposed itself not only on the arts but also on the 
sciences. That is whyTime’s Arrow, Time’s Cycle, Stephen Jay Gould’s brilliant 
study of the geological theories of gradualism and catastrophism is, in 
essence, a study of narrative. In Gould’s telling of the story, the 
catastrophist recounting of the Earth’s history is exemplified by Thomas 
Burnet’sSacred Theory of the Earth (1690) in which the narrative turns on 
events of “unrepeatable uniqueness”. As opposed to this, the gradualist 
approach, championed by James Hutton (1726‑97) and Charles Lyell (1797–1875), 
privileges slow processes that unfold over time at even, predictable rates. The 
central credo in this doctrine was: “Nothing could change otherwise than the 
way things were seen to change in the present.” Or, to put it simply: “Nature 
does not make leaps.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c50e59cc0aab05fdc401f497c57f1259bcecb34%2F0_368_4961_2976%2F4961.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amitav%20Ghosh%3A%20where%20is%20the%20fiction%20about%20climate%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amitav%20Ghosh%3A%20where%20is%20the%20fiction%20about%20climate%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c50e59cc0aab05fdc401f497c57f1259bcecb34%2F0_368_4961_2976%2F4961.jpg>
 A satellite image of the Ganges delta, which is vulnerable to flooding as sea 
levels rise Photograph: UniversalImagesGroup/UIG via Getty Images 
The trouble, however, is that Nature does certainly jump, if not leap. The 
geological record bears witness to many fractures in time, some of which led to 
mass extinctions and the like: it was one such, in the form of theChicxulub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/01/asteroid-that-killed-dinosaurs-also-intensified-volcanic-eruptions-study>
 asteroid, that probably killed the dinosaurs. It is a fact that catastrophes 
waylay both the Earth and its individual inhabitants at unpredictable intervals 
and in the most improbable ways.

Distinctive moments are no less important to modern novels than they are to 
any other forms of narrative, whether geological or historical. It could not, 
of course, be otherwise: if novels were not built upon a scaffolding of 
exceptional moments, writers would be faced with the Borgesian task of 
reproducing the world in its entirety. But the modern novel, unlike geology, 
has never been forced to confront the centrality of the improbable: the 
concealment of its scaffolding of events continues to be essential to its 
functioning. It is this that makes a certain kind of narrative a recognisably 
modern novel.

Here, then, is the irony of the “realist” novel: the very gestures with which 
it conjures up reality are actually a concealment of the real. What this means 
in practice is that the calculus of probability that is deployed within the 
imaginary world of a novel is not the same as that which obtains outside it; 
this is why it is commonly said, “If this were in a novel, no one would believe 
it”. Within the pages of a novel an event that is only slightly improbable in 
real life – say, an unexpected encounter with a long-lost childhood friend – 
may seem wildly unlikely: the writer will have to work hard to make it appear 
persuasive.

If that is true of a small fluke of chance, consider how much harder a writer 
would have to work to set up a scene that is wildly improbable even in real 
life. For example, a scene in which a character is walking down a road at the 
precise moment when it is hit by an unheard-of weather phenomenon?

To introduce such happenings into a novel is in fact to court eviction from 
the mansion in which serious fiction has long been in residence; it is to risk 
banishment to the humbler dwellings that surround the manor house – those 
generic out-houses that were once known by names such as the gothic, the 
romance or the melodrama, and have now come to be called fantasy, horror and 
science fiction.

...

So far as I know, climate change was not a factor in the tornado I 
experienced. But the thing it has in common with the freakish weather events of 
today is its extreme improbability. And it appears that we are now in an era 
that will be defined precisely by events that appear, by our current standards 
of normality, highly improbable: flash floods, hundred-year storms, persistent 
droughts, spells of unprecedented heat, sudden landslides, raging torrents 
pouring down from breached glacial lakes, and, yes, freakish tornadoes.

This, then, is the first of the many ways in which the age of global warming 
defies both literary fiction and contemporary common sense: the weather events 
of this time have a very high degree of improbability. Indeed, it has even been 
proposed that this era should be named the “catastrophozoic” (others prefer 
such phrases as “the long emergency” and “the penumbral period”). It is certain 
in any case that these are not ordinary times: the events that mark them are 
not easily accommodated in the deliberately prosaic world of serious prose 
fiction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc493143e09a0b10e4908c5c6f173488b1b36b775%2F0_20_2300_1380%2F2300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amitav%20Ghosh%3A%20where%20is%20the%20fiction%20about%20climate%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amitav%20Ghosh%3A%20where%20is%20the%20fiction%20about%20climate%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Famitav-ghosh-where-is-the-fiction-about-climate-change-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc493143e09a0b10e4908c5c6f173488b1b36b775%2F0_20_2300_1380%2F2300.jpg>
 An Indian woman pulls a prawn fishing net from the mud embankment on the Matla 
river, in the Sundarbans delta. Photograph: Deshakalyan Chowdhury/AFP 
Poetry, on the other hand, has long had an intimate relationship with climatic 
events: as Geoffrey Parker points out, John Milton began to composeParadise Lost
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2011/nov/28/milton-paradise-lost-epic>
 during a winter of extreme cold, and “unpredictable and unforgiving changes in 
the climate are central to his story. Milton’s fictional world, like the real 
one in which he lived, was ... a ‘universe of death’ at the mercy of extremes 
of heat and cold.” This is a universe very different from that of the 
contemporary literary novel.

I am, of course, painting with a very broad brush: the novel’s infancy is long 
past, and the form has changed in many ways over the last two centuries. Yet, 
to a quite remarkable degree, the literary novel has also remained true to the 
destiny that was charted for it at birth. Consider that the literary movements 
of the 20th century were almost uniformly disdainful of plot and narrative; 
that an ever greater emphasis was laid on style and “observation”, whether it 
be of everyday details, traits of character or nuances of emotion – which is 
why teachers of creative writing now exhort their students to “show, don’t 
tell”.

Sarah Holding’s top 10 cli-fi books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/apr/23/sarah-holdings-top-10-cli-fi-books>
Yet fortunately, from time to time, there have also been movements that 
celebrated the unheard-of and the improbable: surrealism for instance, and most 
significantly, magical realism, which is replete with events that have no 
relation to the calculus of probability.

There is, however, an important difference between the weather events that we 
are now experiencing and those that occur in surrealist and magical realist 
novels: improbable though they might be, these events are neither surreal nor 
magical. To the contrary, these highly improbable occurrences are 
overwhelmingly, urgently, astoundingly real. The ethical difficulties that 
might arise in treating them as magical or metaphorical or allegorical are 
obvious.

But there is another reason why, from the writer’s point of view, it would 
serve no purpose to approach them in that way: because to treat them as magical 
or surreal would be to rob them of precisely the quality that makes them so 
urgently compelling – which is that they are actually happening on this Earth, 
at this time.

• Amitav Ghosh’s The Great Derangement: Climate Change and the Unthinkable is 
published by University of Chicago.
 