
British director Amma Asante has hit out 
<https://www.aol.co.uk/entertainment/2016/09/25/men-at-top-of-film-industry-dont-trust-female-directors/>
 at the film industry’s “misguided distrust” of female film-makers.

Asante, who was speaking at the Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> on Screen panel during Empire 
Live, said women directors were held back by the lack of trust shown by their 
male peers.

No female film directors from two major Hollywood studios through 2018
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/21/hollywood-paramount-20th-century-fox-no-female-directors>
 “It’s a trust issue in terms of the powers that be and whether or not they 
believe that these movies can sell, will sell, in terms of the female 
narrative, and how much they trust women when it comes to directing … Even when 
we are able, or allowed, to make movies, we are making certain types of movies.”

Asante, whose third feature, A United Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/09/a-united-kingdom-review-rosamund-pike-david-oyelowo-toronto>
, is due to open the London film festival on 6 October said: “It comes down to 
who they feel safe about in terms of flying the plane … We know that it’s a 
misguided distrust in many ways because we know that women-directed movies 
don’t necessarily make less money than your average movie directed by a man – 
but for some reason there’s that fear and that is something that has to be 
dealt with.”

Asante’s comments come in the wake of a plethora of research showing the 
paucity of women film-makers in top Hollywood roles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/12/female-film-makers-19-percent-hollywood-jobs-2015-gender-equality-pay-gap>
 and thefailure of the major studios to tackle the problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/21/hollywood-paramount-20th-century-fox-no-female-directors>
. A United Kingdom, which premiered at Toronto, features David Oyelowo and 
Rosamund Pike in a study of the true-life romance between a Botswanan prince 
and an English typist. Asante is due to follow it with Where Hands Touch, an 
interracial romance set in second world war Germany.

TV is opening the door to female directors – film needs to catch up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/05/tv-film-female-directors-susanne-bier-the-night-manager-le-carre>
Asante did express some confidence for the future: “I think we’re turning a 
corner, but it’s a big one and we’re not round it yet.”
 