
Amma Asante is drinking tea – “If you have PG Tips, all the better,” she calls 
to the retreating waiter – in the plush quietness and gleaming surfaces of 
London’s Cafe Royal. Despite traffic jams and torrential rain, she is 
impeccably calm, certainly calmer than many film-makers would be had their 
latest production been selected to open this year’sLondon film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/21/a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival-david-oyelowo-amma-asante>
. But Asante, whose previous filmsA Way of Life  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/nov/08/hayfilmfestival2005.race>and Belle
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/15/belle-review-costume-drama-teeth-slavery>
garnered her high praise and multiple awards, including a Bafta, is clearly a 
star in the making – and possibly also a star-maker; Gugu Mbatha-Raw, whom she 
cast in her breakthrough part as the title character inBelle, has just appeared 
opposite Matthew McConaughey in the American civil war dramaFree State of Jones
. Earlier this year Asante was also invited to become a member of the US 
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which has had its biggest ever 
intake of new members following intense criticism over the lack of racial 
diversity in Oscar nominees. In joining a Hollywood club with a decades-long 
reputation for being largely white, male and aged over 50, she’ll now have 
voting rights on the Oscars, and a part to play in steering the industry and 
what comes to our screens in the future.

For the moment, though, she’s concentrating on A United Kingdom, which had an 
unexpected – and even inconvenient – genesis. About 18 months ago, Asante was 
about to move not only home but also country, quitting the Netherlands, where 
she had lived for eight years, in favour of Denmark, where her husband is from. 
Amid all the upheaval and readjustment the phone rang. At the other end was 
actor David Oyelowo, whom Asante had known since they worked together on the 
BBC dramaBrothers and Sisters back in 1998. Oyelowo, fresh from playing Martin 
Luther King inSelma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/08/selma-observer-film-review>, 
wanted to persuade her to be part of an idea whose moment had come – “a labour 
of love”, as he described it.

The project was to film the life of Seretse Khama and Ruth Williams, the first 
prime minister of Botswana and his wife, an office clerk from Eltham. Their 
marriage, in 1948, when Botswana was still the British protectorate of 
Bechuanaland, had immense ramifications, both personal and political: Khama, 
who had met Williams at a missionary society dance in London, had been supposed 
to return from his stint at Balliol College, Oxford and subsequent studies for 
the bar to take up the kingship of the Bamangwato people. He was not supposed 
to return with a white, English bride, and particularly not just as 
neighbouring SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> had made 
interracial marriage illegal under the apartheid system; her arrival angered 
both Bamangwato chiefs and many who couldn’t believe that their future leader 
would choose an outsider above a local. Ruth Williams’s family also opposed the 
marriage, and there was vehement objection from the British government, enraged 
by what they saw as a dangerous misstep in managing regional relationships.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fa-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20United%20Kingdom%20trailer%3A%20interracial%20marriage%20causes%20outrage%20in%20true%20story%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fa-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20United%20Kingdom%20trailer%3A%20interracial%20marriage%20causes%20outrage%20in%20true%20story%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fa-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video&media=>
A United Kingdom trailer: interracial marriage causes outrage in true story. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/25/a-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video>
Oyelowo had first come across Susan Williams’s book Colour Bar 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/colour-bar.html>, on which the film is based, 
in 2010, through producers Justin Moore-Lewy and Charlie Mason, who had 
acquired the rights. Since then, the three had struggled to get the project, 
with Oyelowo playing Khama, off the ground. But the story of Khama, Williams 
and Bechuanaland’s gradual journey towards independence immediately struck a 
chord with Asante, fresh from her success with the recently releasedBelle, 
which also drew on a complex piece of history to explore relationships across 
racial divides. Her father, she tells me, was a pan-African, a man who believed 
in a united states of Africa. “He grew up in Ghana when it was still the Gold 
Coast; grew up, as my mother did, as the child of a colony, and watched it 
become independent. And Ghana was the first sub-Saharan country to gain its 
independence, so we always lived with that badge on our chest; I was always 
raised knowing that was the country that I came from. I grew up being able to 
repeat – at seven or eight years old — the speeches of Kwame Nkrumah, who 
became the first president of Ghana.”

Consequently, she explains, she was gripped not only by the fierceness and 
endurance of the romantic relationship at the heart of the story, but also by 
the intricacy and subtleties of its sociopolitical setting. Reading her way 
through Williams’s book – it’s brilliant, she says, but so dense with complex 
detail that she could only read 18 pages a day – she realised that she wanted 
to explore how Khama came to a point where he could contemplate utterly 
changing the political landscape of his country. “Even though I didn’t know the 
story,” she remarks, “I was very aware of the young, privileged men of Africa 
who moved through the UK in the 1940s, who were sent to be educated. I knew it 
because the women weren’t.”

What she didn’t want, she explains, was to privilege one aspect of the drama 
over the other. And neither did she think it was necessary: “You could create a 
very political backdrop against the love story. Because, really, what is 
interesting about being a black man married to a white woman today? Yes, in 
certain quarters, it’s still difficult and there is still a taboo. But it’s not 
that interesting – why pick them, as opposed to any other interracial couple? 
What’s really interesting is what happened once this couple chose to fall in 
love, the period in which they fell in love, which was right as South Africa 
was about to enshrine apartheid into its laws, and the fallout that occurs.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Qx90wdRD2I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Qx90wdRD2I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Qx90wdRD2I&media=>
The trailer for Belle, Assante’s second film as director. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Qx90wdRD2I> 
She notes – while also acknowledging the earlier film’s vital importance at 
the time – thatA United Kingdom is not a rerun of Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner, 
the 1967 film in which a black man played by Sidney Poitier courts a white 
woman, to the consternation of her parents. Rather, she says, she had to find 
those things in the story that would resonate with contemporary issues. Among 
those is the issue of transition and identity. One facet of the story she 
focused on explores the idea that someone might be sent away at a formative age 
to experience life and education in another country and yet still be expected 
to return essentially unaltered; it also shows those at home, inching their way 
towards establishing nationhood in the face of societal change.

I tell her that I was struck by the numerous interwoven stories of restriction 
and emancipation, and the different weight that history accorded them. Near the 
start of Asante and screenwriter Guy Hibbert’s film, Khama and his wife, played 
by Oyelowo and Rosamund Pike, return to Bechuanaland and are met with 
hostility, despite his previous popularity; he determines to address thekgotla 
– a public meeting – and put his case. Scores of Bamangwato men, many of them 
dressed in suits, walk from their villages to attend, but there is barely a 
woman to be seen. Asante nods: she dotted a few around the edges, she 
remembers, as if to suggest that they couldn’t help themselves from coming to 
listen, but there was a firm message that politics was not for women.

And yet she knew that she had to represent the view of Bamangwato women. “When 
I first came to the script, the point of view of the black female wasn’t really 
there, and it was very important,” she says. “I thought about my mother, I 
thought about my aunts; my mother was born and raised in a very rural village, 
but her brother is a chief. And the idea that he should go abroad and return, 
even with someone of the same colour but who was an outsider, and say, this is 
going to be your queen, I just imagined what their response would be. And there 
you have it, in the film.”

Asante has had a lifetime of considering the nuances that attach themselves to 
the questions of identity and power informing her work. Now 47, she reckons 
that she is in a position to empower two sides of her identity – her Ghanaian 
heritage and her British upbringing – to be in dialogue with one another. “I 
allow that conversation to happen, and it’s a pleasure,” she explains. “And I 
don’t know what side I’ll come out on each day, or what decision I’ll come out 
with on each day, but it is a dynamic rather than a conflict.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2613452f51f0f0245ceb64ca9cb832f80999453%2F0_45_2362_1417%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amma%20Asante%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20here%20to%20disrupt%20expectations%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amma%20Asante%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20here%20to%20disrupt%20expectations%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2613452f51f0f0245ceb64ca9cb832f80999453%2F0_45_2362_1417%2F2362.jpg>
 Rosamund Pike and David Oyelowo in A United Kingdom. 
Is she able to put into words what characterises these different parts of her? 
She mentions her pride in the traditions of her parents’ Ghanaian background, 
and of how important it is to her to be able to speak their language. “And yet, 
the very British side of me, who is the child of immigrants, is the side of me 
that welcomes outsiders – the modern British side, that is – and enjoys 
crossing boundaries and sharing boundaries and being open to what an outsider 
might bring. But I’m still deeply protective of my traditions at the same 
time.” (Amusingly, as we both ponder the miniature glass cloche covering the 
miniature biscuit that has accompanied tea, she puts her mild aversion to 
elaborate service down to her British “side”.)

She grew up in Streatham, which she describes, in the early 1980s and beyond, 
as “a pretty racist environment” – complete with graffiti on the walls and lit 
matches pushed through the letterbox. “That was just a way of life,” she says 
now, inadvertently making reference to the title of her first feature film, 
“but I was aware of the stress it put my parents through.” Her accountant 
father’s response was to tell his family that there was one thing they had to 
remember at all times: “Know that you are loved.”

Fascinatingly, these exact words recur as a line in Belle (2013), the story of 
Dido Elizabeth Belle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/04/dido-belle-slaves-daughter-who-lived-in-georgian-elegance>
, the child of a British admiral and an African slave, who was brought to 
England by her father and left in the care of her great-uncle, Lord Mansfield; 
they are the words spoken to her by her father, whom she only knows for a few 
hours, as he bids her farewell. Even more poignantly, Asante’s father died 
during the filming ofBelle, and she talks movingly about his impact on her 
work. She will always, she thinks, create benevolent fathers who are also 
flawed; hers, whom she describes as her hero, “made mistakes, but when he got 
it right, he got it really right”.

Belle grew up in Kenwood House in Hampstead, surrounded by great material 
privilege and familial love, but simultaneously excluded from vast swaths of 
society by the colour of her skin. As inA United Kingdom, there is a love 
story; but there is also a highly involved narrative that chronicles the 
changing legal position of slave cargo – at heart, the degree to which slaves 
being transported at sea were regarded as human beings rather than mere 
possessions, to be jettisoned at the drop of a hat. Both elements of the film 
unite to portray a mixed-race woman growing in self-recognition and 
self-possession, and balancing the different claims made on her loyalties.

Both movies also imply that a key moment in the journey towards selfhood is 
the acceptance that individuals contain multitudes. As a child, Asante began to 
act, and joined the cast ofGrange Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/feb/07/bbc.television1>; she was part 
of the “Just Say No” campaign, and was one of nine cast members tovisit Ronald 
Reagan’s White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2016/mar/07/grange-hill-nancy-reagan-white-house-just-say-no>
. But she would also develop lines to use in her off-screen life; for instance, 
she always used to reply “Ghana” when asked where she was from, because 
“Streatham” seemed to cause confusion of the “No, where are you really from?” 
variety. “So that became too complex,” she recalls, “and also it was a big fat 
rejection, because I actually felt as British as anybody else but I would 
constantly be reminded that I wasn’t. And so it was easier to just say African.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14bff481e025f0a69d560c0c0091d44e09f3dd36%2F0_183_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amma%20Asante%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20here%20to%20disrupt%20expectations%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amma%20Asante%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20here%20to%20disrupt%20expectations%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14bff481e025f0a69d560c0c0091d44e09f3dd36%2F0_183_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Assante’s debut feature, A Way of Life, told a story about racism using white 
characters. Photograph: Imagenet 
But things changed somewhat when her debut, A Way of Life, was released. Set 
in Wales, the film tells the story of a young, single mother fighting extreme 
disadvantage, and also of her Turkish, Muslim neighbour. It started to get a 
little attention, and “quite often I would read about myself, and it would be, 
‘young British film-maker’. And when you see words written about you, they’re 
very powerful.” Did she feel that, in a sense, she was being claimed? Yes, she 
replies, “but there was a sense of, well, that’s what I’ve been saying all 
along, but haven’t been allowed to say. But that’s exactly what I am. I’m a 
young British director.”

We talk more broadly about the issues of migration and the resistance to it 
that are bedevilling the world at the moment. Asante locates in much of the 
fear that surrounds the conversation an interesting insight into entitlement. 
“I often think about what we might look back at in 100 or 200 years’ time from 
now and see as really…” – she grasps for the word – “primitive. Because we 
fear, we really believe, there isn’t enough to share, and there really isn’t 
enough to go around, because that’s a narrative that we’re given. But that’s 
because we’ve decided that certain boundaries should exist and must exist, and 
you should stay over there, because the world over there is created for you, 
and the world over here is created for us. Well, that’s never worked.”

At the time, she points out, change is always complicated, and when it happens 
too quickly, can be problematic. “You can’t have a country of fearful people,” 
she says, and inA United Kingdom, she is understanding of the competing demands 
on the Attlee and Churchill governments, both of which adopted problematic 
stances towards Bechuanaland as they sought to rebuild postwar British society. 
And yet, as she also says and the film makes clear, there was a good outcome: 
Seretse Khama took his country towards independence and democratic 
representation, and there it remains. She has already been criticised, she 
says, for making too much of a crowd-pleaser, to which she retorts that she 
can’t change history. But does she think that underlying that attitude is an 
unfamiliarity, perhaps even tantamount to disbelief, with the business of 
telling an African success story?

She nods vigorously. “There was an argument over whether we should show some 
of the more beautiful images that we have in the film of Africa. This is why 
you need a person of colour at the table. Because I said, why not? That’s the 
Africa I know. Hundreds of thousands of people travel to Botswana every single 
year to go and see the animal life there. Why would we pretend that that 
doesn’t exist? Why wouldn’t we show the beautiful sunsets? I remember waking up 
in my mother’s African village to beautiful sunrises and beautiful sunsets.

“We’re so used to seeing flies in African children’s faces, we’re so used to 
seeing what I call a degraded Africa, that does not have a person of colour at 
the centre of their own story – they’re usually a supporting character who’s an 
observer of their own story – that sometimes I think that when you see it told 
a different way, which means that you take a character like Rosamund Pike 
played in Ruth and flip the switch and make her the other, then it makes some 
people feel uncomfortable. Your expectations are disrupted. And I believe 
that’s what I’m here for. I hold that flag.”

Amma Asante: film industry chiefs 'don't trust female directors'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/26/amma-asante-female-directors-a-united-kingdom>
Asante is full of praise for Pike, who came to film after Gone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/05/gone-girl-review-two-different-readings-modern-marriage>
, and immediately embraced the no-makeup, frizzy hair and sensible shoes look 
that her character adopted when she moved to Botswana (there are rather more 
swinging skirts with nipped-in waists at the jazz clubs that feature in the 
film’s London scenes). “To me, she embodied the courage that I imagined Ruth 
had,” she says. Particularly impressive was Pike’s insistence that she would 
simply drop to the ground during a scene in which Williams, suffering from 
diphtheria, collapses on a dusty road. Asante, worried about the numerous rocks 
in the path, had had sleepless nights wondering how they could conceal a 
mattress, but had to content herself with setting the crew to remove as many 
stones as they could. When one of Khama and Williams’s sons visited the set, he 
delivered the ultimate imprimatur: “It’s not every day you see your mother and 
father come back to life.”

Next, Asante is going to tackle the Nazis. Where Hands Touch, which she has 
written herself, will start filming in October, withThe Hunger Games’s Amandla 
Stenberg andCaptain Fantastic’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/captain-fantastic-review-viggo-mortensen>
George MacKay starring as a teenage couple facing the not inconsiderable 
obstacle of his membership of the Hitler Youth and the fact that she is a 
mixed-race girl living in the Third Reich. Once again, issues of identity play 
an integral part, as does Asante’s abiding interest in capturing social and 
political structures at the moment where they begin to fall apart.

We conclude by talking about broader issues of representation within the film 
industry, and specifically in the context of her recent membership of the 
Academy. How effective does she feel that development will be in promoting 
change and inclusion in the entertainment business? It is, she says, a 
“substantial and relevant” move, and she commends the Academy for doing it. But 
she remains realistic: “When you’re in it, it seems slow and it feels slow. 
When we look back in 100 years, who knows how it will look with hindsight. 
However, it does feel like we’re turning a corner. It’s not a short corner, 
it’s a very big bend, and we’re some way around it and we’ve still got a long 
way to go. Let’s be really honest about this: the Oscars reflect the industry, 
so theOscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> can change but they can 
only do so much without the industry changing as well.”

In other words the movies need to get made in the first place, so that 
audiences are not presented with eight identical films when they go to the 
multiplex. Cinemagoers, too, can play their part, choosing to see a more 
diverse range of films as they are released, and not necessarily waiting until 
they come out on DVD.

“It’s really interesting, “she continues, “that if you walk into an industry 
party and it’s predominantly male, predominantly of a certain age, 
predominantly white, it starts to feel old-fashioned. It doesn’t feel 
progressive. When you walk into a place and you see women, and you see people 
of colour, and varying abilities and disabilities, it feels like it’s somehow a 
reflection of the world – you’re in the world, and that we’re in a relevant 
industry.” She laughs, remembering her recent trip to a vibrant Toronto. “That 
didn’t mean to say that the lovely old white men were gone. They were still 
there!”

The bottom line, she thinks, is that the industry needs to see a broadening of 
the wares as a business opportunity, not merely as a matter of morality: “If 
you do not have a flourish of new lifeblood,” she says, “you don’t get a 
beautiful ocean, you get a dull, dank puddle.”

A United Kingdom opens the London film festival on Wednesday 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::permalink=unitedkingdom>
 andwill be in cinemas from 25 November <http://www.aunitedkingdomfilm.com/>

Race on screen: critic Jonathan Romney’s highlights from this year’s London 
film festival
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbc23ee529cce4b0df99ea55e96756a7caa9a7a1%2F0_112_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amma%20Asante%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20here%20to%20disrupt%20expectations%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amma%20Asante%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20here%20to%20disrupt%20expectations%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbc23ee529cce4b0df99ea55e96756a7caa9a7a1%2F0_112_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Teyonah Parris in Chi-Raq. Photograph: Allstar/Lionsgate 
Chi-Raq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/25/chi-raq-review-spike-lees-urgent-angry-and-very-sexy-midlife-masterpiece>
Dir: Spike Lee
The Greek comedy of Lysistrata’s sex strike, adapted as the story of a Chicago 
woman who campaigns to stop gang war
Spike Lee’s most acclaimed film for ages – a jovial yet impassioned musical 
strike against violence within black communities. Angela Bassett, Wesley Snipes 
and Samuel L Jackson join newcomer Teyonah Parris in an uproarious slice of 
hip-hop Brecht.

Daughters of the Dust 
<http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/daughters-of-the-dust-1992>
Dir: Julie Dash
An evocation of a community of island-dwelling African American women in 1902
Now restored, Julie Dash’s 1991 debut feature opened up a new direction in 
independent US cinema that has never been followed up. Fusing black history, 
costume drama and a vision of feminist utopia, this dream-like film wasone of 
the inspirations for Beyoncé’s Lemonade visuals. 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/08/daughters-of-the-dust-exclusive>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17116378d361608b71c9bd061a1f0cbe3fd22148%2F616_5_4536_2722%2F4536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amma%20Asante%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20here%20to%20disrupt%20expectations%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amma%20Asante%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20here%20to%20disrupt%20expectations%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Famma-assante-interview-a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17116378d361608b71c9bd061a1f0cbe3fd22148%2F616_5_4536_2722%2F4536.jpg>
 Nate Parker in The Birth of a Nation. Photograph: 
Fox/Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
The Birth of a Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/the-birth-of-a-nation-review-sundance-slavery-epic-as-brutal-as-braveheart>
Dir: Nate Parker
The story of Nat Turner, a preacher who led a slave revolt in Virginia in the 
1830s
A Sundance-winning debut from actor turned writer-director Nate Parker. It 
polemically appropriates the title of DW Griffith’s 1915 film – a classic 
forever identified with American racism, against which Parker boldly takes up 
the cudgels.

Divines <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tJFgCB1gB0o>
Dir: Houda Benyamina
A young woman from the Paris banlieue hustles to survive, while getting 
emotionally entangled with a male breakdancer
The debut from French director Houda Benyamina, inspired by her experiences of 
the 2005 Paris riots, was one of this year’s Cannes breakout titles. Anarchic, 
ferociously energetic and joyously flouting the sexual stereotypes of hood 
drama, it introduces the explosively talented Oulaya Amamra as heroine Dounia.

Hissein Habré, A Chadian Tragedy <http://icarusfilms.com/new2016/hiss.html>
Dir: Mahamat-Saleh Haroun
The former president of Chad prepares to stand trial for the crimes of his 
regime
Mahamat-Saleh Haroun is one of the foremost contemporary African directors, 
his dramas includingAbouna and A Screaming Man. Here he’s in a less familiar 
role as documentarist, scrutinising the past and present traumas of his own 
country.

The 60th BFI London film festival takes place across the capital, 5-16 October 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/lff>
 