
The marriage and subsequent banishment of Seretse Khama, Botswana’s first 
president and former tribal chief, wasbig news in late-1940s and early-50s 
Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/may/29/guardianobituaries>, but 
had been somewhat forgotten until the filmA United Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/09/a-united-kingdom-review-rosamund-pike-david-oyelowo-toronto>
 – due to open the London film festival on Wednesday 5 October – put it back on 
the map. And according to its director, British film-maker Amma Asante, those 
who cared about the story, particularly in Botswana, were “comforted that it 
was going to be told through the gaze of a woman of colour”.

Asante was speaking at a press conference before the festival’s opening gala, 
and added: “The sense I got while we were filming was that [Botswanans] knew 
this was a great story, but [it] was an untold story, one that most of the 
world didn’t know about today … There was relief, and of course a curiosity, as 
to how their country, and they as a people, would be reflected on screen.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fa-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20United%20Kingdom%20trailer%3A%20interracial%20marriage%20causes%20outrage%20in%20true%20story%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fa-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20United%20Kingdom%20trailer%3A%20interracial%20marriage%20causes%20outrage%20in%20true%20story%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fa-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video&media=>
A United Kingdom trailer: interracial marriage causes outrage in true story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/25/a-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video>
 – video. 
Asante explained that she had decided to shoot the African scenes of her film 
in Botswana, rather than the neighbouring and more technologically advanced 
South Africa, because “we wanted the DNA of the country running through our 
film” – but they maintained a respectful approach to local traditions and 
authority by negotiating permission with village chiefs whenever a location was 
required.

A United Kingdom <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-united-kingdom> tells the 
story of Khama’s courtship of and marriage to British office clerk Ruth 
Williams in 1947, in the teeth of widespread social disapproval and 
international diplomatic scandal. Khama was the son of the king of the 
Bamangwato people, in what was then the British protectorate of Bechuanaland. 
In a particularly shabby episode of end-of-empire politicking, Khama was exiled 
from Bechuanaland in 1951, partly in an attempt to placate an apartheid-riven 
South Africa. After giving up royal status, the Khamas were allowed to return 
to the country in 1956, and Seretse Khama would go on to found the Bechuanaland 
Democratic Party, and become the first president of Botswana when independence 
was gained in 1966.

Actor David Oyelowo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-oyelowo>, who 
played Khama and was instrumental in getting the project off the ground, said 
he felt the film reflected the multicultural nature of modern Britain, as well 
as addressing the ongoing problem of diversity in the film industry. “What we 
are seeing in A United Kingdom is a reflection of the country we live in,” he 
said. “Amma directing this film shouldn’t be special, but here we are. We are 
still in that place.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Famma-asante-a-united-kingdom-david-oyelowo-rosamund-pike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F816161006ebdfe724e6e19efcf8f6fb4f2e09810%2F0_54_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amma%20Asante%20on%20A%20United%20Kingdom%3A%20'People%20were%20comforted%20a%20woman%20of%20colour%20was%20telling%20this%20story'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Famma-asante-a-united-kingdom-david-oyelowo-rosamund-pike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amma%20Asante%20on%20A%20United%20Kingdom%3A%20%27People%20were%20comforted%20a%20woman%20of%20colour%20was%20telling%20this%20story%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Famma-asante-a-united-kingdom-david-oyelowo-rosamund-pike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F816161006ebdfe724e6e19efcf8f6fb4f2e09810%2F0_54_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Rosamund Pike and David Oyelowo in A United Kingdom 
Both Oyelowo (who is also of royal lineage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/01/david-oyelowo-selma-martin-luther-king-benedict-cumberbatch-interview>
) and Asante are of African descent: the former’s family emigrated to the UK 
from Nigeria, the latter’s from Ghana. Oyelowo said he had first discovered the
Susan Williams book Colour Bar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/aug/19/biography.shopping>, on which 
the film is based, when it was sent to him by the producers of another film he 
was working on. He added: “My hope is that people will see themselves in both 
Ruth and Seretse, they will see this country’s history, they will see the 
history of people of African descent, and why we are very proud to call 
ourselves Britishand to call ourselves African.”

Asante is the most high-profile black British female director currently 
working, having completed her two previous featuresA Way of Life 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/films/2004/10/28/a_way_of_life_2004_review.shtml> and 
Belle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/15/belle-review-costume-drama-teeth-slavery>
 (after a career as an actor, including a stint on school series Grange Hill in 
the 80s). She had sharp words for the marginal status of women film-makers. “As 
women, we are not a minority, we are 50% of the population. We also play a 
large part in getting men to the cinema to watch these films, that a lot of the 
time are about white men, in a certain age bracket. That’s not to say women 
directors should always direct women’s stories, but seeing the world through a 
female gaze from time to time shouldn’t be that odd. It’s getting better, but 
it’s still not good enough.”

She added: “We are not saying we want to stop films about white men being 
made, or get rid of them; just that there are other realities. I walk a female 
path every day, I see the world through female eyes, and I know there are 50% 
of people in this country who walk a similar path. It’s not about removing 
what’s already there, it’s about allowing a space for others to join, and have 
the same privilege.”

• A United Kingdom opens the London film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/londonfilmfestival> on Wednesday 5 October, 
and goes on release on 25 November in the UK.
 