
Michael Haneke's Palme D'Or-winning Amour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amour> has continued its emergence as a 
strong outside bet for Oscars success after taking three top prizes from the 
National Society of Film Critics at the weekend.

The Austrian film-maker's French-language drama about an elderly couple 
dealing with the aftermath of a devastating stroke was named best film of 2012, 
while Haneke was garlanded with the best director prize and Emmanuelle Riva won 
best actress. It was also a good night for Steven Spielberg's Lincoln, which 
has an even better shot at being the year's big winner at February's Academy 
Awards; the historical biopic taking best actor forDaniel Day-Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danieldaylewis> and best screenplay for Tony 
Kushner's script. Paul Thomas Anderson's The Master achieved rare honours in 
what has been a disappointing awards season for the critically acclaimed period 
drama: it took best supporting actress for Amy Adams and best cinematography 
for Mihai Malaimare Jr.

The 60-strong National Society of Film Critics occasionally proves an Oscars 
bellwether, but is also capable of offbeat choices and has leaned notably 
towards non-English-language fare in recent years. In 2011it named Lars von 
Trier's Melancholia as best film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/09/melancholia-best-film-2011-us-critics>
, and in 2007 it gave the award to Ari Folman's Waltz With Bashir. Neither film 
was among the major Oscars contenders for its year of release. The NSFC did 
successfully spotlight Academy Award-winners The Hurt Locker and The Social 
Network in 2009 and 2010, however. Elsewhere, Matthew McConaughey won best 
supporting actor for his performances inMagic Mike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148230/magic-mike> and Bernie, while 
documentary The Gatekeepers, about Israel's secretive internal security 
service, won the non-fiction prize.

Amour has already won the best picture, best director, best actor and best 
actress prizes at the European film awards last month, as well as honours from 
influential critics bodies in LA, San Francisco, Boston and New York. It looks 
the clear frontrunner for the best foreign-language prize at the Oscars, but 
could yet break out of the foreign-language film ghetto to be a contender in 
mainstream categories, as Roberto Benigni's Life Is Beautiful did in 1999.

A hint of the glitz and glamour to be expected at this year's Oscars was 
delivered at the weekend by the annualPalm Springs international film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/jan/06/palm-springs-film-festival-awards-video>
, which played host to Academy Award-winners such as Sally Field, Helen Hunt,
Robert Zemeckis 
<http://www.palmspringslife.com/Palm-Springs-Life/Desert-Guide/November-2012/Robert-Zemeckis-to-Receive-Director-of-Year-Award/>
 and Ben Affleck, as well as luminaries such as Naomi Watts and Richard Gere. 
Field, who stars as Mary Todd Lincoln in Lincoln, picked up a career 
achievement award, while Hunt took the spotlight award forher turn as a "sex 
surrogate" in The Sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/145815/surrogate>. Bradley Cooper and 
Watts received achievement awards for their performances in Silver Linings 
Playbook and The Impossible, while the cast of Affleck's Argo won the ensemble 
performance award. Zemeckis was named director of the year, and Gere won a 
special chairman's award for his performance in Arbitrage. The 
celebrity-centred awards are generally recognised as a harmless bit of fluff 
ahead of more meaningful ceremonies such as the Screen Actors Guild awards and 
the Oscars themselves.

The nominees for the 85th Academy Awards will be revealed on 24 January, with 
the ceremony proper following on 24 February at the Dolby theatre in LA.
 