
Two of the year's major festival hits, Michael Haneke's Amour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amour> and Paul Thomas Anderson's The Master, 
will lead the charge for the annual London Film Critics' Circle awards with 
seven nominations each.

Amour, Haneke's Cannes-winning tale about an elderly French couple dealing 
with the aftermath of a series of debilitating strokes, will compete for best 
film, best director, best screenwriter and best foreign language film, as well 
as best actor (Jean-Louis Trintignant), best actress (Emmanuelle Riva) and best 
supporting actress (Isabelle Huppert). The Master, Anderson's period drama 
about an L Ron Hubbard-style cult leader, is up for best film, best director, 
best screenwriter, best actor (Joaquin Phoenix), best supporting actor (Philip 
Seymour Hoffman) and best supporting actress (Amy Adams). The film, which won 
several prizes at the Venice film festival in September and was also 
subsequently popular with critics at Toronto, also has a nod for the technical 
achievement prize.

Neither film is considered a frontrunner for February's Academy Awards, though 
The Master could be picking up momentum in the acting categories after grabbing 
three nominations (Phoenix, Seymour Hoffman and Adams) for the Golden Globes 
last week. Amour has generally been confined to the best foreign language film 
section by the major critics' bodies, though Trintignant is also up for the 
Critics' Choice best actor prize. Steven Spielberg's Lincoln is currently 
consideredthis year's Oscar frontrunner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/12/lincoln-tipped-for-oscar> after 
taking seven Golden Globe nominations, four Screen Actors Guild nods and a 
record 13 Critics' Choice nominations. Tom Hooper musical Les Miserables, Ben 
Affleck's Argo, Kathryn Bigelow's Zero Dark Thirty and – if the often unreliable
Golden Globes are to be believed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/13/lincoln-seven-golden-globe-nominations?intcmp=239>
 – Quentin Tarantino's Django Unchained could also be in with a shout come 24 
February at the Dolby theatre in Los Angeles next year.

The London Film Critics' Circle, which has a far more UK and Ireland-oriented 
focus – Irish actors and directors are considered "British" for the purposes of 
the awards – than the major Hollywood awards bodies, handed Lincoln, Argo and 
Les Miserables four nominations each, with Zero Dark Thirty getting three. Also 
popular was Sam Mendes' Skyfall, which became the most garlanded James Bond 
film in the organisation's history with five nominations.

"Once again, the selections of the British critics illustrate the great 
variation of extraordinary work in film over the last year," said chairman 
Jason Solomon. "In all categories, the films are of outstanding quality this 
year, indicating how the London critics view all films from around the world on 
a level footing – brilliance is the only benchmark. Choosing winners will be 
harder than ever, but never will they have been more deserving."

The 33rd annual London Critics' Circle Film awards will take place on Sunday 
20 January at London's May Fair Hotel.

Nominations in full

The Sky Movies award: FILM OF THE YEAR

Amour (Artificial Eye)

Argo (Warners)

Beasts of the Southern Wild (StudioCanal)

Life of Pi (Fox)

The Master (Entertainment)

FOREIGN LANGUAGE FILM OF THE YEAR

Amour (Artificial Eye)

Holy Motors (Artificial Eye)

Once Upon a Time in Anatolia (New Wave)

Rust and Bone (StudioCanal)

Tabu (New Wave)

DOCUMENTARY OF THE YEAR

The Imposter (Picturehouse/Revolver)

London: The Modern Babylon (BFI)

Nostalgia for the Light (New Wave)

The Queen of Versailles (Dogwoof)

Searching for Sugar Man (StudioCanal)

The May Fair Hotel award: BRITISH FILM OF THE YEAR

Berberian Sound Studio (Artificial Eye)

The Imposter (Picturehouse/Revolver)

Les Miserables (Universal)

Sightseers (StudioCanal)

Skyfall (Sony)

The Spotlight award: ACTOR OF THE YEAR

Daniel Day-Lewis – Lincoln (Fox)

Hugh Jackman – Les Miserables (Universal)

Mads Mikkelsen – The Hunt (Arrow)

Joaquin Phoenix – The Master (Entertainment)

Jean-Louis Trintignant – Amour (Artificial Eye)

ACTRESS OF THE YEAR

Jessica Chastain - Zero Dark Thirty (Universal)

Marion Cotillard - Rust and Bone (StudioCanal)

Helen Hunt - The Sessions (Fox)

Jennifer Lawrence - Silver Linings Playbook (Entertainment)

Emmanuelle Riva – Amour (Artificial Eye)

SUPPORTING ACTOR OF THE YEAR

Alan Arkin – Argo (Warners)

Javier Bardem – Skyfall (Sony)

Michael Fassbender – Prometheus (Fox)

Philip Seymour Hoffman – The Master (Entertainment)

Tommy Lee Jones – Lincoln (Fox)

SUPPORTING ACTRESS OF THE YEAR

Amy Adams – The Master (Entertainment)

Judi Dench – Skyfall (Sony)

Sally Field – Lincoln (Fox)

Anne Hathaway – Les Miserables (Universal)

Isabelle Huppert – Amour (Artificial Eye)

BRITISH ACTOR OF THE YEAR – In association with Cameo Productions

Daniel Craig – Skyfall (Sony)

Charlie Creed-Miles - Wild Bill (The Works/Universal)

Daniel Day-Lewis – Lincoln (Fox)

Toby Jones – Berberian Sound Studio (Artificial Eye)

Steve Oram – Sightseers (StudioCanal)

BRITISH ACTRESS OF THE YEAR

Emily Blunt – Looper (eOne) and Your Sister's Sister (StudioCanal)

Judi Dench – The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel (Fox) and Skyfall (Sony)

Alice Lowe – Sightseers (StudioCanal)

Helen Mirren – Hitchcock (Fox)

Andrea Riseborough – Shadow Dancer (Paramount)

YOUNG BRITISH PERFORMER OF THE YEAR

Samantha Barks – Les Miserables (Universal)

Fady Elsayed – My Brother the Devil (Verve)

Tom Holland – The Impossible (eOne)

Will Poulter – Wild Bill (The Works/Universal)

Jack Reynor – What Richard Did (Artificial Eye)

The American Airlines award: DIRECTOR OF THE YEAR

Paul Thomas Anderson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-thomas-anderson> – 
The Master (Entertainment)

Kathryn Bigelow – Zero Dark Thirty (Universal)

Nuri Bilge Ceylan – Once Upon a Time in Anatolia (New Wave)

Michael Haneke <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-haneke> – Amour 
(Artificial Eye)

Ang Lee – Life of Pi (Fox)

SCREENWRITER OF THE YEAR

Paul Thomas Anderson – The Master (Entertainment)

Mark Boal – Zero Dark Thirty (Universal)

Michael Haneke – Amour (Artificial Eye)

Quentin Tarantino - Django Unchained (Sony)

Chris Terrio – Argo (Warners)

BREAKTHROUGH BRITISH FILM-MAKER

Ben Drew, writer/director – Ill Manors (Revolver)

Sally El Hosaini, writer/director – My Brother the Devil (Verve)

Dexter Fletcher, co-writer/director – Wild Bill (The Works/Universal)

Bart Layton, writer/director – The Imposter (Picturehouse/Revolver)

Alice Lowe & Steve Oram, writers – Sightseers (StudioCanal)

The Sky 3D award: TECHNICAL ACHIEVEMENT AWARD

Anna Karenina – Jacqueline Durran, costumes (Universal)

Argo – William Goldenberg, film editing (Warners)

Beasts of the Southern Wild – Ben Richardson, cinematography (StudioCanal)

Berberian Sound Studio – Joakim Sundstrom & Stevie Haywood, sound design 
(Artificial Eye)

Holy Motors – Bernard Floch, makeup (Artificial Eye)

Life of Pi – Claudio Miranda, cinematography (Fox)

Life of Pi – Bill Westenhofer, visual effects (Fox)

The Master – Jack Fisk & David Crank, production design (Entertainment)

My Brother the Devil – David Raedeker, cinematography (Verve)

Rust and Bone – Alexandre Desplat, music (StudioCanal)

DILYS POWELL AWARD FOR EXCELLENCE IN FILM: Sponsored by PREMIER

Helena Bonham Carter
 