
Investigators are sifting through the wreckage of a Boeing 737 that plummeted 
into a field near Amsterdam's Schiphol airport in an attempt to find clues to 
what caused the crash, in which nine people died and 86 were injured.

Dozens of safety officials and police worked overnight at the scene of the 
disaster in the hope of discovering evidence that could help explain why the 
pilot lost control of the Turkish Airlines plane seconds before it hurtled to 
the ground.

An airport spokesman confirmed today that three Britons were on board the 
flight. They are believed to be Susan Lord and her daughters Sofia and Lisa 
Labeij, who were travelling to theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> with Jakavus Labeij, the girls' 
Turkish father. All are thought to have escaped without serious injury.

Of the 125 passengers who survived the crash, six are critically wounded, 
officials said. Four of seven Americans on board were Boeing employees, 
Haarlemmermeer mayor Theo Weterings told a press conference at the airport.

The flight's data recorders and voice tapes have been sent to Paris for 
examination and investigators said they expected the results within days. A 
separate team is working on location in the field near runway 18R, where the 
plane hit the ground and smashed into three pieces.

Fred Sanders, a spokesman for the Dutch Safety Authority, which is leading the 
inquiry, said the damage to the aircraft supported witness statements that it 
had hit the ground tail-down.

"This may indicate that the plane had lost its forward momentum, that there 
was no motor function," he said, cautioning that it could be a long time before 
a full explanation was available. "We will have an official finding probably in 
about a year, but we should be able to give an interim finding within weeks," 
said Sanders.

This morning the Turkish news website Hurriyet.com raised questions about the 
technical record of the aircraft, quoting sources who said it had been sent for 
repairs twice last week, undergoing maintenance on 18 February for a failure 
detected in its flaps, and again on Monday, when its "master caution" lights 
burned out. Those reports could not be confirmed.

Other theories behind the crash, including birds being sucked into the engine 
and the plane running out of fuel, appeared to be dismissed by investigators. 
"The cause of the crash is not yet known, and we have no hypothesis at this 
stage," said Rob Stenacker, a spokesman for Schiphol police.

The pilot of Flight 1951, Hasan Tahsin Arisan, who was one of three crew 
members to die in the crash, was an experienced former officer in the Turkish 
air force. There was nothing in the weather to indicate problems â€“ aside from a 
slight mistiness, visibility was clear at 5,000 yards. The Boeing 737-800 model 
has an unblemished safety record.

Today's Turkish newspapers are critical of Turkish Airlines and the 
government's handling of the crisis. Initial statements claimed all passengers 
and crew had survived the crash. It was only hours after that the full extent 
of the casualties became clear. One newspaper labels the mix-up a scandal, 
while another writes that the aftermath "turned from celebration to torture".
 