
Dozens of heavily armed military police flooded into Amsterdam’s Schiphol 
airport on Tuesday night, evacuating part of the busy travel hub and arresting 
one man during a four-hour security alert.


The lesson of Brussels: jihadi terrorism crosses borders, and so must 
solutions | Natalie Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/01/lesson-brussels-jihadi-terrorism-solutions-france-belgium-finger-pointing>
The incident came as the Netherlands has been on high alert following the 22 
Marchattack on Brussels airport and metro system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brussels-attacks> in which 32 people were 
killed.

“Police have evacuated part of the airport plaza and the adjacent Sheraton 
Hotel and arrested one person amid a suspicious situation,” airport spokeswoman 
Danielle Timmer said.

Witnesses saw heavily armed Dutch special military police, wearing balaclavas, 
patrolling the airport while passengers watched from behind security tape.

Part of the airport was cordoned off for about four hours while a helicopter 
hovered overhead. The alert was lifted at around 1:30am (2330 GMT).

It remained unclear exactly what had triggered concerns, or who had been 
arrested, but a Dutch news reports said nothing dangerous had been found in a 
search of the arrested man’s luggage.

Military police spokesman Alfred Ellwanger said that “around 9:45pm a man was 
arrested on the square in front of the main entrance to the airport’s plaza”.

No flights were disrupted and trains continuing arriving as normal at the 
underground station, which links the huge travel hub to the rest of the
Netherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>.

“Nobody is telling us anything about what’s going on. My car is in the parking 
garage and I can’t get it out. I’m a diabetic and I need my insulin,” said a 
72-year-old Dutchman.

Schiphol, which lies about 16km (10m) southwest of central Amsterdam, is one 
of Europe’s busiest travel hubs with about 50 million visitors passing through 
each year.

“Part of Schiphol is not accessible due to an incident. Police is 
investigating the matter. For now, air traffic has not been affected,” the 
airport said on its official Twitter account.

There has been concern in the Netherlands about whether it could targetedby 
terrorists in the wake ofthe attacks in Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/12/brussels-bombings-two-more-charged>
 and France.


As a precaution, the government stepped up security at national airports and 
train stations and tightened controls on its southern border with Belgium.
 