
Amy Adams leads Denis Villeneuve’s brainy sci-fi drama Arrival, which had its 
North American premiere at theTelluride film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/telluridefilmfestival> on Saturday, but she 
often prefers being a supporting player.

Arrival review: heartfelt alien-contact movie communicates spectacular ideas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/arrival-review-amy-adams-denis-villeneuve-alien-contact>
During a tribute to the actor that preceded the well-received screening, Adams 
took part in a discussion which focused on her ability to invest the smallest 
roles with considerable interior life. Adams has been nominated for the best 
supporting actress Oscar four times (for Junebug, Doubt, The Fighter and The 
Master) – most recently she also netted her first leading Oscar nod for 
American Hustle.

“In my experience, the lead role has the burden of plot,” said Adams. “A lot 
of the times, as a supporting character, you get to play an amazing character. 
I’m not looking at the size of a role, I’m looking at the chance to grow.”

Referencing Paul Thomas Anderson’s 2012 drama The Master, in which she plays a 
Lady Macbeth-like wife to Philip Seymour Hoffman’s charismatic cult leader, 
Adams said she took on the role because of the scene where her character 
masturbates her husband, and then proceeds to wipe her hands on a towel and put 
in a damper. “This girl is crazy!” Adams said, laughing. “Sometimes it’s as a 
simple as that. That’s what I wanted to do with my summer.”

That scene was included in a 20-minute showreel to honor Adams, that she sat 
through before the conversation. She was spotted wiping away tears during a 
selection from Doubt, in which she appeared alongside Hoffman, who passed away 
unexpectedly in 2014. (“He’s one my favorite people that I’ve had the honor to 
have in my life,” she said.) Also included were clips from her work in 
Enchanted, Julie & Julia, and incongruously, Man of Steel.

“I don’t typically like to watch my work after I’ve seen it once, maybe 
twice,” said Adams, looking a little uncomfortable. “I’m a really harsh critic 
of myself.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Farrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arrival%20trailer%3A%20Amy%20Adams%20makes%20first%20contact%20with%20aliens%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Farrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arrival%20trailer%3A%20Amy%20Adams%20makes%20first%20contact%20with%20aliens%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Farrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video&media=>
Arrival trailer: Amy Adams makes first contact with aliens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/17/arrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video>
Adams conceded she does a “worrisome amount of preparation” before each 
project. “I don’t sleep, I start acting weird. You can ask my husband!” she 
said, pointing to him in the front row.

“It’s irritating,” she continued. “I’ve stopped talking to people on set about 
my preparation. For me it gives me a lot of confidence in my character. You 
never know what’s going to happen on set, so I tend to be someone who’s really 
self reliant.”


Adams did however note that she’s learned to loosen the reigns a bit, after 
collaborating with Spike Jones on his 2013 futuristic romance Her. She noted 
that she felt a “shift” in her process while on set.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F29%2Fher-joaquin-phoenix-trailer-spike-jonze-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F11%2F29%2F1385728399559%2FJaoquin-Pheonix-in-Spike--025.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Her%3A%20watch%20Joaquin%20Phoenix%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20Spike%20Jonze's%20romantic%20drama%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F29%2Fher-joaquin-phoenix-trailer-spike-jonze-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Her%3A%20watch%20Joaquin%20Phoenix%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20Spike%20Jonze%27s%20romantic%20drama%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F29%2Fher-joaquin-phoenix-trailer-spike-jonze-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F11%2F29%2F1385728399559%2FJaoquin-Pheonix-in-Spike--025.jpg>
Her: watch Joaquin Phoenix in the trailer for Spike Jonze’s romantic drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/nov/29/her-joaquin-phoenix-trailer-spike-jonze-video>
“I stopped caring about the weight of criticism that was with me, just 
trusting I was enough,” said Adams. “Spike and I had many conversations about 
this. I really was so tired of giving a fuck all the time. Watching I can see 
it in my work – when I stopped needing to be so perfect.”

Adams said that parenthood is the presiding factor in determining her career 
choices. “I really love the stuff I get to do now, because I have a different 
kind of balance,” she said. “I’m looking for sets that are calm. I want to come 
back the same person I was. I don’t want the experience on set to be something 
that’s disruptive to my life.”

“I love having a separation between work and life – it allows me to get lost 
in my work too,” she added. “I can’t come home acting like my character from 
American Hustle … ”

 * Arrival opens in the US and UK on 11 November
 