
It was a Saturday afternoon when it happened. There I was, tapping diligently 
at the laptop keyboard, 26,000 words into Heads You Die, my second Young Bond 
novel, propelling my teen hero through the sultry streets of Old Havana towards 
a deadly appointment with his latest nemesis, when —


Steve Cole: nothing is quite like Bond, so this was a great excuse to re-read 
my Ian Fleming 007 collection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/nov/12/steve-cole-young-james-bond-interview>
Death struck swiftly and silently.

What a cliché! you’re thinking. And you’re right, if I’d written those words 
in Heads You Die, I’d had cut them straight out again. Or, Iwould have, had I 
been able to see them.

But the screen had gone black. It was my MacBook that had died. The 
susurrating whir of its hard disk went on, as if trying to process this sudden 
dying of the light.

I tried restarting my laptop. It made that familiar fruity chime, went through 
the motions of starting up, but then…

There are certain sights that no one should have to see. One of them is the 
Apple “grey screen of death”, cheating you of any access to your files.

 As I hit restart over and over, unease gave way to distress as the 
ramifications sank in. Heads You Die was gone. I had never configured Time 
Machine, the Mac’s auto-backup software. I had never fancied my documents 
floating about in the iCloud. I had foolishly thought that my laptop, which was 
only two years old, would repay my near constant attentions with long, loyal, 
loving service. But no. It had died. When had I last backed up my computer? The 
answer was never. I’ve worked with Macs since 1993 and nothing like this had 
ever happened before.

 The only backup of Heads You Die was a Word document of the first 10,000 
words, mailed to myself when working on a different computer. Which meant that 
if I couldn’t retrieve the master document, 16,000 words – 16,000 slow-won, 
sweated-over words of action-packed prose – would be lost. About a quarter of 
the novel. And my deadline was drawing closer…

Steve Cole's top 10 space books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2011/aug/10/steve-cole-top-10-space>
 To action! The doomed, ridiculous action of a headless chicken running about 
once the cleaver has fallen, but action nonetheless. I scoured Mac forums 
online for a baffling array of alternative start-up modes – without success. I 
copied and entered little bits of computer code I didn’t understand in the 
slightest – without success. Then I tried the alternative start-up mode of 
punching my laptop while swearing and crying. Violence turned to prayer but 
both were pointless, for the grey screen of death would not be overcome.

What to do? Cross fingers that James’s Cuban struggles could be extricated by 
professionals and carry on from where I left off? Or rewrite the missing chunk 
while it was reasonably fresh in my mind?

Such a situation is a double nightmare for the writer. Firstly, the horrid 
realisation that so much effort may have been wasted: I felt like an arthritic 
marathon runner who’d been stumbling for miles in the wrong direction – I would 
have to expend so much energy returning to the point where calamity struck, 
that the finish line could now surely never be reached. But worse still for a 
writer is explaining his predicament to his publisher; as excuses for late 
delivery go, “My laptop crashed and I lost loads of my manuscript” ranks 
alongside that schoolchild lament, “The dog ate my homework”. He knows that not 
only will he be disbelieved, but also his originality will be mocked 
mercilessly. I wanted to take my editor with me to the repair store to show her 
the truth of my situation. I wanted her to see my tears.

Eventually, a catastrophic motherboard failure was diagnosed. I was told it 
would take a week to order in parts and that because I’d stored my Young Bond 
file on the desktop rather than in a proper folder, there was no guarantee that 
Heads You Die could be rescued. Nevertheless, I confirmed that they could begin 
work.

Guardian children's books podcast: Steve Cole on time travelling cows, 
astrosaurs and Doctor Who
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2012/aug/20/steve-cole-childrens-books-podcast>
Nine days of making truncated pen-and-paper progress through my Bond plot 
followed. Having heard nothing from the shop, I phoned up, fearing the worst. I 
was told that repairs hadn’t been started as no one had confirmed my 
confirmation. Once I’d calmed down, I bought a new laptop, fearing the old one 
would never return: an expensive way of ensuring, of course, that it did.

But alas, many files could not be recovered. My 16,000 words of James fighting 
corruption had been themselves corrupted. How my editor laughed at the irony! 
(Or was she weeping? It was hard to hear over my own sobs.)

My inspiration: Steve Cole on Douglas Adams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/23/my-inspiration-steve-cole-douglas-adams>
Still, Bond would never give up, and I couldn’t afford that luxury either. 
While it’s true to say that rewriting something never takes as long as it did 
the first time round, it’s still an utter sod, especially when there’s so much 
to reproduce. My deadline was kindly extended, and really, any rewrite brings 
greater focus and clarity to a work, so I console myself that Heads You Die is 
a better novel for my laptop’s misfortune. Also, since writers thrive on 
martyrdom, self-abnegation and commiserations, the experience wasn’t all bad.

 My newly repaired laptop survived a further couple of months before packing 
up for good, and I vowed never to be caught unprepared again. I bought a 
two-terabyte AirPort Time Capsule to wirelessly back-up my every document.

That was about 10 months ago. One of these days, so help me, I’m going to take 
it out of its box and find out how it works.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fan-authors-worst-nightmare-the-grey-screen-of-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7973c1b09b16f48e9c8a8acf6bcd12ae38ed2fd%2F0_0_1018_1559%2F1018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20author's%20worst%20nightmare%3A%20the%20grey%20screen%20of%20death&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fan-authors-worst-nightmare-the-grey-screen-of-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20author%27s%20worst%20nightmare%3A%20the%20grey%20screen%20of%20death&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fan-authors-worst-nightmare-the-grey-screen-of-death%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7973c1b09b16f48e9c8a8acf6bcd12ae38ed2fd%2F0_0_1018_1559%2F1018.jpg>
A better book for the rewrite? Buy Steve Cole’s Young Bond: Heads You Die from 
the Guardian bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/401930/> and find out!
 