
Some painters – and some paintings – are the silent type. They fear language. 
Their art is a wordless enigma.

Caravaggio 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/michelangelo-merisi-da-caravaggio> 
left almost no trace of his speech, let alone any writing. The court cases his 
violent life led to are the only record of the way he accounted for himself, 
verbally. His paintings aregreat frozen moments 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/michelangelo-merisi-da-caravaggio-the-supper-at-emmaus>
 of wordless power.


David Hockney: ‘Just because I’m cheeky, doesn’t mean I’m not serious’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/09/david-hockney-interview-cheeky-serious>
David Hockney is another kind of artist, a painter-poet for whom language is a 
musical instrument, a second art. If Hockney was not such a talented painter, 
perhaps he’d have become a writer. Everyone knowshis Bradford voice, 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04w0b2v> one of the great non-southern, 
non-posh accents that changed spoken English in the 1960s. But it’s not just 
his eloquence in interviews that makes him an artist of words.

On the London Underground the other day, I came across a poster for a new film 
calledA Bigger Splash 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Bigger_Splash_(film)#/media/File%3AA_Bigger_Splash_poster.jpg>
. What, I thought – has someone remadeJack Hazan’s haunting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/mar/04/a-bigger-splash-hockney-dvd> 1973 
Hockney biopic <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0071219/>, which in turn takes its 
title from the artist’s 1967 masterpiece of that name?

But no – the new A Bigger Splash is a psychosexual thriller starring Tilda 
Swinton and Ralph Fiennes that has, writesthe Guardian’s Andrew Pulver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/07/a-bigger-splash-review-tilda-swinton-ralph-fiennes-luca-guadagnino-venice>
, “nothing specifically to do with David Hockney, aside from the presence of 
swimming pools glinting in full-beam sunlight …” Great title, though. You can 
see why they chose it instead of The Swimming Pool, for this loose remake of 
the 1969 French classic,La Piscine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/29/la-piscine-film-review>. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fan-even-bigger-splash-why-david-hockneys-pop-art-poem-lives-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f4f43fbe0761af065f68bb0df1fb071a16f9406%2F0_0_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20even%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20why%20David%20Hockney's%20pop-art%20poem%20lives%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fan-even-bigger-splash-why-david-hockneys-pop-art-poem-lives-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20even%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20why%20David%20Hockney%27s%20pop-art%20poem%20lives%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fan-even-bigger-splash-why-david-hockneys-pop-art-poem-lives-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f4f43fbe0761af065f68bb0df1fb071a16f9406%2F0_0_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
 The perfect lyric … a still from the film version of A Bigger Splash. 
Photograph: Studio Canal 
If you are going to have people sensually diving into sun-kissed pools, why 
not go with the best and use Hockney’s lingeringly enigmatic title? It is a 
piece of poetry that floats in the modern mind, quotable and reusable, like a 
perfect lyric. I can’t immediately think of any other titles of paintings that 
function in this way, separate from the picture itself, as a lovely and 
suggestive arrangement of words.

But what does A Bigger Splash mean? Hockney’s perfect California moment – a 
diver’s white foaming wake in a blue pool under a blue sky and framed by a 
board, two tall palms and a long low house – was one in a series of 
swimming-pool pictures that also include The Splash and A Little Splash. So at 
its simplest, the titleA Bigger Splash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-bigger-splash> is a jokey reference to its 
place in a group of works. How prosaic.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fan-even-bigger-splash-why-david-hockneys-pop-art-poem-lives-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F208e37e134752d0b132d7ce2d474700f7443d19f%2F0_0_3223_3311%2F3223.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20even%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20why%20David%20Hockney's%20pop-art%20poem%20lives%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fan-even-bigger-splash-why-david-hockneys-pop-art-poem-lives-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20even%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20why%20David%20Hockney%27s%20pop-art%20poem%20lives%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fan-even-bigger-splash-why-david-hockneys-pop-art-poem-lives-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F208e37e134752d0b132d7ce2d474700f7443d19f%2F0_0_3223_3311%2F3223.jpg>
 And the original … at London’s Tate Britain. Photograph: Alamy 
 But no one seeing the words A Bigger Splash on a film poster is going to read 
them that way. And we don’t when we see Hockney’s painting in London’s Tate 
Britain either. A Bigger Splash is a poignant and inscrutable line that 
suggests some great emotional moment. It implies glamour. It speaks of glory, 
drama and exhilaration. It may be a lyric of longing, love, lust. And yet it is 
languid. It’s a cool observation.


Hockney was getting used to being famous, and wealthy, when he painted A 
Bigger Splash. He was loving his new home in Los Angeles. This all adds to the 
eerie, cool, fascinating lyricism of his painting and its title – that moment 
when life erupts so beautifully. Hockney is a fine poet. Both his art and words 
make a bigger splash.

 