
At last, bankers are paying the price for their bailouts – in Ireland, at 
least. The decision by Brian Lenihan to refuse to hand over any more cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/dec/13/allied-irish-bank-bonus-brian-lenihan>
 to the stricken Allied Irish Banks if it pays out €40m in bonuses to 2,400 
staff is the most decisive move yet by a finance minister to stamp out the 
bonus culture.

No doubt motivated by the humiliation he faced by having to accept €85bn in 
aid from the IMF and the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ireland-bailout>, Lenihan has gone 
further than Alistair Darling was prepared to when he was bailing out RBS at the
height of the banking crisis two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-crisis>.

Then Darling stopped bank bosses taking bonuses but allowed RBS to keep 
shelling out to the overpaid troops on trading floors on the basis that without 
the payments, they would walk out of the door – and take lucrative business 
with them. With his reputation in tatters and facing an election next month 
that is likely to sweep his Fianna Fáil party out of government, Lenihan may be 
hoping to retain some dignity among his furious electorate by halting the bonus 
payouts at a bank that is likely to be nationalised in the coming weeks.

The fact that AIB felt it needed to pay bonuses at all demonstrates how badly 
broken the bonus system is. Logically it would seem implausible that anyone 
working at a bank needing a taxpayer bailout could be entitled to a bonus. 
Rationally it would seem any banker working in such an institution would be 
ashamed to take a payout. Rightly the bonus system should operate in such a way 
that they would not be in line for such a cash boost at all.

However, such is the structure of these sorts of bonuses that they are paid 
regardless of performance. In the case of AIB, the bonuses that have been 
stopped were deferred payments granted in 2008 – the year the wheels started to 
fall off the industry.

The bank had decided to make the payments after being taken to court by a 
trader.John Foy 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/irish/employee-who-took-court-case-will-still-get-payment-2459531.html>
 won a ruling that he should be paid the €161,000 he was awarded in 2008. 
Lenihan cannot override that judgment, but the bill to pay off the rest of 
Foy's colleagues could be €40m.

When the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/dec/08/allied-irish-banks-pay-bonuses-despite-bailout>
 and others reported this fact a fortnight ago, the outcry in Ireland made the 
embattled minister rethink his options. Last week he announced an amendment to 
his austerity budget that will slap a 90% tax on bankers' bonuses in the 
future. After a weekend of thought, he came up with his latest plan to tie the 
IMF/EU bailout – likely to be €9bn at AIB – to a pledge from the bank not to 
pay the bonuses.

The new management team at AIB will welcome Lenihan's tough stance. But, 
across the Irish sea, bankers in the City were today watching nervously, aghast 
even, that the Irish government could take such an extraordinary step.

Bankers have warned time and again that if their bonuses are curtailed, they 
will move to places where there are no such restrictions – robbing the country 
of vital income.

That cuts no ice with European commissioner Michel Barnier, who regards the 
threats as nothing more than "blackmail" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/dec/13/banking-bonuses-fsa-regulations>
. With the round of rewards just starting in the City,new bonus guidelines from 
Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/dec/10/banks-sidestep-bonus-crackdown>
 have prompted fresh threats of an exodus; but policymakers around the world 
now have a chance to see what really happens when the plug gets pulled on 
bonuses entirely.

Will 2,400 furious bankers walk out of the doors of AIB in Dublin and pitch up 
in Hong Kong, Singapore or even London? Time will tell, but Lenihan's 
face-saving exercise could have repercussions far beyond Dublin if AIB's doors 
fail to revolve, opening the way for other governments to stop big bonuses.
 