
Noxolo Nogwaza was just 24 years old when she was raped, beaten and stabbed to 
death on her way home from a night out with her friends in the South African 
township of Kwa Thema on 24 April 2011.

Her brutalised body was dumped in a shallow ditch. It appears that the only 
motive for the killing was that Noxolo was a lesbian.

Nearly two years after her death, little progress has been made on Noxolo's 
case and her killers remain at large.

Homophobia is still widespread in South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, despite its progressive laws. 
The constitution forbids discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation 
and it is the only African country to have legalised homosexual marriage.

Nevertheless, Noxolo's assualt was the latest in a long series of vicious 
crimes against lesbians and gay men, and such attacks have created fear in the 
country's lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) community.

Noxolo was an active member of the Ekurhuleni Pride Organising Committee, and 
had spoken out about her own sexuality. She and others had campaigned bravely 
for equal rights for LGBTI people.
 Noxolo Nogwaza, who was killed in Kwa Thema, South Africa, in 2011. 
Amnesty supports campaigners in South Africa who are calling for an end to 
homophobia across the country, and features Noxolo in itsWrite for Rights 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/series/amnesty-campaign-write-for-rights> 
letter-writing campaign.

Ana Matronic, lead singer of Scissor Sisters, supports Amnesty's call for 
justice for Noxolo's cause, and has seen the positive effect that the simple 
action of writing a letter can have on a person's life.

Ana said: "It is my dream of dreams to have everyone in the world be unafraid 
to be who they truly are and are able to express themselves. I believe we 
should accept each other for who we are.

"This is why I'm supporting this case. Noxolo was brave enough to stand up for 
her beliefs and paid the price with her life. We must now take action to demand 
justice for her."

Watch Ana's full interview below and if you would like to call for justice for 
Noxolo visitamnesty.org.uk/noxolo 
<http://action.amnesty.org.uk/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1194&ea.campaign.id=17047>
 