
The debut full-length trailer for Anchorman: The Legend Continues has hit the 
web, with Ron Burgundy and his team of eccentric news types relocating from San 
Diego to New York at the start of the 80s.

The new film, which arrives more than nine years after the release of 2004's 
Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/101940/anchorman>, sees Will Ferrell's 
moustachioed lothario/sex pest transferring to a new 24-hour news channel in 
the Big Apple. As he tells his recruiter: "I'm going to do the thing that God 
put Ron Burgundy on this Earth to do: have salon-quality hair and read the 
news."

Fans of the original will be pleased to note that birdbrained weatherman Brick 
Tamland (Steve Carell), fashion-obsessed field reporter Brian Fantana (Paul 
Rudd) and chauvinistic sportscaster Champ Kind (David Koechner) have all 
followed their anchor to the Atlantic coast, and the new film will also find 
room for Christina Applegate as fellow news presenter Veronica Corningstone. 
This time around, however, Burgundy seems to be more interested in "romancing" 
a new colleague, played byMeagan Good <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0328709/>. At 
a dinner at her home, it is strongly hinted that his comprehension of racial 
politics is even more primitive than his understanding of feminism proved back 
in sunny San Diego.

There's also love (of a kind) for Tamland, in the form of an appropriately 
dimwitted new wife, played by Bridesmaids'Kristen Wiig 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/nov/18/kristen-wiig-bridesmaids>. They 
share a certain connection, but who can tell if it's a romantic one? Over 
dinner, he tells her: "Your hair looks like wet popcorn." She responds: "I like 
the parts of your face that are covered in skin."

Anchorman: The Legend Continues also features Vince Vaughn, Luke Wilson and 
Greg Kinnear, while there are said to be cameos from Harrison Ford, Nicole 
Kidman, Sacha Baron Cohen and Jim Carrey, among others. The new trailer also 
featuresJames Marsden <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005188/>, perhaps portraying 
a younger rival newsman, who gets short shrift from Burgundy: "He's not that 
great," he says, in a not-so-withering aside that is immediately repeated, 
loudly, by Brick, for the benefit of its target.

The new film, directed by a returning Adam McKay from a screenplay he wrote 
with Ferrell, arrives in cinemas on both sides of the Atlantic on 20 December.
 