
As you might expect of someone who has been modelling for L’Oréal for 30 
years, Andie MacDowell looks good. In fact, at 57, she looks fantastic: 
Cheshire-cat grin sweet as ever, genuinely pleased with the commemorative cake 
the brand has baked for her. It’s teatime halfway through the Cannes film 
festival and MacDowell is sitting in a suite at the Hôtel Martinez, one of the 
most decadent pit stops on the Croisette. This passes for familiar territory:
Steven Soderbergh <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevensoderbergh>’s Sex, 
Lies and Videotape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/17/my-favourite-cannes-winner-sex-lies-and-videotape>
, her breakthrough, won the Palme d’Or here in 1989; I assume that was her 
first Cannes. “I didn’t come,” she says forlornly. “I had just had a baby, and 
I was afraid people would make fun of me. Because I looked … big. Now people 
can make fun of me and I don’t mind so much. I was more sensitive back then.”

Insecurity turns out to be a bit of a leitmotif for MacDowell, alongside the 
steeliness that carried her through her early struggles as a star. This yin and 
yang is key to her screen appeal, certainly in her most effective performances: 
the sexually repressed wife who finds liberation in Sex, Lies and Videotape, 
the grieving mother who finally snaps inShort Cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,544570,00.html>
, the kindly news producer who repeatedly slapsBill Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bill-murray>’s weatherman in Groundhog Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79383/groundhog-day>. It has been some 
time since she starred in a film as impactful as any of those, so it’s easy to 
forget just how huge she was: during the 1990s she’d already been nominated for 
three Golden Globes before the release ofFour Weddings and a Funeral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/four-weddings-and-a-funeral>.

Magic Mike XXL trailer review: no doom, no gloom, just nipples
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/may/07/magic-mike-xxl-trailer-review-no-doom-no-gloom-just-nipples>
And now she’s set to return to multiplexes in Magic Mike XXL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/magic-mike>, Channing Tatum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/channing-tatum>’s second ode to male 
stripping. Much lighter than its predecessor, the film is low on plot, high on 
road-trip, as Tatum and his abdominal all-stars amble down south for an 
enormous strip-show; the film is basically one big hen do. Stopping off to meet 
a friend, they instead find her mother, played by MacDowell as an outrageously 
flirty, sexually charged, loose-lipped woman who’ll be damned if she’s gonna 
let her daughter have all the fun. Of the part, MacDowell says she “really 
wanted it very bad”. Why? “Because the character is completely different than 
anything I’ve played. She’s really wild, and foul-mouthed.” I ask for an 
example, because I want Andie MacDowell to swear at me. “Well, I say: ‘Watch 
your fuckin’ language.’ Which I think is a great line. Hahahaha! Watch your 
fuckin’ language.” Twice. Mission accomplished.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fandie-macdowell-magic-mike-xxl-male-stripper-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435242305060%2Fcf10e1c4-baf5-48e7-b603-1ff4cb50d543-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andie%20MacDowell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20a%20problem%20with%20the%20word%20cougar.%20It%E2%80%99s%20demeaning%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fandie-macdowell-magic-mike-xxl-male-stripper-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andie%20MacDowell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20a%20problem%20with%20the%20word%20cougar.%20It%E2%80%99s%20demeaning%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fandie-macdowell-magic-mike-xxl-male-stripper-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435242305060%2Fcf10e1c4-baf5-48e7-b603-1ff4cb50d543-2060x1236.jpeg>
 MacDowell in Magic Mike XXL. Photograph: Allstar/WARNER BROS. 
How does she feel about the cougar tag? “Hmm hmm,” she says, but her eyes 
don’t smile along with her mouth. Does she see her character like that? “I 
guess so, I think it’s unfair that we don’t have a male equivalent. There was a 
cougar line; I took it out. I didn’t wanna say it.” So she has a problem with 
the word? “I have a problem with the word.” Did she bristle when I said it? 
“Yeah. I just think it’s unnecessary. It’s demeaning. I think the idea that men 
get more handsome and sexier as they get older is a fallacy. There’s no 
difference. We’re the same. It was a way to empower men and disempower women. 
And that’s changing, because if I wanna date someone that’s 20 years younger 
than me, I can do that now.”

What really appealed, she says, was how the women in the film – some of them 
plus-size – get to objectify the men. Such scenes, she says, she found “quite 
erotic. Oh gosh, they’re just really sexy women”. She almost blushes as she 
speaks; there’s an innocence about her. What did she think of the firstMagic 
Mike <https://www.theguardian.com/film/magic-mike>? “It is, I will say, a 
little odd to go to the movies and get turned on with a bunch of other people. 
In the room! I was like, oh mygosh, this is an interesting feeling, you know, 
because it’sreally sexy!”

It took a long time for MacDowell to get what she wanted. Raised in Gaffney, a 
small town in South Carolina, her ambition was to act, but she didn’t have the 
courage to pursue it. “And once I started to model, I heard all the negative 
stuff that people would say. So I was afraid to try. I just didn’t want 
everybody to make fun of me.” In 1979 she went to New York, walked into the 
model agency Elite and was signed on the spot. A great time to be in Manhattan 
– Studio 54, she says, “was crazy. Crazy people dressed up, a lot of 
transgender looks – imagine that, in 1979. People doing drugs.” Was she 
attracted to the lifestyle? “No. I burned out on that really fast, because I 
started working all the time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fandie-macdowell-magic-mike-xxl-male-stripper-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435242372877%2F992ec448-9c2a-4194-a382-add870a87603-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andie%20MacDowell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20a%20problem%20with%20the%20word%20cougar.%20It%E2%80%99s%20demeaning%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fandie-macdowell-magic-mike-xxl-male-stripper-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andie%20MacDowell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20a%20problem%20with%20the%20word%20cougar.%20It%E2%80%99s%20demeaning%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fandie-macdowell-magic-mike-xxl-male-stripper-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435242372877%2F992ec448-9c2a-4194-a382-add870a87603-2060x1236.jpeg>
 MacDowell in Sex, Lies and Videotape. Photograph: ITV/REX Shutterstock 
In 1984, at 23, her modelling work brought her to the attention of the 
producers of Greystoke: the Legend of Tarzan, and she was cast as Jane opposite
Christopher Lambert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jun/17/christophe-lambert-white-material-highlander>
. But her triumph was short-lived: after filming, she learned thatGlenn Close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/glenn-close> was to dub her throughout. “I 
could have definitely used some more training,” she says, but she was crushed; 
her fears had been validated. They wanted the face, but not the whole package. 
“I had three choices. The first was jump out a window. I thought about it.” 
Seriously? “For about three seconds. But it was an option. And I thought: 
‘That’s stupid.’ Option No 2 was give up. Truly give up. ‘You’re no good. 
You’re a disaster. You’re horrible.’ And option three was fight. ‘Go prove 
yourself.’ And I chose option three.”

Soon after, she was cast as the object of Emilio Estevez’s affection in Joel 
Schumacher’s 1985 bratpack melodrama St Elmo’s Fire. “I was shocked. Because I 
really was the untouchable.” Really? Or was that just how she felt? “I think I 
was. Everybody’s perception of me was that I was bad. It didn’t matter what I 
would do.” Possibly. Her on-screen sweetness in St Elmo’s didn’t lead to much. 
“I don’t think my performance was outstanding,” she says. “I think I was 
beautiful. I was very soft, I was very shy, so that didn’t change anybody’s 
mind.”

She threw herself into acting classes, and signed with L’Oréal. But the years 
went on, and she was at her wits’ end just as Sex, Lies and Videotape turned 
up. Soderbergh had written the role of Ann, who discovers her husband is 
cheating on her, for Elizabeth McGovern, but her agent hated the script and 
never told her about it. Soderbergh didn’t want to see her (“Andie was forced 
upon me,” he says on the DVD commentary), but MacDowell was confident she’d get 
Ann right.

Magic Mike XXL trailer – super-size my Channing, hold the McConaughey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/feb/04/magic-mike-xxl-trailer-super-size-my-channing-hold-the-mcconaughey>
“She was from the south. That’s not hard for me. And I knew a lot of women 
like her. Women who were frigid. There was this thing in the south, it used to 
be that the purity of a woman was so important. And my character was the 
A-student, wanted to get everything right. She was pure. She equated sex with 
not being pure.” She improvised in her audition, surprising Soderbergh; he cast 
her, later saying she’d blown his mind. To this day she says it’s the best role 
she’s ever been given, and it stands up as a frustrated, pent-up performance. 
“This poor woman hadn’t had an orgasm, what do you expect?” she laughs. The 
film changed her life: “I got out of the hole. I climbed my way out.”

Sex, Lies and Videotape won her her first Golden Globe nomination; suddenly, 
credible film-makers wanted to work with her:Peter Weir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/peter-weir> (Green Card), Robert Altman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertaltman> (Short Cuts and The Player), 
Harold Ramis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/harold-ramis> (Groundhog Day and 
Multiplicity). She beat Jennifer Jason Leigh, Julianne Moore and Laura Dern for
Mike Newell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/19/film-changed-life-grande-illusion>
’s Four Weddings and a Funeral. The film’s budget was only £2.8m, and she 
accepted a low fee as she thought “the script was perfect. It was flawless. 
Gorgeous.” In lieu of upfront cash, she took percentage points, which proved 
smart when it made £159m. In Cannes for the film, surrounded by bodyguards, 
fans rocked her car on the way to the red carpet. This was 1994 – she was 36, 
and hit peak fame. “But it passes,” she says. In the late 90s she worked for 
Nora Ephron, Wim Wenders and Albert Brooks, but the 21st century resigned her 
to less impressive TV movies.

She’s said in the past that professional rejection led her to therapy, which 
she now lives for. “I love the study of ego,” she says. “It’s a very cathartic 
way to live your life. Because we are victimised by what the world throws at 
us. Life can be hard … And projection. People project all kinds of cuckoo 
things on to actors.” Recently, she’s taken to addressing herself out loud, a 
technique she read about in a psychology magazine. It’s soothing, she says. “I 
use my name, Rose [her birth name is Rosalie Anderson MacDowell]. If I’m 
starting to panic, I go: ‘Uh uh, Rose: you’ve got this.’ It calms you down.”

Magic Mike XXL reunites her with Soderbergh, who directed the original and 
took cinematography and editing duties on this one. “My heart was wide open, 
just to see him again,” she says. Their reunion made her feel reflective. 
Looking back on her career now, she says she regrets turning down certain roles 
because she was afraid of disappointing her family and queering her reputation 
back home. “I think the reason I understood [Sex, Lies and Videotape’s] Ann 
Bishop Mullany so well is I grew up in a culture where to be sexual was dirty. 
And I was also afraid of embarrassing my children. I was so afraid what people 
would say about me in my community. This was my way of thinking because I grew 
up around that kind of pressure, of purity. That was so much my childhood that 
I was afraid to be too provocative. Finally now, I realise. It’s kind of late 
in the day to be really provocative, but now I would do it. I’m sad that I 
didn’t take more chances.” What did she turn down? “There were some sexual 
roles I could have definitely fought for, at least.” Adrian Lyne’s kinkfest 9½ 
Weeks was one, she says. “Now, in hindsight, if I could just tell my younger 
self to go in and fight for it. I didn’t even go in!”

Is her Magic Mike role an attempt to redress that balance? The start of phase 
two? She laughs. “Some crazy sexy roles since I’m no longer worried about what 
people think? Hahahaha! Maybe! It’s a little late in life, but hey, why not!”

• Magic Mike XXL is released in the US on 1 July, the UK on 3 July and in 
Australia on 9 July.
 