
Andre Agassi has said he has no regrets about baring the details of his life 
in his recently published memoirs andhis use of crystal meth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/oct/28/andre-agassi-wada-doping>, 
adding that his wife Steffi Graf was proud of him.

In his book Open, Agassi describes loathing the tennis life he was pushed into 
by his father and reveals that a deep depression in 1997 led him to use the 
recreational drug, and that he lied to officials about using crystal meth after 
testing positive.

"I knew it wasn't going to be pleasant waters, but again nothing really 
worthwhile in life comes without great sacrifice," Agassi said. "How do you 
regret your life, how do you regret telling the truth? This is the only chance 
I have to communicate the power of my journey," he said. "That's why I called 
the book Open. That's why it took me three years to write it. I want this thing 
to impact millions of people I've never met."

Agassi's book has been the subject of intense criticism however. The world No2 
Rafael Nadal said cheats in tennis must be punished. Sergi Bruguera, who lost 
the 1996 Olympic final to Agassi, said the gold medal should be forfeited. The 
former US and Australian Open champion Marat Safin said Agassi should return 
any tainted prize money and titles.

The World Anti-Doping Agency (Wada) said it wanted to investigate whether any 
charges could be brought against Agassi following his admission that he lied 
about using crystal meth.

Agassi said he hurt himself, not the game, by turning to the drug after 
plunging to the depths of depression. "I say I made a choice to hurt myself, 
destroy myself and during the year that I was involved with the horrifying 
drug, crystal meth, I didn't win anything, I didn't do anything, I pulled out 
of everything. As far as I'm concerned you can take that entire year and take 
it away."

Agassi, 39, said that while negative comments had received a lot of publicity, 
he had been moved by many messages of support. "I got a lot of support, and I 
mean immediately," he said. "I had a lot of reactions â€“ phone calls and emails 
and texts ... saying I support you.

"I was touched by Andy Roddick and Andy Murray, who not only reached out but 
were very public about how they felt at a time when it wasn't going to be a 
very popular side to take."

Agassi, who made a choice at the age of 27 to make something of his career, 
said he was not concerned about reaction from the tennis world and believes his 
message is further reaching.

"I feel like I've lived a life, had a second chance in life and I feel like my 
story has real power in people's lives, people I'll never meet. What this book 
will do for so many people will be a powerful thing."

Agassi, who has two children from his current marriage to the former women's 
tennis world No1 Graf, said he had his own children in mind when he took on the 
project: "I wrote this book with them first and foremost on my mind. To not be 
scared to deal with the truth, but also understand that people make mistakes 
and it's not the mistakes that is the problem. The problem is what we do with 
it.

"Just to really understand how you can control your life, how you can choose 
your life, take ownership of your life. I was 27 years old is when I chose 
tennis. I was 140th in the world and been in a pretty dark time. I could've 
walked away but I chose it. I found myself starting to take ownership of my 
life.

"No matter where you find yourself, millions of people wake up in a life they 
find themselves in and there's actually some hope there."

Agassi said his wife was a helpful partner in the project. "She had a huge 
involvement," he said. "Just her support and the time it took me. Thousands of 
hours away from the family trying to do this the right way.

"She knew about everything going back to the fall of '99. That is when we fell 
in love and we didn't fall in love under false pretence. I had disclosed it 
all. So the stories in my life didn't surprise her, but the story of my life 
was quite powerful for her. When you see it in black and white, you understand 
yourself."
 