Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FmG_ljGv-M8U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FmG_ljGv-M8U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FmG_ljGv-M8U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to view Lawrence's Comedy Store video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mG_ljGv-M8U>

With these opening jokes, I'm trying to confound the audience's expectations. 
All night, comics have been coming on stage saying, "It's great to be here." 
Then I come on and say, "I'm miserable." Now the audience are curious – and 
that's half the battle won.

I like to start with something interactive. Ideally, it will be something 
spontaneous and I'll be talking about a shared experience, something everyone 
in the room or watching on TV has in common. Here I'm making jokes about misery 
and depression, things that everybody experiences to a degree – but something 
that you wouldn't necessarily talk about in everyday life, something to which 
there's a stigma attached. So fertile territory for standup, I think.

At its best, standup is a forum for all the things that aren't being talked 
about but should be. A place where you can't be – or shouldn't be – censored. 
But of course, all standup on TV is heavily censored, and a standup who chooses 
to be on TV is compromising their integrity by allowing what they do to be 
edited, manipulated and conveyed on other people's terms.

There's been a lot of disingenuous and aggressive gender politics at play in 
the world of standup over the past few years that's been militantly censorious 
and damaging to the industry. The word "misogyny" has been bandied about in 
ignorance, in ways that could be described as at best absurd, at worst 
malevolent. I suppose where I make a joke about prejudice in this clip, it's my 
own fairly mischievous reaction to that – and it's this joke that gets the best 
response from the audience on the night.

Audiences only really remember the end of your act. If the first five minutes 
is hilarious and the last two minutes don't work, the audience go away thinking 
you're not that good. If the first five minutes isn't great, but the last two 
are hilarious, they'll think you're brilliant. So you've got to have a good 
closer. I close here with an extended rant about applause and how sinister it 
is. In 10 years of doing standup and coming up with material, it is still the 
bit I enjoy performing most, because it allows me to improvise around the 
audience's reactions.

More from Behind the joke:

• Nina Conti on the perils of audience participation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/27/nina-conti-behind-the-joke-comedy>
• Hal Cruttenden, Kurt Braunohler and Kerry Godliman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/29/comedy-cruttenden-braunohler-godliman-behind-the-joke>
• Katherine Ryan, Simon Evans and John Robins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/18/behind-joke-katherine-ryan-simon-evans-john-robins-comedy>
 