
Andrew Flintoff <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff> has 
revealed his infamous pedalo incident in the Caribbean was an attempt to get 
out to sea and find the boat on which he believed Ian Botham was enjoying a 
late-night drink.

The former dual Ashes-winning all-rounder said he still regrets the moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/mar/20/topstories3.mainsection> – and 
the consequences when England’s then coachDuncan Fletcher found out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/oct/29/cricket.andybull> about his 
drunken expedition.

In Piers Morgan’s Life Stories: Andrew Flintoff, to be screened by ITV at 9pm 
on Friday, the 36-year-old relives many of his escapades.

As well as his revelation that he suffered, during his playing days, from 
bulimia, Flintoff recalls his misadventure in St Lucia at the 2007 World Cup – 
as well as his post-Ashes trip to Downing Street in 2005, and meeting the Queen.

It was an intended date with cricketing royalty, though, that got him into 
trouble in the Caribbean – not least with Fletcher, whobanned him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/mar/19/cricket.sport> from England’s next 
match and put him before the press to explain what had happened.

What Flintoff did not tell them was that his reason for boarding a pedalo – 
from which he was rescued – was his decision, on a late-night whim, to head out 
across the bay by whatever means for an impromptu nightcap with Botham.

Flintoff said: “We’d played New Zealand on the Friday, the first game of the 
World Cup, and things hadn’t being going well. We’d just come off the back of 
the Ashes [whitewash defeat under his captaincy in 2006-07], and I was so 
desperate to do well in this World Cup.

“I went out, I got a duck, out first ball actually … then I didn’t get a 
wicket, and then we got beat. I went back to the hotel room … I thought: ‘I’m 
not going out’ … but I was in my room, I was smashing the room up, I was gutted 
and then I thought: ‘I’m going to go out for a bit.’”

That was his first mistake.

“About 1.30am I thought: ‘I’m hammered here, go home.’ I had to walk partially 
across the beach. For some reason I had this idea these boats out to sea – it 
sounds bizarre – but I knew Ian Botham was on one and I thought: ‘I’m going to 
have a nightcap with Beefy.’

“I thought: ‘I can’t swim ... that would be dangerous,’ so I was going to get 
a kayak.”

Botham was on the tour as a television pundit. Their meeting on this occasion 
never happened.

“I couldn’t find the oars, so I dragged this pedalo into the water,” Flintoff 
added. “The next morning I woke up, I was on my bed and … still wet and … sand 
between my toes.

“Then the door knocked. The door had these slats, and I thought it was the 
maid wanting to clean the room. So I said: ‘Can you come back?’

“But it was the coach. I pulled the slats down and answered the door, and then 
Duncan just said: ‘My room – now.’”

What followed, even eight years on at the age of 36, remains a hugely 
embarrassing wake-up call for Flintoff.

“It was a real low point … I had this press conference and walked across the 
hotel reception – and the England fans, who were only months previously 
cheering my name and high-fiving me … were shaking their heads. I couldn’t make 
eye contact with them and I thought: ‘This isn’t good.’”
 