
Before I mustered the courage to get up on stage on my own, I was part of a 
double act. The other half was a bloke called John Lynch. He was on my English 
course at university in St Andrews, Fife. It didn't last for long. We went to 
Edinburgh for a couple of weeks one summer and had a bit of success, but soon 
lost interest and eventually went our separate ways.

I went to London for a couple of years of ill-attended open-mic nights and 
gigs at the ends of the Earth, playing for petrol money. I tried to scrape a 
living, and somehow, joyously, it became my profession. This, I would like to 
say, was back in the days before stand-up exploded on TV and any skinny-jeaned 
or shiny-suited perma-grinning, loud-mouthed chancer could make a lucrative 
career out of talking nonsense. John, meanwhile, went back to his music. After 
finishing at St Andrews, he remained in Fife. He moved to Anstruther, 
irrevocably seduced by its glamorous lifestyle of fishing boats, farm animals 
and wind-ravaged hedonism, and got involved in the running of the indie label
Fence Records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/series/fence-collective-takeover>, founded 
by Kenny Anderson, AKA folk musician King Creosote. John adopted an alter-ego, 
The Pictish Trail, but never seemed to record anything. In 2008, he finally 
released his debut album, Secret Soundz Vol 1, and earlier this year he 
followed that up with In Rooms â€“ an album of 50 songs, each one 30 seconds in 
length. Which was very specific. He spent most of 2010 involved in an 
electronic pop collaboration with the multi-instrumentalist Adem, and somehow 
also found the time to supportKT Tunstall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kttunstall> on her European tour. Over this 
extraordinary creative period there's been just the one downside: he has eaten 
quite a lot of backstage pies and can no longer shop in Topman.

Every time I hear what John is up to, I can't help but feel a little proud. 
Beyond his own music, he helps to promote others in the Fence Collective, 
including Kid Canaveral (whose debut album Shouting At Wildlife became the 
bestselling title of 2010 in Scotland's biggest independent retailer, Avalanche 
Records) and the Shivers, a band from Queens, New York, who John saw performing 
at SXSW, fell in love with, and immediately asked to do a record on Fence.

What with the recent Mercury nomination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2011/jul/19/mercury-prize-2011-nominees>
 for King Creosote and Jon Hopkins's Diamond Mine, it's heady times for this 
beardy co-op of coastal-dwelling DIYers. Busy as he is and moderately 
employable as I am, I've not seen much of The Pictish Trail lately. I believe 
he's been living in a caravan on Eigg for the past month, feeding goats and 
writing songs. I would say that music's gain is definitely comedy's loss, as it 
has been suggested he was the funnier of our double act all those moons ago. 
But there again, I do seem to remember having the better singing voice.
 