
When a book is finished it’s surface seals over. This can be a relief, a kind 
of freeing up, but it makes the day-to-day experience of writing the book hard 
to hold on to.


 The Crossing is my seventh novel (the difficult seventh?). When I had finished
the sixth, Pure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/24/andrew-miller-pure-costa-fiction>
, my intention was to “look up” and spend some time reflecting on what it was I 
was doing or trying to do. I was 50-and-a-bit, and had been writing fiction 
since I was 17. Did I want to go on? I had signed no contract in blood to say 
that I would write until I dropped, and though it was not obvious to me what 
else I might do – gardener? short-order chef? – I wanted there to be a reason 
for going on that was more and better than simply doing what I was used to 
doing, what was expected. What did writing mean to me now? What, specifically, 
did it mean to write fiction?

The Crossing by Andrew Miller review – a remarkable novel about loneliness and 
self-possession
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/29/the-crossing-andrew-miller-review-novel>
 For years – decades – I had believed in DH Lawrence’s idea of the novel as 
“the one bright book of life”. I had believed in fiction as a uniquely powerful 
way of speaking the truth about experience. I had believed that it was, like 
art in general, necessary, and that a society with no interest in reading 
serious fiction (serious meaning done with care, with love) was in some way 
damaged or on its way to being so. None of that, I realised, had really 
changed. What I had believed at 17 I still, by and large, thought true. But now 
there was something else going on, a chilly countercurrent, a hard-to-pin-down 
sense of frustration that seemed to organise itself around the idea that 
fiction – in novels, in films, on television – had become more competent than 
interesting, more decorative than urgent, more conventional than otherwise. I 
picked up novels and put them down again. They were not badly written, not at 
all, but after a page or two I felt I knew them, knew what, at the deeper 
level, they were up to. I slid off their surfaces. I struggled to care. I had 
precisely the same difficulty with my own work. Projects started; projects 
abandoned. Was this writer’s block? Or was it a hazy recognition that there 
might be some problem with “traditional narrative”? A set of assumptions that 
had become almost invisible but that shaped what we wrote?

 I was aware, of course, that all this might just be some new symptom of 
middle age but I decided to trust the restlessness it brought. I looked, as one 
does, for helpful voices. The first I found wasWalter Benjamin’s, in his essay 
The Storyteller 
<https://modernism.research.yale.edu/wiki/index.php/The_Storyteller>, 
particularly his questioning of the deployment of psychology: “It is half the 
art of storytelling to keep a story free from explanation as one reproduces 
it.” Then Iris Murdoch’s 1961 essayAgainst Dryness 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=H3-7AAAAIAAJ&pg=PA23&lpg=PA23&dq=%E2%80%98Against+Dryness%E2%80%99&source=bl&ots=VcvhYsPKLQ&sig=I6DTvTf-u9lb2W76qEEfNTi7yv4&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwix_NmQsMrNAhXmAMAKHY_6ANYQ6AEIIzAB#v=onepage&q=%E2%80%98Against%20Dryness%E2%80%99&f=false>
, where she calls for a renewed sense of “the opacity of persons”, and the need 
for fiction – art in general – to resist offering consolation based on 
inadequate models of personality and society. A more contemporary voice 
belonged to Tim Parks who, in his collectionWhere I’m Reading From 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/14/where-im-reading-from-changing-world-of-books-tim-parks-review>
, makes the following point:

So many writers now are able to produce passable imitations of our 
much-celebrated 19th century novels. Their very facility becomes an obstacle to 
exploring some more satisfactory form … Is there a way forward in words that 
would explore a quite different vision of self and narrative?

 None of this, however, offered me a recipe for getting myself to work again. 
What might this “more satisfactory form” be? I began to imagine myself in a 
landscape deeply grooved with paths. How would it be if I tried to make a new 
path in the ground between them or, failing that, walked from path to path in a 
process of continual self-interruption? I could become, perhaps, that awkward 
tourist who wanders off the trail and becomes lost among the tenements, around 
the industrial zone, only finding the cathedral by accident, at midnight, the 
far end of an empty square.

There are, doubtless, many objections to such an ambition. The landscape I 
imagined was culture itself. To be free of the assumptions I sensed shaping 
narrative was to attempt a kind of leap out of culture – which is to say, a 
leap out of my habitual mind and into something else. And who does that? 
Picasso? OrAndrew Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrew-miller> 
sitting in his pyjamas in an attic in Somerset?

 I’m not sure what I ended up with, although I know it was an exciting and 
rather anxious ride. I suppose my one ambition for The Crossing that survives 
its completion is that it should be hard to close down on, hard to precis. 
Again and again while writing, I fell back on something explained to me by a 
painter friend I once shared a flat with in Bath – the idea of a line that goes 
out across the paper and which, for as long as possible, remains simply that, a 
line with all its potential intact before, the moment no longer deferrable, it 
becomes, at last,something: a head, a tree, umbrellas in the rain. In the 
visual arts, that experience of the line’s potential belongs principally 
(exclusively?) to the artist. In The Crossing, I hoped it might also belong to 
the reader, and that even at the very end of the book the line would still be 
travelling, still be, in some way, undeclared. It is, I think, in the moment 
before we can say, “it’s this”, that we are in the more interesting place. As 
we settle on a thing we often miss it.

Extract

Six weeks before Christmas, seven months into the relationship, Maud and Tim 
begin to live together. Tim finds a first-floor flat in a small, half-hidden 
crescent on the hill above his old place. It’s hidden from the main road by 
three plane trees that have grown as tall as the buildings. The houses (that 
must once have belonged to wealthy and perhaps fashionable families) have been 
converted into flats by someone more interested in rent than architecture, but 
the big sash windows are unspoilt and admit a tree-filtered light that shimmers 
when the sun is low and throws shadows of branches onto the back walls of the 
rooms. Tim puts down the deposit, rents a van. The van is almost entirely taken 
up with his own stuff; Maud’s few boxes are squeezed in by the rear doors. All 
of it – the relationship, the move – feels inevitable to Tim and several times, 
as they carry their things up the common stairs he says, “Doesn’t this feel 
inevitable?” After the first time, she’s quick enough to agree with him.

More about The Crossing

The story of Tim’s narcissism, self-deception and deception, and of the 
chiming treacheries of his friends and family, is rich and delicate enough to 
have sufficed for most contemporary novels.

Miller, though, is more ambitious. About halfway through the novel, he chooses 
to wrench the marriage short with a – tremendously well done – tragic accident, 
and sends Maud out into the world alone: a character in her own right rather 
than a screen for other’s foibles. - Kate Clanchy


Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/29/the-crossing-andrew-miller-review-novel>
 