
Congratulations!

It’s so incredible. Amazing. I’m slightly embarrassed, but thank you very much.

Were you ever worried about people embracing the film, given that it’s 
difficult to watch, especially with a partner?

When you make films like this, you really never know if you’re going to get an 
audience. Even when I got Charlotte and Tom, you still just don’t know. Even 
when the film was finished, I just didn’t know how it would resonate with 
people, and if they would care. It’s been such an amazing surprise that it’s 
gone down well.

Are you a bit of a masochist when it comes to confronting uncomfortable truths 
about relationships?

I want to ask those difficult questions, but I don’t want to necessarily know 
the answers. I think that’s what I always liked about the original story. Kate 
wants to ask the questions but doesn’t want to know the answers. I think that 
feels true to a lot of us in relationships.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440591103431%2FKP_403726_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlotte%20Rampling%20and%20Tom%20Courtenay%20on%2045%20Years%3A%20'A%20life%20without%20regrets%20is%20quite%20unusual'-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlotte%20Rampling%20and%20Tom%20Courtenay%20on%2045%20Years%3A%20%27A%20life%20without%20regrets%20is%20quite%20unusual%27-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440591103431%2FKP_403726_crop_640x360.jpg>
Did making the film bring up questions for you?

I’m probably like Kate, in that I just push it down to the core of my being 
without having to think about it too much. Inevitably, you can’t help but bring 
aspects of yourself when you’re writing, so it does swirl around in my head.

Have you been approached by people sharing their own marital issues with you?

I would love it if people started doing that! I haven’t, but it has been 
interesting to see how it affects certain people. We’ve done so many Q&As and 
there are always people who come up at the end and say how it deeply affects 
them. It’s a real joy of this process. But I’m hoping I haven’t destroyed any 
relationships. I hope I haven’t split people up [because of] the film!

As a gay film-maker whose work focused on gay stories prior to 45 Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/45-years>, did you ever encounter any 
resistance from people who didn’t believe that you could authentically tell a 
“straight” story?

It probably hasn’t happened as much as I thought it would. Weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141120/weekend> managed to break out of 
a small niche, so I think that helped. I still think there were a few people 
who thought this was going to end up as a gay story, and perhaps were a little 
bit disappointed that Katya [Tom Courtenay’s character’s ex-girlfriend] didn’t 
end up being a man.

You’ve gone from making films about gay characters to a story about a couple 
over the age of 60; both people often marginalised by the industry.

I’ve always felt like an outsider, whether in school or when I’m working or 
within the industry, or just in society at large. It just seems like the 
interesting perspective to me. I am fascinated by that person who is trying to 
live authentically, but they are on the outside of society, so how do they 
manage in the world around them?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2F45-years-video-review&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=45%20Years%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2F45-years-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=45%20Years%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2F45-years-video-review&media=>
Despite six nominations at the British independent film awards, 45 Years won 
nothing. Do you ever think there’s a sort of inverse snobbery towards a film 
about middle-class characters?

I don’t know what it is. I have to not think about those things like the Bifas 
or any other awards because you can end up being obsessed with them. We didn’t 
win and that’s fine; people chose to give it to Ex Machina, and I think it’s a 
good film. I’m not too upset about it.


You have said that the portion of British society in 45 Years is often 
under-represented on screen. We usually see the extremes of class.

I think people do like extremes in cinema. There are very few films told about 
everyday middle-class couples, which is odd to me, as there are a lot of 
everyday middle-class couples. My films are very everyday, and people don’t 
always want to go to the cinema to see ordinary lives. They want to see 
something a bit more extraordinary. I get that desire, but it’s not the kind of 
film I want to make.

Could you ever see yourself working within another genre?

Weirdly, I do. I would love to make a sci-fi film, or maybe even a horror 
film, some kind of psychological horror film. You never know. One day I could 
do some massive sci-fi blockbuster!

A lot of people have been wrecked by the final scene of 45 Years – and the 
choice of the very sharp end shot.

I think that final shot was actually in my head from when I started writing 
the script. To me, the whole film is building up to that moment, from the very 
first shot to the very last and I always wanted a very big wide shot at the 
beginning, and I wanted to end with a shot of her face. Slowly, the film is 
trying to go deeper, into trying to understand Kate and explore how she is 
feeling. As I always knew that we were building to that moment, it was a 
slightly terrifying thing because you want to make sure it works. If it hadn’t 
have worked, the film wouldn’t have worked.

The film ends on a cliffhanger of sorts, but do you have any personal 
fan-fiction of what you think happened to the couple after the party?

I do, but it changes, depending on my mood and who I’m talking to. In reality, 
I don’t really know, because in that moment, I don’t think Kate really knows. 
All she knows is that she can’t hide anymore. Something dramatic has changed in 
her. She is heartbroken about so many things and she can’t escape that feeling. 
So whether she stays with her husband or leaves her husband, I know that 
nothing will ever be the same again, and that’s the tragedy to me. Something 
has come up from the past and questioned everything about the relationship, and 
it’s left her stranded. That’s what makes me feel so sad.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2F45-years-trailer-charlotte-rampling-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434626253389%2FKP_300028_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=45%20Years%3A%20Charlotte%20Rampling%20digs%20up%20the%20past%20-%20exclusive%20trailer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2F45-years-trailer-charlotte-rampling-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=45%20Years%3A%20Charlotte%20Rampling%20digs%20up%20the%20past%20-%20exclusive%20trailer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2F45-years-trailer-charlotte-rampling-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434626253389%2FKP_300028_crop_640x480.jpg>
Do you think that there’s an assumption people in long-term relationships have 
less need to discuss problems?

I think once you’ve passed the 10-year barrier, everyone assumes it’s perfect 
and will last for ever - as if you’ve suddenly stopped changing and wanting 
anything different from your life. I don’t think films help, because most films 
about relationships are usually in the genre of the romantic comedy. It ends, 
and everyone gets married, and that’s the end of the story. I do think it’s 
important that you keep talking within relationships, but I also think it’s 
important that you do keep things to yourself. You don’t need to share 
everything with your partner. We all have deep feelings inside of us that we 
don’t know how to articulate. We don’t always need to share them.
 