
Andrew Lansley <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley>, the 
former health secretary, has taken on three more private sector jobs, including 
advising a pharmaceuticals firm at the centre of a row over the price it 
charges the NHS for cancer drugs.

Despite David Cameron’s promise in 2010 to end the “revolving door” between 
Whitehall and the private sector, the recently ennobled Tory peer has declared 
work as an adviser toRoche <http://www.roche.com/about.htm>, the Swiss drugs 
company, and as an adviser to private equity firmBlackstone  
<https://www.blackstone.com/businesses/aam/private-equity>on investments in the 
health sector.

Cancer Drugs Fund seems to help pharmaceuticals giant Roche most
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/08/pharmaceutical-roche-benefits-cancer-drug-fund-nice-rejects-kadcyla>
Roche has been one of the biggest beneficiaries of the cancer drugs fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/08/pharmaceutical-roche-benefits-cancer-drug-fund-nice-rejects-kadcyla>
 that Lansleyset up in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/jul/27/cancer-patients-fund-drugs-nice>
 to pay for life-extending medicines that were considered too expensive by the 
NHS.

His work involves advising on “pharmaceutical supply and pricing issues in 
Europe” until the end of November,according to his House of Lords register of 
interests <http://www.parliament.uk/biographies/lords/lord-lansley/123>. 

A controversy broke out in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/01/health-secretary-breast-cancer-drug-nhs-kadcyla>
 when it emerged that the company’s breast cancer drug, Kadcyla, was to be 
dropped by the fund because of the £90,000 per patient per year price – 
although Roche claimed it was closer to £70,000. Adeal has since been struck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/04/breast-cancer-drug-kadcyla-to-remain-on-nhs-after-manufacturer-lowers-price>
 to bring the cost down to £60,000, allowing it to remain on the fund’s list.

Lansley, who is considered the architect of the coalition’s controversial NHS 
changes that critics say have led to greater privatisation, is also giving 
“advice on industry” to Blackstone, whichwas criticised for its previous 
ownership of Southern Cross care homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jun/03/southern-cross-care-private-equity>
, which failed under a mountain of debt in 2011 five years after being sold by 
the company.

A letter approving the Blackstone job from the advisory committee on business 
appointments 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/advisory-committee-on-business-appointments>
 (Acoba) says Lansley’s work would be in “assessing value in investment 
opportunities, primarily in healthcare, working approximately two days per 
month”.

A third role is acting as an adviser to the chair and executive director of 
UKActive <http://www.ukactive.com/>, a fitness industry trade body that counts 
Coca-Cola as one of its sponsors and has a representative of the drinks company 
on its board. Lansley chaired the group’s national conference last week, which 
was attended by government ministers.

Tanni Grey-Thompson, the paralympian and chair of UKActive, defended its links 
to Coca-Cola in response to media criticism in October 
<http://www.ukactive.com/home/more/8814/page/1/ukactive-responds-to-today-s-article-in-the-times>
, saying it would work with anyone who had a role to play in getting “more 
people, more active, more often”.

Ex-health secretary Andrew Lansley to advise firms on healthcare reforms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/20/andrew-lansley-advise-firms-healthcare-reforms>
In October, it emerged Lansley has also taken up work advising corporate 
clients on innovation in healthcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/20/andrew-lansley-advise-firms-healthcare-reforms>
 for management consultants Bain & Company, as well as working for a 
consultancy set up by his wife called Low Associates for which he would provide 
“expertise on competition, economic regulation, health and social care, local 
government and the communications industry”.


Lansley told the Guardian that none of the roles involved lobbying the 
government and all had been notified to Acoba. The Tory peer has taken on the 
private sector work since stepping down as an MP at May’s election.

ACOBA said it had approved the roles at Bain and Blackstone in July and 
UKActive and Low Associates in June, subject to a two-year ban on lobbying 
starting from his last day as a minister in 2014 and on condition that he did 
not draw on privileged information that was available to him when in 
government. It is understood Lansley had mentioned the work for Roche in 
correspondence with Acoba.

Lansley became health secretary in 2010 and was replaced by Jeremy Hunt in 
2012 shortly after the British Medical Association (BMA)voted in favour of his 
resignation 
<http://www.pulsetoday.co.uk/bma-calls-for-andrew-lansley-to-resign/14196451.article#.U8UZDeJkZK0>
 and staged a day of action against the government’s NHS pensions reform. He 
then became leader of the House of Commons.


Cameron attempted to ensure that Lansley became the next UN under-secretary 
general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief 
<http://www.unocha.org/about-us/headofOCHA> this year, but his efforts were 
thwarted. The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, announced he would appoint the 
former UK international development minister, Stephen O’Brien.
 