
Andrew Flintoff <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff> made an 
inauspicious start to life in Australia’s Big Bash Twenty20 as his Brisbane 
Heat side were convincingly beaten by the Sydney Thunder.

The 37-year-old Flintoff, who made a comeback this year after initially 
retiring from all forms of cricket in 2010, went for 25 runs in two wicketless 
overs, then when his turn to bat came was caught on the boundary for a duck, 
lasting just three balls.

They were resoundingly beaten by the Thunder, for whom a couple more veterans 
made telling contributions. Jacques Kallis and Mike Hussey (both aged 39) 
shared an opening stand of 160, making 97 not out and 96 respectively, as the 
Thunder posted a total of 208 for one from their 20 overs. England’s new 
one-day captain Eoin Morgan made a brief cameo, scoring 12 from five balls.

The Heat lost a wicket in their first over and were eventually bowled out for 
152, Nathan Reardon top-scoring with 49.

Meanwhile, Flintoff has waded into the row over Kevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>, asking for an explanation 
from the ECB as to why the former England batsman has been exiled from the 
international set-up.

“What Kevin’s done can’t be as bad as what’s been portrayed and it’s time the 
ECB told us, the paying public who are missing out on watching him, what went 
on,” Flintoff said on Sky Sports.

“I think Kevin is somebody with immense talent who people are quick to praise 
when he is good, and jump on straightaway when he has a bad game or something 
doesn’t go his way. He was challenging at times because sometimes he wants to 
do things his way but as long as it is working out in the middle, that’s fine.

“He was the hardest trainer so Kevin was never a problem for me, and as a 
player I’d have him every day of the week.”

Pietersen is also appearing in the Big Bash, and made 66 on debut for the 
Melbourne Stars on Thursday.
 