
In 2012, Andrea Arnold was en route to Salt Lake City airport after an intense 
two days of press interviews at the Sundance film festival in Utah, where her 
adaptation ofWuthering Heights  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/10/wuthering-heights-film-review>had 
just had its American premiere. It was still dark as she left her hotel at five 
in the morning, but as the shuttle bus rounded a bend in the road, the sun rose 
and the elemental landscape around her was suddenly revealed. “I had a bit of 
an emotional moment,” she says now. “It just hit me that being in this 
beautiful place for only two days felt so wrong.”

I met kids from mag crews. I stayed in all the same places they would stay, I 
drove the routes they would drive

At the airport, she checked in her bag, but immediately went to the only car 
hire desk in the concourse. “When they said they had one car available, I 
immediately went and got my bag out of the hold and let go of the flight. It 
was all very impulsive, but it felt so right. I got in the car and decided to 
explore America a bit. I needed to connect emotionally with it somehow and a 
road trip seemed the best way to do that.”

That spur-of-the-moment expedition was the first of several extended American 
road trips over the following few years “through the south, up the middle, 
everywhere I could go”. It was the beginning, too, of a creative journey that 
has led to her latest film,American Honey, a road movie that unfolds over 
almost three hours.

It is the first film Arnold has made in America: gone are the sink housing 
estates, tower blocks and claustrophobic interiors ofRed Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/oct/29/philipfrench> (2006) and Fish Tank
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/13/fish-tank-andrea-arnold-french>
(2009), her brutally realist depictions of working-class life in contemporary 
Britain; they are replaced by the vast plains, endless highways and mega-malls 
of an America that is both recognisably real – in its poverty and exclusion – 
and knowingly cinematic.

“America is a vast and complicated place filled with all kinds of truths and 
contradictions and I wanted to find my own emotional connection to it,” she 
says. “Otherwise I couldn’t have made this film. It’s a mixture of what I saw 
and learned on those travels, but also what I grew up seeing on films – the 
mythical America of westerns and road movies. That’s all in there, too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa81088c131ba42ca8b06eb46d14bcc71c5b7d8a8%2F112_29_4998_3095%2F4998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20always%20aim%20to%20get%20under%20the%20belly%20of%20a%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20always%20aim%20to%20get%20under%20the%20belly%20of%20a%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa81088c131ba42ca8b06eb46d14bcc71c5b7d8a8%2F112_29_4998_3095%2F4998.jpg>
 American Honey follows the fortunes of a fictional ‘mag crew’, a group of 
outsiders who travel through the midwest selling subscriptions to specialist 
magazines door to door. Photograph: Rex Features 
Punctuated by episodes of breathtaking beauty – flat sunlit landscapes, 
insects and flowers filmed in hallucinatory close-up, the vernacular America of 
road signs, diners and motels –American Honey is another of Arnold’s evocations 
of contemporary outsiderness.

The plot, what there is of it, unfolds amid the chaotic travels of a fictional 
“mag crew”, a bunch of unruly young outsiders who travel through the midwest in 
a minibus selling subscriptions to specialist magazines (cars, guns, sports, 
current affairs) door to door in suburban neighbourhoods. Eighteen-year-old 
Star (played brilliantly by newcomer Sasha Lane) joins them on impulse, 
desperate to escape her harsh home life and drawn to the street-smart charisma 
of recruiter Jake (Shia LaBeouf, the Hollywood actor and sometime performance 
artist whose film roles to date range from the Michael Bay blockbuster series
Transformers to Lars von Trier’s Nymphomaniac). They have a short, intense and, 
for her, damaging relationship – he is also entangled with Krystal (played by 
Elvis’s granddaughter, Riley Keough), the beautiful and bullying crew manager, 
whose rules of the road tend towards the sadistic and humiliating. In subject 
and style, critics have compared the film to those ofHarmony Korine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harmony-korine>, Gus Van Sant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gus-van-sant> and even Terrence Malick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/terrence-malick>.

I myself was struck by how closely the mag crew resembled the real-life 
itinerants, runaways and train-hoppers photographed by Mike Brodie in his 2013 
bookA Period of Juvenile Prosperity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/mar/30/mike-brodie-juvenile-train-rider-photos-interview>
. “Yes!” exclaims Arnold, when I mention this. “I love his photos, they’re 
beautiful. When I first spoke toShia [LaBeouf] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/10/shia-labeouf-performance-art-trio-liverpool-fact-gallery>
 about the film, I actually gave him a Mike Brodie photo for one of the 
characters I imagined him to be. But also his pictures have the Polaroid light 
that I love.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgu--mZpcCAY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgu--mZpcCAY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgu--mZpcCAY&media=>
Watch the trailer for American Honey. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gu--mZpcCAY> 
I ask Sasha Lane what it was like to work opposite LaBeouf, with whom she had 
to do a sex scene that redefines the notion of up close and personal. “Oh, it 
was fine,” she laughs. “We felt good. He didn’t seem in a different world to 
the rest of us.” (Since I spoke to her, the tabloids have revealed that she and 
LaBeouf are a couple, with theDaily Mail describing how he “romanced the 
newcomer both on and off camera in the whirlwind 56-day shoot”.)

The crews of magazine subscription sellers on whom the film is based are an 
actual phenomenon that has somehow survived into the digital age. “I met kids 
from mag crews,” says Arnold, who spent months recruiting unknowns for the 
film. “I stayed in all the same places they would stay, I drove the routes they 
would drive.”

Her interest was piqued when she read an investigative article about them by 
Ian Urbina in theNew York Times in 2007. In it, he described young kids living 
on $10 a day and sleeping three to a motel room amid constant threats of 
violence. A common ritual, which features only fleetingly in Arnold’s film, 
involves the lowest subscription sellers on each crew being forced to fight 
each other in front of the others. Urbina also wrote of widespread hard drug 
use, beatings dealt out by crew managers, thefts from customers and “several 
highly publicised fatal accidents and violent crimes involving the sales crews.”

The kids in Arnold’s fictional mag crew are a much more romanticised bunch, 
stoners rather than meth-heads, messed up but not to the point of violence or 
addiction. She and her scouting assistant found them in shopping malls, skate 
parks and urban beaches across America. One of their number, Raymond Coalson, 
22, from West Virginia, told theNew York Times: “When they talked to me, I was 
like, ‘Are you sure it’s not a porno? Because I’m not down with that.’”

Just weeks before the film started shooting, 19-year-old Texan Sasha Lane was 
on spring break on a beach in Florida, when she was approached to be in the 
movie. “Really, I didn’t know anything about acting, so I was surprised and a 
bit wary,” says Lane now. Her expressive face and instinctive emotional range 
is – along with Arnold’s regular collaborator Robbie Ryan’s luminous 
cinematography – the most powerful element in the film. “When we started 
improvising, I began slowly to feel comfortable. It seems almost overwhelming 
now but, back then at that moment, I felt I could do anything because she gave 
me this sense of confidence in myself.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F399bb9ee3cb3f45b407d5d7a0e0f953977c3c1ff%2F0_0_5103_3309%2F5103.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20always%20aim%20to%20get%20under%20the%20belly%20of%20a%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20always%20aim%20to%20get%20under%20the%20belly%20of%20a%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F399bb9ee3cb3f45b407d5d7a0e0f953977c3c1ff%2F0_0_5103_3309%2F5103.jpg>
 ‘Magnetic presence’: Sasha Lane as Star in American Honey. Photograph: Rex 
Features 
For the eight-week shoot, LaBeouf committed to living on the road with the 
production team and the cast of mainly unknowns, sleeping in cheap motels 
across Oklahoma and North Dakota like the actual mag crews, shooting throughout 
the day and partying into the night. The film’s freewheeling style makes you 
wonder if Arnold ever turned off the camera; the atmosphere is one of 
on-the-road languor mixed with edgy camaraderie.

“It was a real road trip movie in that sense,” says Arnold who, at 55, has 
something of the eternal teenager about her. “We were all together from the 
beginning, with no one flying in and out. Crazily, we went up to the Dakotas, 
where I had never been on my road trips, and started in Muskogee [Oklahoma], 
one of the poorest towns in America. It seemed as good a place as any to start 
from.”

Arnold has used unknowns before, but what was it like to work with so many 
untrained actors; was the camaraderie we see on screen echoed in real life?

“Sometimes. Yes and no. There was a lot of bonding but there were also times 
when somebody would behave quite badly and there was a lot of anger about. It 
was tough, I have to say. We had our moments.”

Could she elaborate?

“No. No way.” She sounds slightly affronted. “I can’t repeat some of the 
things that happened on the set. I just can’t. It would be a betrayal somehow 
but suffice to say we had some dramas.”

Did she have to fire anyone along the way?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4949ac8af92a20cfb7ebd424d4561cb7519e1ad5%2F0_0_1280_720%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20always%20aim%20to%20get%20under%20the%20belly%20of%20a%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20always%20aim%20to%20get%20under%20the%20belly%20of%20a%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4949ac8af92a20cfb7ebd424d4561cb7519e1ad5%2F0_0_1280_720%2F1280.jpg>
 Natalie Press in Wasp, Arnold’s award-winning 2003 short film. 
“No, it didn’t come to that,” she laughs, “but it was hard, physically and 
emotionally. We were travelling a lot and we had a lot of people to look after 
and a limited crew. Every single day I didn’t know what was going to happen and 
I had to stand up straight to go out there. We got on so well, but sometimes I 
had to shout.”

Members of her cast were more forthcoming in a recent American interview. “I 
shot a porcupine with a 9mm,” 18-year-old Dakota Powers told theNew York Times 
of her between-scenes downtime, while Isaiah Stone, one of the few cast members 
with acting experience, talked about the constant pranking: “They superglued my 
hand to my face. I’d wake up, my hair was superglued.” Another cast member 
recalled one of the producers “walking around worried – he’s like, ‘Oh God, one 
of them is going to die, where’d they go? What are they doing?’”

Arnold’s edgy style and her empathy with outsiders recall an older generation 
of British film-makers that includesKen Loach  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ken-loach>and the late Alan Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jun/08/alan-clarke-film-maker-maverick-scum-made-in-britain>
. Born in Erith, Kent, she was the eldest of four children – her mother was 
just 16 and her father 17 when she was born. “I grew up in a working-class 
family,” she once said, “so you could say I write from what I know.” She seems 
to have been a darkly serious child, writing one of her first stories, aged 10, 
about the slave trade, and creating a performance piece for her dance GCSE in 
which she recitedThe Diary of Anne Frank. Having left school at 16, she landed 
a job as a dancer onTop of the Pops, before going on to present a children’s TV 
show,No 73, alongside Sandi Toksvig, the beginning of a 10-year career in 
television that also included a stint presenting the children’s Saturday 
morning showMotormouth. Throughout, she continued writing and her early shorts, 
Milk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0KJCizVeowE> (1998), Dog (2001) and Wasp 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U6lrf7lUDkY> (2003), which starred Natalie 
Press and Danny Dyer, were made after she studied directing at the American 
Film Institute of Los Angeles.

In 2006 her first feature film, Red Road, a claustrophobic study in obsession 
and revenge, introduced her abiding subject – young people searching for hope 
in difficult circumstances – and her willingness to take risks by casting 
unknowns. Shot using hand-held cameras and available light for around £1m, and 
set in and around the Red Road flats in Barmulloch, Glasgow, it won the Jury 
prize at Cannes. The acclaimed Fish Tank followed in 2009, again featuring a 
fierce young girl (played with visceral intensity by newcomer Kate Jarvis) 
railing against her circumstances. On watching it again, I was struck by the 
sustained sexual tension between Conor (Michael Fassbender) and the underage 
Mia (Jarvis), and how casually harsh her everyday life is, from her scathing 
verbal exchanges with her family and neighbours to her acute sense of aloneness.

I have a lot of respect for Shia and we got on really well… a few more free 
spirits would make life more interesting

To Arnold’s annoyance, critics have often described her films as bleak, as if 
she has somehow exaggerated the struggles of her characters. “The last lady who 
interviewed me mentioned the bleak word,” she says, grimacing. “I get that a 
lot but I let it wash over me now. I don’t think my films are bleak at all.”

She does seem drawn to the marginalised and excluded…

“That’s true,” she says. “I can’t argue with that.”

How does she feel about being linked to the older generation of socially 
conscious film-makers? She shrugs.

“I’m OK with that, but I don’t try and emulate anyone. A film for me is a 
journey I have to go on. It starts with myself emotionally and moves outwards. 
I do make my films with a social eye. It’s not a huge thing, and I don’t want 
to ram it down people’s throats, but it’s there all the time in the way I feel 
and think. It’s just how I see the world.”

Her films also share a strong sense of place, whether it’s the darkly lit 
Glasgow ofRed Road or the widescreen midwestern landscape of American Honey. 
She certainly picked an interesting time to make a film there.

“Oh yes,” she says, shaking her head. “I think the temperature has gone up 
since we were there, but you could feel something in the air then. It’s a place 
of very stark divides, but it was exciting to try to get under the belly of the 
place, which is what I always aim to do.”

Arnold can be a frustrating interviewee, affable but defensive, even a bit 
prickly if the subject moves off the work. Her eyes darken beneath her cropped 
fringe when she grows uncomfortable and you sense that you wouldn’t want to get 
on the wrong side of her. She will provide a tantalising snippet of 
information, then steadfastly refuses to discuss it in any detail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F802952873d51d4bdc1338506595b888df23b366a%2F0_115_1387_883%2F1387.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20always%20aim%20to%20get%20under%20the%20belly%20of%20a%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20always%20aim%20to%20get%20under%20the%20belly%20of%20a%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F802952873d51d4bdc1338506595b888df23b366a%2F0_115_1387_883%2F1387.jpg>
 Arnold on working with a large group of non-professional actors: ‘We got on so 
well, but sometimes I’d have to shout.’ 
Of working with the conundrum that is Shia LaBeouf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shia-labeouf>, who sometimes threatens to 
destabilise the precarious chemistry of theAmerican Honey ensemble with his 
characteristically unrestrained approach, she says: “I have a lot of respect 
for him and we got on really well. A lot of the stuff that people were telling 
me beforehand made me quite angry because they were not taking him as a human 
being, and I had met him. Someone sent me an online spoof that made me angry as 
well. It’s so easy now to be cruel. I don’t go by things I read in the media or 
online or whatever – that’s a small part of someone.”

He does, though, have a reputation for unpredictable behaviour.

“A lot of that comes from a few incidents. He has grown up as a celebrity with 
all that entails today and he has been challenging his place in all that, which 
I respect. There are very few mavericks in Hollywood. A few more free spirits 
would make life more interesting.”

Why, though, did she choose him rather than another unknown? “We just got on 
really well, Someone suggested him for the role so I met him in a cafe in 
London and I talked to him about the film and he went for it. He’s a very 
experimental actor. He never questioned the way I wanted to work. He loved it.”

It is Sasha Lane’s Star, though, who is the most magnetic presence in the 
film, from the moment we see her scavenging in a supermarket bin for discarded 
food to the final symbolic scene in which she appears to gain a degree of 
hard-earned self-awareness. Her face is an index of her internal state, which 
fluctuates from Zen acceptance to reckless impulsiveness. Was she aware of the 
existence of the real mag crews beforehand?

“I knew about them all right. I’ve had people come up to my door. You come 
from my kind of background, it’s the America you see every day.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58e771221db025f3af3bba1c9c31d71fbb895acf%2F0_53_2896_1783%2F2896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20always%20aim%20to%20get%20under%20the%20belly%20of%20a%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20always%20aim%20to%20get%20under%20the%20belly%20of%20a%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fandrea-arnold-interview-american-honey-shia-labeouf-sasha-lane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58e771221db025f3af3bba1c9c31d71fbb895acf%2F0_53_2896_1783%2F2896.jpg>
 Andrea Arnold with Sasha Lane after winning the Jury prize at Cannes film 
festival, May 2016. Photograph: Reuters 
Lane grew up in a working-class family in rural Texas – “we didn’t view 
Hollywood as very respectable” – and was working in a Mexican chain restaurant 
in San Francisco for $7 an hour during her college breaks before she landed her 
role. “I don’t really know how to describe my life except to say you don’t 
really ever know what is going to happen next,” she says. “You just go with it, 
day to day. I was raised outside of Dallas. It’s a tough life, for sure, 
minimum wage, multiple jobs, real hard work. There’s a huge struggle to it, not 
having a lot of money and not having a lot of support, but it’s what I grew up 
with.”

Did she identify with her character?

“I did. For a lot of those kids, life is just something they take day by day 
to get by. It’s about having nothing left to lose and accepting it. It’s what I 
took from my own experience and brought to the movie. I have a lot of love for 
people in their raw human form. Their lives are kind of beautiful and hard. 
They don’t let fear get in the way.”

At times, though, Star’s storyline seems almost incidental to the film, so 
central is the road-trip element. It unfolds with wilful repetition through 
several long scenes in which the kids chat, drink, sleep and verbally spar on 
the bus to the constant backdrop of thumping hip-hop, R&B and, somewhat 
incongruously, Lady Antebellum’s lush country song from 2010 that gives the 
film its title.

When American Honey premiered at Cannes in May, Arnold won the Jury prize for 
the third time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jun/21/american-honey-first-trailer-for-andrea-arnolds-cannes-winner-teases-rebel-spirit>
, but the film has divided opinion. TheNew York Times described it as, “by 
turns observant and exuberant, and sweet in a way that is both unexpected and 
organic”, while one British reviewer dismissed it, unfairly, as “in effect a 
music video of tediously exaggerated proportions”.

There were times as I watched it when I did feel as if I was trapped on the 
bus with a bunch of hyperactive teenagers – seemingly immune to the soporific 
effect of the weed they smoked or the vast distances they travelled.

Andrea Arnold shocked at lack of women directors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/05/andrea-arnold-shocked-at-lack-of-women-directors-american-honey>
Arnold seems unfazed by criticisms of the film’s longueurs and repetitiveness. 
“I didn’t set out to make a long film, but that’s what happened. There were all 
these beautiful people in the film and I wanted them not to be just wallpaper 
so I allowed them to do things that were not part of the script. Sometimes, 
when we were travelling there might not be a scene written but we would film 
them anyway.”

It turns out that there had been even more on-the-road scenes in an earlier 
cut, but Arnold was persuaded to excise them as the film nudged the three-hour 
timespan. “The travelling really reflects the lives of the actual mag crews and 
the time they spend on those buses. It was integral to me. But, when we first 
showed those early cuts, the audiences were feeling it,” she laughs. “They were 
experiencing what it was like to be on that bus – which I thought was perhaps 
not a bad thing!”

That quip says a lot about Arnold, a film-maker for whom the usual industry 
rules of writing, casting and shooting do not seem to apply. And, despite its 
length and meandering plot,American Honey is a film that sticks in the mind 
long afterwards. Its portrait of American outsiders surviving against the odds 
in an often wondrous landscape recalls the great gritty American road movies of 
the early 70s. Arnold is a maverick with a social conscience at a time when we 
certainly need independent voices, both here and in Hollywood. “I don’t make 
easy choices,” she says, “but there is always more to it for me than just 
making a film.”

American Honey is out on 14 October
 