
A British independent film about a burgeoning gay relationship has proven a 
surprise box office smash inItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, 
despite an alleged attempt by the Catholic church to “paralyse” its release.

Andrew Haigh’s Weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/03/weekend-film-review>, which was 
released in the UK in 2011, achieved the highest per-screen average in the 
country this weekend,according to Variety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/global/after-vatican-interference-gay-themed-weekend-scores-strong-niche-opening-in-italy-1201729242/>
. One screening at Rome’s famous Quattro Fontane art house cinema pulled in 
receipts of more than €16,000, the Italian capital’s top haul.

Weekend, which was brought to Italy by distributor Teodora Film following the 
2015-16 awards season success of Haigh’s Oscar-nominated film45 Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/27/45-years-review-tom-courtenay-and-charlotte-rampling-superb-as-couple-freshly-possessed-by-the-pasthttp://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/27/45-years-review-tom-courtenay-and-charlotte-rampling-superb-as-couple-freshly-possessed-by-the-past>
, had been labelled “not advised, unusable and scabrous (indecent or 
salacious)” by the powerful Italian Conference of Bishops’ Film Evaluation 
Commission. The ruling meant the Nottingham-set film was restricted to just 10 
screens, despite Italy’s official censor having handed the drama a 14 
certificate, because the church owns more than 1,100 of Italy’s independent and 
art house cinemas.


Weekend – review
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/03/weekend-film-review> 
Teodora president Cesare Petrillo accused the church of homophobia last week 
after its ruling.

“I cannot see any other explanation than a problem of homophobia in the 
church,”he told AFP 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/entertainment/a/31069192/censorship-row-as-italy-bishops-curtail-release-of-gay-film/>
. “They decided it was unacceptable, that it should be censored and they have 
used their power to paralyse the distribution.

“Normally, a film like this would have been picked up by many of these 
cinemas,” he added. “Instead there are whole regions and big cities like 
Florence, Bergamo and Padova where we have not been able to get it put on. And 
the only reason for that is that the main characters are gay.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fnov%2F04%2Fweekend-video-review&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Weekend%3A%20'A%20soap%20bubble%20that%20could%20pop%20any%20second'%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fnov%2F04%2Fweekend-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Weekend%3A%20%27A%20soap%20bubble%20that%20could%20pop%20any%20second%27%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fnov%2F04%2Fweekend-video-review&media=>
Watch a video review of Weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2011/nov/04/weekend-video-review> 
The Catholic church in Italy maintains a powerful hold over the country’s art 
house scene via its ownership of cinemas, which stretches back to an era in 
which local parish priests decided which films were suitable for their flocks. 
However, Weekend appears to be a rare example in which a film is effectively 
banned: while films such as transgender romanceThe Danish Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/31/the-danish-girl-review-redmayne-tom-hooper>
 were handed a “problematic” label, and Catholic church abuse dramaSpotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/28/spotlight-review-catholic-church-called-to-account-over-child-abuse>
 received a “complex” rating, only one other recent movie has been vetoed 
altogether for release in church-owned cinemas. According to AFP that was the 
Chilean director Pablo Larrain’s drama The Club, which also features instances 
of clerical abuse.

Variety reports 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/global/after-vatican-interference-gay-themed-weekend-scores-strong-niche-opening-in-italy-1201729242/>
 11 more Italian cinemas are now said to be interested in screening Weekend in 
the upcoming frame.

 