
Andrew Miller's first novel, Ingenious Pain, was published in 1997. It won the 
James Tait Black Memorial prize (for fiction) and the IMPAC Dublin prize. It 
was followed by Casanova (1998), a fictional portrait of the infamous libertine 
and writer. Both novels are currently being adapted for film.

His next novel, Oxygen (2001), was set in contemporary England in 1997 and 
shortlisted for both the Booker and Whitbread prizes. The Optimist followed in 
2005 and One Morning Like a Bird in 2008.

His new novel Pure, published this month, is set in Paris soon before the 
French revolution. Telling the story of a young man charged with clearing an 
overloaded and insanitary cemetery, the Guardian's review described it as "
dazzling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/24/pure-andrew-miller-review>".

Buy Pure by Andrew Miller at the Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444724257>

"There are still critics out there who insist that novels with historical 
settings are not quite proper. Novels should be about the Now, should have a 
whiff of last week's headlines – or next week's. It may be that such people – 
victims of some clumsy teacher at school – have little imaginative sense of the 
past and associate history with outings to Cardiff Castle in the rain, the 
tedious recollections of aged relatives, the mothball corridors of provincial 
museums. But for others – and there are many of us – history was always a 
rattle-bag of wonderful stories. As a boy I understood perfectly that history 
is not something apart from us, sealed off. It is in our blood, our music, our 
language, the buildings we pass on the way to work. And at its best, historical 
fiction is never a turning away from the Now but one of the ways in which our 
experience of the contemporary is revived. Janus-like, such books look both to 
the past and to the present, and there is no need to laboriously draw out the 
parallels for they suggest themselves, inevitably and plentifully.

"The books listed here share the essential virtues of all good fiction: the 
renewal of our sense of the world, of ourselves, of language, the extension of 
ourselves across time and space. And how odd it would be, how dull, if 
novelists and readers confined themselves, in the name of some dubious notion 
of relevance, to the events and style of one particular period."  

1. Eagle of the Ninth by Rosemary Sutcliff 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780192753922>

As a boy, Rosemary Sutcliff was my favourite author and this, the story of a 
young Roman centurion caught up in the search for the lost eagle of the Ninth 
Legion, my favourite of her novels. I had not heard of her or of the novel in 
many years, but Eagle of the Ninth has just been made into a film. It would be 
nice to think that a new generation of young readers will discover the 
pleasures of Sutcliff's writing. Librarians of the nation (those who are still 
left) stand by your desks!

2. I, Claudius by Robert Graves 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141188591>

I'm told that Graves wrote the Claudius novels in order to raise a little 
money. Whatever the motive – and writers should never be entirely believed when 
they speak of such things – the Claudius novels are insanely readable tales of 
violence, incest and family life in the days of the Roman Imperial high noon. 
Everyone knows the brilliant TV adaption with Blessed and Jacobi and Sian 
Phillips but perhaps not everyone has read the novels. They should.

3. Kepler by John Banville 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330372336>

I sometimes find Banville's work a little rich for my taste but this novel 
about the astronomer Kepler is a model of the type of historical fiction I 
would love to write myself. Banville is a great stylist and Kepler's knockabout 
life in the late 16th century is carried on a raft of beautifully exact 
language. And less than 200 pages long! Perfect.

4. The Baron in the Trees by Italo Calvino 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099430865>

A grand house in an 18th-century Italian backwater. A boy at the dinner table 
– the young Baron – refuses to eat a plate of snails. Rebuked, he climbs out of 
a window, shins up a tree and lives the rest of life moving from tree to tree, 
branch to branch, through the forests and parks of Ombrosa. There has been much 
speculation as to what Calvino meant the story to represent – the isolation of 
the intellectual? – but I think he just fell in love with a strange and 
delightful idea and followed it as far as he could.

5. The Blue Flower by Penelope Fitzgerald 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780006550198>

Fitzgerald was one of the finest British novelists of the last 50 years. The 
Blue Flower – the story of the young German Romantic poet Novalis and his love 
for the even younger Sophie Von Kuhn – was her last novel. Nothing much 
happens; nothing much needs to. Fitzgerald leaves her characters to live and 
breathe, to clump about in their uncomfortable rooms and say wise, witty things 
to each other. There is something beautiful and generous in the way she holds 
them all. A conjuring trick of a book. Impeccable.

6. The Leopard by Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099512158>

Those who discover this novel hold it close to their hearts. Lampedusa was a 
Sicilian aristocrat living in Milan and The Leopard, published in 1958, was his 
only completed novel. The setting is mid 19th-century Sicily. The atmosphere is 
one of gorgeous decay. If I had to strip my library down to 10 books, The 
Leopard would certainly be one of them.

7. Memoirs of Hadrian by Marguerite Yourcenar 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141184968>

The dying emperor reflects on his long and eventful life in this ringing, 
expansive, hard-won novel. Most editions come with Yourcenar's essay reflecting 
on the writing of the book, a wildly chaotic process that lasted almost three 
decades and that I, reading it while trying to finish my first novel, Ingenious 
Pain, was hugely encouraged by. (I fell to making, and then remaking, this 
portrait of a man who was almost wise.)

8. Rites of Passage by William Golding 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571191444>

Published in 1980, this novel was reminder for anyone who needed it that 
Golding was infinitely more than just the author of that novel we all had to 
read and write about at school. Rites of Passage is told with the voice of a 
buoyant, well-educated young man sailing to Australia in the early 1800s aboard 
an old ship-of-the-line. The mood at first is almost comic but it soon darkens. 
The lingering, self-willed death of the young clergyman, Colley, is one of the 
most shocking episodes I can remember having ever read.

9. A Place of Greater Safety by Hilary Mantel 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007250554>

Hilary Mantel <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> has achieved a 
kind of fame with the Booker-winning Wolf Hall but she has, of course, been 
writing wonderful fiction for many years. A Place of Greater Safety was her 
first novel (though not the first published). Many of the great figures of the 
French Revolution – and many of the minor ones too – are brought to life here 
in a way I do not think has ever been bettered. A really audacious piece of 
work.

10. The Siege of Krishnapur by JG Farrell 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781857994919>

I adored this book when I first read it. A sprawling, brilliantly comic satire 
of imperial Britain and the Raj. I might just as easily have chosen his other 
great book, Troubles, which shares many of the themes and virtues of the Siege. 
His voice, lost to us when he drowned off the west coast of Ireland at the age 
of 44, was unlike any I have come across elsewhere in fiction.
 