
The former health secretary Andrew Lansley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley> has joined MPs from across 
the political spectrum in criticising the autumn statement for its lack of 
extra funding for the NHS and social care.

Lansley, who is now a peer, said he was disappointed there was not extra cash 
for the health service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/key-points-autumn-statement-at-a-glance>
, which is under increasing pressure becauseadult social care budgets have been 
cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/13/vulnerable-adult-social-care-risk-england-councils-face-1bn-shortfall>
.

“I think the time is now to put some measure in place to try and help health 
and social care through the next two years,” he told the BBC’s World at One.

Asked whether he had been surprised at the lack of a funding announcement, he 
said: “Not being surprised doesn’t mean I’m not disappointed.”

Labour pours scorn over autumn statement for ignoring sick and old
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/labour-pours-scorn-over-autumn-statement-for-ignoring-sick-and-old>
He said the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and social care were 
facing an “incredibly difficult” period in the coming years.

“In the last parliament a challenging target was set and it was achieved,” he 
said. “The trouble is in this parliament, what has been asked of the National
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Service is not just more of 
the same but even more, and I’m afraid what was evident in the last financial 
year was when you take the level of support for the NHS below a 2% increase – 
to hospitals, that is – and the demand is rising at 4% there comes a point 
where they start to go in to significant deficit.

“The front-end loading of the money for the NHS in this parliament in to this 
financial year will probably mean those deficits come down this year, but 
without action next year and the year after thosedeficits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/19/nhs-deficit-climbs-rising-costs>
 will rise again and the accumulated deficit will make it very difficult for 
hospitals in particular to cope.”

He said the Better Care Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/a-hard-times-chancellor-with-little-to-give-away>
, which brought together money from the NHS and social care, amounted to 
“robbing Peter to pay Paul”.


“That is not going to be remedied simply by taking money out of the NHS budget 
and passing it to local authorities,” he said.

Government scolded by watchdog over NHS funding claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/23/government-scolded-by-watchdog-over-theresa-may-nhs-funding-claims>
Labour politicians led criticism of the chancellor, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/labour-pours-scorn-over-autumn-statement-for-ignoring-sick-and-old>
, after his autumn statement for his failure to mention the NHS or social care 
in his fiscal document or to allocate any more money, instead prioritising 
infrastructure and projects such as more grammar schools.

Some Conservatives also voiced concern, including Sarah Wollaston, the chair 
of the health committee, who has said NHS and social care are at a tipping 
point. She and four other members of the health committee have also criticised 
the government’s claim to be putting anextra £10bn into the NHS by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/theresa-may-denies-that-10bn-nhs-funding-pledge-is-misleading>
.

“The continued use of the figure of £10bn for the additional health spending 
up to 2020-21 is not only incorrect, but risks giving a false impression that 
the NHS is awash with cash,” Wollaston and her four fellow committee members 
told the chancellor in a letter earlier this month.
 