
Andy Murray does not expect Novak Djokovic to be able to repeat his 
sensational 2011 next year. The Serb goes into this week's BarclaysATP World 
Tour Finals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> in London 
as the world No1, holder of three grand slam titles and having lost only four 
matches all season.

For a player who began the year looking to build on the solitary grand slam he 
won in Australia three years ago, it has been a remarkable achievement.

Assessing his friend's prospects for 2012, Murray said: "How many times have 
players had pretty much the best year in tennis and then repeated it next year? 
It doesn't happen in sports.

"Like Barcelona in football â€¦ they're the best team, but to win back-to-back 
Champions Leagues, even though you're the best, it's so tough, the margins are 
so small. A lot of things have to go your way."

Murray was an early victim of Djokovic's annus mirabilis, the world No3 being 
brutally outplayed in an Australian Open final from which he took months to 
recover.

The defeat looked less horrible as Djokovic went on a run of 41 consecutive 
victories through to the French Open semi-finals, but for Murray the fact his 
conqueror was the Serb made it harder to take.

The pair were born a week apart, with the British No1 the elder, and their 
careers had taken similar paths before Djokovic's huge jump this season. They 
will clash again this week having been drawn in the same group for the O2 
event, and Murray now sees his rival's success as a sign of encouragement.

He added: "I didn't [match up to him] in Australia. I was disappointed with 
that match and I had to learn from that and realise why I didn't that day. But 
other times I have played against him we always have a lot of long rallies, we 
have similar game styles and we both make a lot of returns. I feel like it is 
pretty even in a lot of respects. This year he has really carried it through.

"He was struggling a lot at times last year, not just losing matches but 
struggling with his serve. People were saying, 'Is Djokovic ever going to win 
another grand slam? Is he good enough to do it?'

"And it just goes to show that everyone is good enough to do it, it's just 
whether you can play your best tennis at the right moments and gain that 
confidence that he's had this year. Because no one can improve that much at 
this stage in our careers, it's a confidence thing."

That is a view shared by the man himself, who will go into 2012 determined to 
use this season as a springboard rather than a noose around his neck.

Djokovic said: "I am going to do my best to try to get as close to these 
results as possible. I know it's going to be a really big task but it's a new 
year and I think after the year I had I can only take the best out of it, be 
positive and be proud of what I have achieved, and that can only give me a lot 
of confidence for what is coming up.

"With the new position that I have, obviously I have more expectations but I 
am ready for it. It's always possible to get better."

Djokovic also had encouraging words for Murray, who has made obvious advances 
himself this year and reached at least the semi-finals at every grand slam for 
the first time.

"I know the difference in my game was a mental approach, a maturity on and off 
the court, figuring out things, how to deal with the pressure, how to play the 
right shots at the right moments and using the necessary experience I have 
gained over the years playing against Roger [Federer] and Rafa [Nadal] and 
Andy," Djokovic said.

"There hasn't been a big difference in my game, it's just that mental switch, 
more belief that I can win the major events. I'm sure he [Murray] wants a grand 
slam title at this moment more than anybody and I'm sure he will make it 
because he has the quality."
 