
Andy Murray leaves the last tournament of the season on one good leg, a 
disappointed and chastened man. A groin strain will not do lasting damage but 
ignoring it may have taught him a lesson that will determine at least the 
immediate management of his career.

Three months ago he complained that the physical demands of the tour weighed 
too heavily on players who consistently go deep in big tournaments. On Tuesday, 
he provided the proof of that assertion. Simultaneously, however, he confessed 
he had ignored his better instincts by playing in theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> here in Greenwich.

Against sound medical advice, Murray decided to risk aggravating an injury he 
has never had before, one he collected recently â€“ to go with niggles in a 
buttock, an elbow and a hamstring he had acquired in the previous few weeks, 
not to mention the mental anguish that accompanies him everywhere.

Murray has an excellent record of completing tournaments and did not want to 
disappoint the organisers, the fans or himself. This is probably not a mistake 
he will repeat. He always had one eye on the Australian Open, which starts in 
mid-January and at least now he can begin his rehab in good time. The muscle 
strain does not require surgery but it needs attention he could not give it 
while competing here. If it did not go in Greenwich, it might have gone in 
Melbourne.

The mental and physical strains manifested themselves in his ragged 
straight-sets loss to David Ferrer on Monday afternoon, only his second since 
the US Open. The disappointment was etched in his face 24 hours later when he 
succumbed to common sense and withdrew.

A tournament too far? Hardly. In all the agonising over burnout among modern 
players, the one argument conveniently ignored is the most obvious: they do not 
have to play if they do not want to. The consequences are loss of world 
rankings points and quite a lot of money but nobody is standing over them with 
a gun.

It is their collective drive that unites them. And Murray, who recently 
leap-frogged Roger Federer to No3 in the world rankings but may now slip back 
to fourth, is more driven than most. Frustration curdled with relief when he 
announced his decision.

"I never want to pull out of tournaments," he said, "especially one of this 
size. But it's a decision I had to make because I was probably going to do 
myself more damage. There's no chance I would have been ready to win the 
tournament here. So, in hindsight, it was maybe the wrong decision [to play], 
but you also want to give yourself an opportunity."

By coincidence he felt the groin go when hitting up with Janko Tipsarevic, the 
Serb who takes his place and will play Tomas Berdych on Wednesday. He will also 
face the world No1, Novak Djokovic, in the final round-robin match of his group 
on Friday.

On Tuesday, Murray was scheduled to hit at 1pm but cancelled the session and 
sat down with his team for two hours. They agreed he should pull out and head 
for his warm-weather training camp in Florida ahead of his Australian 
commitments. He also agreed this week to playing in the Brisbane Open in the 
new year, and hopes he can recuperate in the six or seven weeks he has left.

"That off-season is so important for me," he said, "and has been for the last 
few years, getting myself in shape. It's one of the few times when you can have 
an actual training block."

What an anticlimactic end to his year, though. Murray was on form in Asia, 
where he won three tournaments on the spin. But a strained buttock forced him 
to pull out of Basel and Berdych beat him in a tight quarter-final in Paris. It 
was then that the doubts festered.

Murray returned from Paris on the Friday and a couple of days later, his body 
started to give up on him. He suspected the worst and hoped for the best.

When Murray, Rafael Nadal and Andy Roddick raised concerns at the US Open 
about the schedule that makes life so tough for leading players on the tour, 
they were not drowned in sympathy. But this is how it unfolds, a gradual 
depletion of their physical resources.

"I was told to take a week to 10 days completely off," Murray admitted. 
"Again, I couldn't do that. So each day I was hitting up and down the middle of 
the court, not moving. You can get away with doing that. I played with the 
Bryan brothers on the Saturday. I felt OK. I went to do some serve movement 
work afterwards to test it out. I had to stop when I was doing that. Then on 
Sunday I played some points with Tipsarevic, and didn't feel good, stopped the 
practice early. I knew in my head I wasn't ready to play and wasn't right to 
play."

But play he did. Because that is what he wakes up in the morning for.
 