
It is easy in this business for a quote to turn from a dart into a timebomb. 
And, whileAndy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> remained 
stone-faced, he responded to Roger Federer's little hand grenade about the 
Scot's allegedly easy hat-trick of wins in Asia with a subtle bazooka blast of 
his own.

Slip of the tongue (or dagger), or maybe a misquote, Federer's backhanded 
compliment can hardly have pleased the Scot, who recently moved past the former 
world No1 (as he would prefer to be introduced) into third place in the 
rankings.

"I always try, if I can, to be positive about all the other players," Murray 
said, luxuriating on a Union Jack sofa. "Roger is one of the best players ever 
to play and I'm glad I've had the chance to play against him." Did he think 
Federer feared him, then? Running around his backhand, Murray set himself for a 
forehand winner down the line.

"Maybe," he said. "He's entitled to say whatever he wants. I hope I get the 
chance to play against him this week and I can let the tennis do the talking."

As for the quality of his achievements in Asia, he said, "With the depth of 
players these days, you can't just turn up and win a Masters tournament. The 
week in Tokyo, I played Rafa [in the final], David Ferrer in the semis, David 
Nalbandian and Marcos Baghdatis. Those are good players, some of them great 
players, so it's not an easy thing to do.

"In Paris [where Federer won], Rafa didn't play, Novak [Djokovic] was injured, 
I was injured. Every week is different. If you play your best and not 
everybody's there, it's not relevant. You can only beat what's in front of you."

Federer, in sublime form , is favourite to retain his ATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> title, and Murray is 
not far behind him. But there is now an edge to a projected 15th meeting 
between them, perhaps in the final. Murray leads 8-6.

Federer opens the tournament against Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, whom he respects for 
his unpredictability, as much as anything else. Later, Rafael Nadal, who has 
rested, plays Mardy Fish, who has not and is hobbling. An intriguing week is in 
prospect â€“ on court and, perhaps, in the locker room.
 