
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> jokes that his 
brain is hurting. So is his elbow and his hamstring. After winning five 
tournaments, as well as reaching three semi-finals and a final in the four 
slams, he enters the last leg of a fruitful campaign weary but happy.

Whatever the aches and pains, Murray thinks he is finishing the season in 
richer form than ever and has enough energy left for one more effort in the 
Barclay'sATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals>, which start at the O2
 Arena in Greenwich on Sunday.

Murray's first match is against David Ferrer on Monday afternoon. He has 
surely not played better in four previous preparations for this tournament.

"In terms of the matches I've had at the end of the year, I'd probably say, 
yes. Physically, probably not. In terms of the way I'm hitting the ball, this 
is probably the best. I've taken a few days off. I practised the last couple of 
days at Queen's for an hour each day. I had a few injuries after Paris so I've 
had to manage that and not overdo it this week. My hamstring is still a lit bit 
sore, the elbow â€¦ brain. No serious injuries, just niggles."

He was perhaps unaware, though, of another niggle: one reported this week in 
the words ofRoger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer>, 
who claimed Murray's three recent tournament wins in Asia were cheapened by the 
quality of the opposition.

Federer sought to defuse the row when the players gathered in Greenwich on 
Friday. "I didn't say that, no," the world No4 said, annoyed when the quotes 
were thrown back at him. "I just thought he was the big favourite going into 
those matches early on in Asia. I think he's done really well. He'd already 
played great when there was an absolutely perfect field in Cincinnati and in 
the US Open he was playing supremely well. He's one of the best indoor players 
out there. So, for me, it comes as no surprise that he was able to dominate 
that stretch."

It was a limp assertion, anyway, given that Rafael Nadal, the world No2, was 
among those Murray defeated and that Federer's victims in winning back-to-back 
tournaments in Basel and Paris all came from outside the top six in the world.

Petty squabbles aside, this tournament has a knife-edge feel to it. Murray's 
hamstring is "a little bit sore"; Mardy Fish is playing on one good leg but is 
"tons better" than after his second collapse in a week in Paris last week; and 
Federer wonders if Nadal is "a bit rusty" and says of Novak Djokovic's right 
shoulder: "I guess that's going to be OK with the rest he's had."

This is not a tennis tournament; it's a hospital waiting room. The players, 
meanwhile, are upbeat. It is not in their interest to dwell on real or imagined 
physical frailties when there is one more prize to play for.

Federer, who opens the tournament on Sunday against Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, is the 
defending champion. He has been in scintillating form, refreshed after a break 
and buoyed by a couple of near-flawless wins. He would love to climb back 
towards the summit, having been overtaken in the rankings recently by Murray, 
but said: "Forget about the rankings. Right now it's about trying to win the 
World Tour Finals or, for me, to defend it. We'll see what the rankings are at 
the end of this year. Next year starts from scratch. Novak's the player of the 
season and that's what fans will remember."

Nadal paid tribute to Djokovic, who has been smiling widely all week but might 
have a few doubts about his shoulder. "Roger is winning, Andy had very good 
results in Asia, winning three straight tournaments; he lost a tough match in 
Paris against [Tomas] Berdych but he is playing very well. Djokovic must have 
unbelievable confidence for the whole season. They are the favourites."

His personal struggle with Djokovic, who has beaten him six times this year, 
still concerns him but he is trying to erase those demons. "He played at a 
fantastic level, probably one of the highest levels of tennis that I ever saw, 
but my focus is not Djokovic. My focus is myself."

The player who arrives with no baggage but a few bandages, perhaps, is Mardy 
Fish, the lone American here on one leg and a prayer. Cut down by injury twice 
in his past two tournaments, he is happy with his fitness and just delighted to 
be in London. It is a journey not many would have predicted for him a couple 
years ago, when he was lurking outside the top 100 and piling on weight after 
recovering from an operation.

"I was the most stressed out that I've ever been in my career [the past two 
events] because I didn't know how many points I was ahead, or if guys were 
going to jump up," said Fish, who was the last to qualify. "There were some 
sleepless nights, nights when I lost or was injured, or rehabbing, basically 
for the past 25 days.

"Thanksgiving is a big holiday for us in the States. I've never missed that 
with my family. I'll be playing that day, hopefully, on Thursday."

The lonesome Yank may yet shock them all.
 