
Andy Rubin <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/andy-rubin>, who sold his 
Android company to Google in 2005 and then became the head of the division of 
the same name, is stepping aside to other tasks within the company.

The move was announced in a blogpost from chief executive Larry Page 
<http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013/03/update-from-ceo.html>, who also 
announced that more than 750m Android devices have been activated globally 
since it was introduced in 2009, and 25 billion apps downloaded from the Google 
Play store.

Now Page suggests that Rubin will be called on to power some of the 
"moonshots" - extravagant bets on the future - that the company is trying to 
find.

"Having exceeded even the crazy ambitious goals we dreamed of for Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> — and with a really strong 
leadership team in place — Andy's decided it's time to hand over the reins and 
start a new chapter at Google," Page wrote. "Andy, more moonshots please!"

Rubin is a former Apple staffer who left that company in 1992 and went on to 
set up two successful mobile companies - Danger and Android. Rubin left the 
former before it was sold to Microsoft, while he headed the latter to a sale to 
the search giant's co-founders Page and Sergey Brin - who bought Android 
without telling Eric Schmidt, then the chief executive.

Rubin will be replaced at the head of the Android team by Sundar Pichar, who 
formerly worked on the Chrome browser, which is now competing with Microsoft's 
Internet Explorer for the title of the most widely-used browser in the world, 
despite onlylaunching in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2008/sep/02/googlejoinsthebrowserwars>.

While the figure for activations makes Android by far the largest mobile 
platform, well ahead of Apple, whose cumulative total of iPhones, iPads and 
iPod Touches is close to 500m, the figure for app downloads leavesGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Play still behind Apple, which 
boasts 40bn downloads from its App Store since it opened in 2008.
 