
Oscar-winning director Ang Lee has been attacked by members of the VFX (visual 
effects) industry for his failure to recognise their contribution to the 
success of his filmLife of Pi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149778/life-of-pi>.

Lee won the Academy Award for best director for Life of Pi on Sunday, but has 
been criticised for omitting to acknowledge in his acceptance speech the VFX 
team who worked on the effects-heavy adaptation ofYann Martel's novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/21/life-pi-catapulted-bestseller-list>
.

The protest has been led by Bruce Branit, a visual effects artist on a string 
of high-profile TV shows such as Star Trek: Voyager and Lost,who accused Lee 
(as well as his Oscar-winning cinematographer, Claudio Miranda) of ingratitude 
in a robust Facebook post 
<http://www.facebook.com/bruce.branit/posts/10200665318986444>.
 "Neither Ang nor his winning cinematographer, Claudio Miranda felt they 
needed to thank or even mention the VFX artists who made the sky, the ocean, 
the ship, the island, the meerkats and oh yeah … the tiger. Ang thanked the 
crew, the actors, his agent, his lawyer and the entire country of Taiwan right 
down to the team that built the wave-pool on the soundstage where Pi was shot. 
But failed to mention 100s of artists who made not only the main character of 
the tiger, but replaced that pool, making it look like a real ocean for 80% of 
his movie." 
Branit's post comes on the back of increasing restlessness in the VFX sector, 
whichsaw a 450-strong protest outside the Oscar ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/25/oscars-protest-life-of-pi> and a 
plane buzz the red carpet towing the slogan "Box Office + Bankrupt = Visual 
Effects vfxunion.com".

Branit also pointed out that Lee in recent weeks had complained about the cost 
of VFX, without suggesting similar cutbacks in actor and director pay: "Ang Lee 
has not discussed how actors' salaries could be cheaper, or how director or 
producer's percentages could be limited. Yet it is valid to argue that visual 
effect played an equal if not greater role in making the movie Ang wanted to 
make."

Of particular concern is the recent Chapter 11 bankrupcty of Life of Pi's 
effects house Rhythm & Hues – but as evidenced in anopen letter published two 
years ago <http://www.visualeffectssociety.com/node/2425> by Eric Roth, 
executive director of the Visual Effects Society, resentment has been building 
for a considerable time in the VFX community, which unlike other areas of the 
film industry remains largely unregulated and non-unionised, over what it sees 
as unfair distribution of profits.
 