
Ang Lee is to follow up his Oscar-winning fantasy Life of Pi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/20/life-of-pi-review> with a very 
different kind of 3D film, this time focusing on the legendary boxers of the 
1960s and 70s,reports Deadline 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/08/ang-lee-to-next-helm-3d-film-with-classic-boxing-battles-including-ali-frazier/>
.

Joe Frazier and Muhammad Ali's classic 1975 Thrilla in Manila fight will be 
one of the movie's centrepieces, with Lee hoping to advance stereoscopic 
special-effects techniques into new territory. Deadline says the film will 
feature a "narrative that connects the 3D depiction of some of boxing's great 
fights". There are few further details at this stage, but the screenplay is by 
another figure with serious awards-season pedigree, Britain's two-time 
Oscar-nominee Peter Morgan, ofThe Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/114297/queen> and Frost/Nixon fame.

The new project expands Lee's reputation for diverse material. The Taiwanese 
film-maker has directed movies as varied as martial arts epicCrouching Tiger, 
Hidden Dragon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/86383/crouching.tiger.hidden.dragon>, 
superhero story Hulk and gay cowboy western Brokeback Mountain, as well as Jane 
Austen period dramaSense and Sensibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/62314/sense-and-sensibility> and 
salacious Chinese wartime romance Lust, Caution.

Lee was in many ways the surprise winner of the best director gong at this 
year's Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/25/ang-lee-best-director-oscar-life-of-pi>
, beating out the favourite, Lincoln'sSteven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg>. However, Life of Pi was 
easily one of the most popular prize-winners with audiences, having taken a 
hugely impressive $609m across the globe. Intriguingly, Lee's decision to 
venture further into stereoscope comes at a time when 3D revenues are falling 
in the US, the world's largest box office, though the medium remains popular 
elsewhere.
 