
You can’t choose a leader just because they have two X chromosomes. Angela 
Eagle <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle> is many things – 
clever, quick, Labour through and through, northern – and she is a woman. A gay 
woman, as it happens.

Her gender was not exactly a problem. Her problem was that she was cursed with 
a bit too much history. She had been around long enough to understand what 
power is like. She has had to make hard, real-time decisions. Notoriously 
(nowadays) shevoted for the Iraq war. 
<https://www.theyworkforyou.com/mp/10182/angela_eagle/wallasey/votes> She was 
for Trident modernisation, has generally been for military intervention and she 
is pro-EU.

That lingering backwash of the patriarchy which did for Barbara Castle all 
those years ago has had one more outing

Knowing that the choice will ultimately be made by Labour members who often 
find purity more appealing than pragmatism, this may have been enough for her 
colleagues to suppose that the clean-skinOwen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith> – only in parliament since 
2010 and unscathed by the experience of being a government backbencher let 
alone a minister – would be the better choice. Or maybe the same old entrenched 
prejudice against women that the left seems unable to shake off triumphed one 
more time. That lingering backwash of the patriarchal world of industry, trade 
unionism and smoke-filled constituency committee rooms, which did for Barbara 
Castle all those years ago, had one more outing, felling a candidate who would 
have stood head and shoulders above her rivals (metaphorically if not 
literally) in any general election.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fangela-eagle-pulls-out-of-labour-leadership-race-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Eagle%20pulls%20out%20of%20Labour%20leadership%20race%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fangela-eagle-pulls-out-of-labour-leadership-race-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Eagle%20pulls%20out%20of%20Labour%20leadership%20race%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fangela-eagle-pulls-out-of-labour-leadership-race-video&media=>
Angela Eagle pulls out of Labour leadership race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/19/angela-eagle-pulls-out-of-labour-leadership-race-video>
Idiots, oh idiots! Don’t they know that the most effective way of signalling 
change in politics (or any other line of business) is to bring in a woman? 
Eagle has always seemed to me exceptional: unafraid, funny, brainy and human. 
She would have bridged that difficult gap that could yet scupper Hillary 
Clinton’s presidential bid: between being able to inspire respect, and being 
likable too.


It used to look as if Labour had an institutional bias against women. I think 
something harder to tackle happens now. It is not unique toLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>. It is something that the Tories 
escaped – once the smoke had cleared from the battlefield (the contest ended up 
feeling like the final scene from Hamlet) – only because the candidates still 
standing were women.

Owen Smith to face Corbyn in Labour leadership challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/19/owen-smith-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-angela-eagle>
For different reasons, none of the candidates in these two curious elections 
could make policy differences part of the argument. So gender kept being 
brought into the debate. It happened again on Newsnight on Monday, when Lillian 
Greenwood, who backed Eagle, was accused of promoting her because she was 
female.


The point should be that it is not because she’s a woman; rather, it is and 
she’s a woman. Her gender should have been the killer fact, the proof that 
Labour really is open and modern. Instead, once again, Labour has swatted aside 
a strong female contender, and the party members will get to choose between an 
old white man and a younger white man.

There have now been hundreds of female Labour MPs and hundreds of thousands of 
women members. Yet none of them have ever had a real shot at the Labour 
leadership. What a record for a party that prides itself on its progressive 
attitudes and diverse membership. What a terrible record.
 