
Ange Postecoglou <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> can 
appear taciturn and largely emotionless. But behind the public persona is a 
more complex character whose identity has been forged by a fascinating 
backstory, one intertwined with – and shaped by – the colourful National Soccer 
League and the associated immigrant experience.

To say Postecoglou’s start in senior football was notable is an 
understatement. It is, however, the kind of anecdote that seemingly only “old 
soccer” could produce. The visit of perennial champions Sydney City toMiddle 
Park 
<http://www.goalweekly.com/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=217:middle-park-at-the-centre-of-victorian-football-1880s-to-1994&Itemid=141>
 was always a highlight on the South Melbourne fixture list. Taking on and 
overcoming the bone-rattling take-no-prisoners style of Eddie Thomson’s 
all-star side was not a task for the faint-hearted. One blood and thunder 
challenge, albeit one no different to countless others, left Socceroo Alan 
Davidson – father of Australia’s current left-back Jason – on the ground having 
swallowed his tongue. Tragedy was only avoided as a fan hurdled the waist-high 
fence, alerting the bench to the figure of a by now shaking Davidson. Davidson 
was carted off to hospital and the 18-year-old Postecoglou thrown into the 
skirmish to survive or perish. A boy became a man.

It was a unique way to make the transition from worshipping along with 
thousands of other Greek-Australians in the stadium's old, tin-shed grandstand, 
to being one of the feted few chosen to play. It could, though, have been a 
different scenario. Only a few years earlier Postecoglou was shunning the game 
he loved in an effort to fit in with a monocultural Australia. To be a soccer 
fan was almost to be part of a subculture; one on the fringe of society. In 
Johnny Warren’s parlance, this was the era of “sheilas, wogs and poofters 
<http://theconversation.com/the-case-for-sheilas-wogs-and-poofters-by-johnny-warren-23696>
”.

Born in Athens, Postecoglou’s family joined the burgeoning Greek diaspora in 
Melbourne when he was five. He may not have understood growing up in what was 
then the world’s second-largest Greek city, but Postecoglou now readily admits 
that his character developed firstly as a slightly marginalised immigrant kid, 
and then later in life as a soccer zealot in a world of non-believers.

“Many of my most memorable times [as a child] were football related,” 
Postecoglou says. “My dad first took me down to South Melbourne when I was 
eight and I joined the club when I was nine. Those are the strongest memories 
of my youth. It was a big part of my childhood.

“For us Middle Park became almost the social hub for Greek-Australian 
migrants. It almost became our church and it is significant that it was a 
Sunday because it was a place where we found community.

“It was a unique atmosphere, a sense of community, a passionate vocal crowd, 
and it made a strong impression on me as a young kid.”

For a while Postecoglou partly shunned his natural passion, playing Aussie 
Rules and supporting Carlton. Eating funny food and referencingthe likes of 
Atti Abonyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/08/should-the-ffa-cup-award-the-attila-abonyi-medal>
 or Eddie Krncevic brought little kudos in the schoolyard, in an era without 
wall-to-wall football on TV. “There was a while there when I didn’t love 
soccer, I loved [Australian Rules] football,” says Postecoglou. “It was a way 
of fitting in. You want to fit in and not be the kid with a long surname that 
doesn’t fit in. Sport is the common denominator. I think that experience taught 
me resilience and a real determination for what I want to do because my love 
for the game was tested.

“It has become my career and that was something completely unfathomable when 
the sport was a second-tier sport at best. That has given me a really strong 
belief in the game, shaped by those experiences about the beauty of the game 
when so many were blinded to it because it was something that wasn’t Australian 
for so long.”

In the long-term such experiences merely served to harden his passion for 
football. It means Postecoglou, like others of his generation, has a strong 
appreciation of the warp-speed growth in the game over the past decade.

“The game was poorly run and administered, and for many it was seen as a 
foreign thing that wasn’t Australian and had nothing to do with society,” said 
Postecoglou. “That was really tough if people weren’t accepting of something 
you really loved and wanted to talk about. It almost became a taboo subject at 
times.

“There was a very real point when I thought the game was going to die. I still 
get nervous when people talk about turning the corner because I have seen so 
many false dawns. I remember when we went national in 1977 before AFL and NRL. 
We thought that was the turning point.

“I know now that it is part of our society and is not seen as un-Australian 
anymore. The A-League has played a big part in that. It [football] is 
definitely part of the Australian landscape and growing.”

While Postecoglou rightly points to the A-League as pivotal in the growth of 
football inAustralia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> he, with 
typical understatement, is reluctant to talk about his own role. Yet his 
contribution has been hugely significant. He is the only coach to consistently 
taste success either side of the game’s schism that resulted in the end of the 
NSL in 2004 and the birth of the A-League a year later. He won two 
championships at the helm of his beloved South Melbourne – the first at just 32 
– and two more with Brisbane Roar in the A-League, a tally unsurpassed by any 
coach in the 37 years of national competition.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F12%2Fworld-cup-socceroos-moments-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F10%2F1402375797283%2FTim-Cahill-scores-012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Socceroos'%20favourite%20World%20Cup%20moments%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F12%2Fworld-cup-socceroos-moments-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Socceroos%27%20favourite%20World%20Cup%20moments%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F12%2Fworld-cup-socceroos-moments-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F10%2F1402375797283%2FTim-Cahill-scores-012.jpg>
More telling, perhaps, is Postecoglou’s role in almost single-handedly 
altering the football philosophy in Australia. Under Postecoglou, Brisbane were 
transformed into a team that played a modern high-tempo possession-based 
attacking game. They were immediately successful and almost overnight the 
discourse across the league, and even in grassroots football, shifted to 
“playing the right way”. History will undoubtedly cast Postecoglou at the 
forefront of this rapid-fire evolution.

The game’s current management, to their credit, recognised the pendulum swing 
and, after several years of privately having a policy of ‘locals need not 
apply’, Postecoglou was appointed to the national team role last October. He 
brought with him a heartfelt pride in the local game, and therefore the 
Socceroo shirt. It was something that was, by definition, missing under the 
previous reigns of Holger Osieck, Pim Verbeek and Guus Hiddink.

Postecoglou was choking back tears when the 1974 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> Socceroos met the 
current team in a social function in Sydney late last year. Not a man given to 
overt displays of emotion, the sight was undoubtedly a new experience to 
witness even for those who had known Postecoglou for a long time.

“I don’t think we have done our history well as a code,” Postecoglou says in 
tone that suggest it is a subject of exasperation. “There were times when we 
seemed to have tried to bury our history as a dirty little secret. Ultimately 
we are all here because of pioneers of the past. I remember watching the likes 
of Jimmy Mackay and Jimmy Armstrong playing for South Melbourne in the early 
70s and it had a significant impact on me as a person.”

Now Postecoglou has the opportunity to make his mark in the annals of 
Australian sport with a tenure that spans two World Cup campaigns. And he says 
he is ready to make his mark.

“I think I was born to coach rather than play,” Postecoglou says. “I’m 
probably a little unusual in that sense. I have found my coaching career a lot 
more fulfilling than my playing career, even though I ticked many boxes as a 
player. To be honest I never thought I would reach those heights [international 
football] in my playing career. Not that I wasn’t ambitious, but I thought it 
was a bridge too far and I had realised goals by playing for South Melbourne 
and winning championships [Postecoglou won four caps for Australia].

“I tell players all the time that when you get to the end of your career you 
will most likely get two questions: ‘did you win anything’ and ‘did you play 
for Australia’. It is nice to say yes to both and it probably carries more 
significance for me now than it did then.”
 