
Angelina Jolie's return

Records tumbled as the humanitarian superstar returned to mortal pursuits and 
made a movie. Disney'sMaleficent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent> 
lined up on the starting blocks, rolled up its sleeves and sliced through the 
competition like a jewel-encrusted knife through butter. How's that for a salad 
of metaphors? Fox'sX-Men: Days of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-days-of-future-past>, which only last 
weekend clobbered its way to the top, was tossed aside as Jolie's digitally 
enhanced cheekbones went to work. It's been four years since the debacle that 
was The Tourist and the considerably superior Salt. How Jolie must be loving 
this. Maleficent's $70m (£41.8m) North American haul and the $101.6m estimated 
international tally delivered domestic, international and worldwide box-office 
career highs for the star. She can return to editing her potential Oscar 
contender Unbroken with a smile on her face.

Imax is not just for the fanboys

Approximately $6.7m of the $70m in ticket sales came from Imax theatres, 
delivering yet another reminder of the large-screen format's growing appeal. 
Usually Imax comes in and cleans up on the fanboy stuff – the Batmans and 
Avengers of this world – but to claim nearly 10% of domestic box office for 
something as distinctly un-fanboy as Maleficent is impressive. Even more so 
when you consider that a lot of Imax screens are already deployed in service to
X-Men: Days of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-days-of-future-past> and Godzilla.

A Million Ways to Die in the West does just that

The title says it all. Ah, the old ones are the best. But seriously, folks, 
who does Seth MacFarlane think he is? His R-rated comedy Ted took the world by 
storm, sure, but that's no guarantee of success every time asA Million Ways to 
Die in the West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/million-ways-to-die-in-the-west>'s $17m debut 
proves. It's hard enough to make money with a straight-down-the-middle western, 
let alone do it when you subvert the genre. It's been 40 years since Blazing 
Saddles rode off into the sunset with $119m, which in case you're wondering 
equates to approximately $500m when adjusted for inflation. And talents like 
Mel Brooks are truly once-in-a-generation. Wild Wild West did pretty well too, 
but that awful piece of cinema emerged in 1999 and probably would have bit the 
dust were it not for the star power of Will Smith in his prime.

Korengal follows in Restrepo's footsteps

Sebastian Junger's Afghan war documentary Korengal is a welcome addition to 
the distribution landscape. The movie comes almost exactly four years after 
Junger's Restrepo made waves for its stoic depiction of a US platoon deployed 
to the Korengal Valley. The follow-up focuses on the same troops and is made 
all the more powerful by the knowledge that Junger'sformer compadre Tim 
Hetherington shot the footage before he was killed in Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tim-hetherington> in 2011. Saboteur Media 
releases Korengal on a single screen. I've not heard of the distributor, but 
the movie grossed a respectable $15,100 and it would be good if it stuck around 
a while for more people to see.

Tom Cruise next weekend

He's ba-aack. Next week a frisson of expectation will surge down the 
collective spine of Generation X as the era's ultimate Hollywood poster boy 
strides back into action. And this time he's wearing a very heavy-looking piece 
of gear in the time-loop sci-fi thrillerThe Edge of Tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-edge-of-tomorrow>. And he stars next to 
Emily Blunt. And – it gets even better – Doug Liman became the only director to 
get permission to film a helicopter landing in London's Trafalgar Square. Bet 
there were a few smirks of barely suppressed glee when London Mayor Boris 
Johnson's office orchestrated that traffic scenario. Cruise's last outing was a 
year ago in Oblivion, the guilty pleasure that did pretty good business – $286m 
worldwide – and found plenty of admirers. Admit it, you loved it too.

North American top 10, 31 May - 1 June, 2014

1. Maleficent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent>, $70m

2. X-Men: Days of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-days-of-future-past>, $32.6m. Total: 
$162.1m

3. A Million Ways to Die in the West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/million-ways-to-die-in-the-west>, $17.1m

4. Godzilla <https://www.theguardian.com/film/godzilla>, $12.2m. Total: $174.7m

5. Blended <https://www.theguardian.com/film/blended>, $8.4m. Total: $29.6m

6. Neighbors <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bad-neighbours>, $7.7m. Total: 
$128.6m

7. The Amazing Spider-Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-amazing-spider-man-2>, $3.8m. Total: 
$192.7m

8. Million Dollar Arm, $3.7m. Total: $28.1m

9. Chef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/08/chef-jon-favreau-review-sxsw-2014>
, $2m. Total: $6.9m

10. The Other Woman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/other-woman>, $1.4m. 
Total: $81.1m

More on Maleficent

• Angelina Jolie hints at acting retirement after Cleopatra biopic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/02/angelina-jolie-cleopatra-acting-retirement>
• Peter Bradshaw's Maleficent review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/28/maleficent-review-angelina-jolie-sleeping-beauty-horns-vinegar>
 