
Ange Postecoglou <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> has 
praised his “outstanding“ team but admits their defeat to Holland was hard to 
take. The Socceroos were 2-1 up against arguably the best team in the 
tournament before losing 3-2, a result that ended their hopes at the World Cup.

"I put pressure on the players and the staff to go and get at the big teams. 
Saying it and doing it are two different things. But today they did that and 
they didn't get a reward. It's heartbreaking,” said Postecoglou. "Everyone was 
outstanding. For the majority of the game, we looked more likely to win than 
game than not."

Tim Cahill <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tim-cahill> scored 
Australia’s first goal with a brilliant volley. "It's a great moment. Gowser 
[Ryan McGowan] crossed from the right, the ball was sitting beautifully,” he 
said on ITV.com. "It just felt so right to hit it. I hit it sweetly and it's 
what it's all about. Defining moments."

Cahill was booked, meaning he will be suspended for Australia’s final game 
against Spain. At the age of 34, it it almost certain that he has played his 
last game at aWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>. "It is what it is. I 
leave everything on the pitch,” he said. "It was an amazing performance. We 
knew this was a chance. We thought we could win this game. We got close. We'll 
earn a lot of respect from today's game."

It was a sentiment Holland’s Arjen Robben agreed with. “[Australia] played 
really aggressively," he said. "They played like it was their last chance. We 
were a little bit under pressure, but we gave the ball away too easily.

"But we made big step today. We have maximum points. Goal difference can make 
a difference, so the first game was like an extra point for us."

Postecoglou added that he was confident Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> are heading in the right 
direction.

"People were saying we weren't going to score a goal and we would just try and 
survive," he said. "In both games we have taken it to the opposition. I firmly 
believe that we have only just started on this journey.

"The goal is to come back in four years’ time, that they fear us before we get 
on the pitch as much as they fear us on the pitch now. There is no doubt now 
both Chile and the Dutch know they have been in a game and respect the way we 
have gone about our football."

Postecoglou's opposite number, Louis van Gaal agreed that the Socceroos had 
won Holland's respect. "Australia is a tough game, a tough team to play 
against, well organised," Van Gaal said. "This coach [Postecoglou] is really 
good. He allows his team to play an attacking game."
 