
Angela Eagle’s local Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party is in further turmoil over a formal complaint that alleges she was 
referred to as “Angie the dyke”, and that a member was threatened with being 
punched in the head at an official meeting.

The Labour MP, who challenged Jeremy Corbyn for the leadership before 
withdrawing from the contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/19/owen-smith-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-angela-eagle>
, saw her constituency party of Wallasey suspended last month over the claim of 
bullying and intimidation.

The complaint by 17 Wallasey party members, seen by the Guardian, alleges that 
Eagle was the subject of the homophobic slur, and that others were intimidated 
at the annual general meeting on 24 June, which the MP did not attend.

However, the claims are so hotly contested by Eagle’s critics that some 
members are holding an unofficial meeting to discuss the crisis on Tuesday, 
despite a party edict banning them from gathering.

The meeting, held under the banner of Wirral TUC, has been advertised to local 
Labour members and supporters, telling them: “This is your chance to find out 
what is really going on in Wallasey Labour party and your chance to have your 
say.

“Why are the 1,400-plus members of the Wallasey party not allowed to meet, 
what are the accusations being made, are they true, why are 150,000 fully 
paid-up Labour party members not being allowed to vote in the leadership 
election, including over 540 who live in Wallasey?”

One of the organisers, Paul Davies, a vice-chair of the suspended party, said 
the allegations of intimidation and bullying were “all lies”, and that he 
planned to explain to Labour members “all the inconsistencies, what’s happened, 
what’s been said”.

Eagle was invited to the Wirral TUC event, but a spokesman said she was unable 
to attend. One of her allies has now submitted a formal complaint that local 
Labour members have been sent flyers on the basis of data that was “illegally 
procured and used by an external organisation and/or unauthorised people 
without consent”.

The original complaint about the AGM was made by 17 delegates led by Paul 
Stuart, also a vice-chairman of the suspended party.

“Meetings have become very hostile, with people attending who should not be 
present. Members have been heard threatening people, saying they ‘Would come 
back there and punch you in the head’ for having an opinion. This is 
commonplace now and goes unchallenged by anyone because of intimidation and 
bullying,” the complaint says.

“When people try to leave, people stand in the way of the door and are told 
those trying to leave, they are not leaving and sit down. While people do 
leave, the actions are an intimidating act ... At our AGM, when electing the 
LBGT officer, there was some delegates who started limping their wrists to each 
other and laughing. Homophobic comments have been said by members including 
‘Angie the dyke’, making reference toAngela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle> MP.”

This account is strongly disputed by Davies, who said in a letter to Tribune 
magazine 
<http://www.tribunemagazine.org/2016/08/angie-the-dyke-a-wallasey-folk-myth/> 
that accusations that Eagle was called “Angie the Dyke” were a Wallasey “folk 
myth”.

Davies told the Guardian there would have been uproar if such comments were 
made: “There were 44 people in a room not much bigger than my front room. It 
was cheek to jowl, no one could do much [without] someone else knowing.

“Nobody heard a comment of homophobia or any intimidation in that meeting. 
Nobody mentioned it despite the fact there was maybe four or five councillors, 
several full-time officials, there were a number of gay people. It is not as if 
it was full of timid people.”

He said he had been delivering flyers to all houses in the hope of reaching 
Labour members who were interested in the Wirral TUC meeting, so there was no 
data-protection breach.


The tensions in Wallasey began three days before Eagle challenged for the 
Labour leadership and then withdrew, but she was already being mooted as a 
candidate at the time by the media.

The day after she declared as a candidate, her staff said a brick was thrown 
through the window of a stairwell in her office building. Some of her opponents 
have questioned whether the incident was linked to her challenging Corbyn, but 
Eagle made it clear she believes they are related, appearing in the media at 
the time asking the leader to “control” his supporters.

Eagle has also linked her opponents in Wallasey constituency Labour party to 
members who have joined under the leadership of Corbyn. “There’s a disruptive, 
newly joined element, many of whom were thrown out [of the Labour Party] in the 
1990s, who are making a lot of noise,” she told ITV last month.

At least one branch in Wallasey has passed a no-confidence motion in Eagle and 
declared support for Corbyn in the leadership contest.

Responding to questions about the Wirral meeting, a spokesman for Eagle said: 
“Angela is happy to meet any constituent to discuss their concerns. They can 
make an appointment to see her at her surgery or contact her offices in 
Wallasey or Westminster for a meeting.

“It is a shame Mr Davies feels it is better to spend his time organising 
internally facing meetings, rather than doing what Angela is doing, which is 
working in Wallasey and around the country for a strong, united Labour party 
that can take on the Tories and heal the divisions that six years of Tory 
government have caused.”

The controversy in Wallasey came as Corbyn again proved his ability to draw 
crowds of thousands – even in the rain. Speaking to a packed crowd at a rally 
in St George’s Plateau in Liverpool, he stressed the importance of reaching out 
to people beyond Labour and rejected the idea that he is exists in a “bubble of 
adulation”.

Corbyn received a further boost when the Communication Workers’ Union (CWU) 
became the third to endorse his leadership.
 