
Los Angeles Angels fans watched in shock as their ace fell on to the dust at 
Fenway Park 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_08_20_anamlb_bosmlb_1&mode=video&content_id=35527867&tcid=vpp_copy_35527867>
. All the promise, everything the team has done to wrestle away the best record 
in baseball from their AL West rivals in Oakland, seemed to leave on a 
stretcher with Garrett Richards on Wednesday night. “I got sick to my stomach,” 
said team-mate Mike Trout. He wasn’t alone.

The Angels have lost their best starting pitcher at the worst possible time, 
and we all know that’s trouble.

Los Angeles steamrolled through July and stayed hot in August 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/LAA/2014-schedule-scores.shtml>, yet 
the club has struggled in one single department: altering the narrative around 
their team, at least outside of Anaheim. After four seasons in which a 
high-priced roster brought nothing but disappointment, the team couldn’t shake 
its reputation as a bunch of mismatched, underachieving rich kids, even as the
offense generated the second most runs 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/LAA/2014-batting.shtml> in the AL, the 
pitching staff shot up to fifth 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/LAA/2014-pitching.shtml> in the league 
in team ERA and the trades made for Huston Street, Joe Thatcher and Jason Grilli
solidified their shaky bullpen 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/angels/la-sp-angels-street-smith-20140729-story.html>
.

Numbers aside, baseball still needed some convincing. 


Now with Richards, who leads the staff in strikeouts, WHIP, and innings 
pitched, out for the season with atorn knee tendon 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/angels-ace-garrett-richards-out-for-season-with-torn-left-knee-tendon?ymd=20140821&content_id=90757124&vkey=news_mlb>
, the doubts will grow louder.

Before the postseason is the current race for the division title, which means 
more than ever under the current playoff structure – fail to finish first and 
face a win-or-go-home wildcard game. Richards has become the kind of pitcher 
who could help Anaheim avoid such a fate, and the man they’d want on the hill 
for that wild card game if they couldn’t.

There are pitchers in the organisation who could fill that gaping hole in the 
rotation, but the quality at hand means that serviceable results would be 
considered the upside. They could go out andtrade for a pitcher such as the New 
York Mets’ Bartolo Colón 
<http://www.nj.com/mets/index.ssf/2014/08/mlb_trade_rumors_are_angels_looking_at_mets_starter_bartolo_colon_to_replace_garrett_richards.html>
, an obvious choice despite his 41 years, but he would come with an $11m price 
tag for next season and have to pass through thewaiver wires process 
<http://www.blessyouboys.com/2014/8/4/5959777/august-waiver-trade-deadline-explanation>
 first – considering the wily mood Billy Beane is in this year, the A’s could 
be the team that blocks such a move.

A’s don’t make the grade in Oakland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Faug%2F22%2Fmlb-angels-season-marred-injury-garrett-richards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F21%2F1408646573588%2Fe4a4b2f3-7112-46e3-9389-1f729cb31dca-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angels'%20season%20marred%20by%20injury%20to%20ace%20Garrett%20Richards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Faug%2F22%2Fmlb-angels-season-marred-injury-garrett-richards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angels%27%20season%20marred%20by%20injury%20to%20ace%20Garrett%20Richards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Faug%2F22%2Fmlb-angels-season-marred-injury-garrett-richards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F21%2F1408646573588%2Fe4a4b2f3-7112-46e3-9389-1f729cb31dca-2060x1236.jpeg>
 How much are the Oakland A’s missing Yoenis Cespedes? Photograph: Gary A 
Vasquez/USA Today Sports 
It’s not like the Oakland A’s weren’t locked up in an all-out war with the 
Angels to be the best in the (AL) West when the trade deadline rolled around 
some three weeks ago. Yet as the incumbent, with two consecutive division 
titles under their belt buckles, it certainly felt like they were in control.


Then came the trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/01/mlb-trade-deadline-deals-price-detroit-beane-boston>
.

At the 31 July deadline, their slugging golden-armed Cuban, Yoenis Cespedes, 
was dealt to the Red Sox for Boston’s ace pitcher Jon Lester, and since then 
we’ve seena very different version of the Oakland A’s 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/OAK/2014-schedule-scores.shtml>. 

Their starters had the fourth-best ERA in baseball before the deal, but since 
then they’ve slipped, all the way down to 22nd of 30MLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> teams. Equally as startling is the 
team’s fall in run production, from first to 14th.

All this leads to the question of team chemistry. Some find it vital, some 
find it one of the most overrated intangibles in sports. When Cespedes departed 
the Bay Area, what left with him besides his bat?

A recent piece on MLB.com 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/yoenis-cespedes-reflects-on-deal-sending-him-from-as-to-sox?ymd=20140818&content_id=90255502&vkey=news_mlb>
 makes it pretty clear that there was plenty of admiration between Cespedes and 
his team-mates, and an emotional connection between the Cuban and the club that 
extended all the way to his mother. Cespedes told MLB.com:

My initial reaction was that I almost wanted to cry. I didn’t end up crying, 
but as the day progressed and I started to think about it a little more, I 
thought of the saying, ‘God knows why things happened,’ and this is probably 
for the best.

Maybe, but not for the A’s lineup. Oakland averaged five runs a game before 
the trade, and now they’ve lost more than a run, down to 3.84. Drop the two 
games during the stretch where they scored 20 runs and it’s down to 3.11 per 
game. The biggest culprits are Derek Norris, Jed Lowrie (who was locked in a 
major August slump before hitting the disabled list), Brandon Moss and Coco 
Crisp, all of whom are seeing a different set of pitches now that Cespedes is 
gone.


Lester has held up his end of the bargain but most other starters have been 
hit hard in August. General manager Billy Beane tinkered with this team in 
order to have the rotation humming when October comes, so its recent failures 
are perhaps more mysterious than the lineup’s.

So, is the A’s 8-11 August 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/sweetspot/post/_/id/50686/athletics-need-to-be-worried-for-stretch-run>
 a result of an alteration in team chemistry, a departure of a major lineup 
cog, or just a good old-fashioned collective team slump? Their fans are pinning 
their hopes on it being the latter, and that the team which racked up wins over 
the first four months of the season will soon return to wrap up a third 
straight division title.

Perhaps we’ll begin to learn more when they face the Angels in a three-game 
series starting Friday.

Priced out

Sports can be cruel, baseball especially. On Thursday, the Detroit Tigers’ 
David Price put together what was probably thebest eight innings of his career 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/mlb-big-league-stew/david-price-throws-one-hitter-in-his-return-to-tampa-bay--but-loses-1-0-202343334.html>
, and left the ballpark with a loss. Back inside Tropicana Field, facing his 
old team, the Tampa Bay Rays, Price had a shaky first inning: Eugenio Suárez’s 
error at shortstop put the Rays’ Ben Zobrist on first base and the next batter, 
Brandon Guyer, knocked him home with a triple to right field, putting the Rays 
up 1-0. That’s how it ended. In between Price struck out nine and walked none, 
but Alex Cobb was also stellar, shutting down Detroit over seven innings, 
striking out six, walking two and allowing just two hits. Jack Boxburger and 
Jake McGee finished off the Tigers with two shut-out innings.

Baseball-reference.com 
<https://www.facebook.com/Baseball.Reference?hc_location=timeline> says that 
Price is the first pitcher since Andy Hawkins in 1990 to lose while pitching a 
complete game with zero earned runs allowed and one or fewer hits allowed and 
that he is just the fourth pitcher in this millennium to lose a complete game 
while allowing one hit or fewer. ESPN Stats & Info provides this nugget on the 
performance.

It was a tough loss, both for Price personally, and his team, which is 
struggling down the stretch after being overtaken by the scorchingKansas City 
Royals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kansas-city-royals> and is now 1.5 
games behind KC in the race for the American League West title.
Your browser does not support iframes. 
Vive Les Expos!

If star power is any indication of Montreal’s bid to bring a team back to 
Quebec, then momentum seems to be building. On Wednesday, future hall-of-fame 
hurler Pedro Martínez, who began his career in La Belle Province and won a 
National League Cy Young award with the club, made his wishes publicon the 
Expos Nation website <http://exposnation.com/>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Oq0LeSXAvs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Oq0LeSXAvs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Oq0LeSXAvs&media=>
Martínez has always had a special place for baseball in Montreal, going out of 
his way to mentionthe fate his former club faced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/11/1994-major-league-baseball-strike-montreal-expos>
 while celebrating a World Series title in 2004.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUXq7ZVXgvU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUXq7ZVXgvU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUXq7ZVXgvU&media=>
Now the Montreal Baseball Project 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/sports/baseball/former-expo-leads-the-charge-to-bring-big-league-baseball-back-to-montreal/article10045131/>
, the group trying toland a team for the town  
<http://m.mlb.com/video/topic/7417714/v31267965/will-major-league-baseball-return-to-montreal>
again, will be attempting to curry favour withcommissioner-elect Rob Manfred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/15/major-league-baseball-commissioner-rob-manfred>
, who will take over for Bud Selig in late January. How the new leadership will 
affect the bid is unknown, but in March, the city will have another opportunity 
to show their revitalised interest in the sport. Some 96,000 fans watched a 
pair of exhibition games between the Toronto Blue Jays and the New York Mets 
last spring, and it was recently announced thatthe Jays will host the 
Cincinnati Reds 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/sports/baseball/report-blue-jays-reds-set-to-play-in-montreal-in-2015/article20029723/>
 for two more games before the 2015 season.

What’s in a number?

John Lackey really wanted to wear his number 41 jersey after being traded from 
the Boston Red Sox to the St Louis Cardinals 
<http://espn.go.com/boston/mlb/story/_/id/11291111/john-lackey-traded-st-louis-cardinals-boston-red-sox-allen-craig-joe-kelly>
, but unfortunately for the big Kentucky-born hurler, it was taken by reliever 
Pat Neshek. Still, obstacles such as spoken-for jersey numbers have never 
seemed to deter determined athletes, and we’ve since learned that Lackey was 
happy to pony up for his favorite digits.


Now yes, that is ridiculous 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2014/08/john-lackey-pat-neshek-uniform-number-babe-ruth-st-louis-cardinals>
, but before we all go crazy here, let’s keep in mind that the Babe Ruth 
autographed baseball is reportedly worth somewhere in the range of $4,000 to 
$6,000, which isn’t that much considering other sales we’ve seen. Last season 
Darrelle Revis paid some $50k to his Tampa Bay Buccaneers team-mate Mark Barron 
for No24. The New York Jets’ newly acquired wide receiver Eric Decker paid half 
that to Jeff Cumberland to get No87. A decade ago New York Giants quarterback 
Eli Manningacquired his No10 shirt from punter Jeff Feagles 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/05/13/sports/13numbers.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0> 
for an all-expenses-paid trip to Florida, the full cost of which was not 
disclosed. When hall-of-fame pitcher Tom Glavine signed with the Mets, he 
agreed to build a new baby nursery in team-mate Joe McEwing’s home for his No47.

Times have certainly changed – back in 1991, John Kruk traded his No28 to the 
Philadelphia Phillies’ Mitch Williams fora grand total of two cases of beer 
<http://theaposition.com/torsmangolf/golf/personalities/59/ten-minutes-with-john-kruk-2>
.

A winning appeal
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Faug%2F22%2Fmlb-angels-season-marred-injury-garrett-richards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F21%2F1408651574739%2F31a61688-fec0-47ad-a0ca-ba91e70e901c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angels'%20season%20marred%20by%20injury%20to%20ace%20Garrett%20Richards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Faug%2F22%2Fmlb-angels-season-marred-injury-garrett-richards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angels%27%20season%20marred%20by%20injury%20to%20ace%20Garrett%20Richards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Faug%2F22%2Fmlb-angels-season-marred-injury-garrett-richards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F21%2F1408651574739%2F31a61688-fec0-47ad-a0ca-ba91e70e901c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A member of the grounds crew works on the field after a heavy rain soaked 
Wrigley Field on Tuesday. Photograph: Jeff Haynes/AP 
Things that never (or almost never happen) in baseball – teams successfully 
protesting the results of games. On this occasion, however, common sense won 
out as the commissioner’s office ordered the San Francisco Giants’ 2-0 
rain-shortened defeat to the Cubs on Tuesdayto continue 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/san-francisco-giants-win-protest-over-rain-shortened-loss-in-chicago?ymd=20140820&content_id=90563200&vkey=news_mlb>
. The MLB’s ruling stated that because the grounds crew failed to cover Wrigley 
Field adequately during a downpour, the game should have been suspended rather 
than awarded to Chicago, despite the fact that the regulation 4-1/2 innings had 
already been played. This makes a heck of a lot of sense, especially when you 
consider that San Francisco is fighting to reach the playoffs. Cubs general 
manager Jed Hoyer told the media that:

I think the last thing you want is a playoff team feeling bitter about the 
result here – something, obviously, that was caused by our organisation, so I 
think it’s a good outcome. Hopefully, we win the game.

The Giants won the protest but ultimately lost the game 2-1 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_08_19_sfnmlb_chnmlb_1&mode=box#gid=2014_08_19_sfnmlb_chnmlb_1&mode=recap&c_id=sf>
, which was played on Thursday. They rebounded to win the regularly scheduled 
game, 5-3. San Francisco is now 3.5 games behind the Los Angeles Dodgers in the 
race for the NL West title, and currently occupies the second wild card spot, 
1.5 games ahead of the Atlanta Braves.

And finally ...

The Washington Nationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-nationals> have at last hit that 
elusive stride, finding the form that made them the surprise package of the 
2012 season before crumbling under expectations a season later. They’re running 
away with the NL East and are the hottest team in baseball, winners of ten 
straight ballgames. On Thursday, they slapped a button on the streak, winning 
1-0 over the Arizona Diamondbacks in walk-off fashion.
Your browser does not support iframes. 
Click here for the Major League Baseball standings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/index.jsp?ymd=20140821>
 