
Angela Eagle has stopped holding public surgeries for constituents following 
police advice after she received abuse and threats in the wake of her decision 
to challenge for theLabour party leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labourleadership>.

The Wallasey MP would see constituents who made appointments, but had stopped 
walk-in advice sessions for now, her office said. The security of all MPs has 
been reassessed after theLabour MP Jo Cox was killed in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-shot-in-west-yorkshire>
.

Her office said police had advised Eagle that holding open surgeries could 
bring some risks, so staff decided to stop them for the time being.

Eagle, the former shadow business secretary, was the first MP to challenge 
Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/im-here-to-win-angela-eagle-launch-labour-leadership-bid>
 for the Labour leadership after a no-confidence vote by the parliamentary 
party against the leader. She has since dropped out of the race to support the 
only other contender,Owen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith>.


The day after Eagle announced her challenge, a brick was thrown through a 
window of the building where her constituency office is based. Her local 
constituency party, which has threatened to deselect Eagle, was suspended this 
week amid allegations of bullying.

Eagle told the Liverpool Echo 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/angela-eagle-cancels-advice-surgeries-11646109>
 the advice on public surgeries came from counter-terrorism officers.

 “Because we have been getting so much abuse direct to the office, and the 
advice surgeries are normally done in public, [the police] have sent me an 
email advising me to cancel them,” she told the paper.

“The police basically think it might not be safe – they do not want them to go 
ahead at all,” she said. “I think it’s also in the aftermath of what happened 
to Jo Cox. I am going to take their advice this time but people can still 
contact my office by phone and email. They are talking to me about future 
arrangements in terms of security.”

She added: “It’s with great reluctance that I’m doing this but the safety of 
my staff is paramount.”

DCI Sarah Kenwright of Merseyside police said: “We have given Ms Eagle advice 
about her surgeries, at her request, but the decision to cancel surgeries is 
not a police matter and would lie entirely with them.”

Last week a man in Paisley, Renfrewshire, was arrested on suspicion of 
threatening to kill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/15/man-arrested-angela-eagle-death-threats>
 Eagle. He has since been released on police bail.

 