
Angela Merkel has said that the UK’s European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> deal had demanded “a lot of willingness 
for compromise”, but that such compromises were easier to justify if they meant 
Britain was more likely to stay in the EU.

The question of “ever-closer union” had proved a particularly sensitive 
subject, the German chancellor said, because it was “an emotional issue” 
although one she is in favour of.

David Cameron will put 'heart and soul' into staying in Europe after sealing 
EU deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/19/david-cameron-deal-european-leaders-paves-way-june-referendum>
One of the obstacles during the negotiations had been that states like Germany 
and Austria were too fond of Cameron’s proposals to curb benefits for EU 
migrants, triggering fears of “contagion” among eastern-European states. Merkel 
said Germany would look into eventually implementing the indexation of child 
benefits for EU migrants.

Addressing reporters in Brussels after the deal had been announced, the Greek 
prime minister,Alexis Tsipras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>
, congratulated Cameron and said he wished him the best of luck in his 
endeavours to persuade the British people to remain in the EU.

“But his work will not be easy because this is a deal in which he will propose 
less Europe, that is the contradiction. The solution is not less Europe but a 
betterEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>,” said the 
leftwing leader, who had threatened to veto the EU-UK deal if Greece had not 
received assurances that it would remain part of the passport-free Schengen 
zone.

David Cameron's dogged work won tussle in Brussels – now he faces fight at home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/19/david-camerons-dogged-work-won-tussle-in-brussels-now-he-faces-fight-at-home>
The real test for Europe, insisted Tsipras, would not rest on the result of 
the referendum but would come in the weeks ahead when the 28-nation bloc would 
be judged by its handling of the refugee crisis. Greece by dint of its 
geography has been forced into a frontline role in that drama.

 Poland’s minister for European affairs, Konrad Szymanski, said his government 
had supported British demands on eurozone and non-zone regulations, demanding 
democratic scrutiny throughout the process.

 Others delegates, including Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi, appeared 
relieved that a deal was reached at all, telling journalists: “The fact that we 
can go home now is also a step forward because at a certain point even that 
wasn’t a given”.

After a 30-hour negotiation marathon, few journalists were awake enough to 
cast as confident a judgement on the deal as Spain’s El Pais newspaper, who 
declared the deal “a new milestone for British exceptionalism”. Most European 
commentators instead saw Cameron’s deal as a stepping stone for a longer 
journey ahead.

David Cameron's EU deal: what he wanted and what he got
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/camerons-eu-deal-what-he-wanted-and-what-he-got>
Henrik Enderlein, director of Brussels-based thinktank Delors Insitute, 
tweeted: “Today’s deal is necessary condition at best. Sufficient condition is 
strong yes campaign. Internal UK politics will be decisive for#UKinEU 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UKinEU?src=hash>.”

Centre-right daily Die Welt pointed out that the British PM had had to make 
concessions too: “He will in the future have powers to be involved in eurozone 
decisions, and he will have more freedom to regulate the finance sector in his 
country. But it is clear that this won’t grant the finance sector in Great 
Britain any competitive advantages.”

On German state broadcaster ZDF, Shakuntala Banerjhee said the negotiations 
had shown “how the fear of a Brexit had in the end outweighed narrow national 
interests”. It would take days of closer analysis to see whether Britain’s deal 
was so substantial that it would change not just Britain’s future, but the 
future of the European Union as a whole.
 