
Porto Alegre, where the women stroll the streets with Europeanising airs and 
old men walk slowly through manicured parks with hands behind backs, their 
faces quizzical and ironiclike everyday Fernando Pessoas 
<http://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poet/fernando-pessoa>, is the most Portuguese of 
Brazil’s big cities. Sitting at the apex of Latin America’s gaucho territory, 
it’s the kind of place where the people discuss the things they care about – 
barbecued meat,mate, and football – with an intellectual seriousness that’s at 
odds with the stereotypical image of Brazil as a dreamland of neverending 
smiles and samba.

The arrival of Louis Van Gaal’s side in town earlier this week marked a 
peculiar kind of homecoming: the heirs of the world’s most fervently 
intellectual football culture and Brazil’s most earnestly theorising football 
city, together at last. But when Australia and the Netherlands took to the 
field at the Estadio Beira-Rio on Wednesday, for much of the first half it was 
the team in gold, not the team in orange, that produced football worthy of the 
culturethat gave birth to the Cruyff turn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/11/world-cup-stunning-moments-johan-cruyff-turn-1974>
. It was the Socceroos who passed and moved with a verve to delight the local 
purists, not the team bearing the heritage of total football andDennis 
Bergkamp, Dennis Bergkamp, Dennis Bergkamp 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XsZkCFoqSBs&feature=kp>. As Australia took 
hold of the game, it was not long before the Dutch were reduced to playing long 
balls from deep – a statement of footballing respect more significant than 
anything that will ever be said into a recording smartphone.

Sure, Arjen Robben’s opening goal had promised to deplete some of that early 
Socceroos momentum, but when Australia’s equaliser went in, Ryan McGowan’s ball 
looping through the air and meeting Tim Cahill’s supposedly weak left foot with 
the precision and inevitability of good mathematics, it was yet another moment 
that recalled the best traditions of the Oranje. On the sideline, Van Gaal, a 
disciplinarian so stern and pure he has deprived himself, seemingly 
permanently, of the pleasure of sideburns, looked even more chubbily 
unimpressed than usual. Australiawere playing more Dutch than the Dutch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/19/australia-holland-world-cup-2014>
.

The beautiful, battling loss that unfolded from there was a tribute to 
qualities many will want to describe as quintessentially Australian: fighting 
spirit, commitment, the simple fact of pulling on a gold shirt and giving a 
shit. But what impressed more than any of those things was the intelligence of 
the players, the patience and coolness they showed in playing out from the 
back, and their ability to push fame to one side and treat each opponent on the 
merit of his two legs, rather than the weight of his CV. The players themselves 
deserve much of the credit for that, of course. But given where Australian 
football was just nine months ago, stumbling into the double-massacre of 
successive 6-0 defeats to Brazil and France with a squad not entirely 
dissimilar to that which took the field on Wednesday, a lot of the praise must 
also go to the coach.
 Tim Cahill celebrates that goal. Photograph: Martin Meissner/AP 
Watching the managers is always one of the great pleasures of the World Cup, 
and in that sense – as in so many other senses – this tournament has not 
disappointed. Brazil 2014 has thrown up manifold variants on the managerial 
style.Didier Deschamps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/19/france-south-africa-didier-deschamps-world-cup>
 patrols the technical area with the stubby, square-jawed authority of a 
Marseille taxi driver with high standards. Vicente del Bosque is the veteran 
consigliere slowly confronting his own horrible obsolescence, a paralysed owl 
observing the massacre of his own from the peak of a great but useless wisdom. 
And Roy Hodgson fills the role of the minor Dickens character, hook-nosed and 
conspiratorial, a small-target schemer whose hands look like they belong in a 
pair of mangy cut-off woollen gloves.

Ange Postecoglou has neither the sideline theatricality nor the flair for the 
bon mot that many of his counterparts at this World Cup exhibit; his main 
gesture in the technical area is the double-punch of the arms, a pudgy 
triumphalism, and his press conferences are uniformly downbeat. He’s what my 
mother (who is Greek) would call “a nice Greek boy”, an undemonstrative man of 
simple values who talks (and moves) only when absolutely necessary – the kind 
of guy you’d expect to find at a suburban family BBQ, sharing the occasional 
property tip, hovering by the meat platter and complaining about the traffic. 
But he is clearly a deep football thinker, and much like Arsene Wengerhe is 
humble enough to recognise the limitations of his own playing career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/12/ange-postecoglou-interview-world-cup-australia>
; unlike many former players who take to the dugout, he has approached his 
second footballing life unburdened by any sense of entitlement to recognition 
on the basis of past glories. And in his own gently, unfussily reflective way, 
he is quickly imbuing the Socceroos with the spirit of the kind of passing, 
possession-focused football Australia has always wanted to play. It’s been a 
revolution of the mind as much as a renaissance on the pitch.

Wednesday’s performance had its flaws, very obviously. Alex Wilkinson, who 
always looks like he’s turned up to the match by accident on his way to the 
beach, was at fault for the first Dutch goal, allowing Robben to skid away from 
him unchallenged; Mathew Leckie spurned a glorious second-half chance to win 
the match, body-checking Tommy Oar’s cross towards goal in a valiant attempt at 
the World Cup’s first ever boobed finish; Jason Davidson played Robin van 
Persie onside for the equaliser; and there was a general melting of the 
defensive will for the third Dutch goal, Australia’s back four calling smoko 
and allowing the only player in the tournament with a genuinely porn-ready 
name, Memphis Depay, to step forward and slam a long-range finish past the 
curiously indecisive Mat Ryan. That’s quite a few things to get wrong in a 
game, and it says much about Australian football’s growing sense of itself that 
both the players and Postecoglou himself were unflinching in their assessment 
of these mistakes in the immediate aftermath of the match. But these moments of 
naivety aside, it was a performance of surprisingly cosmopolitan accomplishment 
from a side that many had assumed would drown on a leaky dinghy amid the tall 
ships of Group B. Postecoglou has made these players, many of them incipient 
journeymen scrapping a living in the lesser leagues of Europe and Asia, feel 
like they belong at the banquet with Robben and Van Persie. That, really, is 
the essence of man management.

In short time Australian coaches have made great progress. Recall that just 
seven years ago, in response to loud and frequent calls for the Socceroos to be 
managed by an Australian, Frank Lowy handed the car keys to Graham Arnold. At 
the time Arnold was a coach of little experience beset by the type of paranoia 
and insecurity that would lead him to call journalists up and berate them 
whenever he disagreed with something they’d written (I speak from experience).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGWGNPFI-MtE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGWGNPFI-MtE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGWGNPFI-MtE&media=>
The chaos of the 2007 Asian Cup campaign set back the cause of handing the 
Socceroos job to an Australian for years; and Postecoglou’s own ill-starred 
stint with the Young Socceroos,whose nadir came via his infamous 2006 argument 
over a mythical land called “Layos” with resident SBS curmudgeon and part-time 
geographer Craig Foster <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GWGNPFI-MtE>, added to 
the sense that for all their enthusiasm and “knowledge of the local game”, 
Australian coaches just weren’t ready for prime time. But the A-League has 
allowed them all to grow up very quickly, and both Postecoglou and Arnold, 
along with several of their peers, are now far more mature, less impetuous 
characters than they were even half a decade ago.

Indeed, as these men have shaken out the angers of their managerial youth, 
it’s Australia’s experiments with foreign coaches that have started to look 
curiously out of step with the times. Pim Verbeek was a droning bore unwilling 
to gamble on youth; and if Holger Osieck had a commitment to the passing game, 
it was so subtly patient and long-term that it never actually surfaced over the 
course of the three years he was in charge of the national team. Who can know – 
and who cares? There’s nothing deader to a national team than its former 
manager.

We’re only a few matches into the Postecoglou era but on the evidence so far, 
Australia have never, with the exception of Guus Hiddink, had a coach this 
good. United in physique, the differences between Postecoglou and his Dutch 
predecessor are nevertheless great. Hiddink was a maestro-for-hire brought in 
on a short-term assignment to ignite a team of great, but flickering, talents 
and get us to theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> for the first time 
since 1974. His task was to convince a group of very good players to produce a 
brief starburst of performances in a gold shirt equal to their proven ability 
at club level.

Postecoglou has taken charge of an outfit with less obvious natural talent, 
and much slimmer experience, to call on, and been instructed to use them as a 
nucleus around which to form a national team that can compete at the highest 
level for years to come. Hiddink had to get us to one World Cup; Postecoglou 
has been asked to give Australian football a lasting identity. Hiddink helped 
us cram our way the night before to success in the test; Postecoglou is getting 
us a whole degree. The early evidence is that it’s working – and in 
double-quick time.

Would things on Wednesday have turned out differently if Postecoglou had not 
been so stubbornly future-focused and allowed himself to pick Luke Wilkshire? 
Was it a fault of management not to include more experienced heads in the 
squad? We can have the argument all day, but the very public, in some ways 
shocking, break with the past that Postecoglou signalled by selecting just 
Cahill and Mark Bresciano of the wizened guard of 2006 must surely have played 
a major part in convincing the squad’s young players, however indirectly, that 
the responsibility for Australia’s fortunes at this tournament lay squarely 
with them.

There’s always some naivety in pointing to a bright horizon on the basis of 
slim facts, but the World Cup is a springtime for gently seasoned optimism. If 
this is what the Socceroos can produce with a team of supposed no-hopers, the 
future for Australian football under this most roundly capable, quietly 
intelligent of managers looks, you might say, golden.
 