
Labour MP Angela Eagle has accused party leader Jeremy Corbyn of “stirring” 
things aftershe cancelled constituency surgeries because of abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/21/angela-eagle-stops-walk-in-surgeries-amid-security-concerns>
. The former Labour leadership contender said she had been advised by police 
not to hold the public sessions in her Wallasey constituency. Merseyside police 
said the decision to cancel surgeries was a matter for the MP and her staff.


Angela Eagle stops walk-in surgeries amid security concerns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/21/angela-eagle-stops-walk-in-surgeries-amid-security-concerns>
Eagle said a “permissive” environment had been allowed to develop whereby MPs 
opposed to Corbyn faced abuse. She told the Daily Telegraph: “I think he has 
contributed to this. It’s all very well to condemn it, but there’s a permissive 
environment. You can make any number of ritual condemnations as you like but 
you have got to be judged by your actions, not just words.


“He has been stirring. He needs to be held to account. We have contacted the 
police and they have said we should cancel surgeries for safety reasons. I’m 
afraid for my staff. It’s them that have been up there, not me. It’s them that 
have had to field the calls.”


Earlier, Eagle told the Liverpool Echo: “Because we have been getting so much 
abuse direct to the office and the advice surgeries are normally done in 
public, [the police] have sent me an email advising me to cancel them.” She 
said the police “basically think it might not be safe. They do not want them to 
go ahead at all.


“I think it’s also in the aftermath of what happened to Jo Cox. I am going to 
take their advice this time, but people can still contact my office by phone 
and email. They are talking to me about future arrangements in terms of 
security.


“It’s with great reluctance that I’m doing this, but the safety of my staff is 
paramount.”


DCI Sarah Kenwright of Merseyside police said: “We have given Ms Eagle advice 
about her surgeries, at her request, but the decision to cancel surgeries is 
not a police matter and would lie entirely with them.”


Eagle’s constituency Labour party has already been suspended amid allegations 
of bullying and abuse. The former shadow business secretary has faced unrest 
among activists in the Wallasey constituencyLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party since she indicated that 
she might challenge Corbyn.


A brick was thrown through a window of the building 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/angela-eagles-constituency-office-vandalised-after-leadership-bid-launch>
 where the party’s office is based last week after she announced that she 
intended to run. She has since dropped out of the race and given her backing to 
Owen Smith.
 