
When Angela Eagle laid out her challenge to Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, her arms raised in a pink 
jacket and flanked by two bright banners with her first name scrawled across 
them, she declared herself a “strong Labour woman”.

After eight tumultuous days filled with allegations of harassment and 
intimidation, including a death threat that resulted in an arrest, and an 
alleged brick thrown through a window of her constituency building, her 
leadership hopes were crushed as she made good on a deal and stepped aside for 
a slightly more popular male colleague.

Today she is sitting on a sofa in the members’ centre in parliament. It’s 
recess, so the space is empty and quiet, apart from the slight buzz of 
researchers having lunch in the grand atrium of Portcullis House next door. 
Eagle twists around and looks at an image on the front of the latest House 
magazine, which is propped up on otherwise bare shelves in the middle of the 
room.

The new prime minister is standing between tall black gates, her hand raised 
into a wave with a slight smile on her lips, under the headline, “Theresa May 
rises to power”, which uses a similar scrawled handwriting style as Eagle’s 
logo.ƒ

Is what happened – putting herself forward as a female candidate, only to be 
asked to step aside forOwen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith> – an example of Labour 
slipping behind the Tories on the representation of women at the highest ranks? 
Eagle breaks into a grin as she turns back around. “Yes, we do have to practise 
what we preach as the party of equality,” she says. There is a pause, a 
momentary roll of the eyes, and then: “One of these days.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bcf2f06fd867ef207af4533a627ca44631b58cb%2F58_98_3970_2383%2F3970.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20no%C2%A0point%20being%C2%A0sore%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20no%C2%A0point%20being%C2%A0sore%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bcf2f06fd867ef207af4533a627ca44631b58cb%2F58_98_3970_2383%2F3970.jpg>
 Angela Eagle launching her Labour leadership bid, which ended eight days 
later. Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA 
It is a rare flicker of regret – bitterness even – from a woman who otherwise 
repeatedly states that she’s positive, optimistic and forward-looking. “There’s 
no point being sore. Those negative emotions don’t get you anywhere.”

Eagle admits she would have liked more time to make her case. But colleagues 
didn’t want that. Then she slips into discussions of policies, many centred on 
rebalancing the economy. She sounds like a woman in line to become shadow 
chancellor if Smith defies the polls and beats Corbyn to the top job. “I have 
no idea,” she says quickly, before delivering the mantra adopted by manyLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs this summer: “I want Owen to 
win.”

Not that she was impressed by his recent slip-up, when his policy-packed 
speech (she approves of an approach that is more than just “tinkering with the 
edges of capitalism”) was overshadowed by a clumsy promise to “smash [the prime 
minister] back on her heels”.

“He should have, and he has, apologised,” says Eagle, adding that as someone 
who has been the butt of cruel words, “I know language matters”. “We’ve all got 
a responsibility to be sensitive with our use of language. Owen has shown a 
capacity to recognise and apologise for insensitivity, and that’s important.”

But Eagle, who can be cutting at times, says she’s having none of what she 
calls an “extraordinarily disingenuous” intervention by a Corbyn spokesman, who 
urged Smith to take a more careful tone “as many members, including many female 
Labour MPs, have said they feel intimidated by aggressive language. Instead, 
she points back to a 2014 controversy when shadow chancellor John McDonnell was 
alleged to have talked about “lynching” a female Tory MP. (A spokesman for 
McDonnell said that he was simply repeating what a constituent of the MP in 
question had shouted during an event.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb812ecae10308a8419e96e2374ba3c2c9ba6ecf4%2F35_322_2894_1736%2F2894.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20no%C2%A0point%20being%C2%A0sore%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20no%C2%A0point%20being%C2%A0sore%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb812ecae10308a8419e96e2374ba3c2c9ba6ecf4%2F35_322_2894_1736%2F2894.jpg>
 Eagle on The Andrew Marr Show with Owen Smith, for whom she stood aside in the 
Labour leadership challenge. Photograph: Handout/Getty Images 
Eagle looks tired and a little drained, but she has a calm, almost phlegmatic 
aura, as if she has been turning to yoga or meditation to relax and stay 
positive after the bruising and somewhat frantic period of her leadership bid. 
“I wish,” she says, snorting out a laugh, sitting on the edge of her 
comfortable chair.

“I did go to the cinema last night, to see Star Trek Beyond. It’s not as good 
as Into Darkness, I think,” she says, breaking out of the politics for a 
moment, before adding: “I watched the original series, but I wouldn’t say I’m a 
Trekkie.” Eagle describes her trip to the movies as the “first day” she’s had 
off for a while, although she then admits spending most of it “working here in 
parliament”.

“OK, an evening off,” she adds. Her smile serves to evaporate a slight 
prickliness that settled at the beginning of our meeting. Now her mood is 
stoic, shot through with moments of sarcasm and dry humour.

She is resigned about failing to attract enough nominations to top Smith, 
saying that her time in politics has taught her that however “intensely 
personal” it feels when you lose, it often isn’t. “I’m inured to it now,” she 
says. “You put yourself forward and people like you or they don’t. I was 
extremely grateful for the stalwart support.

“It is best not to take it personally. Otherwise you become a completely 
screwed-up individual that hates the world, and I don’t think that is the 
definition of me.”

Not that she was totally unaffected by the experience, randomly pausing to 
throw in the phrase, “slings and arrows” at one point while discussing her 
future prospects. “Sorry, I’m quoting Shakespeare,” she adds, in an amused, 
eye-rolling response to the blank look she is getting. “It’s Hamlet ... 
although I’m slightly more optimistic than him,” she adds, her eyes brightening.

Then she’s back into determined positivity. “To be in politics, to be in 
progressive politics, to be in the Labour party,” she says, “you have to be 
optimistic about people.” It might not feel that way to Jeremy Corbyn, who is 
facing a brutal fight from his own MPs – Eagle among them – who seem deeply 
pessimistic about him and his electoral prospects, and are not shy of saying so.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bed620ea07bed3880a1ecbb2f55d3319a648972%2F265_113_4008_2406%2F4008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20no%C2%A0point%20being%C2%A0sore%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20no%C2%A0point%20being%C2%A0sore%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bed620ea07bed3880a1ecbb2f55d3319a648972%2F265_113_4008_2406%2F4008.jpg>
 Eagle with Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, centre, and deputy leader Tom Watson. 
Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
The party’s soul-searching means that as other Westminster politicians slip 
away for post-referendum holidays, Labour politicians are gearing up for what 
appears ready to be a bare-knuckle fight for their futures.

The Wallasey MP has been the focus of a great deal of attention since 
triggering the contest, with claims and counter-claims about threats and abuse 
flying around. “Go on social media and look yourself,” she says, before adding 
that she doesn’t want to “dwell on it” because “if I talk about it too much I 
should get a load more”. In part, that reluctance is because she’s irritated by 
the way people respond differently to male and female MPs. “If men get death 
threats, they stand up and are seen as brave. When women get death threats, 
they are portrayed as if they are victims. I am not a victim,” she says.

What about that smashed window at her constituency workplace? Eagle has faced 
a torrent of abuse about the allegation, with a YouTube video, tagged “citizen 
journalism”, demonstrating that the window was on to a stairwell in a communal 
part of the building, rather than her office. Some sceptics are now asking if 
there ever was a brick.

“I’ve been in that building for a lot of my 24 years as an MP, it was the 
night of my launch, we’d never had a brick through the window before. People 
can draw their own conclusions,” says Eagle, sounding exasperated, arguing that 
it was not her who raised the issue of the window – which was undoubtedly 
broken – in the first place.

Angela Eagle stops walk-in surgeries amid security concerns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/21/angela-eagle-stops-walk-in-surgeries-amid-security-concerns>
“It was reported in my local news, and now if you look at Twitter I’m meant to 
have done it myself, ordered it to be done ... It is a joke. Its post-truth 
politics and its nonsensical. I’m not a liar.”

Eagle says women in particular have been put off the idea of a career in 
politics by “what has been doled out in the last period”.

But she admits tensions predate the Labour contest, arguing that female 
colleagues became very scared following the killing of the MP Jo Cox. Eagle 
agrees that it felt as if there was a collective pause in the immediate 
aftermath of Cox’s death; a moment in which people expressed appreciation for 
MPs instead of anger.

“That lasted about five seconds,” she says sadly. “When I first came into 
parliament, there was far too much deference around politicians, and now it has 
gone too far the other way. Now, it is open contempt,” she says, revealing that 
she has even faced homophobia for the first time.

Eagle became the only “out lesbian” sitting MP in 1997, five years after she 
was first elected, to a very positive response. “The most trouble I’ve had with 
it is in the last month”, she reveals, in relation to something that has been 
reported to the party’s compliance unit.

Part of the problem cited by Eagle is social media, which has “magnified” all 
forms of abuse, alongside more “precarious, difficult, tumultuous political 
times”.

She sums it up thus: “We are in an era where the politics of grievance seems 
to be on the rise, rather than the politics of solidarity.”

So what is Labour’s response? Eagle talks about a “Marshall plan” for some of 
the most disadvantaged communities in Britain. “When I think back to when I was 
young in the 1960s and 70s, there were far more chances for people like me from 
working-class backgrounds,” she says. “But people have found it harder and 
harder ... to live a reasonably happy life with gradually increasing 
prosperity.”

She argues that when people’s wages are being undercut as a result of 
migration, then the issues – such as exploitative employers or “weak” trade 
unions – have to be tackled head-on.

But she also suggests that there is a more “deep-seated” problem; of a society 
in which people’s skills are becoming increasingly redundant in the face of an 
ever-changing world of work.

Labour has to catch up with the challenges of the “age of Uber”. Taking on the 
impact on that industry, she says black-cab drivers are frustrated that 
technology has suddenly made years of “knowledge acquisition less valuable than 
it used to be”.

But “it was the same for my dad in the print trade,” she says. “There is an 
even bigger problem looming up the track – that soon there won’t be any drivers 
of cars, because they will all be driverless, and then what are you going to 
do?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe22e27d35fe692c19797a3c309171aca8428e420%2F289_464_4876_2926%2F4876.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20no%C2%A0point%20being%C2%A0sore%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20no%C2%A0point%20being%C2%A0sore%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fangela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe22e27d35fe692c19797a3c309171aca8428e420%2F289_464_4876_2926%2F4876.jpg>
 Eagle, second from left, helped make the case for Remain on the EU Brexit 
television debate. Photograph: Matt Frost/AFP/Getty Images 
Eagle says the Labour party was created to help ensure fairness in the 
workplace during an industrial revolution, and now has to adapt to a 
technological one. But why can’t Corbyn, with his huge membership mandate, lead 
the revolution?

Eagle argues that the EU referendum threw up “a serious issue with Jeremy 
being able to communicate with the wider Labour electorate”.

She also accuses the leadership team of failing to reach out, saying that as a 
senior woman in a finance role, she scheduled a meeting every week with John 
McDonnell, to discuss economics. “Every single one of them, except one, in nine 
months was cancelled.” McDonnell’s spokesman says that this was just normal 
rescheduling, and claims that her office was unwilling to work constructively.

She denies such claims. “I’ve tried serving,” she says. “I’ve done my 
damnedest, and it was not reciprocated.”

Angela Eagle accuses Jeremy Corbyn of allowing abuse to flourish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/22/angela-eagle-accuses-jeremy-corbyn-allowing-abuse-flourish>
She won’t be drawn further on Corbyn’s character, and refuses to address what 
happens if he wins. But she is happy to elaborate on a Conservative politician: 
Boris Johnson. Eagle’s disdainful reaction to his elevation to foreign 
secretary was captured on camera. What was she thinking? “You can fill in the 
space. I felt had to restrain myself from saying something I might have 
regretted.”

Would she say it now? “Noooo,” she says with a chuckle, before adding 
seriously, “it makes us a laughing stock in the world.”

There is no such reaction to May, who she describes as a “driven and focused” 
politician, whose promotion to No 10 was something Eagle predicted when she 
stood in at PMQs. She is convinced that the new Tory leader is considering an 
early election.

“She’s got a majority of 12 and she’s sacked more people than that in her 
reshuffle,” says Eagle, hitching her thumb at the same picture of the prime 
minister. “I would if I was her.”

What then for Labour? Eagle says she will never predict a defeat for her 
party. But she doesn’t sound optimistic.

Abuse, electoral gloom and ambition thwarted: it doesn’t seem, all in all, to 
be the easiest time to beAngela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>. Still, there are upsides. 
“I have people send me free glasses of wine,” she says, brightly. Excuse me? A 
wry smile takes over her face. “It has happened several times, if I manage to 
be eating somewhere and someone spots me. I’ve been sent flowers, been stopped 
in the street, praised for making a stand.

“It is not news when people are nice to politicians. But there have been 
people being nice to me, I’d like to emphasise that.” At the moment, you could 
hardly blame her for enjoying it.
 