
Angela Eagle, the former Labour leadership challenger, has launched her most 
direct attack onJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> so far, saying his failure 
to deal with bigotry and intimidation has tarnished the party’s reputation.

The former shadow business secretary, who deputised for Corbyn at PMQs until 
her resignation, accused him of indifference to complaints of bullying and of 
having “sat back silently as this has gone on”.

Eagle’s comments relate particularly to the turmoil engulfing her own 
constituency Labour party in Wallasey. The local party has been suspended over 
allegations by 17 members of bullying and homophobic languageat its annual 
general meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/01/angela-eagle-was-target-of-homophobic-abuse-claim-labour-members>
, including a claim that Eagle was in her absence referred to as “Angie the 
dyke” and that another member was threatened with being punched in the head.

Labour leadership: quarter of new supporters could be barred from voting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/02/labour-leadership-jeremy-corbyn-quarter-supporters-barred-voting>
The claims have been denied by Eagle’s critics within the local party, some of 
whom are holding an unofficial meeting ofLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> members, hosted by Wirral TUC, on 
Tuesday night.

In response, Eagle said on Tuesday: “The 17 whistleblowers who wrote to the 
Labour party with eyewitness testimony of homophobic language and actions, 
threats of violence and other behaviour unbecoming of Labour members did so 
because they want the same as we all should– for the Labour party to be a safe 
welcoming campaigning environment, free of bigotry and bullying.

“That is why I am so saddened and disappointed that Labour party constituency 
officers are seeking to challenge in public the private testimony of 
whistleblowers. If this was happening in a workplace, the unions – for which I 
worked for many years – Jeremy, myself, the whole Labour movement would be 
aghast ...

“Jeremy keeps telling us that he is standing for a kinder, gentler politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/29/corbyn-bashes-misogynistic-supporters-and-pledges-kinder-politics>
, but that is rendered meaningless when he fails to protect people who have 
witnessed bigotry and intimidation from having their anonymous testimony 
challenged in public.

“For weeks now, Jeremy has sat back silently as this has gone on. This is 
precisely the kind of behaviour that has led to the Labour party finding itself 
in crisis. It has tarnished both the party’s reputation but most of all his own.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fangela-eagle-jeremy-corbyn-failure-tackle-bigotry-tarnished-labour-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9aa356fdd0d6d762249919944774537fba028b9e%2F0_89_3689_2214%2F3689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Eagle%3A%20Jeremy%20Corbyn's%20failure%20to%20tackle%20bigotry%20has%20tarnished%20Labour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fangela-eagle-jeremy-corbyn-failure-tackle-bigotry-tarnished-labour-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Eagle%3A%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%27s%20failure%20to%20tackle%20bigotry%20has%20tarnished%20Labour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fangela-eagle-jeremy-corbyn-failure-tackle-bigotry-tarnished-labour-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9aa356fdd0d6d762249919944774537fba028b9e%2F0_89_3689_2214%2F3689.jpg>
 A Corbyn aide has rejected Eagle’s comments, saying he will ensure any 
evidence of abuse is investigated. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
“It’s time for him now to rein in those that have gone too far and for him to 
try to become part of the solution to our problems, not a cause. It is not too 
late to save the Labour party, but every day that his indifference continues, 
it makes it harder for us to come together as a strong, united Labour party 
capable of taking on and beating this awful Tory government and healing our 
nation.”

An aide to Corbyn rejected Eagle’s comments, saying: “Jeremy has consistently 
condemned all abuse and called repeatedly for a kinder, gentler politics. He 
recently launched ‘respect and unity’, a code of conduct calling on all Labour 
members and supporters to conduct themselves with a high standard of behaviour.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fjeremy-corbyn-addresses-thousands-of-supporters-at-liverpool-rally-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20addresses%20thousands%20of%20supporters%20at%20Liverpool%20rally%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fjeremy-corbyn-addresses-thousands-of-supporters-at-liverpool-rally-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20addresses%20thousands%20of%20supporters%20at%20Liverpool%20rally%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fjeremy-corbyn-addresses-thousands-of-supporters-at-liverpool-rally-video&media=>
Jeremy Corbyn addresses thousands of supporters at Liverpool rally – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/aug/02/jeremy-corbyn-addresses-thousands-of-supporters-at-liverpool-rally-video>
“This has made clear that demonstrations outside MPs’ offices or surgeries are 
not acceptable, nor is abuse of any kind. Anyone with evidence of abuse or 
threats should inform both the police and Jeremy, and he will personally ensure 
that it is properly investigated by the party.”

There has also been a complaint that Labour members in Wallasey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/jul/20/labour-liverpool-clp-constituency>
 have been invited to the unofficial meeting in breach of data protection laws. 
This is also disputed by Paul Davies, organiser of the meeting, who said he has 
leafleted many streets in the hope of reaching Labour members rather than 
targeting them directly.

On Monday in a letter to Tribune magazine, Davies, a vice-chairman of the 
suspended Wallasey party, said the allegation that Eagle was called a 
homophobic slur was a local “folk myth”.

Davies told the Guardian there would have been uproar if such comments were 
made. “There were 44 people in a room not much bigger than my front room,” he 
said. “It was cheek to jowl, no one could do much without someone else knowing. 
Nobody heard a comment of homophobia or any intimidation in that meeting.

“Nobody mentioned it despite the fact there was maybe four or five 
councillors, several full-time officials, there were a number of gay people. It 
is not as if it was full of timid people.”
 