
Anglo American <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-american> bosses 
are poised for a showdown with angry investors as the group becomes the latest 
FTSE 100 company to incite shareholder wrath over executive pay.

The mining giant is a braced for a rebellion at its annual meeting on Thursday 
afternoon, with shareholders expected to oppose the £3.4m pay package for the 
chief executive, Mark Cutifani.

The shareholder group ShareSoc has urged investors to vote against Cutifani’s 
pay for 2015, a year in which Anglo suspended dividend payments and was the 
worst FTSE 100 performer. Its shares plunged 72% to 328p from 1,152p.

Anglo American <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-american> said 
Cutifani’s bonus had been reduced by 40% and his salary had been frozen, but 
ShareSoc said he could earn £6.3m for achieving targets and £8.8m if he exceeds 
them.

It follows last week’s BP meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
, when almost 60% of the group’s shareholders voted against the £14m pay 
package handed to the chief executive, Bob Dudley.

Executives may rue the day BP ignored investors over Dudley pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/apr/19/bp-investors-dudley-pay-cable-shareholder-revolt>
Investors overwhelmingly rejected Dudley’s huge pay deal, awarded despite 
record losses, thousands of jobs cuts and a pay freeze for employees.

In echoes of the “shareholder spring” of 2012, when several major companies 
faced rebellions over pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/may/17/shareholder-spring-investor-revolt-pay>
, Smith & Nephew investors also rebelled over pay, with more than 50% voting 
against pay deals at the medical equipment group. Investors were angered by a 
decision to allow a long-term incentive plan to pay out £2.1m to 60 senior 
executives even though the performance criteria had not been reached.

The vote on Anglo’s pay report will be non-binding, just as it was at BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp>.

Anglo has been badly hit by a slump in commodities. In December it announced 
plans to cut 85,000 jobs and dispose of more than half its mines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/08/anglo-american-slashes-assets-as-metals-slump>
 in response to the plunging price of iron ore and other metals.
 