
Mining company Anglo American 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-american> reiterated it was 
“mindful” of shareholder concerns over executive pay, and pledged to consult 
them on a revised remuneration policy to ensure it was “both appropriate and 
motivational”.

Anglo became the latest FTSE 100 firm to face a protest over boardroom excess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/21/anglo-american-chief-executive-pay-mining>
 at its annual meeting, where41.6% of investors voted against its remuneration 
report 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/anglo-american-plc--aal-/rns/result-of-agm/201604220930010427W/>
, including the £3.4m pay package of its chief executive, Mark Cutifani. .

Releasing the vote result, the company said: “Anglo American is mindful of the 
concerns expressed by a large number of shareholders in relation to executive 
remuneration in 2015, which have led to the remuneration report not receiving 
the same high level of support compared to previous years.”

Anglo said the dialogue it had with many major shareholders leading up to the 
AGM had helped clarify the issues, and it would continue to sound out 
shareholders in the next six months ahead of the 2017 meeting, when a revised 
remuneration policy will be put to the vote.

“Setting executive remuneration in a volatile industry such as mining can be 
challenging and the remuneration committee intends to again engage with 
shareholders in order to refine the policy to ensure that it is both 
appropriate and motivational,” it said.


Sir Philip Hampton, who chairs Anglo’s remuneration committee, will lead the 
group’s efforts to get feedback from institutional shareholders.

At the AGM in London, the Anglo chairman, John Parker, blamed a “very 
frenzied” wage debate going on in society at large, but said the group was 
listening to shareholders.

Last week, there were even bigger protest votes at oil giant BP and medical 
equipment group Smith & Nephew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
. Almost 60% of BP investors rejected a £14m pay package for its chief 
executive, Bob Dudley, in a year of record losses and thousands of job cuts. A 
few hours later, more than 50% of shareholders voted against pay deals at Smith 
& Nephew, which makes artificial hips and knees.

Anglo shares fell nearly 4% to 718.5p on Friday.
 