
 The author:  Rudyard Kipling (1865-1936), the son of an arts and crafts 
teacher, lived in India until age six. After spells at school in England, he 
returned to the subcontinent to work as a journalist in Lahore and Allahabad, 
where he began writing stories. Collections such as Plain Tales From the Hills 
(1888), which contained "The Man Who Would Be King", became successful back in 
Britain (where he returned in 1889). A stream of poetry, stories and novels 
followed - including Barrack-Room Ballads (1892), containing "Gunga Din",The 
Jungle Book <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-jungle-book> (1894) and its 
sequel, The Second Jungle Book (1895). Kipling rapidly entered the literary 
establishment, becoming identified with the humane voice of colonialism (The 
White Man's Burden (1899) was written after the US annexed the Philippines), 
and winning the Nobel prize for literature in 1907. Thereafter his output 
started to decline, even more so after his son died in the first world war.

 The story:  Kipling's book comprises seven short stories, prefaced with an 
"editorial" thanking various animals - such as "baggage elephant 174", who 
supplied him with the tales. His principal purpose is to describe allegorical 
social microcosms - whether ones that extol the virtues of colonial servitude, 
as in "Rikki-Tikki-Tavi" and "Her Majesty's Servants", or that admire a 
mystical communion with the natural environment, as in "Toomai of the 
Elephants" and "The White Seal". But the three stories that deal with the 
Mowgli character remain the best known: Mowgli's adoption by the wolf pack 
("Mowgli's Brothers"); his kidnap by monkeys ("Kaa's Hunting"); and the killing 
of Shere Khan ("Tiger, Tiger").

 The film-maker:  The son of a carpenter, Walt Disney (1901-1966) broke into 
animation in the 1920s, but he lost the rights to his first successful 
character, Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, after a contract row with distributors. 
After developing a new one, Mickey Mouse, he never looked back, especially 
after the third Mickey film, Steamboat Willie (1928), which featured a 
synchronised soundtrack. He moved into feature-length cartoons with Snow White 
and the Seven Dwarfs (1937), and thereafter produced a string of iconic 
animations over four decades, including Bambi (1942) and Lady and the Tramp 
(1955). Arguably his biggest success was, however, a live action film, Mary 
Poppins (1964). Disney died during the making of The Jungle Book, from lung 
cancer after a lifetime of smoking.

 How book and film compare:  Where Kipling's original ranges over a 
considerable period of Mowgli's life - the death of Shere Khan, for example, 
takes place after Mowgli returns to his village - Disney compresses the story 
into a single journey as Mowgli returns to the human world after being driven 
out of the jungle. Given Disney's tried and tested storytelling style, it's no 
surprise that the film inserts characters, songs and dialogue at will, even 
including a quartet of vultures modelled on the Beatles. Disney also fillets 
every trace of savagery, demonstrating conclusively the difference in what was 
considered acceptable in children's entertainment between fin-de-si√®cle 
imperial Britain and postwar America.

 Inspirations and influences: The Jungle Book was the last cartoon that Disney 
himself worked on, and it remains a watershed. The studio subsequently went 
into artistic and financial decline - a decline only arrested by a new 
generation of executives and animators with The Little Mermaid (1989) and 
Beauty and the Beast (1991).
 