
This book is set in a future when animals are much cleverer than now. And 
because of their cleverness, the pigs started a revolution against the humans. 
Pigs could speak fluently in English unlike the other animals, and that gave 
them the power to be leaders. But, the story that follows only happened a few 
years after that...

Their first leader, Old Major, was kind and fair who knew animals should be 
equal. But when Napoleon became the leader it was very unpleasant. He made a 
rule that allowed the pigs to have better food and that forced all of the other 
animals to work crazily hard every day and night. That wasn’t enough, Napoleon 
wanted more power.

He decided to kill his brother, Snowball, so that he would be the only leader. 
Snowball was admired because he came up with a clever idea to build windmill. 
Snowball was also popular because of his role in the revolution. He and Boxer 
(a hardworking horse) were the bravest. So this selfish pig, Napoleon, 
destroyed what the animals built (the windmill) and blamed Snowball who escaped 
the farm. Then Napoleon made the animals work harder and harder, making the 
animals very weak and even die. If any of the animals were clever like 
Napoleon, he would just order an execution to get rid of them.

My favourite character is Boxer the horse, who would work the hardest of the 
animals but never give up no matter how much it hurt, or how old he gets. He 
never complained to Napoleon, instead saying, “Napoleon is always right”. This 
book made me think of another newer book, Mockingjay (Part Two of The Hunger 
Games films) because President Snow is like the humans and President Alma Coin 
is like Napoleon. President Alma Coin defeats President Snow, but then becomes 
corrupt and maybe worse.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/animal-farm.html>  