
Animal Collective's newest batch of songs won't be released on CD or vinyl 
record, because they're an accessory to a pair of shoes. The band will follow 
up their psychedelic album, Merriweather Post Pavilion, andpsychedelic film, 
ODDSAC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/may/10/animal-collective-oddsac>
, with a series of psychedelic trainers, each accompanied by a new cassette.

This week, Keep shoes revealed the first of the Collective-designed shoes. The 
Tobin <http://www.keepcompany.com/detail.aspx?id=153> is illustrated by the 
band's own Avey Tare (Dave Portner) with colourful melting ghost squiggles. The 
otherwise plain canvas shoe costs $75 (Â£47) and won't be shipped until March 
2011. All profits from the shoe will go tothe Socorro Island Conservation Fund 
<http://socorroislandconservation.org/socorro/>, dedicated to a small island 
600km west of the Mexican coast.

According to Keep, all advanced sales of the shoe come with a cassette tape 
featuring previously unreleased music. These songs will presumably complement 
Tare's "spectral slip-on" and consist of tunes for lopin', strollin' and, 
perhaps, beachin'. Each of the other members ofAnimal Collective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/animalcollective> will also release shoes, 
to be unveiled soon, hoping the Revillagigedo archipelago, of which Socorro 
forms a part, will benefit from their donations.

"[Band member Deakin] and I have been scuba diving together for a number of 
years, and the Revillagigedos was one of the most amazing places I have ever 
seen," Brian Weitz, aka Geologist, said in a statement.

"Whereas I once saw sharks as potentially frightening creatures and little 
else, I have come to understand that they are a crucial part of a highly 
stressed and collapsing ecosystem," explained Deakin, real name Josh Dibb. 
Perhaps the band's next album will be attached to Animal Collective-branded 
flippers.
 