
Anime <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anime> fans are in mourning at the 
news that Japanese hit-factory Studio Ghibli may have made its final film.

Toshio Suzuki, the general manager of the Tokyo-based animation studio behind 
My Neighbour Totoro, Howl’s Moving Castle and the Oscar-winning filmSpirited 
Away <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spirited-away>, announced the halt in 
production live on Japanese television on Sunday.

Studio Ghibli will cease film-making after 29 years of production, Suzuki told 
the show Jounetsu Tairiku, downsizing its staff to manage trademarks and 
copyrights on its existing portfolio of 20 feature films.

Suzuki took over day-to-day running of the studio when its co-founder Hayao 
Miyazaki retired in 2013. “Obviously, Miyazaki’s retiring was quite 
significant,” Suzuki said on air. “What should Ghibli do? ... Right about now, 
we will take a breather and think about what’s next.”

Rumours of Ghibli’s imminent demise had been circulating in recent weeks. A 
Ghibli insiderforecast its closure 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/film-news/11001081/Studio-Ghibli-may-stop-making-films.html>
 on the Japanese website News Cafe, blaming the high production costs and poor 
profits of its recent releases. “There’s no choice but to dissolve the studio, 
because it’s unable to cross the high hurdle of announcing a new film on an 
annual basis,” the staffer said.


Established in 1985 after the success of the 1984 film Nausicaä of the Valley 
of the Wind, Ghibli built its reputation on its morally complex yet 
family-friendly films, popularising the animé form worldwide and winning the 
Academy award for best animated feature in 2003 for Spirited Away.

Gaming website Kotaku has questioned whether Suzuki’s comments signal a 
definitive end for Studio Ghibli,or merely a pause 
<http://www.kotaku.com.au/2014/08/studio-ghibli-is-not-dead-yet/>. The studio’s 
latest film, When Marnie Was There, was released on 19 July in Japan but no 
international release date has yet been confirmed.

• This article was amended on 4 August 2014. Toshio Suzuki said that Studio 
Ghibli would be pausing production – he did not confirm its closure.
 