
I was surprised to read that Ginni Thomas – the "nonpolitical" wife of 
"Silent" Clarence Thomas, the supreme court justice who, in 19 years, has still
asked very few questions 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/10/06/sotomayor-asks-more-quest_n_310988.html>
 from the high bench – made her bizarre phone call to Anita Hill at 7:30 last 
Saturday morning.

That's usually the sort of call one makes after knocking back a few drinks. 
Thomas may be a teetotaller for all I know. Or she may have been a nursing a 
hangover. Yes – she's clearly been nursing one for 19 years, ever since (by her 
interpretation) her husband was the "victim" of a"high-tech lynching" 
<http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/judicial/2010-10-21-thomas21_ST_N.htm?csp=34news>
 at the senate judiciary committee.

The facts, for that dwindling number who care about them, continue to suggest 
otherwise. True, there is no proof that Thomas lied on the stand about his 
reported penchant for pornography or his alleged sexual harassment of Hill and 
other women in his employ at the time. But in their bookStrange Justice 
<http://www.nytimes.com/keyword/strange-justice>, Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson, 
then with the Wall Street Journal, found, let us say, lots of spent ammunition 
lying on the floor. They concluded that the "preponderance" of evidence 
suggested that Hill was telling the truth.

Many people forget now that the Democrats had a second woman ready to testify, 
but who did not end up appearing before the committee. She was ready to go but 
was not called. Angela Wright, who also worked for Thomas,told NPR in 2007 
<http://www.npr.org/about/press/2007/100907.wright.html> that Thomas had 
"perjured his way onto the court" and, by the bye, had this to say:

I always knew him to be a mean-spirited, nasty, fairly unstable person. It was 
enlightening to read his account of his childhood, because that did put it in 
perspective. Actually, my heart went out to the young child Clarence once I 
understood he was a child whose father was absent, whose mother sent them away, 
who was raised by an unemotional grandfather. I finally understood where all 
his anger and mean-spiritedness came from. I knew it was there. And also, his 
self-loathing and his hatred for anything black or civil rights-oriented or 
affirmative action.

Wright also said Thomas had made offensive sexual comments in her presence and 
pressured her to date him.

Yet, 19 years later, here comes Ginni Thomas to stand by her man.

UPDATE: This post is incomplete. I have this whole ending section about the 
Thomases' apparent conflicts of interest that really is the meat of the thing. 
I started reading the comments, with some of you saying, why is this news, a 
stupid phone call? And I was thinking, well, yeah, I agree, but I just used the 
phone call as the starting point of a broader denunciation. Unfortunately, it's 
on my home computer and I'm in the office now. When I get back home I'll attach 
it, but apologies for those of you wondering what on earth the point of this 
was.
 