 Dame Anita Roddick, the founder of the Body Shop, revealed yesterday that she 
is carrying hepatitis C and has cirrhosis of the liver, one of the condition's 
long-term effects. The 64-year-old entrepreneur said she had contracted 
hepatitis C through a blood transfusion while giving birth to her youngest 
daughter, Sam, in 1971.
"I have hepatitis C. It's a bit of a bummer but you groan and move on," she 
said yesterday. "I had no idea that I had this virus. I was having routine 
blood tests when it showed up."

Hepatitis C <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hepatitis-c> causes 
inflammation of the liver, and can eventually lead to cirrhosis and liver 
cancer. But in a posting on her website yesterday, Dame Anita said she remained 
phlegmatic about the future.

"I do have cirrhosis. I could still have a good few years - maybe even decades 
- of life left but it's hard to say. I could be facing liver cancer tomorrow."

She also announced that she had become a patron of the Hepatitis C Trust, a UK 
charity she discovered to two years ago when she first found out she had the 
virus. She called for hepatitis C to be taken more seriously as a "public 
health challenge" and questioned the success of a government awareness campaign.

"Having hep C means that I live with a sharp sense of my own mortality, which 
in many ways makes life more vivid and immediate," she said.

"It makes me even more determined to just get on with things."

Dame Anita said that more public money needed to be spent on raising awareness 
of the disease, which is thought to affect more than 230,000 adults in England 
alone. "I've always been a bit of a 'whistleblower' and I'm not going to stop 
now," she said.

"I want to blow the whistle on the fact that hep C must be taken seriously as 
a public health challenge and must get the attention and resources that it 
needs."

A Department of Health spokesman said the government recognised the virus as 
"an important public health issue", and was spending Â£4m on campaigns to raise 
awareness of the threat posed by hepatitis C. "It is encouraging that these 
campaigns appear to be leading to increased diagnosis of hepatitis C," she said.

"The Health Protection Agency in England has recorded a rise of around 5,600 
[cases] in 2002 to around 7,600 in 2005."

Charles Gore, the chief executive of the Hepatitis C Trust, said: "We are 
absolutely delighted that someone so dynamic and with such a history of 
fighting passionately for important causes has agreed to support us."

Hepatitis C:

The hepatitis C virus is transmitted through blood-to-blood contact, and more 
than 90% of cases arise in injecting drug users. It can also be passed through 
transfusions and from mother to baby, before or during birth. Unprotected sex 
carries a small risk and sharing razors or toothbrushes can also be risky. The 
virus is not transmitted through normal social contact such as touching, 
hugging or kissing.
 