
Novelist Ann Patchett <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ann-patchett> has 
described how she struck a blow on behalf of independent bookshops everywhere, 
after setting up her own "surprisingly successful" store in Nashville, 
Tennessee in November 2011.

Patchett set up Parnassus Books <http://www.parnassusbooks.net/> as a 
charitable gift to her hometown, after two existing local stores including a 
huge Borders outlet closed down. Against the odds, the indie bookshop became a 
hit, even drawing queues outside the door before it opens in the morning.

In her essay The Bookshop Strikes Back 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/12/the-bookstore-strikes-back/309164/>
, published as a one-off hardcopy edition in the UK to inspire booksellers and 
readers as part ofIndependent Booksellers Week 
<http://independentbooksellersweek.org.uk/>, the Orange Prize and PEN/Faulkner 
award-winning novelist chronicles the shop's beginning. "When I look back on 
all this now I'm dizzied by the blitheness that stood in place of any sort of 
business sense, the grand gesture of walking over to the roulette table and 
betting it all on a single number," Patchett admits.

She puts Parnassus's success down to having a brilliant business partner, 
demand from local book buyers, and media interest from Germany to India to 
Korea.

"Just because some people like to use an e-reader doesn't mean there's no 
market for physical books. Ebooks are still less than half of book sales in the 
US. If you want the new James Patterson you might buy it for an e-reader, but 
you're less likely to buy Dickens on your Kindle. For children's books, 
e-readers are used even less. Everybody is tired of hearing about the death of 
bookshops and of books."

Patchett's media profile helped, underlining the potential power that big-name 
authors have to level the playing field for independent bookshops. In the UK, 
booksellers have urged authors to be more proactive in promoting the sector, 
including adding links to independent bookshops from authors' and publishers' 
websites.

Parnassus was inundated with orders for Patchett's latest novel, State of 
Wonder, after she mentioned the store on US chat show The Colbert Report.

In a comment reminiscent of Waterstones' glory days, Patchett adds: "I can't 
believe that such smart, interesting, friendly people are working in my little 
bookshop for little bookshop wages." The UK chain's success was attributed 
partly to its strategy in the early days of employing arts graduates who love 
books.

The Bookshop Strikes Back is taken from a new collection of essays, This is 
the Story of a Happy Marriage, covering Patchett's marriage, bookselling, 
writing, family and her dog.
 