
Literary novelist Ann Patchett's fight to save independent bookshops, which 
has seen her open her own shop inTennessee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tennessee> and champion the importance of 
bookselling on American television, has led to her nomination as one of Time 
magazine's most influential people in the world.

Patchett, whose 2001 novel Bel Canto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781841155838/bel-canto> 
won her the Pen/Faulkner prize and whose latest book,State of Wonder,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781408818596/state-of-wonder>
was showered with praise by critics, is on a list of 200 names of the world's 
"most influential" selected by Time magazine. The list also includes Barack 
Obama, Oprah Winfrey, the Queen andAung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi>. Readers are currently 
voting for their choices among the 200, with a final list of 100 to be selected 
by the magazine's editors and revealed on 17 April.

Patchett, said Time, "has demonstrated a singular ability to write smart 
literary novels that are also big bestsellers". Opening Parnassus Books, an 
independent bookshop in her hometown of Nashville last year, shows the author 
has "put her money where her mouth is [when] it comes to literature and books 
in general", said the magazine, "placing herself on the front lines of several 
ongoing battles for the fate of the printed word". Patchett recentlyappeared on 
The Colbert Report 
<http://www.colbertnation.com/the-colbert-report-videos/408775/february-20-2012/ann-patchett>
, where she spoke out for the importance of independent booksellers.

As well as names including Ashton Kutcher and Kate Middleton, Patchett is also 
competing on the Time list with her fellow writersGeorge RR Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/george-rr-martin>, author of the 
bestselling fantasy series A Song of Ice and Fire, and The Hunger Games' 
creator,Suzanne Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/suzanne-collins>. Martin, said 
Time, is "radically refashioning fantasy for our complex and jaded era, and the 
results are magnificent", while "as if selling more than 23m copies of her 
dystopian Hunger Games series weren't enough, now Collins is a movie mogul".

To see herself sitting alongside politicians such as Obama and Angela Merkel 
made Patchett laugh,the author told her local paper, the Tennessean 
<http://www.tennessean.com/article/20120331/LIFE01/303310039/Patchett-nominee-Time-magazine-s-most-influential-list>
. "The humour of it is not lost on me," she said. "If Beyoncé can get 30,000 
votes, I'd like to have 30. I would like fellow Tennesseans to vote for me just 
so I'm not an embarrassment to the state. [But] I don't think I am going to 
take Rihanna down on this one."

Her nomination, though, shows "that people are taking independent bookstores 
seriously, and I have come to stand for something," she said – namely, that 
community is important, and so is "feeling like we are not all being eaten 
alive by a giant corporation".

"It means people are ready for this change," she says. "And that's beautiful."

So far, however, the public's votes are not treating the literary novelist 
kindly. Patchett is languishing in 178th place in the poll, while Martin sits 
at 16th, apparently more influential than Obama. Collins is in 38th spot, just 
behind Amazon's boss, Jeff Bezos.
 