
Anna Calvi <https://www.theguardian.com/music/anna-calvi> doesn't like the 
flute. Given that she's a multi-instrumentalist and singer songwriter, Guardian 
Australia thought it would be interesting to know which instrument Calvi is 
least enamoured with, and the poor old flute is dubbed “not very cool".

It’s the worst thing Calvi has to say about anything, even though she is woken 
up early in London for a phone interview on the other side of the world.

Calvi heads to Australian shores this week to tour her second album, One Breath
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/26/anna-calvi-one-breath-review>, 
the follow-up to her critically lauded 2011 self-titled debut.

The quietly spoken and painfully shy Calvi whispering over the phone is at 
odds with the powerful and confident frontwoman seen on stage, alternately 
caressing and tearing at her guitar, her deep, rich singing voice reverberating 
across a room.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fanna-calvi-live-session-blackout&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anna%20Calvi%20live%20session%3A%20How%20I%20wrote%20...%20Blackout&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fanna-calvi-live-session-blackout>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anna%20Calvi%20live%20session%3A%20How%20I%20wrote%20...%20Blackout&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fanna-calvi-live-session-blackout&media=>
Does she feel like a different person on stage, given how much of a contrast 
the performer is to her everyday persona?

“It’s a different part of me but it feels very much a part of who I am,” she 
says. “I don’t feel like I’m putting on an act or anything like that. It needs 
to feel kind of honest somehow."

Calvi has spoken of her shyness before. She didn’t start singing until her 
mid-20s, despite playing the violin and guitar since she was a small child. "I 
started singing really late, but I guess I just have a strong sense of what I 
wanted to perform my own song and express myself through music. It felt very 
natural despite my shyness. It was a kind of need to make music which enable me 
to overcome shyness and get on stage.”

Once on stage, Calvi quickly caught the attention of the music industry. In 
recent years she hasworked with David Byrne <http://www.nme.com/news/nme/77347> 
andMarianne Faithfull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/23/marianne-faithfull-nick-cave-roger-waters-give-my-love-to-london>
, both collaborations she describes as career highlights.

She has also toured with Interpol, Arctic Monkeys and Nick Cave on his 
Grinderman tour. “It was really amazing,” she says. “I found him really 
charming. Getting to watch him play every night was just a real education in 
performance and being in a band.”

On Cave personally, Calvi says the dark and mysterious Australian artist is 
“really funny. The band is kind of like a gang that are just too cool and you 
know you’re never going to be cool enough.”

Calvi’s career and music is littered with legendary names, a nod to her 
eclectic childhood musical influences. “I learnt a lot from listening to Edith 
Piaf, Elvis, Nina Simone, I guess just the classics. InstrumentallyScott Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/mar/05/10-of-the-best-scott-walker>
 is a big influence. Then pop music likeEnnio Morricone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/feb/23/culture.features1> … lots of soul 
music. When I was a kid we listened to Jimi Hendrix a lot.”

For her own songs, Calvi draws inspiration from people she meets. “I guess I’m 
always thinking about and always writing down ideas and when I have some time I 
sit with a guitar and try and work them out. I don’t always come up with good 
stuff but I try and keep going and do a bit of writing as much as I can.”

Her often androgynous appearance on stage hints at Bowie, not least when she’s 
covering his dramatic 1973 balladLady Grinning Soul 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gl-lbhMrGds>. “It is one of my favourite 
songs,” she says. “It’s a great song to sing. It’s very kind of emotive. It’s 
quite difficult to sing, but in a rewarding way.”

Lady Grinning Soul is believed to be about Claudia Lennear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/06/david-bowie-20-feet-from-stardom-claudia-lennear>
, the soul singer who is also cited as the inspiration for the Rolling Stones’ 
Brown Sugar. Has Calvi ever had a song written about her?

“Not that I know of but I would be very flattered if there was,” she says. “If 
it was really insulting I guess I wouldn't like it. But there’s something very 
special about being written about.”

• Anna Calvi plays Vivid Live at Sydney Opera House on 28 May 
<http://vividlive.sydneyoperahouse.com/line-up/anna-calvi>

 