
Anna Calvi <https://www.theguardian.com/music/anna-calvi> never expected her 
music to be popular. In fact, she wasn't even sure that her first album, 
released in 2011, was going to do particularly well.

"My ambition was to sell 5,000 records," she says. "I thought, if I do that, 
I'll be OK." She pauses and a smile creeps across her face. "Obviously, it sold 
quite a lot more than  that."

In fact, Anna Calvi's eponymous debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jan/16/anna-calvi-debut-album-review> 
shifted more than 170,000 copies worldwide and was shortlisted for the Mercury 
prize. It marked the arrival of an extraordinary and uncompromising talent: 
with her swelling guitar chords, passionate lyrics and a voice that sounds like 
it comes from within an echoing cave of emotion, Calvi garnered rave reviews 
and was compared to Patti Smith by none other than Brian Eno (who is such an 
admirer that he sang backing vocals on two of the tracks).

At the age of 33, Calvi is about to release her second album, One Breath. Her 
signature sound is still there but there is, this time round, more light and 
shade at play in her songs. "What she has more of now is subtlety," wrote one 
critic after a recent live gig. Calvi tries not to dwell too much on what other 
people might think of her.

"The idea of trying to please people is dangerous because you're constantly 
trying to chase something that's elusive, that you'll never find," she says. "I 
think the danger is if you put something out and you don't really like it 
yourself, then you're completely fucked really."

She is sitting on a low sofa in the offices of her record label, her small 
hands wrapped around a mug of tea that seems too big for her. We are meeting 
here because she is in the midst of signing 800 copies of her new CD. How many 
has she done so far?

"Ten." She chews her lip guiltily. Does she feel famous enough to have 
developed an autograph yet?

She grins. "I guess I realised that since it's my name, I should change it 
from my general signature I used for other things like credit cards."

We are speaking in a glass-partitioned box dotted with corporate furniture. 
The only other chairs in the room are positioned at a higher level than the 
sofa and perhaps it's this that makes Calvi seem so tiny: a hunched little 
figure with a shock of curly hair in black cropped trousers and a cobalt blue 
shirt who looks like she might always be a bit too cold. She speaks as though 
constantly on the verge of a quiet giggle.

But her slightness is even more striking because of her strong, physical 
presence on stage. The power of Calvi's live performances, often delivered in 
the guise of a male flamenco dancer with slicked-back hair and androgynous 
tailored shirts, has been much commented upon. Her mastery of the guitar (an 
instrument she studied alongside the violin as part of a music degree at 
Southampton University) has led to mild astonishment among male music 
journalists that she can actually play so well.

Calvi rolls her eyes. "Sometimes interviewers ask, 'What's it like being a 
woman playing guitar?' I get asked that sooo much," she says. "And, 'What's it 
like playing such a phallic instrument?'"

I'd never thought of the guitar as particularly phallic, I say.

"Neither have I!" she squeals. "I was saying, 'If anything, the shape of a 
guitar is more like a woman' and then the guy was like, 'Yeah, but the neck, 
the neck.' And I said,'Well, I guess the flute is a phallic instrument; you 
should ask all the flautists what it's like.'"

Such experiences have crystallised Calvi's own feminism. At the beginning, 
when people used to ask her whether she was a feminist, "I felt insulted... I 
was, like, 'Why are they saying that to me? Just because I'm strong on 
stage...'"

But now, having worked for a few years in what she concedes is "a 
male-dominated environment", Calvi has become less apologetic.

"Yeah, now I would say that I am a feminist," she says. "My belief is that men 
and women need to reclaim the word 'feminism'. It doesn't need to have any 
negative connotations. It's about a cultural evolution that everyone should be 
equal."

She has grown, then, both as an artist and as a woman and One Breath is the 
product of what Calvi describes as "a feeling of transition". Over the year 
that she was writing it, a beloved family member died (she does not want to 
tell me who, only that it was an older relative). That got her thinking about 
the fragility of memory and the permanence of loss.

"I suppose the year that I wrote [the album] was quite turbulent on a personal 
level," Calvi says. "It's... kind of... very thrilling to feel you're out of 
control and don't know what's going to happen but it's also scary... I think 
that becomes very apparent when someone passes away because, suddenly, 
everything you thought was your reality changes.

"Ultimately, what I imagine is the scariest thing about dying is not having 
control of your body any more. So that's a theme. I think about it a lot in my 
life and it comes out in my music and I think this record is about addressing 
that in various ways."

Is she scared of dying?

"Yeah. I'm not scared about being dead – I don't care about not existing – but 
the process of dying scares me."

It's interesting, this obsession with control, because both Calvi's parents, 
Claudio and Veronica, are psychotherapists and, as a child, Calvi got quite 
used to being hypnotised as a way of dealing with various aspects of her life. 
If she had a bad day at school, for instance, her father would get her to lie 
back on the sofa and tell her to start imagining a train journey. I say that I 
have always been scared of hypnotherapy for precisely the same reason Calvi 
says she doesn't take drugs: a fear of losing control.

"Hypnosis definitely doesn't feel like being on drugs – it's really peaceful. 
It's a bit like… you know that moment when you're just falling asleep and you 
kind of know that you are and you can explore your dreamworld?" I nod. "That's 
what it's like."

More recently, she had hypnosis for an arm injury and also for a bout of 
tinnitus. The process did not leave her cured, but "it's amazing what your 
brain can do. If you don't focus on something it will just disappear. It's 
really bizarre".

Claudio and Veronica had a lasting influence on the formation of Calvi's 
artistic temperament. It wasn't just the hypnotherapy. Claudio, Italian by 
birth, had come over to England at 18 and met his future wife shortly 
afterwards while asking her directions to the nearest Wendy's. Her Italian 
family, Calvi says, "are all very dramatic and slightly hysterical" while the 
English half is "quite reserved". She can see the two sides at work within 
herself. In person, she is quiet, shy and precise in the way that she expresses 
herself. In her music, by contrast, she is "very emotional and dramatic and 
passionate".

What's she like in an argument?

"I get really angry. Yeah, I shout. I'm kind of like a sleeping lion – it 
takes a lot to make me go but when I do, I get angry."

She grew up in Mortlake, south-west London, where, with her older sister, 
Nuala (now an author), she was introduced by Claudio to a range of artists – 
from Rossini andMaria Callas  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2007/sep/14/mariacallasthegreatest>
toCaptain Beefheart  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/captain-beefheart>and 
theRolling Stones <https://www.theguardian.com/music/therollingstones>. Summer 
holidays were spent in Rome, where Calvi used to listen to her grandfather 
playing the piano. At the age of five, she was "begging" her parents to get her 
a violin after seeing one at a friend's house.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FR5QXoKdF3bc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FR5QXoKdF3bc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FR5QXoKdF3bc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R5QXoKdF3bc>

"I remember feeling really drawn to it. I really wanted to touch it and make 
noise on it. So when I was six, they got me a violin. And I was a tiny 
six-year-old so it was, like, an eighth [size] violin." She smiles. "It must 
have looked really cute."

She loved painting and drawing, too, and often sees music visually, or 
instruments as colours, slashed across a canvas. At one point, Calvi confesses 
that, occasionally, when she looks at a painting, she hears music coming out of 
it. This either means she has a form of synaesthesia (the fusion of two or more 
senses that are normally experienced separately) or that she has encountered 
more than her fair share of faulty music systems.

"When I'm writing, I definitely imagine the song as a kind of mini-film," she 
explains. "Sometimes, I sketch out the story of the song; I draw it or I paint 
it as a way of helping me see where it wants to go."

At university, she learned to score and arrange and, after graduating, earned 
money by giving guitar lessons. The work she has put into mastering her craft 
has left her with minimal tolerance for the kind of manufactured pop currently 
dominating the charts.

"I'm not interested in listening to music just because it's cool or 
fashionable or part of a trend. I mean, I definitely feel like the wholeX Factor
 thing… I wouldn't even describe it as music. It's so far away from anything I 
would feel any connection to and I think it's really sad it exists, actually, 
really depressing."

What was the last piece of music that made her cry?

She thinks for a long time. "I listened to some choral music by Rossini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/feb/29/gioachino-rossini-google-doodle>
 and I felt very moved by that. I really love choral music – there's something 
about it that just gets me."

But it wasn't until 2006, by which time she was in her mid-20s, that Calvi 
started to sing herself. She had been writing songs since the age of 10 but, 
for unexplained reasons, had always been "really phobic" of singing them 
herself.

"I really wanted to see if I could overcome my fear of it. So I just practised 
for hours and hours every day, listening to singers I loved like Elvis, Edith 
Piaf, Nina Simone and Maria Callas and it was like chipping away: eventually, I 
found this strong voice underneath. Because I have a really quiet speaking 
voice, I assumed I wouldn't be able to sing really loud, but I like the fact 
that there's that difference – that I can exist in that quiet way and then be 
really forceful and strong when I'm making music."

The success of her first album catapulted her into the limelight in 
unanticipated ways. She was courted by fashion designers including Gucci's 
Frida Giannini, who provided clothes for Calvi to wear on her American tour, 
and Chanel's creative director,Karl Lagerfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/karl-lagerfeld>, who photographed her 
<http://fuckyeahannacalvi.com/post/17146737069/anna-calvi-by-karl-lagerfeld> 
for an ad campaign for a French millinery house.

What was Lagerfeld like?

"He's cool. He's quite no-nonsense. I told him, 'I don't really want to wear a 
short-sleeved top' and he said [she breaks off to do a convincing impression of 
amittel European fashionista]: "'Why, what's the problem with your arms?'" She 
laughs. "It was really funny. He was like, 'I don't like insecurity.' He very 
much says what he means. Slightly scary, but also very charming."

Calvi recounts a funny story about Lagerfeld wearing sunglasses throughout the 
shoot, even though it was conducted indoors. As a result, every time he raised 
the camera to take a picture, it clunked against his shades.

"He said to me, 'You have a perfect nose – the kind of nose that surgery 
cannot buy!'"

What was Calvi's reaction? She squirms in her seat and flaps her hand, 
embarrassed. "I was like, 'Oh, Karl.'"

Calvi is a likable mix of contradictions: insecure yet confident, passionate 
yet reserved, fragile in person yet strong on stage. She guards her privacy 
keenly but wants people to understand where her music is coming from. "I use my 
image as a way of promoting the sentiment of the music, but it's not about 
fame. I don't want it to be about me. I find the idea of having to talk about 
myself very bizarre."

And yet, with the release of her new album, her fame will doubtless increase. 
There will be more autographs for her to sign, more contradictions for her to 
confront. Over the next few months, Calvi's profile will continue to rise.

At least, as Lagerfeld noted, it's a profile that comes with a perfect nose.

One Breath is released on 7 October on Domino
 