 A saga that has captivated cable news anchors for weeks reached the end of a 
chapter when Anna Nicole Smith was buried in the Bahamas yesterday.
In a ceremony befitting the Playboy model and reality TV star, 300 guests 
gathered at the Mount Horeb Baptist church in Nassau for a memorial service. 
Her body was then to be taken to the nearby Lakeview Memorial Gardens to be 
buried next to her 20-year-old son.

"This is the biggest thing to have happened in the history of the Bahamas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahamas>," said a reporter for the E! cable 
channel. Around him the glitz of the ceremony suggested he might have a point.

Smith's casket, draped in a pink blanket, her favourite colour, was taken from 
a white hearse and borne along a red carpet for the short distance to the small 
wooden chapel. Her body was dressed in a beaded gown and tiara, while the 300 
guests at the memorial service wore pink flowers. Each guest was to write a 
note to the deceased which would be placed inside the casket, along with more 
pink flowers.

Also inside the casket were the ashes of Smith's late husband, J Howard 
Marshall, the oil magnate whom Smith married in 1994 when he was 89 and she was 
26. Smith had been fighting his family over his $500m estate since his death 
the following year.

The funeral came at the end of a legal tussle over who should have control of 
Smith's body following her death on February 8. Her estranged mother, 
lawyer-boyfriend and ex-boyfriend argued over her estate in a court hearing 
presided over by a judge whose own outbursts and tears threatened to overshadow 
the case.

Judge Larry Seidlin declared that she should be buried in the Bahamas next to 
her son, Daniel, who died last year. He also appointed a lawyer to act on 
behalf of Smith's five-month-old daughter. But lawyers for her mother said that 
despite losing an appeal against Judge Seidlin's ruling, they would make 
further efforts to remove Smith's body from the Bahamas.
 