
Opera, I'm afraid to say, has always tended to bring out my inner philistine. 
All thatheaving and warbling 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CMlGokzufqM&playnext=1&list=PL3C8D4BCF3EA704E3> 
and saying things over and over and OVER … overandoverandover … a-GAIN. 
Hairdressers with ideas above their stations; dreary waifs wilting in garrets; 
talking statues; battlement suicides; to say nothing of the one with the Viking 
hats <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mYgWNajLW1I&feature=fvsr>. As 
a babe-in-arms, I was physically removed from a performance ofThe Barber of 
Seville <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vLw_VM5lplc> for wailing with offensive 
loudness, which is as much to say that it's one rule for them and another for 
the rest of us.

I say all this by way of contextualising my reaction to seeing, all over 
London, posters forAnna Nicole: The Opera 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BE8UxXaxLj8>, about the extraordinary life and 
tragic death of thewaitress who became a Playboy model and went on to marry an 
octogenarian billionaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jan/02/anna-nicole-smith-the-opera-turnage-conrad>
. Instead of thinking, "Gah, opera," I thought, "Cool, nowthat I'd go and see." 
Given the aforementioned philistinism, I wonder why that is, and I wonder if 
I'm alone in this reaction. I suspect not.

It's irrational, of course. Why shouldn't I like opera? When Freddie Mercury 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2omuoO_hIbQ> and (here I lose my audience) the 
greatMeat Loaf <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DFrTAtCjzek> introduced operatic 
elements into pop, I gobbled them up. And it's not as if the Royal Opera 
House's Anna Nicole is an overturning of expectations for the genre. With her 
big ambition, bigbalcon and suicidal tendencies, Anna Nicole Smith could 
scarcely be a more traditional opera heroine, could she? Tragic, camp, over the 
top, she was like a mixture ofBecky Sharp 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5N5FhxYl-M8>, Judy Garland 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5g4lY8Y3eoo> and Marilyn Monroe 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IuZgkVvyV-o>: a doomed female impersonator 
trapped in a woman's body.

Smalltown girl strips her way to stardom, falls hopelessly in love with an 
89-year-old (a love the world simply doesn't understand) who dies 14 months 
after they marry. Condemned and outcast, she is brought low again, but bounces 
back with appearances inSkyscraper <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ydcbKRVp8oI>,
Naked Gun 33⅓ <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ADJPmigW9s> and at the MTV music 
awards <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sk0j_Ih4dko>. Still, there is an aching 
hole inside that no amount of methadone and fried chicken can fill. Finally, 
she meets a lonely end – sleeping pills and prescription painkillers being the 
tuberculosis of our age. Amazing to think she was a real person.

I imagine the idea is that the Anna Nicole show will "bring a whole new 
audience to opera". My guess is that it will: but not to the full-dress, 
old-style opera. What it feels like, rather, is that a new category is 
emerging, a sort of third-way thing that's not grand opera and isn't a musical 
or rock opera either, but something that combines newly written classical 
music, an English libretto (I don't think the importance of this should be 
underestimated), and a sort-of decipherable story. The models are things such as
Jerry Springer: The Opera <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lu1y-1bMQR4>, Powder 
Her Face <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/28/powder-her-face-review> 
(about thescandal surrounding compromising photos of Margaret, Duchess of Argyll
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/may/29/classicalmusicandopera2>) and 
Nixon in China <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Tv3hrZmcEk>. Perhaps, in the 
background,Peter Grimes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rCVNAYikjbE>.

This third-wayism is probably more a matter of packaging than of essence. As I 
said, Anna Nicole slots even more perfectly thanColonel Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/31/colonel-gaddafi-libya> into the 
canon of operatic characters; and none of the aforementioned – at least in my 
tone-deaf understanding of it – was musically facile or intellectually dumbed 
down. But that packaging is important. This new category – "popera", somebody 
has no doubt already christened it – stands a good chance of capturing an 
audience that wouldn't tend to be seen at either trad opera or a musical.

As I've written here before, for some reason musicals are regarded as a bit 
naff. Yet almost any of us, if pressed, will admit to loving a handful of them, 
so I'm not sure why this should be – whether snobbery about their coach-party 
appeal, an ingrained loathing ofAndrew Lloyd-Webber 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dzmndrcHid4>, or a traumatic experience with 
Mamma Mia! <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b5ZPDXhEJRM> But there it is. 
Likewise, those of us who are more or less musically illiterate, or have some 
inchoate chippiness about opera's imagined "elitism", or who are simply scared 
to death by the price of the half-time sandwiches at the Royal Opera House, 
tend to steer clear of Tosca.

Yet when we're offered something that doesn't look too red-velvety, that 
promises a high-toned sort of cultural experience with proper music you can't 
sing along to, and a knowing, camp, high-culture-low-culture mash-up, well, 
we're in business. And, in the process, it seems perfectly possible that we'll 
end up digesting ideas and music that are far more challenging than we ever 
expected.

Here's to you, Anna Nicole, wherever you are.

• This article was amended on 15 February 2011. The original said "I don't 
think the importance of this [new genre] can be underestimated". This has been 
corrected.
 