
The FBI investigated whether Anna Nicole Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anna-nicole-smith> plotted to kill her 
tycoon husband's son as they battled for his father's fortune, but the former 
Playboy Playmate who died in 2007 was never prosecuted, newly released files 
show.

Smith's FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> records, obtained by the 
Associated Press, say the agency investigated Smith in 2000 and 2001 in a 
murder-for-hire plot targeting E Pierce Marshall, who was at the centre of a 
long legal fight to keep the starlet, model and stripper from collecting his 
father's oil wealth, valued in the hundreds of millions of dollars. The younger 
Marshall died three years ago of natural causes.

The documents released under the US Freedom of Information Act depict an 
investigation going on as the fight raged over J Howard Marshall II's estate. 
Vast sections of the 100 pages of released materials, a fraction of Smith's 
full FBI file, are whited out, and no evidence of her involvement in such a 
plot is detailed.

There is no indication how authorities became aware of any alleged scheme, but 
agents interviewed Smith on 3 July 2000. Told why she was being questioned, 
"Smith began crying and denied ever making such plans," a report said.

"Smith adamantly denied ever contemplating such a crime," an agent wrote, and 
prosecutors eventually agreed the case could not go forward. A 26 April 2001 
letter to the FBI from Sally Meloch, an assistant US attorney, said she 
reviewed the reports but "determined that there is insufficient evidence to 
establish that there was a murder-for-hire plot by Ms Smith to kill Pierce 
Marshall".

Reached at her Los Angeles office yesterday, Meloch didn't recall the case, 
but said, "Any investigations that we didn't proceed with, we couldn't comment 
on anyway."

An attorney for Smith's estate, Kent Richland, was surprised by the 
allegations. "I have not heard anything about that," he said.

An attorney for the Marshall estate, including for the younger Marshall's 
widow, said he couldn't immediately comment.

Smith was 26 when she wed the 89-year-old Marshall, owner of Great Northern 
Oil Company, whose wealth was estimated by Forbes to be $550m (Â£345m) in 1992. 
They met while she was a topless dancer at a Texas strip club.

He died of natural causes in 1995, little more than a year after they wed. His 
son died in 2006 at age 67 of an infection and Smith died of a drug overdose a 
year later at age 39 after collapsing in her southern Florida hotel room.

The FBI files show a .357-calibre Smith and Wesson revolver was confiscated 
from Smith's home, along with a 9-centimetre stainless steel knife and, for 
reasons that were not explained, a black and orange hat described as "Dr 
Seuss." All three objects were returned to her about seven months later.

Agents reviewed tape recordings of phone calls involving Smith during their 
investigation, though transcripts were not included in the released materials. 
Among the things that were included were agents' scribblings in spiral-bound 
notebooks, accounts of Smith's past arrests for drunken driving and battery, 
and an interview of the younger Marshall. In that 27 June 2000 interview, 
Marshall said Smith rarely spent time with his father after their 1994 marriage 
and said his father complained that she asked for $50,000 to $60,000 twice a 
week.

Smith's lawyer and companion Howard K Stern and two doctors, Dr Sandeep Kapoor 
and Dr Khristine Eroshevich, are charged in California with helping the model 
obtain drugs that ultimately killed her. All have pleaded not guilty.

The dispute between Smith and the Marshall estate has bounced around courts 
for years. The US supreme court ruled unanimously in 2006 that Smith could 
pursue her late husband's fortune, overturning an appellate decision, which 
continues to be fought in California. The money became a factor after Smith's 
death, too, with Stern, her mother, and another boyfriend all fighting over an 
estate that ultimately will go to her daughter, who is now 3.
 