
Anne Hathaway's iffy English accent is the least of One Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141706/one-day>'s problems. It's not 
the way she speaks so much as the way she looks; even in specs and with dull, 
lifeless hair (you wonder why they didn't call it One Bad Hair Day), she can't 
help but radiate movie star glamour. I still don't understand why the role of 
Emma Morley went to her whenCarey Mulligan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/22/carey-mulligan-interview> has 
already demonstrated, inAn Education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/132110/education> – and with the very 
same director, Lone Scherfig – that she can run the gamut from swot to swan, 
con brio.

Beyond the gimmicky structure, one of the most intriguing things about the 
idea of David Nicholls's novel being adapted for the screen was its potential 
to subvert a tiresome movie cliche of our times – that of the geeky bloke who 
gets off with a sexy stunner, as seen in everything fromKnocked Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/119558/knocked.up> to Pineapple Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125575/pineapple.express> to She's Out 
of My League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/136130/she-s-out-of-my-league> to 
anything featuringShia LaBeouf <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/17/1>
. Because in the book, it's Dexter who is the sexy stunner. He's richer, 
better-looking, physically more at ease than Emma; in movie terms, he's out of 
her league.

The narrative viewpoint in the novel is split fairly evenly between the two 
characters, but the author (and by extension, the reader) empathises more with 
Emma. It's she who seems more the protagonist, while he is the object of 
desire, to be gazed upon for his beauty. Of course, this plain Jane/hot guy 
combo is often to be found in novels, presumably because they're bought and 
read by more women than men.

For all their faults, the movie adaptations of the Bridget Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/88087/bridget.jones.s.diary> and 
Twilight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/127062/twilight> books managed 
to preserve this mismatch all the way to the screen, with plump, pink Renée 
Zellweger getting to choose between Colin Firth and Hugh Grant, and spiky, 
interesting-rather-than-conventionally-beautiful Kristen Stewart wooed by 
Robert Pattinson as the sparkly vampire with, as Stephenie Meyer puts it, "the 
most beautiful soul, more beautiful than his brilliant mind or his incomparable 
face or his glorious body". And there's a new version of the prototype of this 
sort of relationship coming up next month; yes, Mia Wasikowska can be pretty, 
but no, we won't be paying much attention to her Jane Eyre so long as Michael 
Fassbender is on screen as Mr Rochester.

Alas, the makers of One Day have bottled out, and instead of giving us a geeky 
heroine in thrall to male pulchritude, they've plumped for Hathaway, which 
throws the dynamic out of whack. She may be capable of looking homely, but I've 
yet to see it; she was improbably cast as the frump in the jumper in The Devil 
Wears Prada, but even in her big stabs at non-glam credibility,Rachel Getting 
Married <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/126507/rachel-getting-married> 
andLove and Other Drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/139936/love-and-other-drugs>, she 
looked like a knockout.

Someone needs to stick up for the girl geek, a social group so 
underrepresented in movies it teeters on the verge of extinction, continually 
at risk of being supplanted by a brave new race of fembot perfection. Her male 
counterpart is ubiquitous, because movies are now made by grownup male geeks 
for adolescent male-geek audiences, neither of which can conceive of girls 
having any other purpose than to look decorative. Actors like Mulligan (who can 
be a sexy stunner when she needs to be) accordingly baffle the young male 
demographic, which thinks girl geeks should look likeKristen Bell 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?q=kristen+bell&um=1&hl=en&sa=N&biw=791&bih=990&tbm=isch&tbnid=MjwlyQ0-BqkdYM:&imgrefurl=http://gossip-juice.com/the-news/1050-kristen-bell-was-a-nerd-in-high-school.html&docid=IgiVyUuLJmrbIM&w=400&h=506&ei=CoZLTseUBdKEhQeC9dmbCA&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=163&vpy=117&dur=388&hovh=187&hovw=148&tx=100&ty=148&page=1&tbnh=156&tbnw=123&start=0&ndsp=15&ved=1t:429,r:0,s:0>
 (You Again, Fanboys) orHayden Panettiere 
<http://www.celebritiesworld.tk/hayden-panettiere.html> (Scream 4) or Jessica 
Alba 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?q=jessica+alba&um=1&hl=en&biw=791&bih=990&tbm=isch&tbnid=9goyJaWdbmsO2M:&imgrefurl=http://jessica--alba8.blogspot.com/&docid=gde8inCfxDaI9M&w=294&h=379&ei=ToZLTv29MsOxhQeL16SOCA&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=147&vpy=113&dur=1462&hovh=255&hovw=198&tx=91&ty=106&page=1&tbnh=166&tbnw=123&start=0&ndsp=19&ved=1t:429,r:0,s:0>
(Good Luck Chuck). Show them a normal-lookingMaggie Gyllenhaal 
<http://uk.askmen.com/celebs/women/actress_250/289_maggie_gyllenhaal.html> as 
an assistant DA in The Dark Knight, and they'll start whingeing she isn't hot 
enough.

I have nothing against beautiful actresses – I love to drink in the 
fabulousness of Françoise Dorléac or Kim Novak or Ava Gardner – and I don't 
even mind looking atAnne Hathaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anne-hathaway>. And I'm not saying girl geeks 
can't be beautiful, too; it's just that giving them movie-star looks tends to 
muddy the waters. It's putting women in their place again – ensuring they're 
less the subjects, the observers, doers, protagonists – than the objects, whose 
primary function is not to do, but to be looked at.
 