
Anne Robinson <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson> is to 
return as the main host of BBC1's Watchdog, replacing the current presenting 
team of Nicky Campbell and Julia Bradbury.

It is 16 years since Robinson first fronted the consumer affairs show and 
eight since she left Watchdog to concentrate on the hit daytime quizshow The 
Weakest Link.

While other BBC stars face a pay cut, the move will enable Robinson – one of 
the BBC's highest paid presenters – to safeguard her £3m-a-year salary,
according to a report in today's Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1180137/Anne-Robinson-says-Goodbye-pay-cut-hello-Watchdog.html>
.

She will continue to present The Weakest Link, which switched from BBC2 to 
BBC1 last year to fill the gap left by Neighbours' move to Channel Five.

Robinson's return will see a shakeup of Watchdog, which will be doubled in 
length to an hour and moved to a new BBC1 slot, expected to be 8pm.

Her return to the show also means the departure of Campbell, who has presented 
Watchdog since 2001, and his co-host Bradbury, who has been with the show since 
2005.

Bradbury returned to the programme last month following a break, after being 
cleared by police of any involvement in an alleged £20,000 frequent-flyer miles 
fraud <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/apr/15/watchdog-julia-bradbury>.

The BBC1 controller, Jay Hunt, said: "Anne Robinson's sharp wit combined with 
her passion for popular journalism make her the ideal people's champion. I am 
thrilled she will be returning to Watchdog.

"Nicky Campbell and Julia Bradbury will continue to be regular faces on BBC1. 
We are also in discussion with them both about future projects."

Campbell, who presents BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 5 
Live's breakfast show, also presents BBC1's Sunday morning discussion strand 
The Big Questions and BBC2 quiz the Battle of the Brains.

Bradbury is one of the presenters of BBC1's Countryfile, which moved to a 
Sunday night peak-time slot last month. Her other TV credits include BBC4's 
Wainwright Walks and Railway Walks.

She voluntarily stepped down from Watchdog in February after irregularities 
were found in her Virgin Atlantic Flying Club account. The police later 
announced that Bradbury was not a suspect in their investigation of the 
irregularities.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 