
Anne-Marie Duff and Andy Serkis last night carried off the acting prizes at the
Evening Standard film awards 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/8504400.stm>, while Andrea Arnold's 
Essex dramaFish Tank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/13/fish-tank-andrea-arnold-french> 
took the award for best film.

Duff won best actress for her portrayal of John Lennon's mother in Sam 
Taylor-Wood's Nowhere Boy, beating out the Oscar and Bafta-nominated Carey 
Mulligan in the process, while Serkis was garlanded for his role as the late 
singer Ian Dury in biopic Sex & Drugs & Rock & Roll. Best screenplay went to 
Armando Iannucci's political satire In the Loop, and film-maker Peter 
Strickland picked up the gong for most promising newcomer for his work on the 
Berlin film festival favourite Katalin Varga, a thriller filmed in the Romanian 
countryside.

A pregnant Duff thanked her husband James McAvoy, who was in the audience, for 
allowing her to take her work "far too seriously". She said: "I'd really like 
to be Mrs McAvoy for a minute and say thank you for seriously having to live 
with a flame-haired broken-hearted banjo player for quite some time." Serkis 
dedicated his award to Dury, saying: "Ian wherever you are, this is for you."

Arnold told the BBC she was "delighted" to pick up best film for Fish Tank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fish-tank>. Her Cannes festival jury winner 
centres on a volatile 15-year-old living on an Essex council estate whose life 
is thrown into turmoil when her single mother takes a new lover.

"It's wonderful for the film and all the people who worked hard on the film, 
but I'd happily sneak away," said the director, who won a Bafta for her 2006 
debut Red Road and an Oscar for her short film Wasp in 2004. "I don't feel any 
different now to how I did five years ago. It doesn't matter how many awards 
you get, it still feels like a massive struggle and a challenge to find the 
truth of what you're doing."

Sacha Baron Cohen made a rare public appearance out of character to collect 
the Peter Sellers award for comedy from Terry Gilliam, while veteran film-maker 
Nicolas Roeg picked up a special award for his contribution to film from actor 
Jenny Agutter, star of Walkabout. The awards were held at the London Film 
Museum, which also sponsored an award for technical achievement. It went to 
Barry Ackroyd, cinematographer on Kathryn Bigelow's Oscar hopefulThe Hurt Locker
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/30/hurt-locker-film-philip-french>.

The winners

Best film: Fish Tank

Best actor: Andy Serkis – Sex & Drugs & Rock & Roll

Best actress: Anne-Marie Duff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anne-marie-duff> – Nowhere Boy

Best screenplay:
Jesse Armstrong/Simon Blackwell/Armando Iannucci/Tony Roche – In the Loop

Most promising newcomer:
Peter Strickland for his direction and screenplay of Katalin Varga

Peter Sellers award for comedy: Sacha Baron Cohen – Bruno

Best documentary
Anvil! The Story of Anvil – Sacha Gervasi

Alexander Walker special award
Nicolas Roeg for his contribution to film
 