
Anne Frank: The Diary Of A Young Girl is the real diary of a teenage girl that 
begins on Anne’s 13th birthday (12 June 1942) when she gets a diary. It tells 
the story of her family who live in Frankfurt, Germany and suddenly have to go 
into hiding as a result of Hitler and the Nazi Party’s treatment of Jews in 
Europe during the second world war. They escape to Amsterdam where they go into 
hiding with other Jews. The diary ends suddenly on 1 August 1944.


There are many important messages in this book, but the most important message 
is that all people have the right to live in freedom. Anne’s story shows us 
that just because people may be a different religion or race, doesn’t mean that 
they should be treated differently. The terrible treatment of Jewish people 
during the war has shown this. Her diary shows us things that people don’t 
think about now, for example how every day the people in hiding worried about 
maybe being found and punished.

I liked that Anne was a really happy and cheerful person even though she and 
her family were in an awful situation. Anne enjoyed writing and describing 
others. She was talkative and inquisitive and could be selfish. She was a 
typical teenage girl and she didn’t always understand how difficult life was 
for her mother and the other adults around her. She commented on the people who 
shared their hiding space. Sometimes this wasn’t very nice, but it shows how 
everybody’s life was challenging because they had to be quiet and not bring 
attention to themselves.

I would recommend this book to anyone who has an interest in reading 
historical, war or mystery books as it is so interesting. This book would be 
suitable for people aged ten upwards since it is very sad in places.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-a-young-girl-11.html>

Want to tell the world about a book you’ve read? Join the site  
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
and send us your review!
 