
Anne Frank <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-frank> may not have been 
betrayed to Nazi occupiers, but captured by chance.

A new study published Friday by the Anne Frank House museum in Amsterdam says 
despite decades of research there is no conclusive evidence the Jewish diarist 
and her family were betrayed to the Netherlands’ German occupiers during the 
second world war, leading to their arrest and deportation.

Handwritten Anne Frank poem sells at auction for £119,000
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/23/anne-frank-poem-sells-at-auction-for-119000-pounds>
Ronald Leopold, Executive Director of the Anne Frank House museum, said new 
research “illustrates that other scenarios should also be considered”.

One possible theory is that the 4 August, 1944 raid that led to Anne’s arrest 
could have been part of an investigation into illegal labor or falsified ration 
coupons at the canal-side house where she and other Jews hid for just over two 
years.

She kept a diary during her time in hiding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/23/anne-frank-poem-sells-at-auction-for-119000-pounds>
 that was published after the war and turned her into a globally recognized 
symbol of Holocaust victims. She died in the Bergen-Belsen Nazi concentration 
camp at age 15, shortly before it was liberated by Allied forces.

The new research points to two men who worked in the building on Amsterdam’s 
Prinsengracht canal and dealt in illegal ration cards. They were arrested 
earlier in 1944 and subsequently released, Dutch records show. The arrests also 
are mentioned in Anne’s diary.

The wound of Anne Frank – archive, 16 July 1985
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/anne-frank-diary-bergen-belsen-second-world-war>
Such arrests were reported to an investigation division based in The Hague and 
the report says that, “During their day-to-day activities, investigators from 
this department often came across Jews in hiding by chance.”

Another possibility raised by the report is that the raid was part of an 
investigation into people being allowed to work to prevent them being called up 
as forced labor and sent to Germany.

“A company where people were working illegally and two sales representatives 
were arrested for dealing in ration coupons obviously ran the risk of 
attracting the attention of the authorities,” the report says.

“The possibility of betrayal has of course not been entirely ruled out by 
this, nor has any relationship between the ration coupon fraud and the arrest 
been proven, ... Clearly, the last word about that fateful summer day in 1944 
has not yet been said,” it adds.
 