
A French academic who published Anne Frank’s diary online on 1 January despite 
the strenuous objections ofthe Anne Frank Fonds 
<http://www.annefrank.ch/foundation.html> has said that the page on which he 
launched the text has now been viewed more than 50,000 times.

On 1 January, University of Nantes lecturer Olivier Ertzscheid and French MP 
Isabelle Attard separately published online the Dutch text of Frank’s account 
of her family’s time in hiding during the second world war. They argue that 
because 70 years have elapsed sinceAnne Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-frank> died in Bergen-Belsen 
concentration camp, and because across much of Europe copyright expires 70 
years after an author’s death, the work has now entered the public domain.

But the Anne Frank Fonds <http://www.annefrank.ch/>, the foundation 
established by Anne’s father Otto Frank, has vigorously denied this.It claims 
<http://www.annefrank.ch/qa-en.html> that while Anne was the sole author of the 
original diaries, “Otto Frank and children’s author and translator, Mirjam 
Pressler, were inter alia responsible for the various edited versions of 
fragments of the diary”, published in 1947 and 1991, respectively, and “the 
copyrights to these adaptations have been vested in Otto Frank and Mirjam 
Pressler, who in effect created readable books from Anne Frank’s original 
writings”. Otto Frank died in 1980, while Pressler is still alive. So the 
foundation, which gives all its income to charitable causes, argues that the 
diary is still protected by European copyright laws.

In a letter to Ertzscheid sent in late December 
<http://affordance.typepad.com//mon_weblog/2015/12/la-lettre-de-lavocat-du-fonds-anne-frank.html>
, the foundation asks him to “cease and desist” from making The Diary of a 
Young Girl available online, to “immediately” announce he was “misinformed” 
about the copyright in the diary, to compensate damages, andto pay €1,000 each 
day 
<http://affordance.typepad.com//mon_weblog/2015/12/la-lettre-de-lavocat-du-fonds-anne-frank.html>
 he does not comply with the instructions, or risk court proceedings.

Ertzscheid went ahead 
<http://affordance.typepad.com//mon_weblog/2016/01/anne-frank.html>, however, 
describing it as a “gift”. “This first of January 2016, 70 years after the 
death of Anne Frank, because this is enough time and because it is legal, this 
diary, her diary, enters the public domain. It belongs to everyone. And it is 
up to each of us to weigh its importance,” he wrote.

Ertzscheid said that since 1 January, the article in which he provides the 
file has been viewed more than 50,000 times, receiving 30,000 hits on the day 
it was published. The diary remains online on his website, and Ertzscheid says 
that he will “wait and see” what the Anne Frank Fonds does next.

Attard also released a download of the diary on 1 January on her website, 
writing 
<http://isabelleattard.fr/blog/2016/01/vive-anne-frank-vive-le-domaine-public/> 
“long live Anne Frank, long live the public domain”. “Despite the legal 
findings of the Anne Frank Fund to slow down as much as possible this 
long-awaited moment, we can, as Olivier Ertzscheid said, collectively ‘after 
these years of the cellar, of darkness, this darkness which weighs so heavily 
in your diary, dear Anne Frank, have the intelligence to offer you at last the 
light which you deserve, that which your diary deserves, that of the public 
space. Welcome to the light, dear Anne’,” she wrote.

A spokesman for Attard said the MP had “no commercial goals” in her release of 
the diary, so was not aware of how many times it had been downloaded. “The 
question has been very popular though, with a coverage Isabelle never had 
before. Please believe this wasn’t a goal at all, it’s a by-product of the 
interest of the subject,” he said.

Attard also received a lawyer’s letter in December, the spokesman added, but 
has not heard from the Anne Frank Fonds since, other than through “insults”made 
to a Swiss paper 
<http://www.swissinfo.ch/eng/literature-and-law_uploading-of-anne-frank-s-diary-ruffles-legal-feathers/41880180>
, in which member of the foundation’s board of trustees Yves Kugelmann said the 
fact that the diary was being “expropriated and subjected to attacks by 
populists continues a long list of egoistic vagabonds, which began with attacks 
by Holocaust deniers and forgeries of the diary”.

This week, the French librarians’ association added its support to Ertzscheid 
and Attard,issuing a statement 
<http://www.abf.asso.fr/1/22/568/ABF/-communique-l-entree-dans-le-domaine-public-du-journal-d-anne-frank->
 protesting “against the recent interpretations designed to limit the spread of 
the diary of Anne Frank, a work belonging to our collective memory”.

The Anne Frank Fonds also put out a new statement this week 
<http://www.annefrank.ch/234/items/anne-franks-diaries-to-remain-protected-in-2016-and-beyond.html>
, saying that the “public discussion about the applicable duration of copyright 
for Anne Frank’s diaries has resulted in widespread confusion”, and reiterating 
its point that “the different versions of the diary of Anne Frank will remain 
protected for many years after 2015”, so cannot be used without its permission.

Outside Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the 
circumstances of Frank’s diary are much clearer: in the US, works first 
published between the 1920s and 1970s are protected for 95 years from the date 
of their first publication, meaning Frank’s diary, first published in the US in 
the 1950s, will remain protected there until the 2040s.

According to the Fonds, Anne Frank’s Diary of a Young Girl has been translated 
into 67 different languages, and has sold upwards of 30m copies.
 