
Annie Lennox <https://www.theguardian.com/music/annie-lennox> has attacked the 
sexual imagery of music videos, saying many are now "pornographic". Talking to 
BBC Radio 5 Live, the former Eurythmics singer said: "I'm all for freedom of 
expression, but this is clearly one step beyond, and it's clearly into the 
realm of porn."

Lennox first spoke out on the subject on Saturday, when she posted a critique 
of the current style of pop videos 
<https://www.facebook.com/annielennox/photos/a.10150674901984589.419727.6216464588/10151886512349589/?type=1>
 on her Facebook page. "I have to say that I'm disturbed and dismayed by the 
recent spate of overtly sexualised performances and videos," she wrote. "You 
know the ones I'm talking about. It seems obvious that certain record companies 
are peddling highly styled pornography with musical accompaniment …

"It's depressing to see how these performers are so eager to push this new 
level of low. Their assumption seems to be that misogyny – utilised and 
displayed through oneself – is totally fine, as long as you are the one 
creating it. As if it's all justified by how many millions of dollars and 
YouTube hits you get from behaving like pimp and prostitute at the same time. 
It's a glorified and monetised form of self harm."

She followed that with a clarification on Sunday 
<https://www.facebook.com/annielennox/photos/a.10150674901984589.419727.6216464588/10151888254549589/?type=1>
. "There is absolutely nothing 'wrong' about our sexuality or sensuality per 
se. But if a performing artist has an audience of impressionable young fans and 
they want to present a soft porn video or highly sexualised live performance, 
then it needs to qualify as such and be X-rated, for adults only. I'm talking 
from the perspective of the parents of those young fans. The whole thing is 
about their children's protection … Boundaries need to be put in place so that 
young kids aren't barraged by market forces exploiting the "normalisation" of 
explicit sex in underage entertainment."

Speaking to Radio 5 Live on Monday, she called for parents to apply pressure 
to establish "very clear boundaries" on what is acceptable in music videos. "I 
think this debate is about getting the voice of reason back there to say: 
'Look, we want to protect our kids.'"

Lennox's remarks follow, most obviously, the furore in the wake of Miley 
Cyrus's video for Wrecking Ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/03/sinead-o-connor-open-letter-miley-cyrus>
. However, the debate around ratings for music videos predates that. David 
Cameron is believed to favour ratings for promo clips, and theBailey review on 
the sexualisation of children 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/bailey-review-of-the-commercialisation-and-sexualisation-of-childhood-final-report-published>
 called for tighter regulation. In the wake of the review, the BPI (the trade 
association for the British record industry) extended its parental advisory 
scheme so explicit songs and videos would be labelled.
 