
It's a far cry from haunting industrial landscapes  
<http://thelowry.com/ls-lowry/the-ls-lowry-collection/>and matchstick cats and 
dogs but a new exhibition atThe Lowry <http://www.thelowry.com> in Salford is 
set to pull in the crowds.

An exploration of the music, image and vision of one of the most successful 
female artists in UK music history opens at the Quays this coming Saturday, 
March 17.The House of Annie Lennox, a touring exhibition originally organised 
by theVictoria and Albert Museum <http://www.vam.ac.uk/> in London, is being 
staged as part of the Lowry's performance-related visual art programme. It 
promises to be a feast for the eyes.

Curated by Lennox with additional content from staff at The Lowry, the 
exhibition has at its heart an installation designed around the concept of a 
'House', providing a journey through the different facets of Lennox's creative 
vision. Objects on show will include costumes familiar to many from Lennox's 
television appearances, music videos and concerts. Ephemera from the political 
causes close to Lennox's heart such as the SING campaign for HIV/AIDS awareness 
will also be on display.
 Also in the exhibition: Annie Lennox and Dave Stewart 1984 Photograph: Gered 
Mankowitz 
New exhibits include a Cabinet of Curiosities, an immersive lyrics area as 
well as photographs and video projections.


Lennox is one of the world's best-selling music artists. She has sold more 
than 80 million records around the globe and won over 100 awards for her work. 
Born in Scotland, she shot to fame after she formed theEurythmics 
<http://http://www.eurythmics.com/> with Dave Stewart <http://davestewart.com/>
. Their second album, released in 1983, was a huge success. By 1990, Lennox had 
gone it alone. Her debut solo album,Diva 
<http://www.metrolyrics.com/diva-album-annie-lennox.html>, sold more than six 
million copies across the globe. In January last year, she was awarded an OBE.

Kate Farrell, curator of special exhibitions at The Lowry, says:

We are thrilled to continue our long term relationship with the V&A by 
displaying their performance related touring exhibitions. It is a real 
privilege to work with Annie Lennox; an innovator, icon and performer whose 
creativity and vision are a true inspiration. We are delighted to explore the 
wealth of archive material available, which is enabling us to double the size 
of the original V&A exhibition.


 The Lowry galleries will allow visitors to explore the prose from Lennox's 
most famous songs and will also show a collection of her musical accolades. The 
new exhibition contains extra photographic material and costumes never 
exhibited before.

Lennox says:

It's amazing to be able to transport The House of Annie Lennox up to Salford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/salford>, and to have an opportunity to present 
a progression from the previous exhibition at the V&A. I'm really looking 
forward to taking my archive and creative vision further afield, and it's an 
absolute honour to be housed at The Lowry.

The House of Annie Lennox is at the Lowry <http://www.thelowry.com/> from 
Saturday March 17until Sunday June 17
 