
A modernist palace of culture built from 130,000 cubic metres of concrete, 
London’s Barbican Centre is the kind of building you can imagine future 
civilisations stumbling across like Charlton Heston in Planet of the Apes. The 
perfect place, then, to be discussing the end of the world. “There’s something 
broken about us,” saysAnohni <https://www.theguardian.com/music/anohni>, 
sitting in a conference room that’s part of the building she’s set to perform 
in this July. “We’re behaving in a virulent manner; we’re cannibalising our own 
home. And we’re unable to stop ourselves.”

Anohni has pondered the apocalypse before with Antony and the Johnsons: “I 
need another world, this one’s nearly gone,” she sang sadly on Another World, 
back in 2008. But on new album Hopelessness, her first studio work in more than 
five years, the trembling ballads of old have made way for lush pop backdrops 
from Hudson Mohawke and Oneohtrix Point Never. And the lamentation is over: 
with this record, Anohni is mad as hell, and she’s not going to take it any 
more. “I haven’t spent a lot of time expressing anger in my life, so this 
record is a new chapter. Anger is energising: it’s quite an empowering 
feeling.” She sings of the world we’re living in – one of warfare, sinister 
technology and rapacious greed that could spin us into oblivion – in order to 
“support people and determine what’s real”.

Anohni is the new “spirit name” of Antony Hegarty, and the next step in a path 
to self-definition, from youth in England to college in California and her 
current life in New York. She has identified as transgender since childhood but 
“cowardice and shame” prevented her from asking people to call her “she”. 
“‘She’ used to make my skin crawl,” she says now. “Within a gay context it can 
be used very snidely: to contain trans people and to denigrate other men. But 
working and socialising with women, and doing [campaign group] Future Feminism, 
empowered me in the feminine, and I could accept that it was OK to be the way I 
am. But I don’t feel emphatically female, it’s more subtle than that.”

Oscars 2016: Anohni boycotts 'degrading' ceremony
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/26/anohni-boycotts-oscars-ceremony-transgender-diversity>
At more than 6ft tall, Anohni could easily be lumbering, but she’s delicate, 
and doodling on a notepad as we talk, she has the quiet, snuffly quality of a 
child missing school. “I was never going to become a beautiful, passable woman, 
and I was never going to be a man,” she says. “It’s a quandary. But the trans 
condition is a beautiful mystery; it’s one of nature’s best ideas. What an 
incredible impulse, that compels a five-year-old child to tell its parents it 
isn’t what they think it is. Given just a tiny bit of oxygen, those children 
can flourish and be such a gift. They give other people licence to explore 
themselves more deeply, allowing the colours in their own psyche to flourish.”

She has certainly flourished, winning the Mercury prize in 2005 for her album 
I Am A Bird Now and, this year, becoming only the second transgender person to 
be nominated for an Oscar, with her song Manta Ray, written for ecology doc
Racing Extinction <http://racingextinction.com/the-film/> (she boycotted the 
ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/26/anohni-boycotts-oscars-ceremony-transgender-diversity>
 after not being asked to perform).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYyx9wMrmgXM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYyx9wMrmgXM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYyx9wMrmgXM&media=>
She’s scornful, though, of how politicians have made trans rights flavour of 
the month: “They realise that it’s not politically advantageous to make 
scapegoats of trans people, because it’s such a popular Hollywood topic. 
Meanwhile, evangelicals are trying to hold back reproductive rights.” For 
Anohni, squabbles about identity are a distraction from the true issues facing 
us. “Black boys are being killed in the streets by idiotic policemen – it’s so 
fucking real,” she says. “So it’s not wrong to fight for justice for your 
special-interest group. But we’ve been deceived into thinking that’s the 
endgame. You look at those rainbow flag-toting, goggle-eyed gays that think 
they’ve hit the jackpot now they can have heterosexual privileges. What are 
they going to say when they’re bobbing in the greenhouse tides? ‘But… I thought 
we won… I can get married now, I didn’t have anything else to fight for.’ It’s 
not all about you!”

Green days: why outsider musicians are putting eco-consciousness on record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/mar/22/eco-conscious-anohni-theesatisfaction-outsider-music-artists-challenge-ecocide-business>
So what is it all about? We arrive at the second soapbox of the day, as Anohni 
points out how a small number of Silicon Valley companies have created a giant 
wealth disparity. “You’re at the Guardian, whose traditional form of income has 
been rendered obsolete by companies that have manipulatively upstreamed all 
that money into their pockets,” she says. I blink and think about my pension. 
“The same thing happened in music. The top end are still making bucketloads, 
while maintaining the illusion of the American dream: that if you work hard 
enough you can make a fortune. Meanwhile, the working and middle classes have 
been hollowed out of the system. A generation of young people don’t expect to 
make money selling records any more. It’s like boiling a lobster: you turn up 
the heat slowly enough, so that everyone still thinks it’s their fault that it 
isn’t working the way it used to work.”

This forced surrender of control is a major preoccupation of Hopelessness. 
Anohni makes cooing come-ons to a voyeuristic NSA on Watch Me, and on Crisis 
weeps an apology to those tortured in Guantánamo. She invites ecological 
destruction on the blockbusting pop single 4 Degrees, with lacerating irony. 
“We’re not just polluting a river and killing a couple of top predator animals; 
we’re eradicating the krill, the necessary algae, we’re dismantling the insect 
and amphibian worlds. We’re going for the building blocks. And we’re never 
going to be able to replicate it, as arrogantly as scientists believe… it seems 
like, on a subconscious level, the goal is to eradicate nature and then 
reintroduce it in dribs and drabs, like a garden of our own design that we can 
pretend we authored.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Ftrans-singer-anohni-new-album-hopelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c69b65252ef376e10e05b26c4368f3710e8bfeb%2F0_232_3696_2218%2F3696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anohni%2C%20the%20artist%20once%20known%20as%20Antony%20Hegarty%2C%20on%20life%20beyond%20the%20Johnsons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Ftrans-singer-anohni-new-album-hopelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anohni%2C%20the%20artist%20once%20known%20as%20Antony%20Hegarty%2C%20on%20life%20beyond%20the%20Johnsons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Ftrans-singer-anohni-new-album-hopelessness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c69b65252ef376e10e05b26c4368f3710e8bfeb%2F0_232_3696_2218%2F3696.jpg>
 Primavera Sound Festival, Barcelona. Photograph: Rex 
Rather than earnest strumming or punk thrashing the music is, Anohni says, 
“sugar to the ear – like how a baby tastes sugar and wants more”. She uses the 
language of pop as a “Trojan horse” to bring big ideas to the masses. So there 
are trap drums, honeyed ambient effects, Tangfastic synths and billowing 
productions of candyfloss sweetness – the kind of gorgeous confections that R&B 
queens covet.

The Interview: Antony Hegarty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/may/17/antony-hegarty-interview> 
Take the swaying fanfare of Drone Bomb Me (which stars a tearful Naomi 
Campbell in its video). It would be perfect for Rihanna, except its perspective 
is of a child whose parents have been killed in drone attacks and who longs to 
die in the same way. “There’s nothing more confounding to someone who wants to 
hurt you, than someone who wants to be hurt,” Anohni says. “You cling to their 
leg so they can’t punch you in the face. It’s a feminine way of dealing with 
rage and disempowerment.”

On a song called Obama, she is livid with the Potus for authorising these 
drone strikes. “We desperately hoped he’d manifest the heroic vision that might 
change America’s course. And how many weeks into office did he sign his first 
kill list? Even the Nazis had Nuremberg: they had a day in court before they 
were executed. Bin Laden was executed in his bedroom, and a country celebrated 
in bloodlust.” She believes that centuries of colonialism are coming home to 
roost. “Look at Northern Ireland: how many generations does it take to ease the 
bile that seeps into the blood of a culture? If you kill an innocent person in 
a far-off country, they’re going to hate you for hundreds of years. And that’s 
what I’m paying for with my taxes.”

The hate is doubled by the US’s innate aggression. “I love looking at the way 
that Norway dealt with Anders Breivik,” she says. “They gave him a forum where 
he could express his demented views, and the country gathered around and 
identified his illness. In America, though, a misguided teenager participates 
in a demented activity like the Boston bombing, and they want to tear him limb 
from limb. I find it amazing that after the Paris attacks, how quickly the 
French origin of [the culprits] was completely bypassed; they were just 
‘towelheads’. Does Europe take responsibility?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Ftrans-singer-anohni-new-album-hopelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae9009bf1130e265aeb4a11f035dce95e94b1e00%2F0_869_3084_3853%2F3084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anohni%2C%20the%20artist%20once%20known%20as%20Antony%20Hegarty%2C%20on%20life%20beyond%20the%20Johnsons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Ftrans-singer-anohni-new-album-hopelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anohni%2C%20the%20artist%20once%20known%20as%20Antony%20Hegarty%2C%20on%20life%20beyond%20the%20Johnsons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Ftrans-singer-anohni-new-album-hopelessness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae9009bf1130e265aeb4a11f035dce95e94b1e00%2F0_869_3084_3853%2F3084.jpg>
 Photograph: Linda Nylind 
It might read like a stump speech, but all of this is delivered in a 
chillingly even tone that teeters on resignation. There’s even a note of 
amusement: the defiant humour of someone on their way to the scaffold. 
Pessimism further clouds the conference suite as we kick about possible 
solutions. “We’re still expecting capitalism to solve problems: ‘Maybe if we 
sell enough oil, we can give some profits to an environmental agency!’ 
Capitalism isn’t a moral system.” But what if sustainability can be made 
financially attractive? She bats the idea aside. “The best thing we can do is 
vote, and meanwhile billions of dollars are being spent to manipulate Americans 
to vote against their best interests. Look at Trump. All the bankers are 
thinking: isn’t that fucking brilliant, all the white trash are going to vote 
for a billionaire.

“As long as poor and middle-class people are looking at their neighbours as 
the source of their suffering, they’re never going to look at the gated 
communities,” she continues. “Why did they shut down Occupy so swiftly and so 
brutally? People for the first time in America were saying: ‘Oh, I always 
thought it was Democrats versus Republicans, but I suddenly realised it’s 99% 
against 1%.’ What a revelation, showing Oz behind the curtain, a little man 
with a megaphone and all this power.”

The world remains unsaved as we walk to the lift, the City of London churning 
away next to us. But Anohni’s invective against the solipsism of the social 
media age remains bracing, and her album, she hopes, will help us voice the 
horror at the world that’s been stuck in our throats. “I am from peasant stock 
with a shit degree in art – I’m a nothing,” she says. “But it doesn’t take an 
expert to diagnose the whole stinking system. I talk to a taxi driver from 
Pakistan and they’re saying the same thing as me. Everyone’s feeling it. David 
Attenborough’s feeling it; all the people we trust are feeling it. Can we 
address it? Can we inhale it? Can we withstand it?”

Hopelessness is out 6 May via Rough Trade. Anohni plays New York’s Park Avenue 
Armory on 18-19 May, Vivid LIVE 
<http://vividlive.sydneyoperahouse.com/home/anohni/> in Sydney, Australia on 
27-31 May andthe Barbican Hall, EC2, 7-8 July



 