
Anomalisa review: sex and depression in Charlie Kaufman's superb stop-motion 
breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/anomalisa-review-sex-and-depression-in-charlie-kaufmans-superb-stop-motion-breakdown>
It’s 2005, and Michael Stone (David Thewlis), a corporate motivational 
speaker, arrives in Cincinnati, a town he hasn’t visited since he lived there 
10 years ago. He rides in a taxi, spends the night in a hotel, contacts an old 
lover (disastrously), meets a new one (more promisingly, but…), drinks, talks, 
has sex, falls in something like love, goes home and wonders what it was all 
about.

What Charlie Kaufman’s Anomalisa is all about is the sterility, emptiness and 
screamingly predictable tedium of modern life, and the inability of people to 
connect with one another. The twist? It’s all done in stop-motion animation 
with creepily realistic 3D-printed human protagonists, all of whom have 
sectional, doll-like faces that look as if they might easily fall off; which, 
in one nightmare sequence, does actually happen.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Qnc0-2VLMI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Qnc0-2VLMI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Qnc0-2VLMI&media=>
Furthering the sense of sameness is the film’s cleverest device: with one 
exception, all the voices we hear apart from Thewlis’s are performed by one 
actor, the intensely creative Tom Noonan (you may remember him as Wild Bill in 
Manhunter and the guy with the bespoke bank heist in Heat). One almost 
identical voice – not just one actor, but a single voice – for every man, woman 
or child who appears on or off screen: the airline pilot, the stewardess, the 
taxi driver, room service, the ex-girlfriend… Indeed, the movie opens on a 
blank dark screen with a tidal tumult of Noonan voices overlaid on top of each 
other in a wash of soundtrack sameness, until Thewlis’s voice finally fights 
its way out of the babble.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fcharlie-kaufman-and-puppet-midlife-crisis-movie-anomalisa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43cdfbbbd1b35a36fc28a0c8d054d688e9382847%2F630_3_1553_933%2F1553.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anomalisa%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%E2%80%99s%20unique%20take%20on%20the%20mid-life%20crisis%20movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fcharlie-kaufman-and-puppet-midlife-crisis-movie-anomalisa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anomalisa%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%E2%80%99s%20unique%20take%20on%20the%20mid-life%20crisis%20movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fcharlie-kaufman-and-puppet-midlife-crisis-movie-anomalisa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43cdfbbbd1b35a36fc28a0c8d054d688e9382847%2F630_3_1553_933%2F1553.jpg>
 Photograph: Allstar 
The only other exception is Lisa (Jennifer Jason Leigh), a customer services 
rep who’s read Michael’s self-help book and thinks he’s a rock star. She alone 
can reach through the carapace of forced politeness that covers his inner rage, 
despair and turmoil. And yes, it’s a puppet movie with full-frontal male 
nudity, awkward sex and even cunnilingus. The chemistry between Michael and 
Lisa is touching and intermittently lovely, but he, and we, can tell it must 
necessarily be fleeting. Yet, while it lasts, it is entrancing, especially when 
Lisa, in a magical interlude, sings Cyndi Lauper’s Girls Just Wanna Have Fun, 
in a quavering, lilting voice, first in English, then in Italian.

Masters of puppets: Charlie Kaufman and the subversive allure of stop-motion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/07/subversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton>
The main drawback is the all-encompassing, Eeyore-like totality of Michael’s 
unhappiness, which at times threatens to suffocate the movie. What I’ve noticed 
about Kaufman’s movies as director (here he’s co-director with animation boss 
Duke Johnson) is that they lack the sardonic bounciness of moves directed by 
others from his screenplays, including my own favourite, Michel Gondry’s 
Eternal Sunshine Of The Spotless Mind. Kaufman’s worldview is courageously 
bleak in ways that other writer-directors would quail at, so he gets points for 
that. I just don’t know how badly I want it, or how much of it I can take.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanomalisa-charlie-kaufman-interview-stop-motion-animation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anomalisa%3A%20the%20tiny%20details%20of%20filming%20puppet%20sex%20in%20Charlie%20Kaufman's%20new%20film%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanomalisa-charlie-kaufman-interview-stop-motion-animation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anomalisa%3A%20the%20tiny%20details%20of%20filming%20puppet%20sex%20in%20Charlie%20Kaufman%27s%20new%20film%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanomalisa-charlie-kaufman-interview-stop-motion-animation-video&media=>
 Behind the scenes of Anomalisa  