
A Portuguese branch of the Anonymous hacking collective says it has shut down 
around 20 Angolan government websites in retaliation to thejailing of 17 youth 
activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/28/angola-jails-17-activists-rebellion-public-book-reading>
 for plotting a “rebellion”.


The youths, including well-known rapper Luaty Beirão 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/16/angola-rapper-hunger-strike-luaty-beirao-interview>
, were sentenced on Monday to between two and eight-and-a-half years, in a 
ruling that Amnesty International said was “an affront to justice”.

Angola jails 17 activists for rebellion after public reading of political book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/28/angola-jails-17-activists-rebellion-public-book-reading>
In a statement on its Facebook page the Anonymous Portugal group listed the 
government websites 
<https://www.facebook.com/portugalanon/photos/a.498330800329063.1073741828.373941706101307/550971945064948/?type=3&comment_id=551034681725341&ref=notif&notif_t=photo_comment&notif_id=1459393729639609&utm_content=buffer0c117&utm_medium=social&utm_source=facebook.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
 it said it had attacked. None of the websites were accessible on Wednesday.

“The real criminals are outside, defended by the capitalist system that 
increasingly spreads in the minds of the weak,”Anonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> said.

There was no immediate comment from the Angolan government on the alleged 
cyber attack.

Beirão, who holds dual Portuguese and Angolan nationality, has a loyal fan 
base inPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal>, the colonial 
ruler of Angola until the country won its independence after a protracted war 
in 1974.

Amnesty called for the immediate release of the activists, 15 of whom were 
detainedduring a weekly book group meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/angola-book-club-dos-santos-arrests>
 in the capital Luanda last June.

“Angolan authorities use the criminal justice system to silence dissenting 
views,” said Amnesty director Deprose Muchena.

“The activists have been wrongly convicted in a deeply-politicised trial. They 
are the victims of a government determined to intimidate anyone who dares to 
question its repressive policies.”

At the sentencing, about 30 protesters outside the court yelled “free the 
youths, arrest dictator Jose Eduardo dos Santos”, the president ofAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> since 1979.

A man who shouted inside the court that the sentences were a “travesty of 
justice” was himself sentenced on Tuesday to eight months in jail.

The jailed activists insist they are peaceful campaigners lobbying for Dos 
Santos, 73, to step down.

This month, he said he would retire in 2018 but the announcement was received 
with scepticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/angola-president-dos-santos-giving-up-power-2018-should-we-believe-him>
 following two similar pledges in the past. His current mandate ends at the end 
of next year.
 