
The hacking collective Anonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> has begun its promised leak 
of the identities of members of the Ku Klux Klan with a data dump of the names 
of more than 350 alleged members along with links to social media accounts. 
Many of the identities are already in the public domain.

Only one of the names listed in the file, on the anonymous sharing site 
Pastebin, had a phone number attached. Fewer than five had email addresses. 
None returned requests for comment.

Many in the release are already in the public eye, at least on social media. 
TheTwitter biography <https://twitter.com/SaberfoxJames> of one such Klan 
member, James Pratt, reads: “A veteran, a daddy, a Klansman of the 
Traditionalist American Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.”


Frank Ancona, whose name was included in the release as an imperial wizard of 
the KKK’s Traditionalist American Knights (TAK), has madeTV appearances 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MP8Of6gbZaM> as a representative of the group. 
Former leaderDavid Duke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/31/david-duke-former-ku-klux-klan-leader-steve-scalise>
 is listed in the release; so is Don Black, the founder of the white 
supremacist site Stormfront.


In a post on Ancona’s Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/frank.ancona.146?fref=ts> page, Greg Ferrell – whose 
name is also in the Pastebin file – said he was not afraid of having his name 
released.

“I’m not ashamed of being associated with it TAK,” he wrote, “I’m proud to be 
a KKK member of the TAK so let anonymous do their thing and f****** stupid 
bastards.”


Others are in the public eye because they have been in trouble with the law. 
Frazier Glenn Miller 
<https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/individual/frazier-glenn-miller>
, the founder of the Carolina Knights of the KKK, is in prison for hate crimes. 
He murdered three people at Jewish sites in Kansas in 2014, and wassentenced to 
death 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2015/09/08/white-supremacist-frazier-glenn-miller-sentenced-to-die/>
 in September.


The Pastebin file contained some hints regarding FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> infiltration of the Klan. The list 
itself was headed with the phrase “PROTIP: THE KKK ARE HEAVILY INFILTRATED BY 
THE EFF BEE EYE”.

On the list, three names were listed alleging that they were “FBI informants”. 
In July, one of them, Christopher Eugene Barker,was revealed 
<http://www.nate-thayer.com/patriot-games-kkk-leader-and-undercover-fbi-agent-heads-south-carolina-confederate-flag-rally/>
 as an informant in a case about the construction of a radioactive ray gun to 
target Muslims.

In a statement on Friday afternoon, a spokesperson for the FBI said: “We are 
aware of these reports and while we will not comment on specific allegations, 
we want to emphasize that those who engage in hacktivism are breaking the law.

“The FBI will continue to work with our public and private sector partners to 
identify and hold those accountable who engage in illegal activities in 
cyberspace.”

Anonymous’ war with the KKK began during protests that followed the death of 
Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, last year when a subgroup of the KKK – 
Ancona’s TAK – disseminated leaflets threatening “lethal force” against 
protesters. The Anonymous operation is now known as Operation KKK or, 
alternatively, Operation Hoods Off.

Operation KKK (@Operation_KKK) 
We removed several names from our list for further investigation. We would 
rather have a smaller, accurate list that we are comfortable with
 <https://twitter.com/Operation_KKK/status/662389419568177152> November 5, 2015
 <https://twitter.com/Operation_KKK/status/662389419568177152> 
Anonymous denies releasing incorrect Ku Klux Klan member information
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/03/anonymous-denies-involvement-ku-klux-klan-data>
In October, the hacktivist group said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/29/anonymous-ku-klux-klan-members-reveal-names>
 it would release the names of 1,000 KKK members on a date aimed to loosely 
coincide with the first anniversary of rioting that followed the Missouri grand 
jury’s decision not to indict Darren Wilson, the officer who shot Michael 
Brown. Anonymous later brought their release date forward to 5 November.


On Monday, a Twitter account claiming affiliation with Anonymous released a 
separate list of names it said were Klan members, including several US senators 
and local mayors. The list was quickly discredited, and the @Operation_KKK 
accountdistanced itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/03/anonymous-denies-involvement-ku-klux-klan-data>
 from it.


Friday’s official release did not appear to mark the end of Anonymous’ 
operation. A tweet on Thursday from the @Operation_KKK account said the group 
had held back some names for “further investigation”.


In an email sent before the data was dumped, a representative of Anonymous 
told the Guardian: “We are trying to change our world. No further comment.”

 