
The hacking collective Anonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> has vowed once again to 
“dismantle” Donald Trump’s presidential campaign and to “expose what he doesn’t 
want the public to know”.


The group announced its re-engagement of “OpTrump” through its traditional 
propaganda video, aiming to take down one of Trump’s property websites for
Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/12/donald-trump-rally-called-off-in-chicago-amid-protests-violence-and-chaos>
 on 1 April.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCiavyc6bE7A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCiavyc6bE7A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCiavyc6bE7A&media=>
 Anonymous declares war on Donald Trump. 
Anonymous said: “We have been watching you for a long time and what we’ve seen 
is deeply disturbing. You don’t stand for anything but your personal greed and 
power.

“This is a call to arms. Shut down his websites, research and expose what he 
doesn’t want the public to know. We need you to dismantle his campaign and 
sabotage his brand.”

Anonymous last declared war on Trump at the end of 2015 in response to Trump’s 
proposal 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/12/anonymous-targets-donald-trump-over-proposed-muslim-ban/420078/>
 to ban Muslims from entering the US. At the time the group took down the 
website of New York’s Trump Tower using a distributed denial of service attack 
(DDoS) that overwhelms a site’s servers using bogus traffic.

Whether this renewed effort by Anonymous will have a greater impact on Trump 
and his campaign for the US presidential elections is unclear. But the 
collective is urging everyone to support their campaign saying “you do not need 
to know how to hack to support this operation”.

“This is a declaration of total war. OperationTrump engaged.”

Trump has been the target of several hacking groups, allegedly leaking 
personal information, voicemail messages and attacking his various sites, all 
of which have had little effect on his popularity.

 * Three French Anonymous activists on trial for targeting police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/23/french-anonymous-activists-trial-police>

 * Donald Trump’s hotel chain reveals hack ‘may have stolen credit card data’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/05/donald-trump-hotels-hack-malware-credit-card-data> 