
Witchcraft was decriminalised in 1735, yet the image of the mature single 
woman remained negative to say the least. She was deviant, desperate and 
pathetic, yet at the same time predatory and threatening. In our own age, when
half of women aged under 35 live alone 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1319007/The-Bridget-Jones-generation-How-half-women-aged-18-35-living-alone.html>
, you might have thought things have changed. According to sociological 
research, this seems to have happenedrather less than expected 
<http://www.springerlink.com/content/r2373700420240k1>.

Apparently, couples still shun the female singleton 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-485097/Why-single-women-pursue-married-man.html>
, fearful that she'll wreck their marriages or at least their dinner-party 
numbers. One survey found that half of its samplenever had single women as 
visitors 
<https://docs.google.com/viewer?url=http://www.springerlink.com/content/r2373700420240k1/fulltext.pdf>
, and 19% knew no single women at all. Casual disregard for this social group 
goes unremarked. Our prime minister insists thatmarriage must be prioritised 
and rewarded 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1263588/Cameron-My-1bn-plan-support-marriage-matters-money.html>
. The last government repeatedlyidentified "hard-working families" as its 
abiding concern <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/458871.stm>. WAGs, 
meanwhile, are celebrated as much as manless Anistons are pitied.

In a world centred on cosily coupled units, leftover women labour under an 
enduring disadvantage. When they're not ignored completely, they're expected to 
provide tireless but unrecompensed support for people who matter more than 
them, as babysitters, carers or shoulders to cry on. When a mother is called 
upon to bunk off work to attend a nativity play, her unpartnered colleague is 
expected to take up the slack.

Cinema hasn't done much for the benighted single woman. Fat, ugly, repressed 
and drably dressed Charlotte, as played by Bette Davis inNow, Voyager 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76242/now-voyager>, helped shape the 
image of the spinster for a generation. Naturally, Charlotte blossoms when she 
meets a man â€“ though she's not as lucky in this respect as all those other 
Hollywood singletons who get romcommed into coupled bliss before they can 
depress us too much. Instead, Charlotte's tasked to show us that those redeemed 
by no such rescue must devote themselves to self-sacrifice: she gives over her 
pointless life to caring for an elderly parent. Half a century later, in
Marvin's Room <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0116999/>, Diane Keaton's Bessie is 
still doing the same thing; her married sister is far too busy to help out.

If anything, the big screen has been growing tougher on single women. Mae West 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mae_West> was free to play roles that prompted 
William Randolph Hearst to describe her as"a menace to the sacred institution 
of the American family" 
<http://www.chronogram.com/issue/2002/07/communitynotebook/notebook_3.html>. No 
such luck today.

Seemingly fulfilled career-girls, like Holly Hunter's Jane in Broadcast News 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Broadcast_News_%28film%29>, turn out to have 
mistaken their true purpose in life. The romcoms that sort out such chumps, 
such as The Bounty Hunter, The Ugly Truth or The Switch, grow ever more 
degrading. Our own era's equivalent of Charlotte, the archetypal celluloid 
singleton, could quite possibly be Fatal Attraction's bunny-boiling maniac.

Time, then, for a socially conscious, subsidised luvvie to put things right. 
Enter no less compassionate and sensitive a figure than Mike Leigh. InAnother 
Year <https://www.theguardian.com/film/another-year>, he paints as memorable a 
picture of the seasoned single woman as we're likely to see for some time. The 
film stars Jim Broadbent and Ruth Sheen as a greying but loving couple called 
Tom and Gerri. Yet the limelight's stolen by their divorced friend Mary, who's 
middle-aged, alone and played by Lesley Manville. So what's she like?

As it turns out, Mary is raddled, deluded and usually drunk. She's desperately 
clingy, and so lonely that she bursts into Tom and Gerri's hallowed home 
without warning in search of crumbs of affection. She wastes their time and 
embarrasses them, but they can't get rid of her. Eventually, of course, they do 
have to show her the door, generous though they've been. If you're pestered by 
singleton friends yourself, you'll recognise the problem.

Mary's also extremely stupid. It's not just that she doesn't know how to park 
her car. She can't get it into her head that someone in her position should 
throw herself at any man foolish enough to show interest in her, however 
repulsive she (and anyone else) might find him. Instead, she dares fancy a chap 
who's actually younger than her and quite good-looking. Naturally, that brings 
her only further humiliation.

Sadly, then, this turns out to be the single woman as conventionally 
understood, rather than radically and positively re-envisioned. As such, it's a 
portrayal that hardly atones for the big screen's previous treatment of them. 
Except, perhaps, in one respect: Mary's interesting. We seem to be supposed to 
admire and even envy Tom and Gerri's cosy contentment, but in fact their 
allotment-centred lives seem mind-numbingly boring. Mary's fate may be chaos, 
misery and hopelessness, but compared to Tom and Gerri's companionable wait for 
death it almost looks attractive.

Mary, it's implied, should have jumped at her last chance of coupledom. Some 
cinemagoers may remain unconvinced. Another Year might shake its head at the 
single woman, as so many other films have done, but inadvertently it champions 
her choice.
 