
I take my hat off to Pedro Almodóvar: this film about a deranged plastic 
surgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/19/cannes-2011-film-festival-pedro-almodovar-review>
 is absolutely brilliant. My wife was so disturbed after watching it that she 
started asking me some concerned questions about what my job actually involves.

Antonio Banderas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/29/antonio-banderas-interview-almodovar>
 plays the surgeon, Robert Ledgard, to perfection. Almost all the Spanish 
plastic surgeons I've met are exactly like him: sophisticated, with 
slicked-back hair, BMWs, huge country estates, and a penchant for wearing black 
tie. We British surgeons like to think we're equally suave, but we don't tend 
to slick our hair back. Neither do we have operating theatres in our houses, as 
Robert does: they're illegal in the UK, though many European surgeons do have 
them.

Robert is a Josef Mengele <http://www.bbc.co.uk/dna/h2g2/A2875368> figure, 
obsessed with sculpting a woman in the exact image of his late wife. A lot 
of plastic surgeons do share Robert's God complex: when you spend your time 
basically stabbing people with knives, you can't really be quite normal. But 
I've never known a surgeon take his narcissism to such extremes.

I felt a shiver of recognition at the scene in which Robert describes the 
transformative, almost religious possibilities of total face transplants: at a 
lecture I once attended on the same subject, the speaker started talking about 
John the Baptist in the same breath as himself.

Robert has crafted a new form of artificial skin that doesn't burn or 
scar. Artificial skin does really exist, though it's not quite as advanced as 
that. Pig skin and skin from human cadavers are sometimes used in 
reconstructive surgery, though both are ultimately rejected by the body.

There's so much in this film that's uncomfortably true. Every wannabe plastic 
surgeon should watch it.

• Nigel Mercer <http://www.circlepartnership.co.uk/consultants/nigel-mercer> 
is a consultant plastic surgeon based in Bristol, and a former president of the 
British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons. The Skin I Live In is out 
now.
 