
British films The King's Speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-kings-speech> and Another Year are 
leading the charge for this year's London Critics' Circle film awards with 
seven nominations each, it was announced today.

Tom Hooper's historical drama about the efforts of King George VI to overcome 
a stammer in the early years of his reign picked up nods for film of the year, 
actor of the year (Colin Firth) and actress of the year (Helena Bonham Carter), 
while Mike Leigh's latest drama was named as a contender for best British 
director, best British actor and actress.

Away from the UK-oriented awards, Oscars frontrunner The Social Network picked 
up five nominations, while Joel and Ethan Coen's remake of the classic John 
Wayne western True Grit received four nods.

Firth will face off against True Grit's Jeff Bridges, Ryan Gosling, Jesse 
Eisenberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jesse-eisenberg> and Jim Broadbent 
for best actor, while Annette Bening and Natalie Portman take on Jennifer 
Lawrence, Sweden's Noomi Rapace and Hailee Steinfeld for best actress.

This year's ceremony will take place at the BFI London on the South Bank for 
the first time, on 10 February 2011, in aid of the BFI archive.

The Circle's chairman, Jason Solomons, said: "The critics have been bowled 
over by the variety and excellence of the nominees this year, from old 
favourites on top form, such asMike Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mikeleigh>, to stupendous debuts such as Clio 
Barnard's The Arbor. I am also delighted that our awards will be at BFI 
Southbank, Britain's home of film culture, and that everyone attending the 
event will help towards the preservation of the nation's celluloid treasures 
for future generations of filmmakers, critics and cinema lovers."

The full nominations list can be found below:

Sky 3D award: Film of the Year

Black Swan (Fox)

The Kids Are All Right (Universal)

The King's Speech (Momentum)

The Social Network (Sony)

Toy Story 3 (Disney)

The Attenborough award: British Film of the Year


127 Hours (Warner/Pathe)

The Arbor (Verve)

Another Year <https://www.theguardian.com/film/another-year> (Momentum)

The King's Speech (Momentum)

Monsters (Vertigo)

Foreign Language Film of the Year

Dogtooth (Verve)

I Am Love (Metrodome)

Of Gods and Men (Artificial Eye)

The Secret in Their Eyes (Metrodome)

Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives (New Wave)

Actor of the Year sponsored by Narrabeen Communications


Jeff Bridges <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeff-bridges> – True Grit 
(Paramount)

Jesse Eisenberg – The Social Network (Sony)

Colin Firth <https://www.theguardian.com/film/colin-firth> – The King's Speech 
(Momentum)

Ryan Gosling – Blue Valentine (Optimum)

Edgar Ramirez – Carlos (Optimum)

Moët Actress of the Year


Annette Bening – The Kids Are All Right (Universal)

Jennifer Lawrence – Winter's Bone (Artificial Eye)

Natalie Portman – Black Swan (Fox)

Noomi Rapace – The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo (Momentum)

Hailee Steinfeld – True Grit (Paramount)

British Actor of the Year in association with Cameo Productions

Riz Ahmed – Four Lions (Optimum)

Christian Bale – The Fighter (Paramount/Momentum)

Jim Broadbent <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jim-broadbent> – Another 
Year (Momentum)

Colin Firth – The King's Speech (Momentum)

Andrew Garfield – Never Let Me Go (Fox)

British Actress of the Year

Helena Bonham Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/helena-bonham-carter> – 
The King's Speech (Momentum)

Lesley Manville – Another Year (Momentum)

Rosamund Pike – Barney's Version (Universal)

Ruth Sheen – Another Year (Momentum)

Tilda Swinton – I Am Love (Metrodome)

British Actor in a Supporting Role


David Bradley – Another Year (Momentum)

Pierce Brosnan – The Ghost (Optimum)

Andrew Garfield – The Social Network (Sony)

Tom Hardy – Inception (Warner)

Peter Wight – Another Year (Momentum)

British Actress in a Supporting Role

Helena Bonham Carter – Alice in Wonderland (Disney)

Christine Bottomley – The Arbor (Verve)

Minnie Driver – Barney's Version (Universal)

Rosamund Pike – Made in Dagenham (Paramount)

Olivia Williams – The Ghost (Optimum)

Young British Performer of the Year

Jessica Barden – Tamara Drewe (Momentum)

Conor McCarron – NEDs (Entertainment One)

Will Poulter – The Chronicles of Narnia: The Voyage of the Dawn Treader (Fox)

Saoirse Ronan – The Way Back (Entertainment One)

Thomas Turgoose – The Scouting Book for Boys (Pathe)

Director of the Year


Darren Aronofsky – Black Swan (Fox)

Joel Coen and Ethan Coen – True Grit (Paramount)

David Fincher – The Social Network (Sony)

Christopher Nolan – Inception (Warner)

Apichatpong Weerasethakul – Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives (New 
Wave)

British Director of the Year

Clio Barnard – The Arbor (Verve)

Danny Boyle – 127 Hours (Warner/Pathe)

Tom Hooper <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hooper> – The King's Speech 
(Momentum)

Mike Leigh – Another Year (Momentum)

Christopher Nolan – Inception (Warner)

Screenwriter of the Year


Lisa Cholodenko and Stuart Blumberg – The Kids Are All Right (Universal)

Joel Coen and Ethan Coen – True Grit (Paramount)

Chris Morris, Sam Bain, Simon Blackwell and Jesse Armstrong – Four Lions 
(Optimum)

David Seidler – The King's Speech (Momentum)

Aaron Sorkin – The Social Network (Sony)

Virgin Atlantic Breakthrough British Film-maker

Banksy – Exit Through the Gift Shop (Revolver)

Clio Barnard – The Arbor (Verve)

J Blakeson – The Disappearance of Alice Creed (CinemaNX)

Gareth Edwards – Monsters (Vertigo)

Chris Morris – Four Lions (Optimum)
 