
ITV star presenters Anthony McPartlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin> and Declan Donnelly have 
signed another exclusive two-year "golden handcuffs" deal with the broadcaster.

The contract will see the popular duo present new series of I'm A Celebrity … 
Get Me Out of Here! andBritain's Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent>, plus the return 
of Saturday Night Takeaway for a tenth series.

However, ITV confirmed that Push the Button, made by the pair's independent 
production companyGallowgate <http://gallowgatetv.com/>, will not be returning.

When they signed their last deal with ITV in 2009, Ant and Dec admitted they 
took a pay cut 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/7309054/Ant-and-Dec-why-we-took-a-pay-cut.html>
, citing the tough economic climate for ITV and saying: "When times were good, 
we made more money. When times are bad, we make less."

They reportedly earned about £5m a year each last time and it is understood 
that financial elements of their new contract are slightly down, but broadly 
they will take the same amount home overall.

Should ITV recommission Simon Cowell's £1m prize gameshow Red or Black?, it is 
expected thatAnt and Dec <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> 
will front it again.

Ant said: "We are really pleased to sign with ITV for another two years and 
continue to make the programmes we love with the channel."

Dec added: "We always said we would bring back Saturday Night Takeaway, so 
we're particularly delighted plans are now in place. We have lots of fresh and 
exciting ideas for the brand new series."

Peter Fincham, ITV director of television, channels and online, said: "Ant and 
Dec remain at the very top of their game as two of the nation's most popular 
television stars. Their ability to connect with our audience is unrivalled and 
I'm delighted that we're extending our exclusive partnership with them both for 
a further two years."

Ant and Dec first joined ITV in 1998 presenting the Saturday morning shows 
SM:TV Live and CD:UK.

They signed their first golden handcuffs deal with the broadcaster in 2000 and 
successfully made the transition to being two of ITV1's biggest mainstream 
entertainment stars, fronting shows including I'm a Celebrity … Get Me Out of 
Here!, Britain's Got Talent and Saturday Night Takeaway.

 

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 