
The ITV1 stars Anthony McPartlin and Declan Donnelly have been confirmed to 
deliver the Alternative MacTaggart lecture at this year's MediaGuardian
Edinburgh International Television Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/edinburghtvfestival> as the full lineup is 
unveiled.

The presenting double act will be joined by actor Amanda Holden in the opening 
event of the festival, a special session called TV's Got Talent: Edinburgh 
Special. No details about Ant and Dec's Alternative MacTaggart, a counterpoint 
to the MacTaggart speech that is generally regarded as a festival highlight, 
have been released.

Gerhard Zeiler, chief executive of the Channel Five owner RTL, will deliver 
the Worldview Address looking at the state of the global television industry.

Meanwhile, BBC's Top Gear team and the actor Ross Kemp will join David Simon, 
who created the critically acclaimed US drama The Wire, in hosting masterclass 
sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/05/edinburghtvfestival-wire>.

The senior Microsoft executive Ashley Highfield, former head of the BBC's new 
media division and chief of the defunct online TV platform Project Kangaroo, 
will give the MTV-sponsored Futureview Address.

Ed Vaizey, the shadow arts minister, will join a panel looking at the issues 
surrounding the potential of advertiser-funded programming.

To mark a decade of Big Brother, a session called How Reality Has Changed TV 
will look at the "influence, history and controversy" surrounding the Channel 4 
show.

This year's festival, which runs from 28 to 30 August, will focus on new 
revenue models, changing technology and explore how the industry is coping with 
the credit crunch and economic downturn.

A number of media and television heavyweights have already been announced as 
part of the lineup.

James Murdoch, the News Corporation chairman and chief executive, Europe and 
Asia, willdeliver the James MacTaggart lecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/apr/20/james-murdoch-edinburgh-festival>
. The BBC business editor, Robert Peston, who has seen his stock rise by 
breaking a string of exclusives during the financial crisis,will deliver the 
Richard Dunn memorial lecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/11/robert-peston-lecture-edinburgh-tv-festival>
.

The ITV director of television, Peter Fincham, who delivered last year's 
MacTaggart lecture,will interview the Ofcom chief executive Ed Richards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/15/peter-fincham-ed-richards-edinburgh-tv-festival>
.

Controllers from the major channels – including BBC1's Jay Hunt, Peter Fincham 
from ITV1, Julian Bellamy from Channel 4, Five's Richard Woolfe and Stuart 
Murphy at Sky1 – will look ahead to 2010.

"At a time when the television industry is facing cutbacks and budgetary 
constraints, it is vital that the industry joins together to consider its 
future position and the Edinburgh International TV Festival is the ideal place 
for this to happen," said Elaine Bedell, MGEITF advisory chair and director of 
entertainment and comedy at ITV.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 