
Gallowgate, the TV production company owned by Anthony McPartlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin> and Declan Donnelly, is to 
launch a strategic review of the future of the business after ITV decided not 
to recommission Push The Button.

It is understood that a review of the business will take place in the new 
year, whenAnt and Dec <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> 
return from filming I'm A Celebrity Get Me Out of Here in Australia, with a 
number of options being considered.

Two industry sources claimed the company could be wound up. However, a 
spokesman for Gallowgate said: "It is not closing, no."

The independent producer was founded in 2004 as a vehicle to produce Ant and 
Dec shows including ITV1 hit Saturday Night Takeaway as well as Vernon Kay's 
ITV1 quiz Beat the Star.

Gallowgate also holds the rights to ITV children's show SM:tv Live and all 18 
series of BBC children's drama Byker Grove – shows which launched the careers 
of Ant and Dec.

Tim Hammond, Gallowgate's managing director, who was given "overall 
responsibility for all Gallowgate business" following thesudden death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/08/gallowgate-chief-ed-forsdick-dies?INTCMP=SRCH>
 of Ed Forsdick in June, has also left the business.

Emails to Hammond are met with the message that he "no longer works at 
Gallowgate".

The company had not responded to a request to clarify Hammond's status and 
whether a replacement as managing director had been appointed by the time of 
publication.

Earlier this year ITV held talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/22/itv-eyes-norton-production-deal?INTCMP=SRCH>
 to potentially buy a stake in Gallowgate, or even buy it outright, but no deal 
emerged.

The company, which made a loss of £358,000 in the year to 31 March 2010, is 
currently in the process of producing a hidden camera show for BSkyB,Meet the 
Pranksters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/25/sky1-autumn-hidden-camera-show?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 