
ITV stars Anthony McPartlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin> and Declan Donnelly are to 
front a new campaign for Nintendo UK that will see them compete against members 
of the public in a series of TV ads.

The ad push, which the games brand claims is the biggest entertainment 
campaign it has run in the UK, kicks off tonight with a scene-setting 
commercial featuringAnt and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> talking about their love 
of Nintendo games and devices.

In the ad, created by ad agency Karmarama, the pair outline the challenge that 
will be played out in a series of TV commercials and online videos where they 
will compete against members of the public atNintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> games.

Before making the Ant and Dec ads, Karmarama ran a national recruitment 
campaign looking for "genuine" Nintendo fans, some of whom made it into the 
wider ad campaign.

Subsequent ads will feature the pair playing against cabbies keeping their 
brain active with Brain Training and women from Weight Watchers having fun 
playing sports title Wii Fit.

"I loved my Nintendo 64 growing up … it kept Dec and I entertained for hours 
during the PJ and Duncan years," said McPartlin.

David Yarnton, Nintendo UK's general manager, said Ant and Dec had been chosen 
to front the campaign because of their popularity with everyone from 
"grandparents to grandchildren".

"With the broad appeal of Nintendo's products from ages five to 95, we knew 
they'd make the perfect partner for the brand," he said.

Nintendo has used a host of stars to front its campaigns in recent years, 
includingGirls Aloud 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/oct/20/advertising-nintendo>, Holly 
Willoughby and Fearne Cotton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/aug/07/advertising.television>, Nicole 
Kidman <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2007/jun/25/advertising1> and Patrick 
Stewart.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 