
Anthony McPartlin <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin> and 
Declan Donnelly have said they may not sign a new golden handcuffs deal with 
ITV so they can work for other broadcasters again, as the prospect of a pay cut 
looms due to the recession.

The duo, who front some of ITV's biggest shows such as Britain's Got Talent, 
Saturday Night Takeaway and I'm a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here!, are on a
reported joint £30m exclusive two-and-a-half-year deal with the broadcaster. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/apr/18/broadcasting.ITV>

However, this is due to expire at the end of this year and the pair have 
reportedly been warned that because of the downturn any new deal will be for 
less. Simon Cowell, who is on an exclusive £20m three-year deal with ITV that 
also ends this year, is understood to have been warned the same.

Ant and Dec today kept open the prospect of working for other broadcasters as 
well as ITV. "I don't know what we'll do - whether we will stay exclusive to 
ITV,"McPartlin told The Sun 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/tv/article2221213.ece>.

"Everybody is suffering, it's global - but what we're interested in is making 
great shows."

Donnelly added: "It's a big thing, our relationship with ITV. We still have 
three really big shows. If push came to shove, we wouldn't be doing much else 
in the year. I don't know if we'd have enough time to do a project on another 
channel."

The pair also said they had been offered presenting duties on Cowell's new 
version of Blind Date, but it is understood they turned the job down.

An ITV spokesman said the broadcaster did not comment on contracts.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 