
1815-1882

"The satirist who writes nothing but satire should write but little - or it 
will seem that his satire springs rather from his own caustic nature than from 
the sins of the world in which he lives."

Birthplace

London, England

Education

He attended Harrow and Winchester, but his education was frequently disrupted 
because of family debts. He was unable to afford a university education.

Other jobs

He worked as a junior clerk in the Post Office and was a surveyor's clerk in 
Ireland; he also edited St Paul's magazine. He attempted to enter parliament as 
a Liberal in 1868 but was unsuccessful.

Did you know?

While working for the Post Office, Trollope invented the letter box.

Critical verdict

Trollope was a chronicler of the minutiae of upper-middle-class Victorian 
England. When he died, and his autobiography was published, his reputation sank 
for a time – due largely to the revelation that he treated literature as a 
trade and wrote by the clock. He considered it the novelist's task "to make his 
readers so intimately acquainted with his characters that the creation of his 
brain should be to them speaking, moving, living, human creatures". He was a 
skilful master of psychological characterisation and satire. Nathaniel 
Hawthorne commented that his novels "precisely suit my taste; solid, 
substantial, written on strength of beef and through inspiration of ale, and 
just as real as if some giant had hewn a great lump out of the earth and put it 
under a glass case, with all its inhabitants going about their daily business, 
and not suspecting that they were made a show of.

Recommended works

Barchester Towers (1857), Phineas Finn, He Knew He Was Right (both 1869). 
Trollope himself thought Dr Thorne his best work.

Influences

William Makepeace Thackeray, R Monckton Milnes, WE Forster, GH Lewes

Now read on

George Eliot, Elizabeth Gaskell, early Dickens (Trollope loathed the 
politicism of his later works, and called him "very ignorant and 
thick-skinned...not a hero at all").

Adaptations

Trollope has appeared only on the small screen.

Recommended biography

His autobiography was written between October 1875 and April 1876, but not 
published until after his death.

Criticism

Anthony Trollope <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonytrollope> And His 
Contemporaries by David Skilton (1996) situates Trollope in his time.

Useful links and work online

Work online
· The Way We Live Now 
<http://www.arthursclassicnovels.com/arthurs/trollope/wwlvn10.html>
· Can You Forgive Her? 
<http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/etcbin/browse-mixed-new?id=TroForg&tag=public&images=images/modeng&data=/texts/english/modeng/parsed>
· Barchester Towers 
<http://www.classicreader.com/booktoc.php/sid.1/bookid.428/>
· 'Hunting sketches' from the Pall Mall gazette 
<http://www.xmission.com/~drudy/fox/trollope.html>
· North America Vol I 
<ftp://metalab.unc.edu/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext99/1noam10.txt>
· North America Vol II 
<ftp://metalab.unc.edu/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext99/2noam10.txt>

Background
· Map of Trollope's Barsetshire <http://www.trollopeusa.org/tsociety/map.html>
· Critical overview <http://www.victorianweb.org/authors/trollope/index.html>
· The Trollope Society <http://www.trollopeusa.org/>
 