 Andy Hayman, who became the Met's head of counter-terrorism in 2005, was 
embroiled in controversy on a number of occasions.
In August this year, he was criticised by an Independent Police Complaints 
Commission report into the fatal shooting ofJean Charles de Menezes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/menezes> at Stockwell underground station in 
July 2005.

The IPCC document said he misled senior officers by failing to tell them that 
the Brazilian electrician was not a wanted suicide bomber.

In June last year, Hayman apologised to two brothers who were freed without 
charge after an anti-terror raid at Forest Gate, east London.

The raid, involving around 250 officers, resulted in the arrest of Mohammed 
Abdul Kahar, 23, and Abul Koyair, 20, who were questioned under terrorism laws 
for a week before being released.

Kahar, who was shot in the shoulder, said he thought he was going to be killed 
by robbers targeting his home.

In a case of unfortunate timing, Hayman - who was praised for his response to 
the July 7 2005 terror attacks on London's transport system - was made a CBE in 
the honours list just days afterwards. However, it was reported that the 
decision to give him the award had been made months before the raid.

In December last year, Hayman was found to have been in command of an 
"unlawful" investigation into one of his own colleagues, Ali Dizaei, then a Met 
police superintendent. Hayman was in overall command of an operation that 
included tapping Dizaei's phones, something the investigatory powers tribunal 
declared unlawful.

The investigation took four years and cost Â£4m, but ended with Dizaei's 
acquittal on corruption charges at the Old Bailey. The Metropolitan police 
commissioner, Sir Ian Blair admitting it had caused "considerable damage" to 
relations between the force and its black officers.

Hayman joined the police in 1978, when he served as a uniformed officer in the 
criminal investigation department of the Essex force.

Ten years later, he was appointed commander in the Met and given 
responsibility for drugs, crime and complaints investigations. In that role he 
commanded the high-profile Operation Trident, which investigates gun crime in 
the black community.

In 2002, he was appointed chief constable of Norfolk constabulary, before 
returning to London as assistant commissioner for specialist operations in 2005.

The role involved responsibility for terrorist investigations, special branch, 
the protection of royalty, VIPs and diplomats and their residences, and 
aviation security.

Hayman was backed for his current job as head of counter-terrorism by Blair, 
taking over from Sir David Veness, a highly regarded figure who left the Met to 
become the UN's under-secretary general for safety and security.

He was instrumental in government attempts to extend the period for which 
terror suspects can be held without charge to 90 days.

MPs were unconvinced by the proposal, and Tony Blair's government suffered its 
first Commons defeat over the issue in November 2005.
 