
During the later Blair years, the prime minister's own aides would sometimes 
raise an eyebrow and mutter the word "respect". Their boss'sswansong agenda 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4597378.stm> pledged to put the respectable 
majority in charge. His henchmen revealed weary irony because, after a decade 
of hyperactive legislating, it was implausible to hope that central diktats 
could really do away with all the dumped fridges and drunkenness.

The coalition initially made a point of saying that draconian activism would 
not deliver. But as it slides in the polls, the old itch to do something about 
everything is flaring up anew. The home secretary's heavily trailedwhite paper 
on antisocial behaviour 
<http://www.official-documents.gov.uk/document/cm83/8367/8367.pdf> yesterday 
took us back to the time of Tony. There was spin about new fines which turned 
out to be on the statute book already, talk of "streamlining" and "joining up", 
plus a more substantive offering of a crackdown through the law.

Like her New Labour predecessors, Theresa May is right to say that bullying 
and unruliness that are tricky to tackle through the criminal law are 
nonetheless a major cause of misery on many streets. This is not always obvious 
from the vantage point of the leafier communities where judges and mandarins 
reside. The difficulty is not recognising a genuine problem, but posturing 
solutions that do more harm than good. New Labour's asbos were punitive all 
right, often a trapdoor to prison, but that did not make them effective. They 
fell out of fashion as theproportion of the orders being breached 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/cmhansrd/cm091110/text/91110w0036.htm#09111081000123>
 rose from about half to 70%-plus. Thus – as yesterday's document stated – 
their use has more than halved since 2005.

Rather than recognise this failure, Mrs May seeks to reinvent it in purer 
form. Specifically, her "crime prevention injunction" would move much of the 
arsenal of punishment out of the criminal and into civil courts, where 
penalties can be meted out on the basis of probabilities rather than proof.Asbos
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/asbos> were always a legal hybrid, and 
New Labour had originally tried a similar trick. But it fell foul of the law 
lords, who ruled that the liberty-sapping potential of an asbo demanded the 
full protections of criminal justice. The new wheeze involves working round 
this judgment by legislating so that the whole process – not just the issuing 
of injunctions, but also determination of whether they have been breached – 
becomes a purely civil matter. Every sort of punishment including imprisonment 
could then be allowed without any conviction having to be secured.

It is frightening stuff, but it won't be happening soon. It was not in this 
month's crime and courts bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/may/22/may-tougher-antisocial-behaviour-laws>
, and will now be examined as draft legislation before enactment is even 
considered. Lib Dems and Ken Clarke's justice department both fret about 
bulging prisons, and may have forced the delay. That is grounds for relief at 
least, if not for respect.
 