
The ripple effects of Donald Trump’s presidential candidacy have led to a 
civil war in the Republican party. But they have also had the unexpected 
consequence of leading to a subterranean civil war withinAnonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous>, the mysterious hacking 
collective.

Anonymous collective declares ‘total war’ on Donald Trump, again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/15/anonymous-declares-total-war-on-donald-trump-again>
 Most of the political operations targeted by Anonymous – including the Church 
of Scientology, Isis and the KKK – have instigated some level of internal 
dispute among people claiming to be part of Anonymous. But when the group
announced <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rFSjg_lyBfY> their next target would 
be the Trump campaign, it set off the most heated debate yet within the 
movement – which has no leader and no specific set of aims.

 Many disavowed the anti-Trump operation as being counter to Anonymous’s 
tradition of not taking sides in political contests. (Aprevious operation 
<http://thehackernews.com/2015/12/anonymous-donald-trump.html> against Trump 
was similarly derailed, albeit on a smaller scale, when another hacker calling 
himself Black Mafia wrested control of the Twitteraccount 
<https://twitter.com/optrumpOfficial>.)

 Others have even alleged the movement is being hijacked by either campaign 
operatives or activists trying to co-opt Anonymous for their own political 
ends. On 15 March, avideo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X39HwW4oKoA> was 
released.

“We are feeling deeply concerned about an operation that was launched in our 
name – the so-called Operation Trump,” says the video, which, in classic 
Anonymous style, is narrated by a disembodied computerised voice.

 “We – Anonymous – are warning you about the lies and deceits pushed under our 
banner,” the voice continues.

 But a user named Beemsee posted a message to a site called Ghostbin 
<https://ghostbin.com/paste/exs77> to defend the operation. 

“There has been large amounts of opposition to this operation as many think 
that OpTrump aims to censor Donald Trump’s free speech,” said Beemsee, who is 
linked to the Twitter accountOpTrumpHQ <https://twitter.com/optrumphq>. “This 
is not the case. We do NOT stand for a specific political ideology,” Beemsee 
continued.

I cheered as protesters clashed with Trump supporters. Then I felt shame | 
Matt Laslo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/15/donald-trump-supporters-protesters-shameful-politics>
 The Twitter account YourAnonCentral <https://twitter.com/YourAnonCentral> is 
one of the longest-standing nodes for Anonymous communications. Its 
administrator, who has been involved in the movement since its inception around 
2006 on the anarchic image-board 4chan, said that the Trump and Sanders 
campaigns had been seen “actively attempting to subvert and misuse Anonymous 
for their own gains”.

 “They are both using Anonymous as a prop in their ‘war’ and it is a lie,” the 
administrator said over Twitter direct message. “Anonymous comes from every 
part of the political spectrum, the only things we could be all (mostly) 
aligned on are against the censorship of candidates by the media or against 
human rights violations or similar,” adding that mimicking the style of 
Anonymous would be “really easy” for anyone motivated to do so.

 Some personal information on Trump has been released as part of the 
operation, but many in the movement have derided it as including only 
information that was already in the public domain.

 OpTrumpTruth was one of the early Twitter accounts associated with the 
purported action against Trump. The operator of the account said that she had 
joined Anonymous nine months ago, and had been part of previous operations 
against SeaWorld and campaigns in support of Chelsea Manning.

 She described herself as politically independent but said, also over Twitter 
direct message, that “we believe Mr Trump is a blatant hateful racist with 
enough money to buy his way to power that’s something that we in good 
conscience can’t allow”.

 Asked about the schism in the movement, she said that many of the major 
Anonymous accounts – including YourAnonCentral – were opposed to the anti-Trump 
operation because “they say Anonymous is against the whole system not just one 
man.”

 She also said that there were many Trump supporters within Anonymous and 
“those people will not want to see anything that brings him down.”

Anonymous denies releasing incorrect Ku Klux Klan member information
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/03/anonymous-denies-involvement-ku-klux-klan-data>
 On the message-board for OpTrump – which is open and, of course, anonymous – 
users have been engaging in fiery debate as to the veracity, and the 
advisability, of taking sides in the presidential election. “So what decision 
should we make, not choosing doesn’t help anything,” said a user who had taken 
the nickname EverythingBerns. “Well, you’ve got to pick someone,” one user 
replied. “DON’T CHOSE [sic]” said another.

 Another account using the visual lingua franca of Anonymous, called 
OpWhiteRose, also agitates against Trump. After several messages, the operator 
of that account admitted that they had no involvement or affiliation with 
Anonymous. Instead, the operator said they were “a small group of like-minded 
people who want to stop Trump’s politics from destroying the US.”

 Asked why they were using the Anonymous logo on their account, and the 
signifiers of a true Anonymous operation, OpWhiteRose replied with a question. 
“Have you ever thought to ask Anonymous why they use an image of a Guy Fawkes 
mask?”

 “It’s a powerful symbol,” OpWhiteRose said, “and it goes hand in hand with 
its history that ‘the people’ would use it, freely, in acts of righteous 
rebellion when the times call for it.”
 