
A former president of the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/14/what-is-the-un-general-assembly> 
general assembly <> turned the world body into a “platform for profit” by 
accepting over $1m in bribes and a trip to New Orleans from a billionaire 
Chinese real estate mogul and other businesspeople to pave the way for 
lucrative investments, a prosecutor charged on Tuesday.

John Ashe, a former UN <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> 
ambassador from Antigua and Barbuda who served in the largely ceremonial post 
from September 2013 to September 2014, faces conspiracy- and bribery-related 
charges along with five others, including Francis Lorenzo, a deputy UN 
ambassador from the Dominican Republic who lives in the Bronx.

70 years and half a trillion dollars later: what has the UN achieved?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/what-has-the-un-achieved-united-nations>
US attorney Preet Bharara repeatedly noted that it was early in the 
investigation and told reporters that as it proceeds: “We will be asking: is 
bribery business as usual at the UN?”

He added: “I wouldn’t be surprised if we see other people charged.”

The prosecutor said Ashe “converted the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> into a platform for profit” 
when bribery opportunities were dangled before him by Chinese billionaire Ng 
Lap Seng, 67, and others.

“We obviously just learned of the very serious allegations this morning,” 
Stéphane Dujarric, spokesman for the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, told 
reporters. Dujarric said Ban was “shocked and deeply troubled” by the 
allegations that “go to the heart and integrity of the UN”.

Still, he challenged Bharara’s claims, saying: “Corruption is not business as 
usual at the UN.” He said the UN’s legal department and senior officials were 
not informed of the investigation in advance.

Dujarric noted that the president of the general assembly “does not report to 
the secretary general and is completely independent in functions”. He said the 
UN had not found any documentation of the claims involving Macau.

Those charged in the criminal complaint unsealed on Tuesday in Manhattan 
federal court included Seng, who was arrested two weeks ago along with his 
chief assistant, Jeff C Yin, 29, a US citizen whose bail was revoked last week 
over allegations that he lied to investigators after his arrest.

Lawyers for Ng, Yin and Lorenzo, 48, did not immediately respond to requests 
for comment. It was not immediately clear who would represent Ashe at an 
initial court appearance on Tuesday. A message for comment left at Lorenzo’s 
mission was also not immediately returned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fantiguan-ex-president-un-general-assembly-faces-corruption-charges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b9e2f036c83646048e562ea7e8a72f911f0a381%2F0_71_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antiguan%20ex-president%20of%20UN%20general%20assembly%20faces%20%241m%20corruption%20charges&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fantiguan-ex-president-un-general-assembly-faces-corruption-charges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antiguan%20ex-president%20of%20UN%20general%20assembly%20faces%20%241m%20corruption%20charges&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fantiguan-ex-president-un-general-assembly-faces-corruption-charges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b9e2f036c83646048e562ea7e8a72f911f0a381%2F0_71_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Preet Bharara, US attorney for the southern district of New York, announces 
the charges in connection with alleged bribery at the United Nations. 
Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images 
Diego Rodriguez, head of the FBI’s New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> office, said the charges should 
be a warning “to those who come to the United States from other countries with 
corruption plans or bags full of cash”.

According to court papers, the 61-year-old Ashe used his UN positions to 
support a multibillion-dollar UN-sponsored conference centre that Ng hoped to 
build as his legacy in Macau, where he lived, and to help Ng meet government 
officials from Antigua. Prosecutors said the conference centre would function 
as a sort of satellite operation for the world body.

The scheme unfolded over the course of nearly three years, from 2011 through 
2014, prosecutors said.

Ng and his assistant had been held by federal authorities on charges they lied 
about plans for $4.5m in cash brought into the US over several years aboard 
private jets.

Prosecutors say some bribe money funded first-class airfare for Ashe, his wife 
and two children to New Orleans, where they stayed in an $850-a-night hotel 
room.

Other money, they said, was used to lease a luxury car, pay his home mortgage, 
buy Rolex watches and custom suits, and construct a $30,000 basketball court at 
his home in Dobbs Ferry, New York, where he was arrested on Tuesday. He opened 
two bank accounts to receive the funds and then underreported his income by 
more than $1.2m, officials said.

No one answered a phone call to the mission for Antigua; Ashe is no longer 
listed in the UN directory. A message left with a representative for the 
general assembly was not immediately returned.

Prosecutors said two other arrested individuals were involved with Ng. They 
were identified as Sheri Yan, 57, and Heidi Park, 52, both naturalized US 
citizens who reside in China and helped facilitate the scheme, prosecutors said.
 