
The communities secretary, Eric Pickles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eric-pickles>, has insisted that troubled 
families are not victims as he championed government plans to break the "cycle 
of deprivation" costing the state £9bn a year.

A payment-by-results scheme to get children off the streets and back into 
school, reduce youth crime and antisocial behaviour and get adults off benefits 
and on a path back to work has beenagreed by all 152 upper-tier local 
authorities in England <http://www.communities.gov.uk/news/newsroom/2158689>. 
Pickles said thetroubled families programme 
<http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/communities/troubledfamiliesframework>
 was not intended to stigmatise people because they are poor but to tackle 
problems destroying lives.

"These families are ruining their lives, they are ruining their children's 
lives and they are ruining their neighbours' lives," the communities secretary 
told BBC Radio 4's Today programme. He said such families needed to see that 
"you are not a victim".

A family with multiple problems has been defined by the cabinet office as "no 
parent in the family is in work; the family lives in poor quality or 
overcrowded housing; no parent has any qualifications; the mother has mental 
health problems; at least one parent has a long-standing limiting illness, 
disability or infirmity; the family has low income (below 60% of the median); 
or the family cannot afford a number of food and clothing items".

Pickles accused previous schemes of throwing money at the problem but said the 
new approach – involving £448m of government funding over three years - was 
different in that it would ensure a co-ordinated agency approach "rather than 
having 20 agencies [involved]".

He said the £9bn cost to the state was calculated from 120,000 problem 
families costing the state £75,000 on average, although he admitted that the 
number of families was an estimate as local authorities were only now beginning 
to identify them.

When asked whether the identification of a higher number of troubled families 
would put a strain on funding, he suggested 120,000 was likely to be at the 
high end of the scale. Pickles said: "We have a chance now, a window to break 
the cycle of deprivation  … we are not going abandon these families."

The government is providing 40% of funding for the programme with the other 
60% coming from local authorities and local agencies. The average cost of a 
successful family intervention is put at £10,000 by the Department for
Communities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local 
Government.

Councils will receive £3,900 for achieving more than 85% attendance in schools 
and fewer than three exclusions in troubled families, along with a 60% 
reduction in antisocial behaviour and cutting youth offending by a third. If 
one adult in a problem family moves off benefits and into continuous work, the 
payment will be £4,000.
 