
Antonio Banderas <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/antonio-banderas> has signed 
up to playPablo Picasso <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/pablo-picasso> 
in Carlos Saura's 33 Dias, a drama about the creation of the painter's great
anti-war masterpiece Guernica 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guernica_%28painting%29>, according to Variety 
<http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118050494?refCatId=13>.

Guernica, a black and white mural that Picasso completed in 1937, was painted 
in response to the bombing of the Basque town by German and Italian forces 
supporting the nationalists during the Spanish civil war. It's unveiling at the 
World's Fair in Paris in the same year helped to bring attention to the 
conflict. The tally of civilian deaths as a result of the bombings is still 
disputed. The Basque government reported 1,654 dead after the attack, but 
modern estimates put the number between 300-400.

"Picasso's a character that has pursued me for a long time and I always 
rejected," Banderas told El País. "He deserves a lot of respect because I am 
from Malaga, and I was born four blocks from where he was born". Banderas, 51, 
is of a similar age to that of the artist (54) when he finished the painting.
 Pablo Picasso's Guernica. Photograph: Denis Doyle/AP 
 Guernica shows Spanish symbols (and Picasso motifs) – the horse and the bull 
– being torn apart by conflict. On the bottom left-hand corner a woman grieves 
over a dead child. To the right a man is consumed by a burning building. But 
Picasso himself remained tight-lipped about the symbolism of the piece. "This 
bull is a bull and this horse is a horse 
<http://www.pbs.org/treasuresoftheworld/a_nav/guernica_nav/gnav_level_1/5meaning_guerfrm.html>
," he once said. "If you give a meaning to certain things in my paintings it 
may be very true, but it is not my idea to give this meaning".
 