
The artist and singer Antony Hegarty has accused Pope Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> of “working behind the scenes 
to undermine gay rights in America”.

During his visit to the US, the pope met Kim Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/30/kentucky-clerk-kim-davis-in-secret-meeting-with-pope-francis-report-says>
, a county clerk in Kentucky who was jailed for five days for disobeying a 
federal court order to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples. Davis’s 
lawyer said the pope told her to “stay strong”, while Davis said the pope 
thanked her for her courage. Hegarty says the pope’s decision to meet her was 
“shameful and pathetic”.

Pope Francis met 'anti-gay' Kentucky clerk Kim Davis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/30/kentucky-clerk-kim-davis-in-secret-meeting-with-pope-francis-report-says>
Hegarty, who identifies as transgender, made the remarks in a Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/AntonyandtheJohnsons/posts/10153704685888552> that 
said Pope Francis “seems still to be causing harm and burning witches in the 
name of Christ, just like his forefathers. Christ himself might weep with 
shame.”

The full post read: 

Apparently Pope Francis was working behind the scenes to undermine gay rights 
in America. How shameful and pathetic of him. I have been so impressed with his 
approach to climate and his call to end the death penalty. But for him to make 
insidious comments about how the ‘traditional family’ is under threat 
(presumably from gay marriage) and then to secretly meet that poor misguided 
cretin Kim Davis … I am glad that he is mobilizing his flock to care about 
nature, but I would still prefer that they would all just go to their heaven 
now and leave the rest of humanity and nature in peace here on earth. Pope 
Francis seems still to be causing harm and burning witches in the name of 
Christ, just like his forefathers. Christ himself might weep with shame. 
Francis attempts to distract us from Catholic sexual predators with a 
smokescreen of fake moralizing about gay people and their rights to live as 
equals in society. Pope Francis should line up one hundred gay, lesbian and 
transgendered people from around the world and wash and kiss their feet. He 
should issue a formal apology on behalf of the church for centuries of 
persecuting, torturing and killing us in the name of their god. Or are we not 
worthy of his humility, unlike criminals, the American indigenous, and the 
poor? Jesus Wept.

The meeting between the pope and Davis was held in secret at the Vatican 
embassy in Washington DC last week and only confirmed by the Vatican last week. 
During his visit, the pope had appeared to strike a conciliatory tone on the 
topic of sexuality, and the Vatican historian Alberto Melloni,quoted in the New 
York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/30/us/county-clerk-kim-davis-who-denied-gay-couples-visited-pope.html>
, suggested his meeting with Davis was likely to be the result of his support 
for conscientious objection across a range of matters, rather than as a 
statement of principle of same-sex marriage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fkim-davis-pope-francis-meeting-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kim%20Davis%20and%20Pope%20Francis%20held%20hands%20and%20prayed%20during%20meeting%2C%20says%20lawyer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fkim-davis-pope-francis-meeting-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kim%20Davis%20and%20Pope%20Francis%20held%20hands%20and%20prayed%20during%20meeting%2C%20says%20lawyer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fkim-davis-pope-francis-meeting-video&media=>
 Kim Davis and Pope Francis held hands and prayed during meeting, says lawyer.
Link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/oct/01/kim-davis-pope-francis-meeting-video> 