
One day in 1979, a few weeks after her arrival in New York City, artist and 
musicianKembra Pfahler 
<http://meltdown.southbankcentre.co.uk/2012/events/kembra-pfahler-availabism-and-anti-naturalism-a-conversation-with-claywoman/>
 was invited to perform in a club on the Lower East Side. "I decided I would 
stand on my head and crack an egg on my vagina," she says with disarming 
matter-of-factness. "Just because my body was available and I had eggs in the 
refrigerator."

Such colourful New York myths ripple through Antony Hegarty's Meltdown 
<http://meltdown.southbankcentre.co.uk/> line-up. By the time Antony became 
widely known in 2005 with his Mercury prize-winning second album,I Am a Bird Now
 <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bird-Now-Antony-The-Johnsons/dp/B0007GFG5Q>, he had 
spent 15 years in Manhattan as one of a startling, inter-generational 
constellation of dancers, painters, film-makers, musicians and performance 
artists, mostly clustered on the Lower East Side. It's this spirit of 
continuity and collaboration that distinguishes the New York performance world 
from the boom-and-bust arc experienced by most scenes. "Antony says the East 
Village is an indigenous population," says his close friend, dancer and DJ 
Johanna Constantine. "There's always been this specific artistic group that's 
been able to thrive there."

Singer and drag artist Joey Arias <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DPwxo0Dfgs0> 
sees this Meltdown as a kind of biography of both Antony and the scene that 
nurtured him. "It's like he's the cake and we're all the ingredients," he says. 
"We're part of what made Antony Antony."

The Meltdown artists who reached New York in the 70s all share certain 
memories: the infernal rattling of the graffiti-smeared subway cars, the 
rent-paying jobs in dive bars and X-rated movie theatres, the hunt for cheap 
accommodation in parts of town where even cab drivers feared to venture, the 
culture shock of entering a rotting, neurotic metropolis. Most of all they 
remember the excitement. Film-makerCharles Atlas 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Atlas_(Media_Dance)>, who moved from 
Missouri in 1970 and began a long-running collaboration with choreographer 
Merce Cunningham, speaks for many when he says, "I came to New York not knowing 
what I wanted to do but knowing I wanted to be in New York. Once I came, I 
never wanted to go anywhere else."

The city promised a sense of community that couldn't be found anywhere else, 
especially if you were LGBT. "I wanted to find the tribe of misfits and artists 
and crazy people," says Arias, who arrived in 1976. "I was not being accepted 
for who I was. The city was wide open so you were able to move through very 
quickly and find a spot for yourself." Pfahler agrees: "We came toNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> to find new families."

Until the late 70s the city's cultural scene was divided, with little traffic 
between the art galleries, chi-chi uptown discos and grimy Lower East Side punk 
haunts. This began to change with the rise of the Mudd Club, a downtown venue 
that pulled all thethreads <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JQW9Ufb0VuA> 
together: musicians (David Byrne, Debbie Harry, Madonna), visual artists (Andy 
Warhol, Keith Haring, Jean-Michel Basquiat), performers (Klaus Nomi, John Sex, 
Divine) and more. The cross-pollination continued at other new East Village 
venues such as Danceteria, Club 57 and thePyramid Club 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zagmcR4_bgU>. It was a time of thrilling 
collisions that broke down the barriers between artforms. Arias and Nomi
performed with David Bowie onSaturday Night Live 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XNKiGFaRxdM>. Graffiti artists bridged the gap 
between the downtown galleries and the nascent South Bronx hip-hop scene. Money 
began to flood the East Village art world and Basquiat made the cover ofTime 
magazine. Performance art boomed. "Everyone had a character, an act, a play, a 
rant, and there were stages to do them on and audiences anxious to catch them," 
says Michael Musto, long-time chronicler of the New York scene for theVillage 
Voice.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fvideo%2Fx7nzk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fvideo%2Fx7nzk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fvideo%2Fx7nzk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
At the same time, though, HIV/Aids made its appearance. "Most of my friends 
died from Aids-related illnesses," says Pfahler. "It was like a horror movie, 
watching people with angina, their bodies blowing up, people wearing germ 
jumpsuitsâ€¦ You can't ever erase these intense images from your eyes. It changes 
you for ever."

Hence the New York that greeted the young Antony in 1990 was not quite the one 
he had imagined. As a teenager in California he had devoured Musto'sVillage 
Voice columns and been thunderstruck by seeing Arias sing Billie Holiday songs 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aRKWl2Ul7-0> in 1988 cult documentary Mondo New 
York <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IvHU_hbewR8>. But Aids had left, Antony 
once said, "little black holes in the skies", includingKlaus Nomi 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klaus_Nomi> and John Sex 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Sex>. "A lot of the people we had grown up 
reading about had died by the time we got there so we felt kind of orphaned," 
says Johanna Constantine, who moved from California alongside Antony and 
co-founded theBlacklips Performance Cult <http://www.blacklips.org/> with him. 
"That huge tragedy was still heavily looming over the East Village. When people 
first saw Blacklips they said, 'Oh, that could happen again.' There was a sense 
of revival."

Manhattan's compact geography, points out Pfahler, means many artistic 
projects begin with chance encounters. "No matter what neighbourhood it is, no 
matter what decade it is, if you walk down the street you'll have a chance of 
running into someone you know." Antony and Constantine toured the streets and 
clubs, recruiting downtown characters to perform in their theatrical 
extravaganzas, which would always climax in a song by Antony. "Whatever you 
saw, no matter how hideous or bizarre, you knew you would get this beautiful, 
incredible song at the end," says Constantine.

Blacklips's Monday night residency at the Pyramid Club between 1992 and 1995 
drew previous generations of artists together, including Pfahler, Arias and 
Atlas. "We all went to each other's shows," says Constantine. "It was 100% 
supportive." Spectators remember Antony as quiet and awkward offstage but 
mesmerising when he was singing. "I was captivated by his voice, which is a 
deep well of soul and pain and love," remembers Musto. "I had no idea who he 
was but I was transfixed by the purity of his talent from the start."

Blacklips was part of the downtown scene's post-Aids rebirth. "It was like if 
an atomic bomb blew," says Arias, "and then when the dust settled people 
started to move. New York has a magic power of picking itself up very quickly."

One important new venue was Arcadia, a former iron works in Williamsburg, 
Brooklyn, which avant-garde composer William Basinski and artist James Elaine 
converted into an extraordinary performance space. "There was a lot of 
collegiality," says Basinski, who is best-known for hisDisintegration Loops 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Disintegration-Loops-William-Basinski/dp/B000EJVWJ0/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1342625022&sr=8-1>
 albums and produced Antony's first demos when Blacklips mutated into Antony 
and the Johnsons. "Everyone just wanted to perform and make work, and any nice 
place that you could do it was welcome."

It is striking how many artists on the Meltdown bill, including singer 
Diamanda Galas <http://www.diamandagalas.com/home.htm> and performance art maven
Marina Abramovic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2010/oct/03/interview-marina-abramovic-performance-artist>
, have worked together in various permutations. "It's fantastically 
interdisciplinary and overlapping," says Pfahler. "You have to have the desire 
to integrate with other artists and artforms."

The only recent cloud over the scene has been gentrification, which began 
under Mayor Rudy Giuliani and went into hyperdrive under Michael Bloomberg, 
forcing up rents beyond the grasp of most artists. "The real-estate bubble was 
like cancer," complains Basinski, who was priced out of Arcadia four years ago 
by the hipster colonisation of Williamsburg. During the same period the city 
slashed arts funding. "You used to have ambitious ideas," says Atlas, "but when 
funding was cut it had a big impact on what people felt they could think of 
doing."

Yet the downtown art scene endures, just not always in the East Village. 
"Giuliani took the air out of the performance scene but it simply ended up 
changing its geographical borders," says Musto. "A lot of creative types moved 
over the bridge [to cheaper boroughs]. It's never going to die because there's 
more to be angry at than ever in NYC, and performers thrive on frustration and 
rage." As Joey Arias puts it: "Everything's still here. It's just somewhere 
else."

Still resident on the Lower East Side 33 years after her fridge-door epiphany, 
Pfahler <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SX3HK_4e5vE> is contemptuous of 
nostalgia. "New York is a city that's always dying and being rebuilt every 10 
years. There's always something intense happening. To look backwards in a 
romantic way to me is yesterbating." She is one of the tribe. She is never 
leaving. Her faith is absolute. "It's unavoidable, New York being the centre of 
attention. We just can't help it."
 