
Antonio Banderas is being tapped by one of Italy's most successful film 
producers 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/italian-comedy-producer-eyes-film-664479>
 to star as a young Pope Francis in a new biopic.

Pietro Valsecchi, the man behind popular comedies Sun in Buckets (Sole a 
catinelle) from this year and What a Beautiful Day (Che bella giornata) from 
2011, broke the news in a television interview. The proposed film would most 
likely debut on the small screen in Italy.

Valsecchi's popular films, which star musician and standup comic Checco Zalone 
and are often directed by Gennaro Nunziante, are lowbrow comedies. But the 
producer certainly has the financial clout to get the biopic made, with his 
last two movies currently standing as the highest grossing films of all time in 
Italy, ahead of Roberto Benigni's 1997 Oscar winner Life is Beautiful. There 
were no further details about the proposed biopic and Banderas has not yet make 
any public comment on the film, which is one of a number of Pope-themed movies 
in the pipeline.

Ridley Scott's The Vatican will reportedly star Bruno Ganz as an unspecified 
pontiff, while Argentina's Alejandro Agrestiplans to cast Rodrigo de la Serna, 
best known for his award-winning role as Che Guevara's travelling companion 
Alberto Granado in The Motorcycle Diaries, as the world's first Argentine pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/04/pope-francis-film>. The film, 
titled Historia de un cura (A Priest's Tale) will tell the story of the man 
born Jorge Mario Bergoglio from his youth to his election as head of the Roman 
Catholic Church.

Born in 1936 as the grandson of Italian immigrant parents in Buenos Aires, 
Francis became the first pontiff from the southern hemisphere and the first of 
Jesuit origin earlier this year, as well as the first from any Latin American 
nation.
 