
Performing a playwright's work for the first time is an experience quite 
unlike reading it, or seeing it staged. Now you're on the inside, feeling the 
author's emotions and tasting his language in a very personal way. WithArthur 
Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/miller>, I have been astonished by 
the rawness of his writing, by his anger and humour. His playBroken Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/oct/08/broken-glass-miller-sher-review>
, which I have been performing for almost a year now, has the fearlessness of a 
young man's response to the world – yet Miller wrote it when he was 78.

The play is set in 1938. In the background, there is Kristallnacht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/04/germany-secondworldwar> in 
Germany; in the foreground, a Jewish community in Brooklyn react to the news. 
Sylvia Gellburg is traumatised, as if she knows this is only a curtain-raiser 
to the horrors to come. Meanwhile, her husband Phillip (my role) wants to 
ignore it; he is uneasy with his own Jewishness. And then there is Dr Hyman, 
who develops a relationship with Sylvia that crosses the boundaries between 
medic and patient. He has studied in Germany, and maintains that such a 
cultured people aren't capable of further brutality.

Miller's is an original view of the Holocaust, seen from the safety of New 
York. When he wrote it, in 1993, he was motivated by contemporary events in
Rwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2008/dec/18/rwanda-genocide> and
Serbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/feb/26/kosovo-milutonovic-hague-not-guilty>
. Once again, he noted, atrocities were happening elsewhere, and we were just 
looking on helplessly. The play's director,Iqbal Khan 
<http://www.theatrevoice.com/2577/director-iqbal-khan-on-arthur-miller-and-antony-sher/>
, describes this as one of the main themes of the play: "The things we allow to 
happen – whether personally or politically".

When, a year ago, lqbal first asked me to play Phillip Gellburg, it was 
impossible not to notice his own ethnicity. Once I got to know him better, I 
asked the inevitable question: "What's a nice Muslim boy doing directing a nice 
Jewish play?" lqbal explained that he has no religious faith (in the same way 
that I am a purely secular Jew), but that he feels sensitive to the characters 
because of the experiences of his father's generation, Pakistanis who emigrated 
to Britain in the 1960s.

"The options were either to assimilate, and remove the sense that you were a 
'threat' to your 'hosts'," he explained, "or to entrench yourself among your 
own people. Fear influenced every action. Fear of rejection, persecution, 
exclusion, or, conversely, of betraying your ancestral origins." In Broken 
Glass, "fear", "frightened" and "afraid" are the most frequently used words.

My own search for Gellburg benefited enormously from an identity crisis I had 
as a young man. I wasn't open about being gay, I kept stumm about being Jewish, 
and I was ashamed of being a white South African. I ended up in so many closets 
I didn't know which key was which. Those early attempts to flee from being
Antony Sher <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/antony-sher> were useful when it 
came to being Gellburg, a man uncomfortable in his own skin.

After an initial run of Broken Glass in London last year, I was asked to play 
Gellburg again, in a new South African production. The cast was local and we 
performed at a new venue in my birthplace, Cape Town: theFugard theatre 
<http://www.thefugard.com/> has a spectacular setting at the foot of Table 
Mountain. Its namesake, South Africa's greatest playwright,Athol Fugard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/31/once-upon-a-life-athol-fugard>
, was rehearsing his latest play there while we were performing. I asked what 
it was like to have a theatre bearing his name. He laughed: "Agh, man, I'm too 
embarrassed to say it – I just call it 'that theatre in District Six'." (In 
1966, the district's mixed race population were forced out of their homes and 
relocated to the barren Cape Flats.)

South Africa's past began to inform the play. Gellburg boasts that he is the 
only Jew in his firm, ignoring the fact that his boss displays the casual 
antisemitism of the period. These scenes reminded South Africans of life under 
apartheid, and the behaviour that a black man, even in a position of relative 
privilege, would be forced to adopt with his "baas" or "master". Especially 
potent, both to cast and audience, was the most challenging question Miller 
poses: what do you do, personally, when you witness evil in action?

In the South Africa of my youth, it was part of daily life. Very few people 
stood up and protested. I suspect that Miller, had he been South African, might 
have been one of them. Hisrefusal to give evidence 
<http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/USAmillerA.htm> to McCarthy's House 
Un-American Activities Committee in 1956 proved he was a brave man.

Back in London, I embarked on a revival of last year's production. Any 
apprehension I might have felt about revisiting familiar territory has been 
dispelled by lqbal's passion for a particular aspect of Miller's writing: its 
unpredictability. As he said: "With Miller, we are constantly surprised by the 
possibilities in each of us, for cruelty or compassion or absurdity." Each new 
cast has forced me to be jolted by the newness of the events in the story.

While the casts have changed, one audience reaction has remained constant: 
they want to know why the play isn't better known. This could have something to 
do with the fact that it came in the latter half of Miller's career, when he 
was underrated in the US (though celebrated here). In 1994, after a lukewarm 
reception on Broadway, the play was a big success at the National theatre in 
London, winning an Olivier for best new play.

Speaking at last month's Edinburgh book festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/19/arthur-miller-america-reputation>
, Miller's biographerChristopher Bigsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/14/biography-arthurmiller> 
predicted that Broken Glass was one of the late plays that would find its place 
among his great works. After my long journey with it, I hope this proves to be 
true.
 