
When an international mining company surveys the Australian land for minerals 
it sees few physical impediments.

If necessary rivers can be rerouted, hillocks flattened and giant boulders 
shifted in order to access the wealth beneath.


Traditional custodians, mindful of the human ancestors and the creationist 
animals, view terrain quite differently. For them that river is the rainbow 
serpent, and the hills the spine of a goanna or a crocodile. And those 
boulders? They could be the eggs – or the newly hatched babies – of the owl or 
the platypus.


The sanctity of country transcends the commercial value of what lies beneath

For many Indigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> the 
sanctity of country transcends the commercial value of what lies beneath. And 
when Indigenous communities do support mining ventures on traditional lands, 
assurances are usually sought – if not guaranteed and met – that sacred sites, 
traditional hunting and burial grounds, will be quarantined and that disruption 
to the earth and water tables will be minimised.


In the more inevitable clashes between miners – with their millions to spend 
on PR, community “consultation” and lobbying - and the custodians,outcomes are 
too often predictable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/jacky-green-nothing-has-really-changed-since-whitefellas-came-first-it-was-horses-now-bulldozers>
: minerals are extracted and subsequently divided communities ignored; 
custodians are denied ongoing access to country while the land and waterways 
are ecologically damaged.

Jacky Green: 'Nothing has really changed since whitefellas came. First it was 
horses now bulldozers'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/jacky-green-nothing-has-really-changed-since-whitefellas-came-first-it-was-horses-now-bulldozers>
But thanks to the power of visual art and the advocacy of Antony Hegarty, the 
New York avant garde transgender singer fromAntony and the Johnsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/antonyandthejohnsons>, the plight of one 
such community in the West Australian Pilbara, Parnngurr, is now starting to 
attract acute national and international notice.

In April the federal government granted conditional approval 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-24/uranium-mine-kintyre-given-federal-approval-cameco-says/6418974>
 to the world’s second largest uranium miner, Canada’s Cameco Corporation, and 
joint venture partner Mitsubishi, to build a mine at Kintyre, inside the 
Karlamilyi national park, part of the traditional lands of the Pilbara’s Martu 
people.

While some Martu have supported the proposed Kintyre mine, those of of 
Parnngurr – 80 kilometres from the proposed open pit mine – are opposed to 
uranium mining. They want the plans for the mine to be scrapped.

The Martu of Parnngurr will cross the continent and bring their protest to the 
Museum of ContemporaryArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> in 
Sydney next Monday morning. There, with their collaborative visual artwork 
about the mine area, Kalyu (water), on display, they will voice their 
objections to the mine while Hegarty will sing in support of them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fantony-jonsons-martu-australia-indigenous-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434413930143%2FAntony-and-the-Martu-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antony%20Hegarty%20from%20Antony%20and%20the%20Johnsons%20with%20Parrngurr%20Yarrkalpa%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fantony-jonsons-martu-australia-indigenous-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antony%20Hegarty%20from%20Antony%20and%20the%20Johnsons%20with%20Parrngurr%20Yarrkalpa%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fantony-jonsons-martu-australia-indigenous-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434413930143%2FAntony-and-the-Martu-001.jpg>
 Antony works with Martu artists in 2013 in Lynette Wallworth’s Always Walking 
Country . The artwork featured is Yarrkalpa 2013, by Martu artists.Link to video
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2015/jun/19/antony-jonsons-martu-australia-indigenous-video>
For Hegarty the protest is the culmination of insights she received while 
living with the Martu for 10 days in 2013 during which time Sydney media artist 
Lynette Wallworth collaborated with the locals on a work of art for the last 
Adelaide Biennial.


Hegarty explained to Guardian Australia how she made the connection with the 
Martu of Parnngurr.

“I spent 10 days with them, watching them paint in the art shed in the 
sweltering heat, occasionally singing a song for them, to their amusement. I am 
sure I was a sight for sore eyes, but they were very gracious and allowed me to 
witness their process. I felt so honoured to be afforded the opportunity. I 
learned so much from watching them. The first day I was there the mob brought 
me out into the bush to pick womalla [bush tomatoes]. Their understanding of 
the land and its intricate interconnecting systems is profound, as evident in 
their paintings and in their approach to land stewardship,” she said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fantony-hegarty-the-martu-and-the-mine-land-custodians-fight-corporate-might%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6727172b7fb6a790efcba0f50896994f2411abde%2F0_221_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antony%20Hegarty%2C%20the%20Martu%20and%20the%20mine%3A%20land%20custodians%20fight%20corporate%20might&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fantony-hegarty-the-martu-and-the-mine-land-custodians-fight-corporate-might%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antony%20Hegarty%2C%20the%20Martu%20and%20the%20mine%3A%20land%20custodians%20fight%20corporate%20might&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fantony-hegarty-the-martu-and-the-mine-land-custodians-fight-corporate-might%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6727172b7fb6a790efcba0f50896994f2411abde%2F0_221_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Antony and the Johnsons with the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra, performing at 
Dark Mofo 2015 in Hobart. Photograph: Derek Tickner/Dark Mofo and Mona 
Hegarty says that discussions about death raised her awareness of the special 
link between Indigenous Australians and country.


“One night I was discussing spirituality with one of the Martu artists. I 
asked her where she thought people went when they died and she said gently, 
‘back to country’. It was so meaningful to me. Raised Catholic, I was taught 
that when I died nature would expunge my spirit and I would be returned to some 
paradise in the sky or in another dimension, never to return to this place. But 
what my Martu teacher suggested to me was that we remain a part of nature in 
some form, forever. Is that perhaps why Indigenous people traditionally stepped 
so lightly and carefully on the land, with such consideration and respect, 
knowing that it was their home now and forever?”


Hegarty believes “some corporations have disingenuously sought to divide and 
conquer locals, and in the dust cloud of confusion, make off with the spoils”.


“For the Martu in Parnngurr, the community nearest the proposed uranium mine, 
the plan is causing distress,” she says. “Some of the women elders of Parnngurr 
seem not only to fear the potential danger that any uranium mine will obviously 
pose to the watershed and the local environment, but they also feel an 
existential burden of responsibility as the stewards of that land to protect 
dangerous resources from being exploited.”

Some corporations have disingenuously sought to divide and conquer locals, and 
... make off with the spoils
Antony Hegarty 
Earlier this year Cameco Australia’s managing director, Brian Reilly, said 
<http://www.mining.com/cameco-gets-approval-australian-kintyre-uranium-mine-34512/>
: “We are confident the Kintyre project can be constructed, operated and closed 
in a way which maintains the ecological functions and environmental values in 
the area and will ensure all regulatory conditions are met.”

But the Martu of Parnngurr oppose the proposed Kintyre mine on myriad cultural 
and economic grounds including that the mine will desecrate traditional 
hunting, fishing and camping grounds, and has the potential to damage complex 
interconnected ground and surface water systems. These water systems are the 
focus of the painting Kalyu.

Environmental groups, including the Australian Conservation Foundation and 
Friends of the Earth,point to several serious safety issues involving Cameco 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&refer=home&sid=aYNr8siTro.Q>
 over the years.

The ACF’s Dave Sweeney says: “This proposed mine is the wrong product in the 
wrong place. It threatens both the country and community in a beautiful part of 
Australia and should not be advanced. The Sydney [MCA] event is an important 
opportunity to ensure that deep community concerns over a risky and radioactive 
plan in remote Australia helps make it onto the radar elsewhere.”


Antony Hegarty condemns 'genocide' of indigenous peoples in Australia and US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/17/antony-hegarty-condemns-genocide-of-indigenous-peoples-in-australia-and-us>
One of the Parnngurr artists, Wokka Taylor, explained: “Forever that uranium 
belongs to that place, underground. But it’s poison when you dig it up – when 
it gets exposed. Like a mother carrying a baby ... we are carrying the land, we 
are that close. This is the reason we hold our children close, our food, but 
mainly our waters. We look after our water ... One way, leave it in the ground 
forever. Old people are less but we have more young people being born. We have 
to look after them. We are talking up for country.”

Hegarty has donated proceeds from her two concerts at Dark Mofo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2015/jun/19/antony-hegarty-the-martu-and-the-mine-land-custodians-fight-corporate-might>
 in Hobart this week towards the Martu. Hegarty will further highlight the 
impact of the proposed Kintyre uranium mine on the Martu of Parrngurr during 
her appearance on Monday night’s Q&A on ABC television. The Martu artists from 
Parnngurr will be in the audience.
 