
The past 12 months have seen Antonio Banderas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/antonio-banderas> star as both a 
food-obsessed pirate called Burger-Beard in The Spongebob Movie: Sponge Out of 
Water and a party-lounging playboy in Terrence Malick’s latest, Knight of Cups. 
At 55, versatility is clearly not a problem for the star.

Knight of Cups review: Malick's back! With the least interesting spiritual 
crisis in history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/08/knight-of-cups-review-film-terrence-malick-christian-bale>
In this week’s Malick, a film that’s difficult to distinguish from the last 
Malick we saw, in 2012, Banderas gets existential with Christian Bale, Cate 
Blanchett, Natalie Portman and some shots of rocks. It’s not a career high for 
anyone involved – but what exactlyis vintage Banderas?

Law of Desire

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM3PayEoGVoo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM3PayEoGVoo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM3PayEoGVoo&media=>
During his early days on stage, Banderas was discovered by Pedro Almodóvar, 
who proceeded to cast him in seven of his films. One of his best performances 
under Almodóvar was in this 1987 drama that made headlines for its explicit gay 
scenes. As the protagonist’s possessive lover, his impassioned performance is 
perfect for the melodrama at play.

The Mambo Kings
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DilZC2F9mjgs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DilZC2F9mjgs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DilZC2F9mjgs&media=>
Banderas was first introduced to Hollywood via Madonna as she awkwardly tried 
to seduce him <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bV8z0DeUKtU>, despite the 
presence of his wife, in her 1991 documentary In Bed with Madonna. But the 
following year saw him land a breakout role in this energetic musical drama. 
While the positive reviews didn’t lead to box office success, it acted as a 
calling card for Banderas.

Desperado
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAEEf_00tNos&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAEEf_00tNos>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAEEf_00tNos&media=>
It’s fair to assume that Banderas isn’t an on-set diva like many of his peers, 
given that aside from his Almodovar films, he’s also made seven with Robert 
Rodriguez. The best of these was this 1995 sequel to El Mariachi which, despite 
a thin plot, gave Banderas the chance to show off the action skills that would 
be later wasted on far lesser Hollywood projects (*coughs* Ecks vs Sever *ends 
cough*).

The Mask of Zorro
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbw7GnKjkThQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbw7GnKjkThQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbw7GnKjkThQ&media=>
One of his more successful studio films gave him his first franchise, albeit 
one that was rather short-lived, with a reboot of Zorro. His chemistry with 
Catherine Zeta-Jones added extra fire to a charming, old-fashioned adventure 
that also showed his ease with comedy. Shame then that the belated sequel, 
seven years later, wassuch a washout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/oct/30/features.review1>.

The Skin I Live In
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF9Af2bG42dE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF9Af2bG42dE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF9Af2bG42dE&media=>
Almodóvar gave Banderas a much-needed career boost in 2011 with this 
psychological thriller that became one of the director’s most accessible films. 
As a plastic surgeon on a bizarre mission, he lurches between charisma and 
menace with ease.
 