
Antonio Banderas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/antonio-banderas> will play 
Mario Sepúlveda, who became the public face of the 33 Chilean miners trapped 
underground for 69 days three years ago,according to Deadline 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/05/cannes-antonio-banderas-joins-the-33-good-universe-selling-chilean-miners-movie/>
.

The 33 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-33>, the latest film to document 
the miners' story, will be the official version of the tale. It has been put 
together with the exclusive co-operation of the men involved in the incident.

Martin Sheen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/martin-sheen> and Rodrigo 
Santoro will also star in the film, which will be directed by Patricia Riggen 
(La Misma Luna) from a screenplay by Mikko Alanne and José Rivera. She expects 
to shoot in the autumn, once the film has secured investment at this year's
Cannes film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannes-2013>.

The rescue of the miners, who became trapped more than half a mile 
underground, was carried out by a Chile-led international taskforce and was 
watched by more than a billion people. Sepúlveda became known to the world as 
the ebullient host of regular video journals sent to the surface by the miners, 
earning the nickname "Super Mario".

Santoro will star as the group's second-in-command, Florencio Ávalos. Due to 
his youth and good health, the 31-year-old was selected as the first miner to 
ride the rescue capsule to the surface in case of complications during the 
15-minute ascent.

It is not clear at this stage whether Sheen, who had a Spanish father and was 
born Ramón Antonio Gerardo Estévez, will also star as one of the miners.

Riggen's project follows a 2010 film about the Chilean miners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2010/nov/18/chilean-miners-rescue-movie-video?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
 entitled The 33 of San José. Spanish director Antonio Recio's little-seen 
movie emerged on DVD in a handful of European countries not long after the 
events it documented.
 