
Rewind, briefly, to the tipping point. Antonio Conte’s initial reaction to that
heavy defeat at Arsenal back in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 had been one of fury. He was livid, humiliated, crushed and, in the emotional 
heart-to-heart he conducted with his coaching staff, he questioned himself and 
the task he had taken on at Chelsea. It took a while for those emotions to 
simmer down and rational thought to return but then, as he surveyed the scene 
in the away dressing room, he recognised broken players still haunted by the 
trauma of underachievement last season, and realised something had to change.

Diego Costa sends Chelsea soaring at Palace with 11th straight league win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/crystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
Now return to the present. Chelsea were rugged and resilient across the capital
at Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/17/crystal-palace-v-chelsea-premier-league-live>
 on Saturday and courtesy of their first headed goal of term, produced by Diego 
Costa just before the interval,secured a club record 11th league win in 
succession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/crystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
.

A group of players who had been torn to shreds at the Emirates Stadium have 
achieved nine clean sheets in that sequence. If there had been initial doubts 
in the demands being placed upon them by a manager who insists upon total 
commitment, then they have allayed. These days, this team’s players are utterly 
convinced in their head coach’s philosophy and methods. To latch on to one of 
the Italian’s buzzwords, they clearly “work”.

The celebrations conducted in front of the away support in the corner of the 
Arthur Wait stand were a show of unity and reflected a remarkable 
transformation. “To come here and take on Crystal Palace, this physical game 
and have the right behaviour, understand the way to win, to fight in the same 
way Palace do is not simple for me,” Conte said. “You can see players with 
great talent but also with great commitment, this will to fight for every ball. 
Something changed in me, in the players, in the club, with those defeatsby 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/chelsea-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 and at Arsenal. I like to win and to see my players have those two bad losses 
– we deserved two bad defeats – I had to try to find the right solutions on and 
outside the pitch. We had to show why we deserved to be better than last 
season.”

Plenty has been made of the switch in formation, instigated at the interval at 
Arsenal when that contest had already been surrendered. Adopting three at the 
back has clearly been a masterstroke, even if it was a tactical tweak Conte had 
been reluctant to implement. “I knew our formation [a back four] wasn’t good to 
face Liverpool tactically, and we paid for this,” the manager said. “Also 
against Arsenal. I always had the will to change it but I waited until the 
right moment. I had players who had only played with four [in defence]. In the 
[recent] history ofChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, they 
had never played with three central defenders. To change that, you have to go 
slowly, slowly, to put the idea across.” The adaptation, in truth, has been 
smoother than he could possibly have imagined. Palace, who went into the 
weekend as the division’s fifth‑top scorers, rarely had a sight of goal, so 
stifled were they in their approach.

Yet just as significant has been the atmosphere Conte has built within Chelsea 
to dissipate all the tension that lingered from last season’s desperate toils. 
He has succeeded in creating a more family-like atmosphere at the club, 
something akin to that generated by Carlo Ancelotti during his spell at Cobham. 
It was Conte who insisted the squad and coaching staff should go on relatively 
regular evenings out for group meals, whether at hip venues such as Nobu or at 
the manager’s adopted Italian eateries in town. There have been at least three 
such get-togethers since the limp defeat at Arsenal. As bonding exercises, they 
been beneficial.

Then there has been his desire to weave himself into the fabric of a club that 
can, at times, appear an awkward blend thrusting together a highly paid playing 
squad, a slickly run commercial machine and an administrative staff who can go 
easily forgotten. Employees from Cobham and Stamford Bridge had gathered at the 
stadium’s music venue Under the Bridge, situated beneath the East stand, last 
Thursday for their Christmas party, with Conte having pre‑recorded a video 
message that was to be broadcast to those present. However, at some point over 
the course of the day, the manager determined such an impersonal appearance 
would be inadequate. Instead, he arrived at the event and addressed the room, 
thanking everyone for the part they have played in reinvigorating this club, 
over a two‑hour stay.

That is only one relatively small example of a manager who sees the bigger 
picture – but cultivating that unity, removing all the “us and them”, is a 
skill. Conte had inherited a tense situation but by ensuring he is in no way 
aloof, he has ensured everyone feels in this together.

Now, almost three months on, all that tension after the defeat by Arsenal, 
when Chelsea were gripped by self-doubt, has gone. This team suddenly seem 
unstoppable, their conviction swollen and the manager a man inspired. APremier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> record of 14 
successive wins is very realistic. Times have changed for the better.
 