
Chelsea are confident they will avoid the imposition of a points deduction as 
they contemplate their latest charge of failing to control their players,at 
Manchester City last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/pep-guardiola-sergio-aguero-manchester-city-chelsea>
, with Antonio Conte dismissing the possibility of such a sanction as “a joke”.

The Premier League leaders, who re-established a three-point advantage at the 
topwith a 1-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/chelsea-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
 over West Bromwich Albion,were charged last week with a breach of Rule E20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/fa-bans-manchester-city-sergio-aguero-fernandinho-chelsea>
 for a fifth time in 19 months after Sergio Agüero’s wild lunge at David Luiz 
sparked a mass brawl on the touchline in stoppage time at the Etihad Stadium 
eight days ago.

Diego Costa strikes again as Chelsea go top with West Brom win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/chelsea-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
The Football Association’s independent disciplinary commission had branded 
Chelsea’s persistent breaches of the rules as “abysmal” when fining them 
£375,000 and warning them about their future conduct after ugly scenes in May’s 
fractious derby against Tottenham Hotspur, and had concluded: “The time cannot 
be too far distant when a commission concludes the only proper sanction is a 
points deduction.” Those four previous charges had taken place under the 
stewardship of José Mourinho and Guus Hiddink.

Conte was incredulous when confronted with the prospect in the aftermath of 
his team’s ninth Premier League win in succession, and pointed out it had been 
Agüero’s challenge – the Argentina forward is currently sitting out a 
four-match ban – which had sparked the fracas in Manchester. “For me, if you 
are involved in a situation where you are not at fault, why must you pay?” the 
Italian said. “Why? I don’t understand this. At the end of theManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> game, my players tried to 
keep their calm. It would be a joke [if the FA imposed such a punishment on his 
club]. You must be honest and understand which team is at fault.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fchelseas-antonio-conte-praises-diego-costa-after-winner-against-west-brom-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea's%20Antonio%20Conte%20hails%20Diego%20Costa%20after%20winner%20against%20West%20Brom%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fchelseas-antonio-conte-praises-diego-costa-after-winner-against-west-brom-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%27s%20Antonio%20Conte%20hails%20Diego%20Costa%20after%20winner%20against%20West%20Brom%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fchelseas-antonio-conte-praises-diego-costa-after-winner-against-west-brom-video&media=>
Chelsea’s Antonio Conte hails Diego Costa after winner against West Brom – video
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/11/chelseas-antonio-conte-praises-diego-costa-after-winner-against-west-brom-video>
“We are trying to improve all aspects, and also this. We had a bad record in 
the past, but now we are different. I don’t know what happened in the past. I 
know what is happening in the present, and that is why I ask if this is a joke 
or not. After the game between City andChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, you could see very clearly that 
my players tried to keep their calm.”

Diego Costa’s goal defeated a stubborn West Brom side to force Chelsea three 
points clear at the top of the division, with Conte gaining more satisfaction 
from the result than his side’s swashbuckling recent demolition of Everton at 
Stamford Bridge. “I do because, when you have an easy win, sometimes you can 
lose concentration or focus,” the Italian said.

“But this game was so difficult. My team showed me great character, great 
attention and great motivation to try and win. They are such a tough team to 
break down, so I’m pleased. Today we showed great maturity and patience to find 
the right solution and win.”

Chelsea have now won nine games in succession and have winnable contests at 
Sunderland and Crystal Palace this week, before Bournemouth and Stoke City 
visit Stamford Bridge before the end of the month. The prospect of this team 
eclipsing Arsenal’s Premier League record of 14 wins in succession is suddenly 
very real. “But I’m not interested in the record,” Conte said. “All I want is 
to gain three points and stay top of the table, fighting for something 
important.”
 