
I was a dancer before I was a photographer. Born in France, the grandchild of 
Armenian genocide <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenian-genocide> 
survivors, dance was one of the few ways I could connect with a homeland I had 
never known. When I danced as an Armenian peasant, I became an Armenian 
peasant. It was a way to animate the stories my grandparents told.

Around 1985, I was performing in Boston, when the owner of a one-hour photo 
lab – a pretty revolutionary thing back then – offered me a job. It came with 
one condition, that I train his amateur dance troupe. Dance inadvertently led 
me to photography, but the two had more in common than many think. Each 
combined artistic vision and technique. Each was about telling a story.

Diana Markosian's best photograph: the 105-year-old Armenian who escaped 
genocide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/30/diana-markosian-best-photograph-movses-haneshyan-interview>
In 1988, an earthquake shook Armenia. Around 40,000 died and hundreds of 
thousands were displaced. I headed there with a humanitarian organisation and 
took my camera. Photography was a way to bear witness to the aftermath of the 
quake, but it soon became more than that: an archaeological enquiry into 
Armenian identity, culture and memory sincethe 1915 genocide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenian-genocide>.

The extermination of Armenian Christians living in the Ottoman empire began on 
24 April 1915, when around 250 intellectuals were deported, many of whom were 
later executed. But I believe the Balkan War of 1912 was the true origin of the 
genocide. TheOttoman empire in Europe collapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/01/fall-of-the-ottomans-eugene-rogan-review>
 that year, sending shockwaves through Anatolia. The trauma burrowed its way 
into the Turkish psyche, and forced it to fortify itself against a weaker 
opponent. In some ways, that trauma has never healed.

Armenian Christians, already classified as second-class citizens with inferior 
legal rights, became an obvious target for a Turkish backlash. In April, the 
operation of forced displacement, death marches, and themass extermination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/from-the-archive-blog/2015/apr/24/armenian-genocide-archive-1915>
 of the able-bodied male population began. Around 1.5m died, and Armenians 
scattered across the world. This was the reason I was born in France, far from 
the land of my ancestors.

Photography became my way of exploring this history. But I learned quickly 
that reportage couldn’t tell the stories I needed to tell.Photography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography> interested me; 
photojournalism did not because it could not explore what I came to learn was 
the heart of Armenian identity: poetry, communion with the land, and ancient 
folk traditions. Every time I shoot, I’m face-to-face with a history that 
traumatised me as a child. In those circumstances, objectivity is a myth.

Burning Eyes – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/may/17/burning-eyes-armenia-perrier-review>
In 1998, I found myself in Aparan, a large town an hour’s drive from Armenia’s 
capital, Yerevan. A local dance troupe was performing that evening, in the open 
air, with most of the suburb in attendance. The old, the young, everyone was 
present, sitting hunched on stools or cross-legged on the floor, transfixed. In 
the background, small mountains and jagged cliffs framed the scene.

As soon as I took my first shot, an old man approached me. Tears streamed down 
his face. He told me that his son had died. That he had been electrocuted, that 
he was his pride and joy, and that I looked just like him. He broke into sobs 
and moved towards me with outstretched arms. His name was Ishran.

I asked if he would dance for me, and he began dancing. The troupe paused and 
perched on an outcrop of rocks in the background. It was beautiful, not because 
the man is beautiful, but because he represents something deep inside the 
collective consciousness of the Armenian community: a celebratory resilience in 
the face of overwhelming loss.

Many who left in 1915 thought they would return. The Armenian people had 
suffered massacres before, and even when mass killings continued into the 
1920s, people believed they would eventually reclaim their homeland. The word 
“genocide” did not exist at the time. Conceptualising what had happened was 
almost impossible. It was only coined in 1943 by Raphael Lemkin to describe 
what had happened inArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fantoine-agoudjian-best-photograph-armenian-man-dances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb99024f1e0c6370621d14227f48135f308f7b391%2F0_0_654_996%2F654.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antoine%20Agoudjian's%20best%20photograph%3A%20an%20Armenian%20man%20dances%20for%20his%20lost%20son&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fantoine-agoudjian-best-photograph-armenian-man-dances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antoine%20Agoudjian%27s%20best%20photograph%3A%20an%20Armenian%20man%20dances%20for%20his%20lost%20son&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fantoine-agoudjian-best-photograph-armenian-man-dances%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb99024f1e0c6370621d14227f48135f308f7b391%2F0_0_654_996%2F654.jpg>
 ‘Photography interested me; photojournalism did not’: Antoine Agoudjian 
The Turkish state still refuses to recognise what happened as genocide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/23/turkey-erdogan-condolences-armenian-massacre>
. In that sense, my work is not historical; it is intimately tied to the 
present. Following the centenary in 2015, the world seems to be taking notice, 
however. The Bundestag officially recognised the genocide in the last few 
weeks. Every other state must do the same. The more Erdoğan denies us, the 
stronger we become. We know what it is to disappear. And we resist that against 
all odds.

Antoine Agoudjian’s CV

Born: St-Maur-des-Fossés, France, 1961

Influences: “My grandparents’ stories, and the Armenian archives documenting 
early 20th century life in Armenia.”

High point: “The publication of my book, The Cry of Silence, following an 
exhibition in Diyarbakir in Turkish Kurdistan. It marked the centenary of the 
genocide and was the culmination of 30 years’ work.”

Low point: “The moment when I realised that a photographer is dependent on the 
establishment, and that without their help, it’s almost impossible to follow 
one’s ambitions.”

Top tip: “Follow your heart and lose yourself in the adventure.”
 