
Apple Pay will come to the UK in July, Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> confirmed at its Worldwide 
Developers Conference in San Francisco on Monday.

It will be available at more than 250,000 locations - more than the number of 
merchants it had in the US for last year’s launch.

El Capitan: Apple unveils next version of OS X software
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/08/apples-next-version-os-x-called-el-capitan>
Participating retailers include Marks & Spencer, Costa and Waitrose – as well 
as Transport for London, meaning that Tube and bus travel can be paid for with 
Apple’s contactless payment system.

Apple Pay will be supported by more than 70% of the credit and debit cards in 
the UK, said Apple executive Jennifer Bailey at WWDC.

The mobile payment system launched in America in 2014, alongside the iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 6, but has been slow to expand 
to other territories.

Britain is the first country outside the US to have access to use Apple Pay, 
which lets users pay for things, both on- and offline, using just their phone 
or watch.

When used as an offline payment system, Apple Pay works in conjunction with an 
NFC (near-field communications) chip found in the two newest iPhones and the 
Apple Watch to let users pay for goods by tapping their phones on contactless 
card readers in stores.

In the US, the system took a marathon of deals to put together, with Apple 
negotiating with banks, retailers and credit card companies individually to 
build enough support.

Elsewhere, however, the launch is expected to be much simpler because Apple 
Pay uses the same technology as that found in conventional contactless card 
readers, already common across much of Europe and Asia.

But unlike contactless cards, Apple Pay includes an extra security measure – 
tokenisation – which ensures that the card details stored on a phone are never 
passed to the retailer. Instead, the payee receives a one-use “token”, which 
allows them to debit the payment but cannot be reused in future.

Online, Apple Pay uses the same tokenisation system to speed up and secure 
e-commerce, letting iPhone owners pay for goods on supported websites with just 
a tap of their finger on the phone’s fingerprint reader.

In the US, uptake of Apple Pay was strong, with more than 40% of iPhone 6 
owners having used it at least once, according to Auriemma Consulting.

But the service was hampered by a need to bring partners in one by one, 
leading to some major hold-outs: most notably Walmart, which is alreadywaging a 
war against credit card firms over merchant fees 
<http://9to5mac.com/2014/11/09/why-walmart-doesnt-accept-apple-pay/> and 
reportedly views Apple Pay as merely perpetuating an expensive system.
 