
Welcome to the baffling world of multinational corporate taxation. The 
European commission’s ground-breaking ruling thatApple owes Ireland €13bn 
(£11bn) in back-taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
 after enjoying a quarter-century of illegal state-aid has exposed at least 
three oddities, or examples of plain old hypocrisy.

First, there is the bizarre spectacle of the Irish government saying it would 
rather not have a cash windfall that would fund its health service for a year. 
Even after the years of austerity, Dublin would rather fight commissioner 
Margrethe Vestager’s ruling.

Second, US politicians are performing gymnastics. A US Senate committee in 
2013 accusedApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> of being 
“among America’s largest tax avoiders” by exploiting Ireland’s generous tax 
breaks. Yet, now that Vestager & co have taken a shot at those same Irish 
inducements, the US political establishment is furious.

Third, there is a mystery of why Brussels has taken so long to act. One of 
Apple’s contentious deals with the Irish revenue authority dates to 1991, for 
heaven’s sake. Or perhaps no detective work is required. Deals between 
multinational and tax authorities are officially confidential. In practice, 
that is merely a polite fiction to allow regulators and legislators to do 
nothing until public anger reaches boiling point. That is what has happened 
with taxation of multinationals. Vestager deserves congratulation for reading 
the mood.

In the other corner, Tim Cook, Apple chief executive, takes the prize for 
misplaced indignation. His“message to the Apple community in Europe” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/30/order-back-taxes-overturned-apple-shareholders>
 was a masterclass in missing the bleedin’ obvious. Cook grumbled about how the 
commission had “launched an effort to rewrite Apple’s history in Europe, ignore 
Ireland’s tax laws and upend the international tax system in the process”. He 
warned – or threatened – that jobs and investment in Europe would be at risk. 
Yet he failed to address the wider picture, or see the basic point that Apple 
has been paying so little tax in Europe that a confrontation was inevitable 
eventually.

Yes, we all understand that the intellectual development takes place in 
California. But that does not equate to a licence to reduce the tax bill to 
tiny sums in territories in which the actual sales of products take place. 
Vestager had it right: “If my tax bill was 0.05%, falling to 0.005%, I would 
think I need to have a second look.”

Cook should indeed rethink. The tax system for multinationals is in a fine old 
mess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/2016/aug/30/ireland-gets-an-apple-windfall-but-tackling-tax-avoidance-just-got-harde>
, but a company like Apple ought to be able to recognise a few basic 
principles. Number one: forget the 1990s, or even the 2000s, and know when your 
tax-planning is just too aggressive for your customers’ tastes.

ARM and Britain’s ‘industrial strategy’

A landslide was always on the cards. By a majority of 95%, the shareholders of 
ARM Holdings voted on Tuesday for their company to be sold to SoftBank of Japan 
for £24bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/arm-shareholders-softbank-takeover-tech-lord-myners>
, a price equivalent to 43% more than the old share price. The result was never 
in doubt.

Less predictable, however, has been the lack of serious fuss elsewhere about a 
foreign takeover of the biggest and best technology company to have come out of 
the UK in the past 20 years. Chancellor Philip Hammond set the tone on day one 
with his silly comment that the deal showed that, after the UK’s vote for 
Brexit, the country had lost “none of its allure to global investors”. Nonsense.
ARM <https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings>, as a firm that sells 
and licenses its microchips around the globe, can afford to be indifferent 
about the UK’s membership of the EU.

The real Brexit angle was only this: SoftBank got its offer on the table 
before Theresa May’s government could decide whether its commitment to “a 
proper industrial strategy” should mean bids like the one for ARM should 
undergo a national interest test.

Hammond’s lack of concern is more alarming the more one considers how little, 
apart from a pay-day for ARM shareholders, SoftBank brings to the table. The 
Japanese firm’s promise to double the workforce in the UK over the next five 
years commits it doing only what ARM would almost certainly have achieved under 
its own steam.

At least SoftBank founder and chief executive Masayoshi Son shares ARM’s 
management’s enthusiasm for the opportunities offered by the chip-heavy 
“internet of things,” it could be argued. Yes, but it’s hard to see why 
ownership from Japan is an improvement on a set-up that has served ARM well.

As a highly successful public company, ARM has never struggled to get its 
investment plans approved by shareholders. SoftBank, by contrast, carries a 
mountain of debt, has no experience in the microchip business, and has 
competing claims on its capital, not least a US mobile telephone business 
facing stiff competition.

“A proper industrial strategy wouldn’t automatically stop the sale of British 
firms to foreign ones, but it should be capable of stepping in to defend a 
sector that is as important as pharmaceuticals is to Britain,” said May in her 
one and only speech in the campaign to win the Tory leadership. The reference 
was to Pfizer’s failed tilt at AstaZeneca in 2014. Is the UK technology 
industry, with ARM at its head, different? Perhaps it is, but a UK government 
ought to be able to explain why.
 