
When Apple debuted its Music subscription service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/08/apple-music-streaming-service-wwdc-spotify>
 at its June 2015 worldwide developers conference, it did so in grand style 
with appearances by music impresario Jimmy Iovine and a performance by Drake.


Apple Music was brimming with features: access to a library of 30m tunes, a 
24/7 Beats One radio station, curated playlists and integration with your 
existing library of music downloads. WithApple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music>, the company was hoping to 
shore up sagging iTunes revenues and drown out rival streaming services like 
Spotify, Pandora and Tidal.

Apple even gave subscribers three months to fall in love with the new service; 
within a few weeks more than 11 million users signed up for the free trial. But 
before it was even half over, some 48% had decidedto cancel before the $10 
monthly fee kicked in, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/18/apple-music-11-million-users-half-tuned-out>
 according to a survey by analytics firm MusicWatch.

Music fans weren’t exactly holding their lighters over their heads, screaming 
for more. Problems ranged from a cluttered and confusing interface, a royalties 
program that angered popular artists (most famouslyTaylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/21/taylor-swift-criticises-shocking-disappointing-apple-music>
), and upgrades that thoroughly bollixed subscribers’ existing iTunes 
libraries. Since then,key executives 
<http://appleinsider.com/articles/15/08/28/apple-music-director-ian-rogers-makes-surprise-departure-for-new-job>
 with Apple’s Beats subsidiary have left the company. Even iTunes international 
VP Oliver Schusser admitted the service“had a bit of homework” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/03/apple-music-improve-festival-streaming>
 to do.

Is Apple Music worth paying for?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/30/is-apple-music-worth-paying-for>
Nearly a year after Apple Music’s debut, however, the company wants to take 
another crack at it. According to a report by Bloomberg, the company plans to 
launchan improved version of the music service 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-05-04/apple-to-revamp-streaming-music-service-after-mixed-reviews-departures>
 at its WWDC next month, along with another massive marketing push. (Apple 
declined to confirm the news to Bloomberg.)

The report was short on details on how Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> intends to pump up the service. 
But assuming it’s true, we have a few unsolicited suggestions.

• Make it simpler, stupid. Apple Music’s interface totally lacks the 
simplicity that has been the hallmark of great Apple products. Fewer options, 
especially on such a small screen, would be welcome.

• More free radio stations. In January, Apple restricted access to its 
ad-supportediTunes <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/itunes> radio 
stations to paying subscribers, leaving Beats One the sole free radio option. 
If Apple wants to convince skeptics its service is worth $120 a year, it needs 
to offer more than the limited tastes of Beats’ DJs.

• A free ad-supported version. It works for Spotify, which has 55 million free 
users (and 20 million paid). Why not Apple?

• A downvote option. You can heart your favorite songs, but you can’t tell 
Apple to stop suggesting artists you don’t like. Apple Music needs to make 
better personalized music suggestions, and adding a Pandora-like thumbs-down 
option (the anti-Drake button, as I call it) would help.

• Lose “Connect”. Apple Music’s Connect service was supposed to bridge the gap 
between artists and their fans, offering them exclusive photos, videos and 
music. But many artists have ignored it, and it mostly seems like another 
attempt to sell more stuff. I doubt anyone would even notice it was gone.

• Better desktop and web clients. If you want to listen to Apple Music on your 
computer, you need to run the resource-hogging and overly complicated iTunes 
software. Would a simple web client be too much to ask? Or even just a 
stripped-down desktop app?

If Apple wants a whole lotta love for Apple Music 2.0, it needs to make sure 
the song does not remain the same.
 