
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> revamped its news service 
on Monday, making a play to take on Facebook as the two tech giants court 
readers and publishers to be the top platform for news.

Media organisations including the Guardian, ESPN, the New York Times, Conde 
Nast, the Daily Mail and Hearst will produce content specifically designed for 
the new service, which will replace Newstand, Apple’s current news app.


Apple iOS 9 to give four extra hours of iPhone battery life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/08/apple-ios-9-speed-size-battery-life-wwdc>
“News [the app’s name] has the latest stories, articles, and posts, with over 
a million topics to choose from,” Susan Prescott, vice president of product 
marketing, told Apple’s WWDC developers’ conference. She said the service would 
track over 1m topics and allow readers to follow all their favourite news 
sources as well as using search to discover new sources.

Craig Federighi, Apple’s senior vice president of software engineering, said 
the New York Times would initially provide 33 articles a day tailored to the 
service as would other publishers including ESPN and Conde Nast magazine’s 
including Vogue and Vanity Fair.

While content will be hosted and delivered on Apple’s platform, the publishers 
will own the content and control the format of articles. Publishers will also 
be able to sell premium ads through the app and keep the revenue. The service 
looks similar to Flipboard, an app that serves up news and other articles in a 
magazine-like format, and can be tailored to location as well as other 
preferences.

Tony Danker, international director, Guardian News & Media, said: “We’re 
excited to be a launch partner for Apple News. Like Apple, we are increasingly 
seeing a surge in demand for original, high quality journalism from millions of 
new readers. And we are delighted that Apple and other large platforms 
recognise the value and influence of Guardian journalism.”


El Capitan: Apple unveils next version of OS X software
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/08/apples-next-version-os-x-called-el-capitan>
Apple’s Newsstand, launched in 2011, was heralded as the saviour of newspaper 
and magazine market in the internet-connected, smartphone and tablet era. The 
app saw digital magazine and newspaper revenue quadruple in the first year.

But more recently publishers have complained that Newsstand hides content 
rather than highlights it. Many have switched to standalone apps dedicated to 
pulling content from websites, like the Guardian app, which has offered them 
greater visibility both on the iPad homescreen and within stores.

Publishers will now sell apps directly within the App Store like any other 
app, with Apple continuing to take a 30% cut of revenue from subscriptions.

Within the new Flipboard-style app, publishers participating and displaying 
content will keep 100% of revenue for ads they sell around their content. Apple 
will also help sell unsold ad slots for a fee, according to the tech site 
Recode.

The revamp comes after Facebook revamped its news service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/24/facebook-host-content-new-york-times-buzzfeed>
 and announced it would partner with publishers to promote stories.
 