
Apple has launched an official Android app for its Apple Music 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.apple.android.music&hl=en> 
streaming service, just over four months after its debut on iOS.

The Spotify <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> rival’s core 
features have survived the translation, including its “For You” playlist and 
album recommendations, Beats 1 radio station and Connect social network - as 
well as its three-month free trial for new users.

The Android version of Apple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music> also provides people with 
access to their purchases from Apple’s iTunes download store - a first for 
Android. For now, the main missing feature is the ability to play music videos.

When Apple unveiled Apple Music in June, it promised that the service would 
later be available for Android devices. “Welcome Android users to @AppleMusic,”
tweeted the company’s services boss Eddy Cue 
<https://twitter.com/cue/status/664156357956734976> as the app launched on 
Android’s Google Play store.

Apple Music interview: 'Algorithms can't do it alone – you need a human touch'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/09/apple-music-interview-jimmy-iovine-eddy-cue>
In an interview with music industry publication Billboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/business/6760576/apple-music-android-eddy-cue>
, Cue said that Apple Music has not been cut down for Android. “If you’ve used 
it on iOS, you’ve used it for Android,” he said. “We wanted it to be for 
everyone.”

In a separate interview with TechCrunch 
<http://techcrunch.com/2015/11/10/apple-music-comes-to-android/#.divrnf:OQ9M>, 
he added that Apple has made the new app according to Android’s design 
principles.

“It’s a full native app, so it will look and feel like an Android app. The 
menus will look like Android, you know the little hamburger they use on the 
top. It’ll definitely feel very much like anAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> app,” said Cue.

Why is Apple making such an effort for a platform that its executives have 
regularly disparaged publicly, from Android malware to the slower (than iOS) 
rates at which new versions of Google’s OS are installed by its community?

There are several theories, including the notion of Apple Music for Android as 
a marketing ploy to lure people towards iOS devices next time they upgrade 
their smartphone or tablet.

“We did this with iTunes very early on when we did it for Windows. It’s really 
important for artists to get as broad an audience as possible, and for us it’s 
really important because it gives us an opportunity to interact with customers 
who may not have experienced any of our products before,” Cue told TechCrunch.


Another theory is that Android support will make Apple Music’s $14.99-a-month 
family plan more appealing for people whose family members are using Android 
devices – a strategy that may also be important if and when Apple launches its 
long-rumoured streaming television subscription service.

Finally, and perhaps most convincingly, there’s the sense that with Apple 
entering the music-streaming market several years after key rivals, it cannot 
afford to ignore a platform that has more than one billion active users – 
especially when Android has proven fertile ground for those rivals.

Spotify and Pandora Radio’s Android apps have both been installed more than 
100m times, while Google’s own Google Play Music Android app has passed 1bn 
installs according to publicGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Play store stats.

In October, Apple said that 6.5 million people were paying for Apple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/20/apple-music-people-paid-streaming-service>
 in the first month after early adopters’ free trial ended – although there is 
some debate over how many of those payers forgot to cancel their automatic 
subscription.

Even if half of them subsequently cancelled, Apple Music would likely be the 
second biggest “on-demand” subscription music-streaming service, ahead of
Rhapsody/Napster which has three million paying users 
<http://news.rhapsody.com/2015/07/22/3m-reasons-to-celebrate/>, and Deezer, 
which hasjust over 1.5 million standalone subscribers 
<http://musically.com/2015/09/25/deezer-ipo-documents-reveal-3-3m-inactive-bundle-subscribers/>
 and another 1.5 million who get it as part of their mobile contract.

Spotify, meanwhile, has more than 20 million paying subscribers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/10/spotify-apple-music-75m-active-users>
 as well as more than 55 million active users of its free service.

• Is Apple Music worth paying for? The Guardian’s three-month review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/30/is-apple-music-worth-paying-for>

 