
Apple's Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) is over for another year - with 
the developers now leaving San Francisco and digesting what they learnt there.
If you agree with Stefan Constantine 
<http://tabdump.com/blog/2014/2/18/two-days> that there are only two important 
events in the annual technology calendar - Apple's WWDC and Google's I/O - then 
the first half is done.

The first big question people have asked: where were the gadgets? Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has released hardware at WWDC in 
the past - notably, iPhones, during the device's early years. This year? 
Nothing.

On the big screen

Make no mistake - Apple is clearly working on phones with larger screens. It's 
part of a drive to close every gap withAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> for users and developers, 
while retaining the differences that have attracted existing users and business 
users, who demand complete security.

Apple's wants to make iOS hugely attractive to developers, while not 
particularly helping those developers to write for Android. It wants to make 
iOS attractive for users, offering apps and features that people can't get on 
Android or don't want to forsake from Android, and extra features so that 
people will stay with the iOS ecosystem.

A bigger phone

The clues were right there in a functionality called "adaptive display" - 
which appeared for a moment in a slide, but isn't mentioned in thepublic 
details about what's new in iOS 8 for developers 
<https://developer.apple.com/ios8/>. Hidden a little deeper is the "
UIAdaptivePresentationControllerDelegate 
<https://developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/ios/documentation/UIKit/Reference/UIAdaptivePresentationControllerDelegate_protocol/index.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014283>
" which "works with a presentation controller to determine how to respond to 
size changes in your app". If it sounds abstruse, it's meant to - it's the key 
to a bigger display.

Developers at WWDC told me that adaptive display is new this year, and that it 
does just what Android does: scales up vector assets so that they will fit a 
screen of undetermined size. That should mean that when Apple introduces one or 
more phones with larger screens, there won't be a long pause while developers 
resize icons and so on to take advantage of it, as happened with the 
introduction of theiPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 5 in 
2012.

The mood music from Apple's executives is slightly different too. Early last 
year questions about screen size (which even then seemed like something where 
Android was beginning to split away) drew responses like "we're quite happy 
with our screen sizes" (which doesn't preclude a change, but doesn't exactly 
presage one either). Now it's "we've never said we're against larger screens, 
but we don't want to compromise on quality."

Apple has always been picky about what's called the "white point" of its 
screens - which is how true on-screen colours are to real life. It has also 
fretted about the effects on a larger screen on battery life (though a larger 
screen should mean longer battery life, because proportionally more of the 
phone can be devoted to the battery while the chips to provide the phone and 
computing functionality don't change in size.)

The "swipe" functionality introduced in iOS 7 - which always suggested larger 
screens were on the way, and that this was a training ground for them - seems a 
clear signal of larger iPhones in the autumn. There's no consensus onhow large. 
A 4.7in screen seems likely as it's a popular size in the Android market.

But a 5.5in device, which would be classed as a "phablet" by analysts, seems 
possible. Ben Bajarin of Creative Strategies points out that Apple will 
struggle to compete effectively for sales in China unless it has a device 
tailored to that market - and Chinese phone users really like phablets. He 
thinks that a China-only launch for a phablet-sized iPhone is possible; the 
fact that it would create a grey market (in which those would be unofficially 
exported from China to other countries) is just a neat irony, given how many 
iPhones were brought to China by grey imports.

With a bigger iPhone, Apple would be able to close one of the gaps that has 
been a key advantage for Android - that some people like larger screens, and 
that using one tends to have a ratchet effect: once you've done it, you don't 
go back.

Coming attractions: keyboards, extensions and widgets

A year ago, the British company Swiftkey was quietly confident that 
third-party keyboards would be allowed into iOS 7 - the first time that Apple 
had allowed another product to replace a system-wide one.

It didn't happen, and Apple indicated to me last year that it had concerns 
about security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jul/09/apple-iphone-keyboard-default-apps>
. But this week, Apple said that third-party keyboards will be allowed in iOS 8 
- subject to the proviso that they can't send data to the cloud without first 
getting the user's explicit permission.

That's only the half of it. As Swiftkey's Joe Braidwood pointed out to me, 
Apple's preliminary support documentation 
<https://developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/ios/documentation/General/Conceptual/ExtensibilityPG/Keyboard.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014214-CH16-SW1>
 (which, it should be noted, could change) on third-party keyboards has all 
sorts of spaces where they can't play.

For instance, the section "System Keyboard Features Unavailable to Custom 
Keyboards" includes password text fields, and phone number fields in the 
Contacts app. (Apple says its system keyboard will pop up for those.) Nor can 
they access the clipboard with its contents from Cut, Copy or Paste actions. 
And third-party keyboards can't show "key artworks" - which seems to mean word 
suggestions - in the top line above the keyboard, unlike the iOS 8 keyboard.

Taken together, that's maximum security. Braidwood is hopeful that things will 
relax as the release comes closer in the autumn. But it's clear from that 
document that Apple definitely hasn't gotten over its concerns about security. 
I'm told that there are extra protections built into iOS 8 - and the bans on 
password (officially, "secure text") fields may be part of it.

How big will third-party keyboards be? There's an assumption by some people 
that because they use one, everyone else in the world is desperate to. But the 
evidence from the Google Play Store is less clear. Here are some third-party 
keyboards and their download numbers:

 * Swype Keyboard Free 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.nuance.swype.trial>: 1m-5m 
downloads 
 * Swype paid 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.nuance.swype.dtc> (£2.42): 
0.5m-1m downloads

 * Google Keyboard 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.google.android.inputmethod.latin>
: 10m-50m downloads. The latest update includes "Improved suggestions and 
corrections using data from Google apps and services", which means it would 
have a tricky time initially on iOS.

 * Swiftkey Free 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.touchtype.swiftkey.phone.trial>
: 10m-50m downloads

 * Swiftkey paid 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.touchtype.swiftkey> (£2.99): 
1m-5m downloads

 * ai.type Keyboard free 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.aitype.android>: 10m-50m 
downloads

 * Fleksy 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.syntellia.fleksy.kb> (offers 
in-app purchases): 0.5m-1m downloads

 * TouchPal X 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.cootek.smartinputv5> (offers 
in-app purchases): 10m-50m downloads

Add these together and third-party keyboards seem a significant business, yet 
an examination of the reviews suggests that many people try out multiple 
keyboards before settling on one - so many of these downloads aren't active. 
The aggregate of the figures above is between 43m and 211m downloads (taking 
the upper and lower limits of each figure); the higher figure would suggest 
that 1 in every 5 Android devices has a third-party keyboard on it - which 
seems unlikely. Given the propensity to download multiple different ones, a 
more realistic market on Android is somewhere between 50m and 60m devices.

That's nothing to sneeze at - but forecasting the size on iOS is harder, 
because Apple is simultaneously upgrading its keyboard in iOS 8 to give it a 
prediction system.

Extensibility

Apple is finally allowing different apps to communicate their ability to deal 
with data from other apps 
<https://developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/ios/documentation/General/Conceptual/ExtensibilityPG/index.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014214-CH20-SW1>
. While Android has had "intents" forever, so that apps can indicate that they 
deal with text, or photos, or video, and offer to take output from other apps 
that generate those sorts of content, or let you direct that content to them, 
Apple has always bound apps more tightly.

The capability to do this has been around in iOS for a couple of years now, 
but Apple held back from implementing it - perhaps last year because there was 
enough upheaval for developers in the swipe-based redesign of iOS 7.


With extensions, apps will be able to indicate that they can perform certain 
functions,such as adding a filter to a photo 
<https://developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/ios/documentation/General/Conceptual/ExtensibilityPG/Photos.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014214-CH17-SW1>
. That will be registered with the system, and those extensions will then show 
up via iOS's "sharing" button. So if you take a photo and then want to apply a 
filter or effect from one app, and then share that photo on Instagram and/or 
Twitter and/or Facebook, you'll call up the filter/effect extension, apply it, 
and then call up the Instagram/Twitter/Facebook extensions, and use those to 
send the modified photo - all while staying in the Photos app.

It's a lot simpler than the multi-app dance that Apple has forced on people so 
far.

Yet - security! - those apps applying the effects and sending the data will be 
sandboxed from the ones they're interacting with: the filter/effect app won't 
get access to all of your photos, only the one being handled.

Again, Apple's closing the gap with what Android has offered - providing a way 
to tempt people over from Android so that they aren't frustrated by what they 
can't do on iOS. Or, alternatively, it's a way to win back iOS users who might 
have left the platform.

Widgets

Widgets on iOS 
<https://developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/ios/documentation/General/Conceptual/ExtensibilityPG/NotificationCenter.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014214-CH11-SW1>
 aren't quite the same as on Android, where they are mini-apps such as the 
weather or clock which reside on the home screen and update in real time. On 
iOS, they are mini-apps, but they run in the slide-down Notifications panel, 
and specifically in the "Today" part (which also contains the calendar).

One difference from Android widgets is that iOS won't let them update all the 
time. Instead, it will only update the widget when the Today view is opened - 
that's because of the concern about draining battery life again. (Widgets on 
Android are notorious juice-suckers.) But they're a "nice to have", and part of 
the way in which the Notifications panel is becoming ever more complex - and 
yet useful.


Cloud

Google's cloud powers the back end of Android. Now Apple is going all-in on 
cloud features in iOS 8, with explicit features like iCloud Drive (which offers 
file system navigation for people who can't get enough of file trees) but also 
background data transfer. Developers can now store data directly into iCloud, 
and photos and changes will be stored too. Charges for users are minimal; 
charges for developers are fractional. Apple is making cloud storage (including 
photos and edits of photos) part of what it does naturally.

As to whether Apple's iCloud is really Apple's storage and processing, or 
whether it's just rented from another company, I was told by authoritative 
sources that Apple doesn't "white label" or buy in any of iCloud: it's all 
Apple's own equipment running it.


As Benedict Evans of Andreessen Horowitz comments 
<http://ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2014/6/4/digesting-wwdc-cloudy>:

The whole of WWDC is full of cloud. A very large proportion of the new 
user-facing features touch the cloud in some way, as a conduit or as storage. 
And the ones that don’t use what you might call the personal cloud - the 
Bluetooth LE/Wifi mesh around you (such as HealthKit or HomeKit). So edit a 
photo and the edits are on all your devices, run out of room and your photos 
stay on the cloud but all but the previews are cleared off your phone, tap a 
phone number on a web page on your Mac and your phone dials it. But none of 
this says ‘CLOUD™’ and none of it is done in a web browser. Web browsers are 
for web pages, not for apps. Hence one could suggest that Apple loves the 
cloud, just not the web (or, not URLs). This is obviously a contrast with 
Google, which has pretty much the opposite approach.

iMessage

According to Craig Federighi, Apple's software chief, the Messages app is the 
one that people spend the most time in per day. Apple is thus enhancing it to 
tie people more closely to it by allowing users to:

• send self-destructing voice and video messages (they are wiped once 
consumed, unless the receiver chooses to keep them)
• see a quick view of photos exchanged during a conversation
• name conversations
• silence a multi-person conversation
• temporarily share present location with the people you're messaging
• permanently share location with others in a conversation

None of those is going to immediately stop people using Snapchat, WhatsApp, 
voicemail or location-sharing apps such as Glympse. But that's not the idea, as 
Jan Dawson of Jackdaw Researchpoints out 
<http://www.beyonddevic.es/2014/06/05/what-winning-means-for-apple/>. The idea 
is to make the iOS Messages app more attractive than those on other platforms, 
so that people who are on iOS are held to it, and those who aren't are bugged 
by their iOS-using friends to switch. (Peer pressure matters to the 
iMessage-using demographic, one guesses.)


That's something Samsung has recognised with its own ChatOn messaging service, 
whichhad 100m users last September 
<http://www.cnet.com/uk/news/samsungs-chaton-tops-100-million-users-threatens-bbm/>
: if you can tie people to your platform with your messaging app, they're 
likely to stay there.

That gives the broad shape of Apple's battle plan in the software and services 
side of the smartphone market, which is approaching saturation (and hence the 
point where further growth has to be won from rival platforms).

The desktop computer stuff

Most of the changes coming to OS X, codenamed "Yosemite", won't affect most 
computer users - because there are only 80m Mac OS X users, and only half of 
those are on the latest version of OS X ("Mavericks"). But Apple's strategy is 
clear here too: encourage people who have an iPhone (a far larger number than 
Mac owners) to get a Mac too, because there are useful things it can do.

The most notable is "Handoff" and "Connectivity", which lets you route phone 
calls and text messages (not just iMessages) to your OS X computer. For some 
people, that's going to be invaluable - apart from anything, it's faster typing 
on a dedicated keyboard than a phone keyboard.

Yes, you can do the SMS-routing between Android and Windows with MightySMS 
phone to PC and Mac 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.texty.sms> - but not many 
people have as yet; it has between 1m and 5m downloads. Itsterms of service 
<http://mightytext.net/tos> also say that "MightyText may need to store message 
content on its servers to facilitate the transmission of the messages to your 
devices" - which might give some pause for thought.


Data protection

A theme - never made explicit, but alluded to many times - was that Apple is 
pushing its data privacy angle in comparison to Google and Facebook. Yes, they 
are there as services on iOS - but it's also introducing DuckDuckGo, which 
doesn't store any user data at all, as an optional search engine on both iOS 
and OS X. It's the first time DuckDuckGo has had any mobile presence, and a big 
win for it. Apple is slowly but surely pushing Google away from iOS: Siri 
search doesn't use Google, but Bing and Wolfram Alpha. Google+ isn't an option 
anywhere. You get to decide app permissions, rather than having to accept them 
in a lump.

This is just the consumer-facing stuff - we haven't touched on Apple's new 
computer language, Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/06/swift-developers-guide-apple-programming-language-wwdc>
, developed in complete secrecy since 2010, or its Metal API for faster 
graphics performance.

So now we await Google I/O. It should be interesting.

• Apple previews new mobile software at WWDC 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/02/apple-previews-new-mobile-software-ios-8-at-wwdc-2014>
 