
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> demonstrated iOS 8, its 
newest version of its operating system for iPhones and iPads, at its worldwide 
developers conference in San Francisco.


The new OS introduced a new Health app to offer "a single comprehensive 
overview of your fitness," as well as updates to features including Mail and 
Notification Centre.

The Health app integrates with apps such as Nike+, or even apps made by 
healthcare providers, to let users manage their health through theiriOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> devices.

"We believe Apple's healthkit will revolutionise how the healthcare industry 
interacts with people," said John Noseworthy, CEO of the prestigious Mayo 
Clinic hospital.

Craig Federighi, the company's software chief, demonstrated the new features. 
Chief among them was a new typing function, called Quicktype, which offers 
predictive typing suggestions.

Similar to Android keyboards such as SwiftKey and Swype, Quicktype looks at 
what a user has previously written and suggests what it thinks the next word in 
the sentence should be. When replying to a text suggesting dinner or a movie, 
for instance, it can automatically work out that the "dinner" and "a movie" are 
words which are likely to be written next.

Photo handling has also been updated, with Apple offering users the ability to 
use the cloud to store every photo and video taken on their iOS devices. With 
iPhones consistently at the top of charts like Flickr's most-used cameras, that 
change is likely to be well received by snap-happyiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> users. But the storage is not 
free – it will cost up to $3.99 a month.

Other features receiving a overhaul include Notification Centre, which now 
allows users to interact with notifications inline, replying to text messages 
or liking Facebook updates without opening the app itself. Additionally, the 
multitasking view of iOS now includes recently contacted people, as well as 
recently used apps.

Mail, the default iOS email app, received a small haul of updates too, 
allowing users to reply to, and delete, messages with just a single swipe. "I 
think we're all going to love doing Mail this way," Federighi said as he 
demonstrated the email app. And Messages, "the most-used app on iPhones" 
according to Federighi, now offers the ability to mute multi-user chats, send 
video or audio messages with just a click and a swipe, and photos in the same 
manner.

Although Apple didn't emphasise the fact, the audio and video messages borrow 
a feature from ephemeral messaging app Snapchat: they will automatically delete 
after a short time, apparently to save space on the phone.

Federighi also demonstrated a new Family Sharing service, letting whole 
families share their photos, calendars and locations with each other. The 
service also allows children to use the App store themselves through their 
parents' credit cards, by sending requests to the adults' iPhones when a 
purchase is attempted.

The total number of iPad users in the US continues to increase, but the 
expanding tablet market means that Apple is actually losing share of overall 
users as Samsung and others increase sales. Emarketer expects US tablet users 
is to fall to 51.8% in 2014, according to down from 54.5% last year.

Apple is expected to claim 12.3 million iPad users in the UK in 2014, which 
represents roughly 50% of the UK tablet users down from 59% in 2013.

Apple’s share of the US smartphone users will rise to 40.5% up from 40% in 
2013 and 36.5% in 2012, according to data from eMarketer. By comparison 
Google’s Android will claim 50% of smartphone users in 2014, up from 49.5% in 
2013.

In the UK, Apple’s numbers are slightly lower. Apple is expected to claim 
30.5% of smartphone users this year, up from 29% in 2013, while Android 
smartphone users will account for 53% of the market in 2014 compared to 54.5% 
in 2013, according to eMarketer.

• Follow WWDC 2014 as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/02/wwdc-2014-apple-ios-8-mac-os-1010-san-francisco-live?view=desktop>
 