
The next update to Apple’s iOS iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> and iPad operating system was 
unveiled on Monday and introduced a new intelligent search assistant, greater 
speed and security.

El Capitan: Apple unveils next version of OS X software
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/08/apples-next-version-os-x-called-el-capitan>
The free update that will be available in September is aiming to refine 
features and styles implemented last year withiOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> 8, instead of launching big new 
features, as the operating system matures following Jony Ive’s promotion to 
chief design officer.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has concentrated on 
optimising iOS to run smoother and faster with lower power consumption, adding 
an extra hour to the iPhone’s battery life, plus an additional low-power mode 
will add another three hours of iPhone battery life.

One of the more significant new features is a new search assistant that builds 
on Apple’s Spotlight search facility and integrates with Siri to create a 
Google Now competitor, capable of displaying data from apps and the web, and 
controlled via text or voice.

Intelligence

Siri can now offer directions based on invitations pulled automatically from 
email, as well as when to leave reminders based on events. The information 
displayed is context sensitive, including the ability to understand that the 
user is looking at something in particular when they say “remind me aboutthis 
later today”. Users can plug in headphones in one location and always get the 
music app, for instance.

Apple’s search app Spotlight will also be able to pull information straight 
from the web and apps such as recipe app Yummly. Siri will also be able to 
search via voice for photos and other apps. A search for “Eddy Cue karaoke” for 
instance, will bring up pictures from the Photos app.

“All of this is done on device, and stays on the device, under your control,” 
said Apple’s senior vice-president of software engineering Craig Federighi, 
saying that searches made on the internet are performed anonymously, as Apple 
is not interested in your data, a dig at rival Google.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fapple-ios-9-speed-size-battery-life-wwdc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8605fc4a2273fc9e3b20f0028c22bb43bf33fc73%2F38_0_1207_724%2F1207.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20iOS%209%20to%20give%20four%20extra%20hours%20of%20iPhone%20battery%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fapple-ios-9-speed-size-battery-life-wwdc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20iOS%209%20to%20give%20four%20extra%20hours%20of%20iPhone%20battery%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fapple-ios-9-speed-size-battery-life-wwdc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8605fc4a2273fc9e3b20f0028c22bb43bf33fc73%2F38_0_1207_724%2F1207.jpg>
 A new Transit view in Apple Maps includes directions for public 
transportation. Photograph: Apple 
Apple Maps will see an overhaul, with public transport directions, including 
those within London, New York and San Francisco, and enhanced street-level 
imagery, similar to Google’s Street View.

News
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fapple-ios-9-speed-size-battery-life-wwdc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe2be89ef813eb0f8a121a9aa53b653b9a767faa%2F0_24_2450_3671%2F2450.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20iOS%209%20to%20give%20four%20extra%20hours%20of%20iPhone%20battery%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fapple-ios-9-speed-size-battery-life-wwdc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20iOS%209%20to%20give%20four%20extra%20hours%20of%20iPhone%20battery%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fapple-ios-9-speed-size-battery-life-wwdc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe2be89ef813eb0f8a121a9aa53b653b9a767faa%2F0_24_2450_3671%2F2450.jpg>
 Susan Prescott, Apple vice-president of product management and marketing, 
speaks about the News app. Photograph: Jeff Chiu/AP 
Apple also launched a new news aggregation app called “News” – a 
Flipboard-style interface for content from third-party publishers including the 
New York Times and ESPN. Apple stressed that readers would be anonymous and 
that their reading would not be tracked. It will be available in the US, UK and 
Australia.

The iPad <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> received enhanced 
multi-tasking upgrades with the ability to have more than one app on screen 
using “slide-over” similar to Microsoft’s Windows 8.1 split-screen modes.

Videos can also be played in a picture-in-picture windowed mode, while the 
virtual keyboard gained text editing features and enhanced support for 
bluetooth keyboards, taking aim at Windows tablets and laptops.

One of the big changes will be in the sizes and speeds of apps built using 
Apple’s Swift language. The programming language, open sourced by Apple, will 
form an integral part of the new operating system.

The operating system will also take up a smaller amount of space on the 
device, requiring 1.3GB of free space to install. iOS 8 required more than 4GB 
to install, which caused issues for users requiring them to delete apps.

Increased security

Security has been improved in iOS 9 to help fend off hackers. Stronger 
end-to-end encryption will be used for syncing information such as notes and 
reminders, while a new set of security extensions will prevent unauthorised 
access to secure files.

The new measures are likely to cause issues for the jailbreaking community, 
which often exploits weaknesses in system files to open up iPhones and iPads 
and install custom software.

iOS 9 will support all devices currently running iOS 8, available as a free 
update in the fall.

Apple follows Google in focusing on making existing features operate better, 
faster and more efficiently. The search giant announced it was making very 
similar changes to its nextversion of Android “M” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/28/google-android-m-software-privacy-battery-life>
, designed to boost battery life, security and speed, while boosting privacy 
features and adding advanced Google Now integration.
 