
The banners have gone up around Moscone West centre in San Francisco: Apple's 
Worldwide Developer Conference (WWDC) is ready to roll. It will carry on 
through the week, but the public-facing part is the keynote address. On Monday 
(10am local time, 6pm BST) Tim Cook, Apple's chief executive, will open the 
show - in which he's expected to be aided by marketing chief Phil Schiller, 
software chief Craig Federighi and others.


But what will they reveal? Based on the banners in which an iOS 7-thin "X" is 
overlaid on a picture of El Capitan in Yosemite in winter, and an "8" overlaid 
on what looks like an undersea view, it's obvious that there are going to be 
big changes coming to the desktop Mac OS X system, and perhaps some smaller 
ones to iOS, used on theiPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 
and iPad, in its new iteration iOS 8.

And what else will there be? After talking to developers and other sources – 
and looking too at past events – here's what one can expect, could expect, and 
probably shouldn't expect in software, hardware and services from the keynote.

As Harry McCracken points out, people tend to expect too much from WWDC 
keynotes. (He'sgone back over a decade of them 
<http://www.technologizer.com/2014/06/01/wwdc/>, with animated GIFs - highly 
recommended.) Because Apple three times launched new iPhones at WWDC (in 2008, 
2009 and 2010), an expectation arose that it would do this every year - to the 
extent that some people really have suggested that it's going to launch or 
preannounce the next version of the iPhone here. It won't, for reasons that 
will be explained below. And note that there were also unrealised expectations 
of an "iWatch" last year.

Mac OS X
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjun%2F02%2Fapple-wwdc-2014-osx-yosemite-ios8-healthbook-appletv-tim-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F2%2F1401684475577%2Fb70a8743-daef-400a-a3ce-3e218d514cd4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple's%20WWDC%202014%3A%20expect%20new%20OS%20X%2C%20iOS%208%20-%20and%20a%20health%20data%20app%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjun%2F02%2Fapple-wwdc-2014-osx-yosemite-ios8-healthbook-appletv-tim-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%27s%20WWDC%202014%3A%20expect%20new%20OS%20X%2C%20iOS%208%20-%20and%20a%20health%20data%20app%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjun%2F02%2Fapple-wwdc-2014-osx-yosemite-ios8-healthbook-appletv-tim-cook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F2%2F1401684475577%2Fb70a8743-daef-400a-a3ce-3e218d514cd4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Yosemite's El Capitan in winter, in a banner at Apple's WWDC 2014 at the 
Moscone West centre, San Francisco. Photograph: Charles Arthur/Guardian 
Apple's desktop operating system is going to get a new look. Version 10.10, 
which will probably be codenamed "Yosemite" (last year's was called "Mavericks" 
after a surf break; the names are based on famous Californian places) is 
expected to get the "iOS 7" treatment - that is, a reduction (or even 
elimination) of drop shadows in favour of a "flat" look like that on iOS 7. 
What's notable is that very little has leaked about this new version – not even 
a screenshot, which would normally be expected. Developers writing for OS X 
expect that they are going to have to rethink app interfaces so that they make 
sense on both this new look of OS X, and on the older ones that preceded it.

iOS 8
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjun%2F02%2Fapple-wwdc-2014-osx-yosemite-ios8-healthbook-appletv-tim-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F2%2F1401684906107%2F95f8f304-e064-4bc5-b443-5fe138abb040-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple's%20WWDC%202014%3A%20expect%20new%20OS%20X%2C%20iOS%208%20-%20and%20a%20health%20data%20app%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjun%2F02%2Fapple-wwdc-2014-osx-yosemite-ios8-healthbook-appletv-tim-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%27s%20WWDC%202014%3A%20expect%20new%20OS%20X%2C%20iOS%208%20-%20and%20a%20health%20data%20app%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjun%2F02%2Fapple-wwdc-2014-osx-yosemite-ios8-healthbook-appletv-tim-cook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F2%2F1401684906107%2F95f8f304-e064-4bc5-b443-5fe138abb040-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A teaser banner - apparently showing a view beneath the sea - for iOS 8 at 
Apple's WWDC 2014, Moscone West, San Francisco. Photograph: Charles 
Arthur/Guardian 
The iPhone and iPad software will get a smaller update than last year's - 
partly becauseApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has shifted 
engineers from its mobile team to work on the desktop software. Equally, it 
doesn't have to make such a dramatic change - much of that (the different 
appearance, and the inclusion of gesture-based interaction such as swiping) was 
done a year ago.

While an update to the desktop software might attract some attention, it only 
has around 75m users - compared to perhaps 500m iOS users worldwide. That means 
that changes and additions to iOS are far more important, in terms of what they 
mean for developers and users.

With that in mind, Apple is also expected to begin an iOS "platform" strategy 
- rather as it did back in 2001-2, when it launched its "Digital hub" platform 
strategy for OS X. That introduced programs to organise music, photos, videos 
and to create DVDs - iTunes, iPhoto, iMovie and iDVD. (Of those, iMovie was 
first - in 1999 - followed by iTunes and iDVD in 2001 and iPhoto in 2002.)

Healthbook app for fitness data

This time the platforms are expected to be "Healthbook", an iOS 8 app which 
will allow separate fitness and health devices to send data to a centralised 
data collection app on the iPhone, and a "smart home" app that will let you 
configure and connect to smart devices - electricity meters, light bulbs, air 
conditioners, and so on - which have a special "Made for iPhone" label.

Will Apple move into those markets, though? It would seem odd for a company 
that makes its money from hardware to offer a platform for hardware, and yet 
not exploit for itself by making its own products. However, if you look at the 
"digital hub" portfolio, Apple only made hardware for one of those strands of 
music, photos and film - the iPod. Unless, of course, you want to argue, as you 
reasonably could, that the iPhone does photos and video. But it came up with 
the digital hub well before the iPhone project began.

So it's possible that Apple will get into the health/fitness and "smart home" 
hardware markets - but it might wait a little while before it does so.

Missing from iOS so far is any equivalent to Android's "intents", which lets 
an app signal to the OS that it's able to accept or send particular sorts of 
data - so for example a Flickr app would indicate that it can send and receive 
photos, which would then be signalled to any app that wanted to receive or send 
a photo within the OS. This is known asXPC (cross-program communication), and 
it has actually beenavailable - but not turned on - in iOS since 2012 
<http://conradstoll.com/blog/2012/11/4/speculation-on-xpc-for-ios.html>. 
However, it's a private API, reserved - so far - for Apple's apps.

One argument I've heard from developers is that after all the upheaval of iOS 
6 and 7 (adding iCloud in the former, and the complete design overhaul in the 
latter), now could be the time for XPC to become visible in iOS 8. If you want 
to try to unpick clues - as people love to - then the relevance of the 
"undersea" picture in iOS 8 is that this previously-submerged system will rise 
above the water. It's as good a suggestion as any.
 Apple's 2013 WWDC poster for iOS 7 - which hinted at translucency, thinner 
fonts and primary colours. Photograph: /Apple 

Last year, the posters showed a wave (as it was revealed to be) at Mavericks 
for OSX, and a set of overlapping, translucent, primary-coloured rectangles for 
iOS 7 - which turned out to be about the "flat" design and translucency 
introduced in iOS. It makes sense, but only after you've seen it.

More confidently expected is that the Maps function is expected to add public 
transport information, at least in the US; for other countries, as so often 
with such services, other countries may have to wait longer (or it may be added 
piecemeal). It's easy to underestimate how vast a project getting public 
transport data for every city in every country is; Google has been at it for 
years, and it's likely to have cost millions and millions of pounds. Public 
transport data is a "nice to have", but is it essential?

There might be cross-platform integration of the "AirDrop" function 
<http://support.apple.com/kb/HT4783>, which currently works between iOS 
devices, or - but not also - between OS X computers. Being able to shift files 
between both platforms sounds attractive - but there's an obvious problem: what 
if you transfer a file from an OSX computer to an iOS device but there's no way 
to do anything with the file on the iOS device? For example, transferring an 
Adobe Illustrator file with multiple layers might sound great - but what's iOS 
going to do with it? And where would the file "be" on iOS when you tried to 
open it? One of Apple's biggest efforts has been to get rid of the visible file 
system, to focus instead on apps, which open files that are available to them 
(and stored in the non-visible iOS file system - it does exist). Cross-platform 
AirDrop might open up a can of filesystem worms.

A similar to-be-avoided can of worms is the suggestion that there will be a "
split screen" system on iOS 8. Although Windows 8 offers this, it's not obvious 
to invoke <http://windows.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-8/getting-around-tutorial>
 (and probably works best on screens which have a 16:9 aspect ratio), and 
figuring out what a "swipe" means becomes more complex if you have two apps 
that use swipes side-by-side - does a swipe from one to the other mean you're 
trying to move content, or just swiped too far?

Possible but unlikely: some form of mobile payment system which turns iPhones 
into a way of paying for things. The obstacle here isn't that iPhones don't 
have NFC - while lots of Android phones do (though nobody, including Google, 
knowsquite how many), the obstacle to their being used as mobile payments 
systems is the lack of standardisation. That hasn't changed; different 
retailers are using different standards, andfighting among each other 
<http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9247016/Isis_CTO_accuses_retailers_of_turning_off_NFC_and_smartcard_payment_tech?taxonomyId=240&pageNumber=1>
. Apple would surely like to get into mobile payments, but the landscape seems 
too confused at present.

Apple TV

This set-top box, which runs a skinned version of iOS, is seriously overdue 
for both a hardware and software update. Apple executives have been dropping 
gentle hints about the size of the business that the Apple TV installed base 
generates - a $1.2bn business (from people buying content such as TV shows and 
films) in the 2013 financial year, according to Tim Cook, who said it wasn't 
right to call it a "hobby" any more.

The Apple TV lacks an app platform, except for a very select few developers - 
specifically, TV channels such as HBO (for its HBO Go service) and Major League 
Baseball (MLB). But all sorts of developers would love to build apps for Apple 
TV; it doesn't make sense either that the BBC can't build an iPlayer app, nor 
ITV or Channel 4.

Looking at the Apple TV content list for the UK, it's a limited list 
<https://www.apple.com/uk/appletv/whats-on/> ahead of the keynote - Netflix, 
Sky News, Sky Sports, Bloomberg, MLB TV, MBA (basketball), NHL (ice hockey), 
Red Bull TV ("live and exclusive events featuring the world’s greatest 
athletes, artists and more"), WSJ Live (news from the Wall Street Journal), 
YouTube, Vevo (music streaming and video), Qello (music concerts and films on 
demand), Vimeo (the video site), Flickr, Crunchyroll ("the best in Japanese 
anime and drama"), and KOR TV ("live Korean TV"). It's hardly a UK-oriented 
list.


Developers and others say that Apple has new Apple TV hardware and software 
that it has had in its testing labs since last year; they've been expecting it 
for ages, and so far been continually disappointed. Updated software with an 
app platform and a smart home interface - because where better to control your 
smart home than through the biggest screen in your home? - would make a lot of 
sense.

Don't expect a TV set; the replacement rate is too slow - about 10%, or once 
every ten years, compared to 50% for the iPhone, and 20% or better for laptops 
and desktops. But a set-top box like the Apple TV is additive - you can buy one 
without getting rid of everything else. (The hope that you might be able to 
route your other set-top boxes, such as digital TV or Sky boxes, through an 
Apple TV is over-optimistic. It's doubtful such a device can even be built.)

Apple and Beats

The Wall Street Journal suggests that the $3bn purchase price breaks down to 
$2.5bn for the (profitable) headphones business, and $500m for the (probably 
unprofitable) streaming music business. And it also gets Jimmy Iovine, who will 
be able to bring his considerable negotiating expertise and contacts in 
Hollywood and the music business. But given the demographic to which the Beats 
brand appeals, and the slightly different one to which Apple appeals, it's 
unlikely that they will be merged.

What about an iPhone - or a hint?

Apple makes phones in volume now - really big volumes. It doesn't launch 
phones in the summer now because it focusses sales towards Christmas, which is 
the biggest buying period of the year for mobile phones. But if - as many 
expect - it's going to launch alarger-screened iPhone later this year, 
shouldn't it give developers some sort of hint about it? Or maybe even just 
announce it?

That's easily answered. It didn't hint that it was going to change the screen 
size of the iPhone with the iPhone 5; developers had to adjust the layout of 
their apps to take account of the longer screen. (It took some a long time.) 
Apple didn't warn them because to do so might have slowed sales of existing 
iPhones. The chances of it doing so seem microscopically remote.

What about simply announcing the new phone? That's where the volume becomes 
important. If Apple were going to announce the new iPhone on Monday, it would 
have had to get millions of them built already - because to announce something 
and then not release it for months would kill sales of the existing product.

But there hasn't been any noise about new iPhones being built in huge numbers 
from the supply chain in China, which you would expect. That means there aren't 
any new iPhones coming.

The same probably applies to the "big iPad": if there's going to be a 12in 
iPad (measured diagonally), there should have been noises already from the 
supply chain. There hasn't been - and the usual focus on the September-December 
period would also suggest that, as for the past two years, the newiPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> or iPads will appear around 
September-October.

MacBook Air, MacBook Pro, iMac, Mac Pro, Mac Mini

This is the present computer line. Two years ago the "retina" MacBook Pro was 
introduced; last year it was the Mac Pro. But theMacBook Air has been updated 
recently, the iMac doesn't need an update, and updating theMac Mini would be 
underwhelming, to say the least. Even if Mac OS X is getting an update, it 
doesn't seem like the time for an update of any of the computer line.

Is that it?

On the user-facing side, yes. For developers, though, the promise is of a huge 
number of changes - as evidenced by the program, which ahead of the keynote 
includes such topics as "No Comment", "This One Is Sealed", "Shhhh, Can't Tell 
You Yet", "It's Under Wraps", and so on. Keeping the content of talks secret so 
that it won't tip developers off about what's coming up isn't unusual, but to 
keep the titles secret to such an extent - so that developers can't even plan 
their day (around iOS or OS X) is. Once the keynote is complete, the schedule 
will be revealed.

Unusually, Apple is streaming its "state of the union" keynote for developers, 
which happens in the afternoon and is the in-depth explanation of the 
public-facing changes that have been announced in the morning. That's 
indicative of something going on.


• Apple chief Tim Cook under pressure to prove innovative flair is still there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/30/pressure-tim-cook-innovation-apple>
 