
Apple, known for its steady stream of slick consumer electronic devices, used 
its annual developer conference inSan Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> to roll out a collection of 
millennial-friendly texting tools to enhance emojis, improve image sharing and 
add animations to messages.

Apple WWDC keynote: key points at a glance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/13/apple-wwdc-keynote-key-points-at-a-glance>
Among a two-hour stream of product announcements at the annual Worldwide 
Developer Conference (WWDC) event,Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> engineers demonstrated the 
latest update of Apple’s smartphone software iOS, which will let iPhone users 
add larger emojis, see photos and videos appear in a stream of text messages, 
add animated effects and “emojify” messages by converting typed words into 
emojis.

Opening the event with a moment of silence for the victims of the weekend’s 
shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/orlando-victims-travel-agent-brand-manager-and-technician-among-dead>
 at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Apple’s CEO, Tim Cook – who has become a leader 
on gay rights issues sincetalking about his own sexuality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/30/apple-chief-tim-cook-proud-to-be-gay>
 in 2014 – called the attacks a “senseless, unconscionable act of terrorism and 
hate aimed at dividing and destroying”.


Cook then set about laying out his vision for a future in which Apple’s 
software forms the central hub of its customers’ lives, helping track their 
fitness, send love notes, navigate the road and trade pictures of cute dogs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-messages-wwdc-new-features-emoji-prediction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18467979bfde722e1bd1bc495da58d0136949b80%2F0_11_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20unfurls%20more%20millennial-friendly%20texting%20tools%20including%20'emoji%20prediction'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-messages-wwdc-new-features-emoji-prediction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20unfurls%20more%20millennial-friendly%20texting%20tools%20including%20%27emoji%20prediction%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-messages-wwdc-new-features-emoji-prediction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18467979bfde722e1bd1bc495da58d0136949b80%2F0_11_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Tim Cook lays out his vision for Apple’s future. Photograph: Andrew 
Burton/Getty Images 
More playful messages

Apple is clearly responding to the voice of the consumer; Messages is the most 
popular app oniOS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios>, and the new 
features are designed to offer more playful options that replicate some 
successful third-party messaging apps.

“We’re providing emoji predictions as you type,” said Craig Federighi, Apple’s 
senior vice-president of software engineering. “When you tap on the emoji 
button, we’ll highlight all the emoji-fiable words.”

Federighi also went slightly off script, joking that “the children of tomorrow 
will have no understanding of the English language”. Clicking on the camera 
icon in Messages will immediately show the camera live, and the demonstration 
showed some shots that appeared slightly more perfect than real life. It was a 
rare moment of candor in an otherwise characteristically veneered Apple 
presentation. “Someone in marketing thought that was what you’d see if you saw 
through the camera ... such an incongruous set of images.”

Digital assistant

The iPhone maker is also betting heavily on winning a multi-front battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/18/google-home-assistant-amazon-echo-apple-siri>
 with Google, Facebook and Amazon to create a market-defining digital assistant 
that helps people make tiny decisions or suggests relevant information 
throughout the day, such as which emoji to use, which family member to tag in a 
photo, or the best time in your diary to get to the gym.

Apple plans to add machine-learning smarts to its messaging app, better 
predicting the content of texts between any two people communicating with 
iPhones.

At the same time, it announced it would open the technical innards of its Siri 
virtual assistant to outside developers who can make other intelligent 
apps.Consumers could just ask Siri how long it would take for a Lyft or Uber to 
show up, rather than opening an app.

Siri also will begin working on Apple’s desktop and laptop computers. In one 
demonstration, Federighi showed how he could ask Siri to gather up all emails 
from a certain co-worker about a certain topic.

Apple’s desire to get more people to use Siri comes as other Silicon Valley 
giants release their own digital butlers. Amazon.com has Alexa, which will 
query the internet and adjust the lights in a room for users; Facebook has M; 
and Google announced its own Google Assistant in May.

Privacy features

Apple did, however, break with the larger technology industry over at least 
one issue: privacy. As Silicon Valley tries to offer more products that analyze 
vast amounts of consumer data to better predict how people will make decisions, 
it often requires users to forgo certain modern privacy tools, such as strong 
encryption. That’s because the companies usually can only analyze consumer 
behavior by monitoring their messages, scanning their photos and tracking their 
movements. These computations are done by running all of this data through 
corporate servers.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-messages-wwdc-new-features-emoji-prediction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d581bdab52bccc1cb56994eb24dde9abec8a35c%2F0_19_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20unfurls%20more%20millennial-friendly%20texting%20tools%20including%20'emoji%20prediction'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-messages-wwdc-new-features-emoji-prediction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20unfurls%20more%20millennial-friendly%20texting%20tools%20including%20%27emoji%20prediction%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-messages-wwdc-new-features-emoji-prediction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d581bdab52bccc1cb56994eb24dde9abec8a35c%2F0_19_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Apple says its Messages app will continue to offer end-to-end encryption by 
default. Photograph: Tony Avelar/AP 
In May, Google announced that Allo, its new messaging app, would only offer 
digital assistant features if users don’t turn on an optional strong encryption 
feature. Facebook will also make its new encryption technology on its Messenger 
app optional for similar reasons,people familiar with the project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/31/facebook-messenger-bot-encryption-secure-messaging>
 said.


Apple, by contrast, said such machine-learning computations will be done on 
users’ devices, rather than company servers. Because of this, the company says 
its Messages app will continue to offer end-to-end encryption by default.

Other updates

Apple is also renaming its operating system, the latest version of which is 
called macOS Sierra. Updates include a shared clipboard, so that content and 
links can be shared between connected iPhones, iPads and Macs, a feature that 
will free up disk space by backing up less-used content on iCloud, and its 
payment service Apple Pay, which can now be used on desktop sites.

Apple’s latest watch software, WatchOS 3, speeds up changes between apps, adds 
text input by typing individual letters on screen and allows users to unlock 
their desktops with the presence of their watch, saving the effort of typing a 
password.

macOS, iOS 10 and WatchOS are all expected to be released in a public beta 
trial in July and on general release in the autumn.

Decline in iPhone sales leads to first revenue decline in 13 years for Apple
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/26/apple-iphone-first-revenue-decline-13-years>
WWDC comes as Apple faces a challenging future. In April, Apple reported its 
first sales decline in 13 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/26/apple-iphone-first-revenue-decline-13-years>
. The company, while still massively successful, appears to be reaching a 
saturation point with its popular products, such as the iPhone and iPad. Its 
latest piece of hardware, Apple Watch, has faced consistentlymixed reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/apple-watch-smartwatch>.

Apple’s annual developer conference isn’t normally the site of sweeping 
product announcements. The audience is full of coders and Apple tends to focus 
on minor tweaks that may only elicit applause from an enthralled audience deep 
in the weeds of app design.

When Federighi announced the shared clipboard, there was an audible gasp. At 
another point, Bozoma Saint John, head of consumer marketing for Apple Music, 
boldly tried to show off a new “lyrics” feature by getting the audience to rap 
along to Sugarhill Gang’s classic Rapper’s Delight.

She quickly gave up after declaring the audience was not, as the song 
instructs, “rapping to the beat”.
 