
Today, Steve Jobs came out of his medical leave early to reveal Apple's new 
cloud service, the iCloud, at the company's Worldwide Developers Conference in 
California. In a world of iAppliances, it is easy to get overwhelmed. For 
example, is it possible to watch programmes from the iPlayer on my iPad? Is my 
iPod synced to my iTunes? What kind of iRain is likely to fall from the newly 
launchediCloud <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/icloud>? Let's start at 
the very beginning.

What is the 'cloud'?

Once, you would do your work on your personal computer and save it onto your 
hard drive. And there it would sit, accessible only to you (and maybe a few 
other select users on a local network), and could only be manipulated (edited) 
if you had the right software on your device. The cloud overcomes this 
limitation – all you need is connectivity (pretty much universal, with the 
internet), and a cloud provider (a company that facilitates access to the cloud 
or their data servers). This means that any computer which is connected to the 
internet (including mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets) is 
connected to all the same applications and files. In terms of online storage, 
it creates better conditions for collaborative work; for example, a change made 
to a Word document would be available to users on different computers because 
the information is synchronised across all computers. The need for carrying 
around physical storage devices is eliminated. Hundreds of millions of us 
already use the cloud everyday, to share photographs, music and video clips. It 
is, like love, all around. The cloud signals, by and large, the end of "stuff".

Where is all the information in the cloud actually stored?

The information in the cloud ranges from the personal but unimportant to the 
highly sensitive. So where is it all kept? If it is lost, can it be recovered? 
And is it secure? The data in the cloud exists on servers, and these are 
mirrored onto other servers to keep data secure and available. That way, if one 
cluster of servers falls over, then data is available from servers in another 
data centre or elsewhere in the same location. For example, Google's index is 
mirrored across thousands, if not millions of servers. So if your data was to 
be lost, it is more or less guaranteed that they would find it.

While it would be easy to find the information, it is no surprise that 
organisations do not willingly yield the details of where the physical servers 
are located. And why would they? No one wants to be held to ransom or attacked. 
Even so, if an attacker were to gain physical access to the servers, it is 
unlikely that they would gain any really useable data.

Uses of the cloud

Web-based email (like Gmail or Hotmail) has been acting in the cloud for a 
long time. People use their email accounts to back up the files on their 
personal computers – and this information can be held securely and indefinitely 
in the cloud. In addition to being a hugely successful online retailer, Amazon 
also provides cloud-computing services by renting out space on its powerful 
servers to customers worldwide. In April an Amazon cloud failure took out 
social-networking sitesFoursquare <https://foursquare.com/>, Reddit 
<http://www.reddit.com/> and Quora <http://www.quora.com/>.

What is the iCloud?

It is, quite simply, a content-sharing service on the cloud. Sources from the 
music industry have indicated thatApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has signed up with the four 
major music labels – EMI, Sony, Universal and Warner Music, to provide a 
music-streaming service in the US. Some are suggesting that the iCloud is 
designed to be the new iTunes – in which music, videos, podcasts etc will be 
available for streaming.

What are the best cloud-based sites?

Dropbox.com <http://www.dropbox.com/> and YouSendIt.com 
<https://www.yousendit.com/> are just two of the most used cloud-based sites. 
Dropbox was created in 2007 by two MIT students who were "tired of emailing 
files to themselves to work from more than one computer". It's a free service 
that let you share your documents easily. YouSendIt.com allows you to store and 
send large files over the web.

Spotify <http://www.spotify.com/uk/> is a music-streaming service launched in 
2008. Previously free, it recently capped its free usage at 10 hours a month, 
with a premium membership allowing for unlimited listening at £9.99 a month. It 
has approximately 10 million users.

Amazon <http://www.amazon.co.uk/> launched its cloud player in March, which 
gives users 5Gb of storage space to upload songs and play them from any number 
of Android devices.

Google Docs is a free web-based storage service. It allows users to create and 
edit text, spreadsheet and slide show documents in real time with other users.
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has also released Music 
Beta, a streaming service announced last month.
 