
Both Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> and the White House 
have announced new policies aimed at boosting the use of encrypted connections 
on the internet, suggesting that the days of insecure internet connections 
could be numbered.

On Monday, Apple revealed the latest version of its mobile operating system, 
iOS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> 9, at the company’s Worldwide 
Developer Conference.

Hidden among the changes in the update is a confirmation that the company will 
encouraging developers to “exclusively” use HTTPS, the secure way of connecting 
to web addresses, over the older and insecure HTTP.

The same day, the White House published a memo requiring all federal websites 
and web services to provide service only through a secure connection.

Like Apple, it recommends that that connection be through the HTTPS standard, 
which it calls “the strongest privacy and integrity protection currently 
available for public web connections”.

The rationale for both changes is the same: over recent years, the 
understanding of where encryption is necessary has shifted. It used to be that 
HTTPS was only expected for websites where “sensitive information” was 
exchanged, such as usernames, passwords, or credit card details.

But increasingly, wider use of encrypted connections has become popular. Sites 
such as Google, Facebook and Twitter now offer HTTPS connection as default, and 
the Electronic Frontier Foundation’sHTTPS Everywhere 
<https://www.eff.org/https-everywhere/> tool lets users connect through the 
most secure channel wherever possible.

In its note mandating the use of secure connections, the White House explains 
that “all browsing activity should be considered private and sensitive”.

“Federal websites that do not convert to HTTPS will not keep pace with privacy 
and security practices used by commercial organisations, and with current and 
upcoming internet standards. This leaves Americans vulnerable to known threats, 
and may reduce their confidence in their government.”

Apple’s advice to developers is similar. Encryption, it writes 
<https://developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/ios/releasenotes/General/WhatsNewIniOS/Articles/iOS9.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40016198-SW1>
, “prevents accidental disclosure, provides secure default behaviour, and is 
easy to adopt”.

“If you’re developing a new app, you should use HTTPS exclusively. If you have 
an existing app, you should use HTTPS as much as you can right now, and create 
a plan for migrating the rest of your app as soon as possible.”

Compared to unsecured connections, HTTPS offers a number of benefits. The 
service encrypts information sent between the user and the website at the other 
end, ensuring that no third party can intercept the communications.

That means, for example, a third-party intercepting an e-commerce order cannot 
steal credit card details, which is why encrypted connections have been the 
norm for online shopping and banking for more than a decade.

But encryption also provides security against other sorts of online attacks: 
malware that injects advertisements into webpages cannot do so if the sites are 
encrypted; phishing sites which attempt to trick a user into giving up personal 
details cannot forge a security certificate; and attempts to hijack domains 
will fail if the security certificate is wrong.

As well as the security benefits, encrypted connections also offer users 
privacy benefits. While the protocol cannot protect the identity of the 
specific site being browsed, it can hide what specific page is being viewed 
from simple attacks.

The EFF explains that “ideally, this provides some protection against an 
attacker learning the content of the information flowing in each direction — 
for instance, the text of email messages you send or receive through a webmail 
site, the products you browse or purchase on an e-commerce site, or the 
particular articles you read on a reference site”.

Ironically, given the support of the White House, part of the impetus for 
wider use of HTTPS for internet security was the revelations of state 
surveillance contained in the files leaked by Edward Snowden.

In September 2013, the Guardian revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/05/nsa-gchq-encryption-codes-security>
 that the NSA has capabilities against HTTPS encryption, but the service is not 
believed to be able to perform “dragnet”-style surveillance against encrypted 
connections.
 