
The origin of April Fool's day is much disputed.

Some claim Chaucer's tale of a vain cock 
<http://www.museumofhoaxes.com/hoax/Hoaxipedia/April_Fools_Day_-_Origin/> in 
Nun's Priest's Tale, written around 1392, inspired centuries of hoaxes. 

Others  suggest the reference within 1508 French poem 
<http://www.life123.com/holidays/more-holidays/april-holidays/april-fools-history.shtml>
Eloy D'Amerval to an "April Fish" (ho ho ho) is the truer source of the 1 April 
prank.

Examiner.com has a further 8 theories 
<http://www.examiner.com/x-4865-Silicon-Valley-Christian-Examiner~y2009m3d30-10-Theories-for-the-Origin-of-April-Fools-Day>
, including the calendar being changed and the notion of an April Fool being 
someone who mistook 1 April for 1 May, and thus launched into May Day 
celebrations a month early.

Whatever your theory as to the day's origin, the most famous April Fool is, 
according to Museum of Hoaxes <http://www.museumofhoaxes.com/hoax/aprilfool/>, 
beyond doubt: the 1957 BBC Panorama piece on Switzerland's little-known 
spaghetti harvest.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGXmaS1ZzpA8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGXmaS1ZzpA8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGXmaS1ZzpA8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGXmaS1ZzpA8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGXmaS1ZzpA8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGXmaS1ZzpA8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
close 
We'll look back at famous April Fool incidents here, and report on 2010's 
batch of buffoonery.

What are your favourite April Fool hoaxes? Seen any good – or bad – ones this 
year? Emailadam.gabbatt@guardian.co.uk <mailto:adam.gabbatt@guardian.co.uk> or 
leave your comment below.

In homage to the day, live updates will appear at the bottom of this article.

8.08am: 

Lots of hoaxes around in the print media today, as per usual.

The Sun <http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/> has revealed a "revolutionary 
new printing technique," which has allowed the newspaper to print "the world's 
first flavoured page".

The page uses "hyrdocolloids," which allegedly "collide with each other to 
spread over your tastebuds". The tabloid has invited readers to lick a blank 
section of the paper (page 17, if you fancy trying it out) and email in their 
"taste test results".

Not all the hoaxes in today's newspapers are editorial pieces – some of the 
best ones are elaborate advertising campaigns.The Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/> has a fine example on page 5, with an advert 
for a "New Miracle Shirt" which has been developed to combat body odour.

The garment purports to contain a "unique neutralizing agent" – "Slip it on 
and Bang! – the BO is gone," asserts the accompanying text. Although quite 
subtle, a clue that the advert is not entirely sincere is given by the 
apparently random decision to get the male model to wear an eyepatch.

Indeed, the website for the shirt – www.miracleshirt.co.uk 
<http://www.miracleshirt.co.uk> – turns out to have been set up by Gillette.

8.19am: 

My colleague Mark Sweney has pointed out that the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/> newspaper has a suspicious looking story on page 
3,and on its website 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/7541455/Ferrets-key-to-bridging-the-digital-divide-between-cities-and-rural-areas.html>
, revealing that ferrets are to be used to deliver broadband to rural areas.

The animals have been used by Virgin Media for more than a year to help lay 
cables for its broadband service, the company has disclosed.

The ferrets wear jackets fitted with a microchip which is able to analyse any 
breaks or damage in the underground network.

...

Jon James, director of broadband for Virgin Media, said: "For hundreds of 
years, ferrets have helped humans in various jobs. Our decision to use them is 
due to their strong nesting instinct, their long, lean build and inquisitive 
nature, and for their ability to get down holes. We initially kept the trial 
low-key as we wanted to assess how well the ferrets fitted into our operations 
before revealing this enterprising scheme."

Ferrets have been used to run cables through hard-to-reach places in the past.

Events organisers in London used them to run television and sound cables 
outside Buckingham Palace for the wedding of the Prince of Wales and the late 
Diana, Princess of Wales.

Elsewhere, TechCrunch has provided a "Definitive List" 
<http://techcrunch.com/april-fools-shenanigans/> of the best April Fool jokes 
from around the web.

Apparently Google have announced new notification plans for Google Wave – 
namely, the company sent a human to tell you when there's a new wave in your 
inbox.

TechCrunch also report on a new feature provided by Google UK which offers to 
translate animal speech 
<http://www.google.co.uk/intl/en/landing/translateforanimals/>.

8.25am: 

I've had a couple of emails suggesting a package on Radio 4's Today programme 
this morning could have been an April Fool.

It either is a windup, or William Shakespeare is French. I'll try and find the 
audio so you can judge for yourself.

Maev Kennedy writes in: 

Radio4 just ran a beautifully set up one about how Shakespeare was French. 
They claim a locket given to him with French inscription from his mother, Marie 
Ardennes, including a lock of Mary Queen of Scot's hair, found in the 
excavation (genuinely going on this week, I was there yesterday) at his last 
home in Stratford, New Place.

Complete with genuine interview with Paul Edmondson, Head of Education at The 
Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, and I presume invented French MP claiming him as 
long lost son of la Patrie.

8.44am: 

@freespeechoneeach comments below on the Guardian April Fool about "the 
charming island of San Seriffe".
 The Republic of San Seriffe – from the Guardian's 8 page pull out in 1977 
This was a particularly elaborate prank, ranked at number five in the Museum 
of Hoaxes "Top 100" April Fool's Day hoaxes" 
<http://www.museumofhoaxes.com/hoax/aprilfool/>. The existence of San Seriffe 
came to light in the form of an 8 page pull out in 1977, reporting on the 
"sleepy island paradise under the authoritarian leadership of an unpopular 
general".

The island was shaped like a semi-colon, with all important conurbations named 
after typefaces or grammatical marks.Here's a piece by Tim Radford 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/1977/apr/01/leadersandreply.mainsection>, on of 
the "tourists fortunate enough to be permitted to visit the Flong settlements 
of San Serriffe during the summer solstice".

The Guardian even re-visited San Seriffe in 1999, with reporter Berlin Sans 
discovering <http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/1999/apr/01/features11.g24> 
"a vibrant nation transformed by a visionary leader".

8.50am: 

Katrina Johnson, among others, emails to point out the Daily Mail's exclusive 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1262603/AA-jetpack.html>: apparently 
AA servicement are to be fitted with "lightweight jet-packs.

'The aim of our AA Rocketman patrols is to give motorists a rapid response,' 
said Dr Raif Lopol, AA future technologies strategist.

'The idea is not to have AA teams constantly patrolling the skies all the 
time. Fuel costs alone make that impractical.

'Instead, the AA patrol van parks within a mile of the stricken member and the 
jetpack pilot launches from the back of the van.'

The jet-packs, which cost £42,000 each, are made of lightweight carbon fibre, 
have a top speed of 80mph, can reach a maximum height of 8,000ft and have a 
flying time of ten minutes.

Most importantly they can hover up to 250ft above gridlocked traffic and drop 
down to a stricken vehicle in areas where a patrol van may not be able to get 
through.

A parachute is packed for emergencies.

By the way, eagle-eyed Guardian readers will be able to spot no fewer than 
four hoaxes in today's paper, including one from those jokers at BMW offering 
different coloured badges for the bonnet of your car, depending on your 
political allegiance.

You can see the advert on BMW's website. <http://www.bmw.co.uk/bmwuk/homepage/>

09.00am: 

I've received a flood of press releases which, if true, mean 1 April 2010 will 
be forever known as the day of nonsense inventions and product launches.

In no particular order... WD40 have developed an aftershave ... Sayers have 
launched a "left handed sandwich" ... and business phone company Cloud Net, 
have accidentally installed a "megawatt" laser on their phones "capable of 
downing planes from 20 miles".

Elsewhere Google has announced <http://googleblog.blogspot.com/> it has 
changed its name to Topeka, following on from the story last month whereby the 
town of Topeka, Kansas,changed its name to Google. 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2010/TECH/03/02/google.kansas.topeka/index.html>

9.08am: 

Many thanks to Briantist, who's posted the link to the audio of the Radio 4 
Shakespeare piece.
 <http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_8598000/8598291.stm>

Here's the blurb:

Could William Shakespeare be French?

New evidence unearthed at the site of his Stratford home suggests that the 
mother of England's most famous son was French.

The French Ministry of Culture has told the Today programme that it wants to 
honour the playwright as a member of France's own pantheon of great writers.

Nicola Stanbridge reports on the Shakespeare's hidden past. 

9.22am: 

I've interviewed the Guardian's northern editor, Martin Wainwright, who 
literally wrote the book on April Fool's Day 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Guardian-Book-April-Fools-Day/dp/184513155X>, about 
the history of the day. Here's the audio:

9.35am: 

Brilliant comment from @sparerib below:

A couple of years ago my boss handed me a new case (I'm a social worker) of a 
little girl whose parents had died, she'd been fostered by an aunt who was 
horrible to her, put her into care where she'd had a terrible time, including 
her best friend dying etc. etc. He worded it really well and it took me ages to 
click that it was the first half of Jane Eyre.

9.48am: 

A round up: 

The Sun reports that referees in the Blue Square Premier will use segways to 
help them officiate matches from next season.

The RSPB has revealed an exhausted polar bear was conveniently washed up on 
Isle of Mull yesterday:

RSPB Mull Officer, Dave Sexton, got the shock of his life while out on a 
routine wildlife survey earlier today, Wednesday 31st March 2010.

"We rounded a headland on the west coast of the island and saw a large, white 
shape lying by some rocks in the distance. As we got closer, I was staggered to 
see that it was a polar bear. At first I felt sure it was dead, but then I 
realised it was still breathing. Scarily, it opened its eyes as we got next to 
it, but didn't show any other signs of moving. We grabbed a few photos and went 
off to get help."

On his return an hour later, Dave was amazed to find that the bear had 
disappeared. "We couldn't find any trace of it. Luckily we have the photos, or 
I doubt that anyone would believe us. Having spent many years protecting 
threatened wildlife, I just hope this polar bear is going to be ok."

Islanders are now searching for the missing bear, which is thought to have 
drifted across to the island on an ice floe. The nearest polar bear populations 
are found on Greenland and on the Svalbard archipelago, midway between Norway 
and the North Pole. In recent years other visitors to Mull from the high Arctic 
have included a bearded seal and two northern bottle-nosed whales.

The left wing magazine Tribune says 
<http://www.tribunemagazine.co.uk/2010/04/01/tribune-under-new-ownership/?utm_source=twitterfeed&utm_medium=twitter>
 it is facing a "hostile takeover bid" from Russian businessman Alexander 
Lebedev. (I'm assuming this is a prank).

The Daily Telegraph lists some of the pranks 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/7541989/British-polar-bears-floating-hotels-Windows-weddings-this-years-best-April-Fool-stories.html>
 flying around this morning, including the story that the StanJames.com 1000 
and 2000 Guineas (strange how many of these stories feature a company name), 
have been forced by EU law to change their name from the Guineas to the Euros.

Page 21 of the Guardian has a dubious looking advert for the "Department of 
Government Waste," allegedly placed by the Conservatives.


"The Department of Government Waste was set up in 1997 with a remit to make 
Britain a worl-leader in spending public money. From our inception, our 
strategic objective has been to maximise expenditure and minimise frugality, in 
order to deliver sweeping cost inefficiencies for taxpayers."

What a hoot.

10.04am: 

Thanks for all the emails so far, here's a round up:

Denise Dryer writes:

The Sun had an article at 8.30 this morning about Sir Geoff Hurst claiming 
that one of his hat-trick goals in the 1966 World Cup should have been 
disallowed. He claimed that the ball did not cross the line, and that West 
Germany should have won the World Cup.
The article concluded with a FIFA spokesperson, called Aprile Foole (or some 
such spelling) being quoted. I see the newspaper has pulled the piece now - 
probably had too many complaints by those who are fooled all of the time!

Oli Barrett reckons the story that London's Waterloo and City tube line is 
going to be pedestrianised ("The tunnel will be transformed into a bright, 
attractive space with video walls and music, and help 'passengers' collectively 
burn off the equivalent of 6 million Calories per week" 
<http://walkit.com/2010/04/londons-waterloo-and-city-tube-line-to-be-pedestrianised/>
) isn't true.

Alex Hemburrow points out that Wikipedia's featured article is on wife-selling 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wife_selling>, although that could potentially be 
a double bluff, as I seem to remember Jeremy Paxman writing about the practice 
inhis book The English 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/English-Portrait-People-Jeremy-Paxman/dp/0140267239>.

Meanwhile, Tony Sharrock's been taken in by this product 
<http://www.artline.com.au/> (it's a pen which "remembers everything you 
write"):

I live in Australia and in this morning's paper there was a large ad for a pen 
with an inbuilt memory stick with records everything you write – not a fanciful 
gadget I thought – so I went to the local supplier requesting to have a look at 
the item, only to be told it was an April fool, the shop assistant and I both 
agreed it wasn't a particularly amusing one, but I still felt a mug all the 
same.

And Sheila Chettle has been teasing her children.

Many years ago, one of my teenage daughters brought a cat for me to take care 
of. He was a neutered male - I named him Kofi. He had been with me for about a 
year when I woke her up saying, in great excitement "Come downstairs quickly. 
Kofi has had kittens." She tumbled down, half asleep and was furious with me 
when she discovered the April Fool trick.

10.27am: 
 "Bowen to open restaurant called El Bulli." El Bull-ocks? 
 News just in: northwest comic Jim Bowen, whose BMW I once sat in, "is to open 
his version of award-winng restaurant El Bulli in memory of his classic TV quiz 
Bullseye. 
<http://www.harpers.co.uk/news/news-headlines/8890-comedian-jim-bowen-opens-northern-version-of-el-bulli.html>
"

Thanks to Jason Deans for spotting this one in, as he calls it, "booze 
industry trade mag Harpers Wine & Spirit".

Bowen's version of El Bulli will be very different from chef Ferran Adrià's 
which has regularly been voted the best restaurant in the world. Instead of 
some of the most innovative gastronomic dishes ever created Bowen intends to 
bring a bit of the north west of England to his new venture - "Heh Bully Bully" 
in the centre of Wigan.

Diners can look forward to special meal deals based on his TV show which saw 
contestants win prizes through a combination of their general knowledge and 
dart throwing skills.

In keeping with the show's many catchphrases guests will be given on arrival a 
copy of the menu from the original El Bulli restaurant and be told "here's what 
you could have had" before being handed the "Heh Bully Bully" menu.

Guests are also encouraged not to order the same two starters or main courses 
because as Bowen says "you get nothing for two in a bed".

11.05am:
 A ballot box. Photograph: Andrew Milligan/PA 
Matthew Weaver has alerted me to a post from political blogger Iain Dale, 
purporting to be an exclusive: it seems returning officers are threatening to 
strike on election night 
<http://iaindale.blogspot.com/2010/04/exclusive-returning-officers-threaten.html>
.

Better still, certain politicos appear to have fallen for it – Iain tweeted 
this morning <http://twitter.com/iaindale>, "Oh dear, Jack Straw's SPAD has 
emailed complaining I haven't called him and asking me to correct the blogpost!"

Rolf Hughes has emailed to point out the Independent story that the Circle 
line is to become "Large Hadron Collider II" 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/hadron-collider-ii-planned-for-circle-line-1932744.html>
 (in fairness, lots of other people have suggested this too, I'm just 
struggling to keep on top of my inbox).

London Underground is in talks with the European Organisation for Nuclear 
Research (Cern) about the possibility of using the 23km tunnel of the Circle 
Line to house a new type of particle accelerator similar to the Large Hadron 
Collider in Geneva.
...Although there are still considerable technical problems to overcome, such 
as a geo-magnetic "kink" in the circuitry at Edgware Road station, Cern is 
quietly confident that it will be able to convince London Underground of the 
merits of the scheme, which should result in the first air-conditioned 
underground line as a spin-off of installing supercooled magnets below ground.
...It would mean that two beams of protons would be travelling in clockwise 
and counterclockwise directions at 99.999999 per cent of the speed of light, 
within feet of Circle line passengers stuck in perpetual immobility.

Here's a BBC spoof from 2008, when an intrepid presenter discovered a colony 
of flying penguins. It seems when Antarctica gets particularly cold they fly to 
an unspecified tropical island.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8kvWS1XwCMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8kvWS1XwCMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8kvWS1XwCMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8kvWS1XwCMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8kvWS1XwCMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8kvWS1XwCMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
close 
Receiving a lot of emails suggesting the Guardian has an April Fool news story 
of its own. Will investigate.

P.S. Olaf Priol 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/apr/01/labour-gordon-brown-hard-man> 
is trending on Twitter.

11.18am: 

From the Guardian's Africa correspondent, David Smith: 

"April Fools' stories in the South African press include Jacob Zuma
marrying his fourth wife and a Somali pirate holding the internet to
ransom by diving to the ocean floor and threatening to cut a crucial
cable."

The Times has an amusing tale on page 11, and on its website 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/politics/article7083513.ece>. Apparently 
lucky voters will be able to purchase a "Book of Gordon" – the prime minister's 
most inspiring speeches since he came to power.


The Change We Choose; Speeches 2007-2009 contains the Prime Minister's most 
exciting speeches from the past three years.

Those who seek inspiration in the oratory of Gladstone, Disraeli and Churchill 
will now be able to turn to Mr Brown's discussion of the Millennium Development 
Goals, his appeal for global solutions to global problems and his promise of a 
points based immigration system.
 Gordon Brown's speeches. Now available to read. Photograh: Amazon.co.uk 
However it seems Amazon has beaten them to it: this tome is available online.

11.38am: 

David Shepherd, James Morrow and Mike Richards have pointed out a story from 
The Register which claims 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2010/04/01/associated_gmg_operations_merger/> 
Associated Newspapers and Guardian Media Group are to share offices, with a 
single team producing stories for both groups.

"Marketing teams at both newspapers discovered a new super-segment of the 
declining newspaper market they have informally dubbed 'the new authoritarian'. 
According to one circulation manager, this is a reader who "wants to find out 
what everybody is doing, and stop them doing it", paraphrasing AP Herbert.

In practice it means a story only need be written once. Software then tailors 
the copy and routes it to the correct title, so for example 'BROKEN BRITAIN' 
and 'BROKEN PLANET' stories essentially share the same misanthropic outlook - 
and 94 per cent common verbiage.

In another innovation, the groups have bought out the image and branding 
rights to leading columnists, who will be released from their contracts. 
Columns bylined to Polly Toynbee, Richard Littlejohn, Jan Moir and George 
Monbiot will continue, although mostly written using the new automated 
software. Reader comments will also be automated, with readers able to choose a 
"party to blame" from a palette of options tailored to suit their prejudices, 
with options including asylum seekers, capitalist pigs, teachers, record 
companies, and human population growth. Only the latter option is common to 
both readers."

The Register says the computer programme did suffer a few glitches, leading to 
the Guardian running the headline: "Asylum seeker quango wants patio heaters 
for all," while one of the Mail's favourite columnists made a surprising 
admission – "Littlejohn: My passion for big gay Archbishop".

11.59am: 

The BBC website has an alternative look at the stories of the day: "10 stories 
that could be April Fools... but aren't 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/8598637.stm>", including the story of a 
duckthat got wedged in the engine of a van 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/7542508/Duck-survives-500-mile-journey-in-van-grille.html>
 and thus travelled from Belgium to England, and that cabin crew from a Spanish 
airlinehave posed for a naked calendar 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/travel/article-1262754/Naked-Spanish-cabin-crew-model-wages.html>
 to earn money while they await a pay off.

The website Mashable also has an accumulation 
<http://mashable.com/2010/04/01/funniest-april-fools-jokes-2/> of good 1 April 
pranks, includingthe YouTube hoax 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q_xVXQCrPxQ&playnext_from=TL&videos=hLvro58tlbU&playnext=1&textp=fool>
 that its videos are now available in text form:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ_xVXQCrPxQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ_xVXQCrPxQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ_xVXQCrPxQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ_xVXQCrPxQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ_xVXQCrPxQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ_xVXQCrPxQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
close 
kmund is calling my use of punctuation into question:

Gabbatt, tell me why you write it "April Fool's day" and not "April Fools' 
Day".

There does seem to be some dispute over this, but both are as common as each 
other. In this piece Guardian style, as used for the title ofMartin 
Wainwright's book 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Guardian-Book-April-Fools-Day/dp/184513155X>, has 
prevailed.

12.20pm: 

And that's it! Far be it for me to engage in any April foolery after 12pm – as 
everyone knows, after 12, "you're the fool".

Just time to finally acknowledge the Guardian's own April Fool 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/apr/01/labour-gordon-brown-hard-man> – 
Labour don't plan to get the prime minister to fight the leader of the 
opposition.

As one emailer wrote: "It was a completely obvious hoax".

Or was it? It seems one Steve Tierney, Conservative county councillor for the 
Roman Bank & Peckover Division of North-East Cambridgeshire and webmaster for 
the NE Cambs Conservative Association, Steve Barclay PPC, Waterlees, the 
Wisbech & District Conservative Branch and the Fens Conservative Future group,
has been deceived <http://www.stevetierney.org/blog/>. 

On his blog <http://www.stevetierney.org/blog/>, Steve reports how he "nodded 
with reluctant approval" at the poster of Brown inviting Cameron to "Step 
outside posh boy".

Generally, I don't really go for negative campaigning. It can be a powerful 
tool, but it's also a very dangerous tool. You can be sure that if you throw 
the first stone it will not be long until a volley comes hurtling back. Labour 
did precisely that with some negative attacks on George Osborne and while some 
of my colleagues felt the response was unfair – I did not. If you're going to 
play rough, expect others to respond in kind.

The news today however is quite different. Apparently, Labour are going to 
"embrace" the image of Gordon Brown as a surly, aggressive bully. They're going 
to acknowledge that people don't much like him and use it to create a 'hard 
man' persona which they believe will help them.

...We'll each draw our own conclusions. I will say this, though. I didn't hate 
it. Something in me which always wants to defend the underdog (even if the 
underdog is the godawful Prime Minister) nodded with reluctant approval at this 
poster. I quite like people who defiantly shout at the storm – though its hard 
to have sympathy when they are the ones who summoned the storm.

Anyone suffering from a drought of humour now April Fool's day is officially 
at an end might enjoyreading his post here in full 
<http://www.stevetierney.org/blog/> (presumably before it is taken down).

Thanks very much for all the comments and emails, afraid I wasn't able to use 
nearly as many as I'd have liked, but your messages were appreciated all the 
same.

Until next year!
 