
The parents of five-year-old April Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones> say they are glad the “house of 
evil” where their daughter was murdered has been demolished.

Coral and Paul Jones said the secluded cottage in Ceinws where paedophile Mark 
Bridger murdered their daughter had served as a constant reminder to them over 
the past two years.

On Monday the couple, joined by April’s elder siblings Harley and Jazmin, 
watched as a digger smashed Bridger’s rented cottage to pieces.

Paul Jones said: “Having this house demolished is symbolic. It’s a sort of 
closure, the end of a chapter. All the time it has been here, its existence 
plays in the back of your mind. Even when you are not thinking about it, it’s 
there in the back of your mind.”

Coral Jones added: “Even driving on the main road near the village is 
difficult. You go past and your head ultimately turns to that house. It brings 
back the horrible memories of what happened. It was a dreadful thing that 
happened here. It will not be a final closure.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2014%2Fnov%2F17%2Fapril-jones-family-demolition-house-ceinws-murder-mark-bridger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F17%2F1416228995821%2F6d470b3d-2ef5-4682-948e-52f718db6c2b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=April%20Jones%E2%80%99s%20family%20watches%20demolition%20of%20house%20thought%20to%20be%20murder%20site&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2014%2Fnov%2F17%2Fapril-jones-family-demolition-house-ceinws-murder-mark-bridger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=April%20Jones%E2%80%99s%20family%20watches%20demolition%20of%20house%20thought%20to%20be%20murder%20site&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2014%2Fnov%2F17%2Fapril-jones-family-demolition-house-ceinws-murder-mark-bridger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F17%2F1416228995821%2F6d470b3d-2ef5-4682-948e-52f718db6c2b-1020x612.jpeg>
 April Jones, who was abducted and murdered two years ago. Photograph: 
Dyfed-Powys police/PA 
Bridger’s rented home, called Mount Pleasant, was bought by the Welsh 
government in August. The house is where the former lifeguard is believed to 
have killed and dismembered April after snatching her outside her parents’ home 
in Machynlleth, midWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.

During his trial, Bridger, who is now serving a whole-life sentence for the 
abduction and killing of April, claimed he knocked her over in his Land Rover 
and then in a drunken panic forgot what he had done with her. April’s body was 
never found, although forensics experts later discovered fragments of a child’s 
skull in a fireplace at Mount Pleasant.

The Welsh government bought the cottage for around £149,000, promising to 
knock it down. Preparation for the demolition began earlier this month, with 
the roof, doors and windows being removed. Demolition began at 10.40am on 
Monday.

Coral and Paul, along with their two children and other family members, looked 
on in silence as the digger knocked down the first-floor walls.

Coral Jones said: “We have been back here before, but coming back today has 
really opened a wound.”

She added that her family did not want a memorial garden to April, and said 
that what happened next to the site was the community’s decision.
 