
There's a particularly enjoyable feeling of suspicion when flicking through 
the papers on 1 April, though I do wonder if we shouldn't adopt the same 
sceptical approach for every other day of the year...

But here's a few April Fool stories we spotted this morning. Have we missed 
any?

• It's nothing to do with me! The Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/apr/01/guardian-twitter-media-technology> 
is scrapping the paper in favour ofTwitter. Not the most subtle April Fool but 
the sample Tweets from the archive are great: "JFK assassin8d @ Dallas, def. 
heard second gunshot from grassy knoll WTF?" There's also the obligatoryDaily 
Mail dig, saying the paper has launched an iPhone application "with a one-click 
facility for reporting suspicious behaviour by migrants or gays." Check out the 
Tech department'scontribution 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/help/insideguardian/2009/apr/01/twitter-publishing-and-commenting>
, too.

• We're not quite sure about this one: the Daily Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/celebs/news/2009/04/01/deal-or-no-deal-first-ever-interview-with-the-banker-115875-21243888/>
 claims the first exclusive interview with theDeal or No Deal banker to mark 
the 1,000th edition of the show. If it is an April Fool, it's very long for 
something not that funny.

• Football fans are bracing themselves for a six-minute rendition of the 
Ukranian national anthem at tonight'sWorld Cup 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/article2353120.ece> qualifier match, 
saysthe Sun <http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/article2353120.ece>. 
"Ukraine's anthem will be sung by folk starFurstov Aprylova, who hails from 
capital Kiev.... And in a dig at its former Soviet rulers, the tune ends: 
'Kiev, Kiev - there is no such thing as a Chicken Moscow...'"

• There's tartan sheep 
<http://www.metro.co.uk/news/article.html?Farmer_breeds_unique_tartan_sheep&in_article_id=605257&in_page_id=34>
 inthe Times (though no link online), the Independent says Egyptian queen 
Nefertiti 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/beauty-of-nile-unmasked-ndash-wrinkles-and-all-1658989.html>
 had a facelift andthe Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/5082676/Swimming-fish-could-be-key-to-generating-electricity-for-UK-homes.html>
 has gone for harnessing the power of fish to supplement Britain's electricity 
needs. Rib-tickling stuff.

• The Economist is launching a theme park as part of the wider diversification 
of its business. "As part of a strategy designed to broaden the revenue base, 
leverage content over new platforms and promote The Economist brand to a young 
and dynamic audience, The Economist Group is delighted to announce the 
development of a public-entertainment facility that combines the magic of a 
theme park with the excitement of macroeconomics..." We can't wait forEconoland 
<http://www.economist.com/world/britain/displayStory.cfm?story_id=13395767&source=features_box4>
 to open.

• The Daily Mail managed to combine its April Fool with a further twist of the 
knife, Photoshopping homeHome Secretary Jacqui Smith 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1166245/Oh-Jacqui-surely-you.html> so 
she appears to be exitingAnn Summers. "Considering her husband's rather 
adventurous viewing habits, Jacqui Smith would be perfectly justified in 
showing her own broad-minded streak..." Never knowingly under-dug.

• I've looked through the FT, and unless we count "Nestle 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/d300e184-1e54-11de-830b-00144feabdc0.html> chairman 
warns on inflation risks" or "Laura Ashley 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/1f060ac8-1e55-11de-830b-00144feabdc0.html> profits 
halve as costs of extra promotions bite", I can't see anything.

• Anchor Butter claims Google Street View has ruined its new TV ad campaign by 
capturing cows not in those idyllic pastures butroaming 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/36927172@N05/3403965500/> across 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/36948500@N06/3401617239/> London. That's not 
butter I'd like to eat.
 YouTube inverted all its pages for the day... 
• Online, meanwhile, we have the global collection of Web 2.0 scents at 
smellr.com <http://www.smellr.com/> including Isolation by Mark Zuckerberg, 
Modesty byMike Arrington and Loquacious by Ev Williams. My favourite: Humility, 
byJason Calacanis. YouTube 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FncILxajmlw&feature=rec-HM-fresh+div&flip=1> 
has a new look with interesting implications for the 'thumbs up ratings', and 
there's acres more tech tomfoolery atTechCrunch 
<http://www.techcrunch.com/2009/04/01/april-fools-youtube-flails-amazon-cloud-computing-in-a-blimp-3d-chrome-browsing-google-master-ai/>
.

• Elsewhere, ITV has to apologise because Linda Bellingham said 'bastards 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/celebs/news/2009/04/01/itv-apologise-for-lynda-bellingham-s-swearing-on-loose-women-115875-21244327/>
' on Loose Women, desperate record labelEMI has partnered with a lottery firm 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB123854056091675567.html> to try and make some 
cash andSacha Baron Cohen is teaming up with Bono and Chris Martin to launch a 
spoof charity single 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/celebs/3am/2009/04/01/sacha-baron-cohen-s-character-bruno-hooks-up-with-bono-and-chris-martin-115875-21243884/>
 to promote his new Bruno film. "For people of Africa who live in hell/They 
will never wear Chanel." And the Mirror also says we're in for a long, hot 
summer.

• The BBC website features exclusive first images of the shark-whale 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/lastchancetosee/>. Stephen Fry and naturalist Mark 
Cawardine front a film in which they discover the mythical creature, which is 
half whale, half – yep, you guessed it – shark. While it doesn't quite scale 
the heights oflast year's inspired April Fool's Day spoof 
<http://www.unrealitytv.co.uk/reality-tv/bbc-iplayer-the-flying-penguins/> in 
which ex-Python Terry Jones apparently discovered a whole species of flying 
penguins, it does have its moments, such as when Cawardine says "This is just 
like discovering the Loch Ness Monster". Like the penguins, which promoted the 
fledgling iPlayer service, this year's wheeze aims to promote Beeb content, 
this time Fry and Cawardine's forthcoming BBC2 natural history show Last Chance 
to See.

I just can't tell any more...
 