
It's no great compliment to say that Wayne Lewis is the best butcher in 
Blaenavon. He's the only one. In the days when the south Wales town was awash 
with money from the coal mines and the iron works, there were several, along 
with grocers, bakers, drapers, hardware shops, and half a dozen boot makers.

The slow death of coal and iron industries gave the town a dose of something 
nasty, until there was almost nothing left alive on the face of the main street 
except Morris's the butchers, a shining light in a wasteland of chipboard.

Years before Blaenavon Booktown was even a glimmer in James Hanna's eye, Wayne 
and his wife Barbara decided to invest a shedload of money in their shop. The 
result shines: the windows, counters, marble floor-tiles all shine, and the 
butcher himself positively glitters. The furthest flung customer I've met in 
the sausage queue came from Hereford. (It may look just up the road on a map, 
on the ground there are several mountains in the way.)

Late nights in Blaenavon, particularly Friday and Saturday, are surprisingly 
noisy. There isn't much to do, but once the weather turns even faintly 
spring-like, most of it happens on the hilly streets. Young voices are raised 
in anger or passion, drowned out by the howl of engines: the town, 
unfortunately for those trying to sleep, is a natural race track. The cars and 
bikes screech down the main street past the two chapels and the four pubs, 
swing in a squeal of rubber around by the takeaway and another pub, and howl 
back up the hill past the post office and the churchyard.

Nevertheless when the butcher got the call from the police in the small hours 
of the morning he thought it might be some brutal practical joke. But it was 
true: his front windows were lying in a hailstorm of glass all over his floor 
tiles.

For days his window was boarded up. The new windows are now in, but the 
shooting remains the only topic of conversation except the weather: his 
customers laugh helplessly at the idea of a drive-by shooting in Blaenavon - 
the fact that the little Co-op supermarket was the only other victim adds the 
final note of farce - then look up at the ceiling, scarred with the worm-cast 
tracks of dozens of shotgun pellets, and then shiver.

The booksellers feel hugely grateful that none of the new shops were the 
actual or apparently the intended victims - and then feel hugely guilty for 
feeling grateful.

"I've got new books - come up and see them" says James McDonald, builder 
turned newsagent and bookseller - the former newsagent-bookseller, Ioan, has 
gone back to the building trade. This innocuous remark masks a seismic split in 
the town.

Spirit of the Green indeed has new books, a landslip of paperbacks. James has 
piled them shoulder high along one side of the shop, and is selling them cheap, 
at Â£1 each or six for a fiver.

But although they are books in booktown, they are not 'Booktown' books. 
McDonald has become the first trader to find a new supplier and back out of the 
Booktown deal with James Hanna - a fixed price for a year's contract with 
varying combinations of premises, training, publicity, support and book stocks.

McDonald says that although he has been trading for four months, it was only 
when he broke away from the Booktown agreement that he began to get welcome 
cards from the older shops. "It's great," he said, "it's going brilliant."

Spirit of the Green is still on the Booktown official map - 40,000 new 
leaflets have just been printed. The next batch, however, will probably show a 
blank at the top of the hill - even though there will patently obviously still 
be a shop selling books there.

Meanwhile in Chattertons, absolutely still a Booktown bookshop (most of the 
40,000 leaflets are stored under the desk) visitors wander in and out. Book 
dealers tend to march straight in and tout their wares. Chris Barber - author 
of a string of hugely successful local history travel guides, lavishly 
illustrated with his own colour photographs - marches in and rearranges his 
books. Shyer souls shuffle diffidently around the shelves, gradually creeping 
closer to the counter. A crumpled-looking man in an anorak asks "Do you ever 
buy books?". The shop does, I explain, but I can't, in the absence of the owner.

The man's life story tumbles out. His wife is dead, and he is moving into 
sheltered accommodation. They were readers, along with one of their daughters, 
but she is dead too. It turned out that they didn't need the larger housing 
association house they got so that she could have dialysis at home - her second 
kidney transplant failed. So he has to get rid of his books, there's no room 
for even a big bookshelf in his new home, and his sons don't want them.

"I chopped up six wardrobes last week," he says suddenly, "fine solid pieces 
of furniture they were, but too big, no good to me." A furniture dealer gave 
him the old old line, his furniture was too big, too heavy, no good to anyone, 
but for a small fee they'd take it off his hands. "I suppose it's true, but I 
wouldn't give them the satisfaction, I'd rather burn it in the back yard."

He turns at the door and says, terrifyingly: "It's been nice talking to you. 
You've been a friend. You're my only friend."

I hope desperately that he's just being polite.
 