
Aquaman, a blockbuster movie about the DC Comics character, will be filmed on 
the Australia’sGold Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gold-coast> next year with 
subsidies from government.

The movie, starring Game of Thrones actor Jason Momoa as the superhero 
Aquaman, will also feature Amber Heard as his wife. Heard will return to 
Queenslandafter the furore caused when she and husband Johnny Depp smuggled her 
pet terriers Pistol and Boo into Australia. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/18/johnny-depps-wife-amber-heard-pleads-guilty-over-bringing-dogs-to-australia>

It’s Depp v dep as Johnny pulps Barnaby Joyce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/may/26/its-depp-v-dep-as-johnny-pulps-barnaby-joyce>
Heard and husband Johnny Depp, who have since separated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/16/amber-heard-assault-allegations-johnny-depp-divorce>
, were earlier this year forced to record a video apology to Australia for 
smuggling in the dogs, which Barnaby Joyce, now the deputy prime minister, 
threatened to have put down.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fjohnny-depp-and-amber-heard-record-psa-to-apologise-for-bringing-dogs-to-australia-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnny%20Depp%20and%20Amber%20Heard%20record%20bizarre%20apology%20for%20bringing%20dogs%20to%20Australia%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fjohnny-depp-and-amber-heard-record-psa-to-apologise-for-bringing-dogs-to-australia-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Johnny%20Depp%20and%20Amber%20Heard%20record%20bizarre%20apology%20for%20bringing%20dogs%20to%20Australia%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fjohnny-depp-and-amber-heard-record-psa-to-apologise-for-bringing-dogs-to-australia-video&media=>
Johnny Depp and Amber Heard record bizarre apology for bringing dogs to 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/18/johnny-depp-and-amber-heard-record-psa-to-apologise-for-bringing-dogs-to-australia-video>
Film studio Warner Brothers reached a deal with the state and federal 
governments. TheQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> premier, Annastacia 
Palaszczuk, who says she personally negotiated the deal, said the film 
production would bring more than $100m into the state and create at least 600 
jobs. “This is another huge win for our local industry and testament to the 
international reputation of our people,” she said.

The shoot will begin at the Village Roadshow Studios on the Gold Coast in the 
first half of 2017 and comes on the back of a string of Queensland-made 
blockbusters including Thor: Ragnarok, Pacific Rim 2 and the next Pirates of 
The Caribbean film. Palaszczuk said Queensland had attracted $233m investment 
in film production in the last financial year, the highest figure since 2002-3.

The Courier Mail in Queensland reported that the federal treasurer, Scott 
Morrison, agreed to pay $22m to secure the film.

Aquaman, due to be released in 2018, will be directed by Australian James Wan, 
whose past credits include horror franchises Saw and The Conjuring and action 
flick Fast and the Furious 7.

 