
The rogue financier played by Richard Gere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-gere> in Arbitrage is a pretty bad 
chap. All he cares about is amassing wealth and status, and, when things go 
wrong, saving his own skin. Yet although he plunders, deceives and betrays, the 
audience is invited to root for him. Such are his charisma and magnetism that 
the invitation proves irresistible. In this film, the villain is the hero. His 
daughter, its paragon of virtue, is a bit of an anaemic bore. His antagonist, a 
maverick detective, is more engaging than her, but to make him so, he too is 
given a sinful side: he himself is prepared to transgress in order to get his 
man.

Arbitrage's success in glamorising evil has attracted comment 
<http://www.vulture.com/2012/09/movie-review-arbitrage.html?mid=imdb the>; but 
of course the film's achievement in this regard is far from unusual. Evildoers 
who have charmed filmgoers range from the Joker, Clyde Barrow and Michael 
Corleone to Catherine Tramell, O-Ren Ishii and Bellatrix Lestrange. Meanwhile, 
worthy characters tend to be dreary, like Captain America, or plain irritating, 
likePoppy Cross <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1045670/>. In Annie Hall, Woody 
Allen's character is unmoved by Snow White and yearns instead for the Wicked 
Queen. The rest of us, it seems, are not so different.

Anyone who thinks the movies influence our behaviour may find this phenomenon 
unsettling. It certainly unsettled James Francis McIntyre, the sometime 
cardinal archbishop of Los Angeles.In 1952 he told assembled Hollywood 
dignitaries 
<http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1951&dat=19530202&id=X4ojAAAAIBAJ&sjid=MIkFAAAAIBAJ&pg=2810,3963695>
: "There is too much glamorising of that which is wrong." He urged them to mend 
their ways, and on their behalf, Oscar-winning actress Loretta Young assured 
him: "We're all sinners, and the one big difference among sinners is that some 
are sorry."

Six decades later, it seems that this sorrow has yet to bear fruit. Perhaps 
that's not too surprising. The sin the cardinal was railing against is far 
older than the movies. William Blake observed that Milton was "of the Devil's 
party <http://www.cems.ox.ac.uk/citizenmilton/viii_heroism.shtml>" in Paradise 
Lost back in 1790. There seems little doubt that in throwing their weight 
behind the bad guys, film-makers are reflecting, rather than shaping, a keen 
human appetite.

Plato's dictum that "to prefer evil to good is not in human nature" is hard to 
square with what we see around us. Mae West was perhaps closer to the mark when 
she ventured: "Between two evils, I always pick the one I never tried before." 
Real-life criminals such as the Krays or the great train robbers can acquire 
something of the allure of their big-screen counterparts. Famously,women prefer 
bad-boy lovers 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/2150930/Secrets-of-James-Bonds-success-with-women-unravelled.html>
.

Or perhaps you think that's just an insulting stereotype cooked up by the 
misogynist media? In 2008 researchers at New Mexico State University tested 200 
male students for deceitfulness, manipulativeness and thoughtlessness. Those 
who scored highest in these categories turned out to have the most sexual 
partners. Another study, conducted at Bradley University, Illinois, suggested 
that this correlation holds good across different countries and cultures. Death 
row groupies, such as the one Nicole Kidman plays inThe Paperboy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149976/paperboy>, take this syndrome to 
an extreme conclusion.

On the face of it, embracing evil seems a little perverse. Bad people harm the 
rest of us, so why should we applaud them?

Perhaps the most obvious explanation is that we're recognising a dark side of 
ourselves that we're otherwise forced to repress. "The line dividing good and 
evil cuts through the heart of every human being," wrote Aleksandr 
Solzhenitsyn, "and who is willing to destroy a piece of his own heart?" 
According to Kenneth Tynan: "A villain who shares one's guilt is inevitably 
more attractive than a hero convinced of one's innocence." Richard Gere would 
probably agree with them both.He believes he shares the moral failings he 
portrays in Arbitrage 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2013/feb/28/arbitrage-richard-gere-nicholas-jarecki-video>
.

He may, but I don't. Gere seems a decent enough bloke when you meet him. The 
prosaic truth is that most of us aren't actually all that bad. Perhaps this is 
the real reason why we're so in thrall to those who are, both in fact and 
fiction. Most of the time, most people live their lives within constraints 
imposed by law, convention, conscience and the needs and wants of others. They 
know that if most people didn't do this, life would become impossible for 
everyone. Yet they also know that there's something inglorious about such a 
circumscribed existence.

On the other hand, evil people create their own essence. They uncover their 
true desires, pursue them wholeheartedly and trample on those who get in their 
way. Compared with them, we're only half alive. Understandably, we don't just 
envy them; to some extent, we admire them. It's therefore hardly amazing that 
we enjoy seeing them heroised on screen.

Perhaps we ought to grow out of this iffy attitude. "Imaginary evil is 
romantic and varied; real evil is gloomy, monotonous, barren, boring,"said 
Simone Weil 
<http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/3266-imaginary-evil-is-romantic-and-varied-real-evil-is-gloomy>
. "Imaginary good is boring; real good is always new, marvellous, intoxicating."

Well, maybe. Even so, we aren't ready to absorb this news. Film-makers, don't 
start disparaging your bad guys yet. We still need to pay them homage to 
compensate for our own dispiriting rectitude.
 