
Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> in 
universities is enjoying the same creative renaissance that has rejuvenated the 
whole profession in recent years, says the head of architecture at the 
University of Cambridge.

The Richard Rogers and Norman Fosters of tomorrow are specialising in the 
subject far earlier than in previous years. Many Cambridge students are now 
opting to push back the boundaries of architectural theory as part of research 
masters courses, rather than pursuing the more traditional architecture career 
route of practical experience after finishing first degrees.

"This year we have noticed a very significant shift in student progression," 
says Professor Peter Carolin. "We have a number of very good students, who 
would normally have followed a very conventional approach to qualifying as 
architects, now wishing to specialise earlier."

After completing three-year undergraduate degrees, students can choose from 
three specialist masters courses at Cambridge, including a masters of 
philosophy in environmental design, and a masters of philosophy and history of 
architecture. The creation of the masters courses reflects the strong research 
ethos at the Cambridge department, but is also part of a wider push being 
spearheaded by the Royal Institute of British Architects to develop more 
specialisms and a stronger theoretical base for architecture.

Cambridge's architecture department is the highest ranked teaching department 
for architecture in the country, according to the Guardian quality ratings. 
Teaching quality inspectors awarded the department an excellent rating after 
reviewing its work. It also boasts the highest spending per student in the 
country, spending over Â£5,400 for every student. Overall, the department scored 
nearly 90 points out of a maximum of 100.

A relatively small department, Cambridge also records a good staff-student 
ratio, with under 18 students for every member of academic staff. Despite being 
a research focused department (it scored a top rating in the last Research 
Assessment Exercise), Professor Carolin says that students benefit from 
Cambridge's dual system of teaching provided by departments and students' 
individual colleges.

"We are very much trying to educate people for a lifetime of change," he says. 
"We aim to give them the skills which will help them engage in a whole new set 
of requirements in architecture, planning and construction in the future, and a 
whole range of different contexts within which they will be working."

Choosing candidates for the architecture degree course is particularly 
difficult as it attracts students from both the sciences and arts, says 
Professor Carolin. "Architecture is not a direct continuation of previous 
learning at school," he says.

"It is also very difficult for applicants to make a judgment. Architecture is 
not just about design, but also administration and management. The first three 
years are to some extent a trial and an experiment."

Architecture students face a long haul before they gain professional status. 
After studying architecture for three years, students take one year out of 
university for practical experience, usually in an architect's office. They 
then return for two years studying for a diploma, and require another year of 
practical experience before taking final qualifying exams. Newly qualified 
architects can start careers in a range of different sized companies, from very 
small partnerships to very large architecture firms.

For those who realise that it is not for them after the first three years, 
there are plenty of other opportunities on offer in the job market. 
Architecture is fast developing a good reputation among university career 
services for providing a number of key skills in demand in many different 
professions: analytical, creative and communication skills, for example.

At Cambridge, architecture students have gone on to pursue careers in health 
services management, merchant banking and advertising, to name but a few.

The teaching rankings show that good architecture courses are offered in both 
old and new university sectors. While departments at the University of 
Newcastle and University of Wales, Cardiff rank highly, the former polytechnics 
of East London and Kingston also perform well. East London University received 
an excellent rating from teaching quality reviewers, and actually enjoys a 
better record than Cambridge in the employment stakes. Less than 1.5% of 
architecture graduates from East London of known destination six months after 
finishing at university were still looking for jobs.
 