
Former Conservative MP Archie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> is to step down as chairman 
of ITV after six years.

ITV’s board is expected to begin the search to replace Norman who, alongside 
chief executive Adam Crozier, has led a turnaround of the UK’s largest 
commercial broadcaster.

The former Asda chief executive joined ITV in 2010 – replacing Michael Grade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/18/archie-norman-itv-chairman1> – 
when its share price was at 50p; it is currently 260p.

ITV’s recovery, fuelled by a bounce back in the ad market and growth at 
production armITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> Studios, has made 
it a takeover target.

Norman presided over the appointment of Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv>, a former 
Royal Mail, FA and Saatchi & Saatchi boss, who is also expected to leave ITV in 
the next few years.

It is not clear whether ITV’s board will look to appoint an internal candidate 
or go outside the company, which would most likely involve the help of an 
executive search firm.

ITV’s board includes former EMI chief executive Roger Faxon and Sir Peter 
Bazalgette, the co-founder of Big Brother maker Endemol.

In potentially auspicious timing last week, the Department of Culture, Media 
and Sport said that Bazalgette will not look to extend his chairmanship of the 
Arts Council England when his term finishes on 31 January 2017.

“The Arts Council is in a strong position to ensure our arts and culture 
continue to flourish,”said Bazalgette 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-chair-of-arts-council-england-to-be-appointed--2>
. “I meanwhile have a number of opportunities in the creative industries I’d 
like to take up before I pop my clogs.”


The ITV chairman, who earns £500,000 a year, is also chairman of Lazard 
investment bank and a director of Australian supermarket chain Coles.

ITV declined to comment.

Norman’s intention to step down was first reported by Sky News.
 