Jonathan Glancey 
Hello everybody we're online with our architecture debate which may be as 
chaotic as an unplanned city or as suavely organised as, erm, well I can't 
think of any great city that is . . .but, lt's ask the panel first before 
everyone else joins in what in their opnion is the most innovative building 
ever and why it matters for them . . .

Dickon Robinson 
 1) Peabodys Islington estate. The first social housing estate in the world 
designed by Henry Derbyshire in 1862. 2) The Crystal Palace. The first 
prefrabitcated industrial society building of any scale.

Sarah Wigglesworth 
Halle des Machine at the Paris exhibition in the 1860s, because of its 
incredible spans all made out of steel technology. It was basically the advent 
of the big shed which has been followed by people to this day.

Hans van der Heijden 
There are 2 aspects in your question which interests me. the first is the 
focuss on the building. in housing design the building itself is of relative 
importance - public space is as important as the objects facing it. the second 
is the yearning for innovation. dwelling in a house follows patterns which are 
bound to change slowly. so, good examples: the evora district by siza, the 
monte carasso village by snozzi & nearly all frankfurt siedlungen by ernst may

Jonathan Glancey 
The first time a good brick or stone all was ever built - a truly good wall as 
opposed to one that just stands up; that's when Architecture as opposed to 
Building started, said Mies van der Rohe . . . it's easy to forget the craft 
element in building; so many new buildings just don't make it as Architecture

Pierre d'Avoine 
In response to Jonathan's question, I'd suggest that Hardwick Hall in 
Derbyshire would be the most wonderful building that I know. the reason it's 
wonderful - because it deals with the fundamental issues of architecture - 
space, place and form in such an inspirational way. It's a 16th century 
Elizabethan mansion, and it's also interesting because the question of 
authorship is still an issue. The owner, Bess of Hardwick, was the driving 
force and the 'architect', Robert Smythson was a genius who didn't necessarily 
read the classical orders in the correct way.

Brix 
What do you think about the current trend towards skyscrapers, particularly in 
London? I think the skyline is a precious asset which is being undermined. I 
don't oppose tall buildings per se, but I think that Canary Wharf and it's 
neighbouring development for HSBC is bland and ugly.

Dickon Robinson 
Thanks Brix. Cannelleto's classic panoramic view of London shows a city 
studded with church spires and towers. Therefore tall buildings seeking 
attention has always been a part of London's physical character. Perhaps it is 
appropiate with the decline of interest in organised religion and the growth of 
a materialistic society that London's skyline is now characterised by tall 
office and residential appartment buildings.

Sarak Wigglesworth 
I think the example of Paris is a useful one. There, they have banned really 
tall buildings in the vicinity of the historic centre but La Defence has all 
the tall modern buildings and this seems to work well - a tension between the 
futuristic city and the traditional one. In London we have a sort of hybrid 
situation but I would favour developing Canary Wharf as the really high density 
development area. Of course, I've been referring only to office development but 
there seems to be a renaissance in high rise housing also and whilst this isn't 
for everybody clearly such developments are quite appropriate for certain kinds 
of lifestyles. The question about whether any building is bland or ugly is an 
entirely different issue and one which it is important to debate. On the other 
hand I'd agree that most speculative is bland and ugly because making money is 
the main object.

Pierre d'Avoine 
Wren's skyline of London has already been ruined by insensitive post-war 
development. The issue of building skyscrapers in London is not necessarily a 
question of preserving something that is already compromised. I think we are 
more concerned with the issue of plurality of different approaches to building 
in the city. I am resistant in principle to mono-cultural environments and I 
view the skyscraper office block as another such environment. For me a 
skyscraper can provide the most fantastic experience which is to do with 
vertiginous height and wonderful view. However the physical and psychological 
shadow of these kind of buildings is such that I feel they diminish the urban 
experience of people at ground level. I still think there's enough 
opportunities to develop or redevelop within the city without recourse to 
building high.

Jonathan Glancey 
It so depends upon where they are sited and, of course, the quality of their 
design; we are so used to second rate towers that we find it hard to believe 
that they can be better; best perhaps to experiment with new wve towers in an 
area of London relatively insensitive in terms of viewsÂƒ imagine a cluster of 
beautifully designed towers on the North Greenwich peninsula perhap; but, in 
the centre of out cities we should watch their design like a collective hawk; 
at the very least, if we are going to have them, they should offer public 
spaces inside and should offer those who work in them a new type of office 
experience with internal sky gardens, balconies and consertatories; they 
mustn't be human filing cabinets as they have been.

Ozzy Osiris 
What does the panel think about the trend for converting churches into 
residential accomodation?

Jonathan Glancey 
Good, if its the House of God . . . a tricky one, this; if a building loses it 
purpose, what can be done for it? Easy if it's a warehouse; not so if it's a 
church; I guess thatt some uses are more or less appropriate: concert hal;ls, 
arts galleries; shelters for the homeless. Cromwell like to use what he say as 
redundant churches as stables for his warhorses, as did Napoleon; really not 
sure about theire conversion to private houses tho; they ought, as far as 
possible be buildings for everyone>

Pierre d'Avoine 
I'd like to bring up the idea of the aedicule, which is the Ur classical form. 
It stands for the temple and the house. It might be something to do with scale. 
We can accept people converting small chapels in the town or country into 
homes, but it's muhc harder to envisage St Paul's being converted into a block 
of flats. The idea of reuse and / or modification is a welcome part of the 
zeitgeist, after the tabula rasa of high modernism, and I woulnd;t necessarily 
completely exclude religious buildings from this conversation.

Ozzy Osiris 
What do you think of architecture in Liverpool? 

Jonathan Glancey 
Liverpool is an odd place to a Londoner: it is a superb looking city, 
centrally; it has magnificent buildings, great character and yet it like a 
ghost town after sunset; of courser I know about its economy; I just wish it 
better; still, there's no excuse for the dumb Post-Modern style housing and 
University offices built in the shadow of Sir Giles Gilbert Scott's haunting 
cathedral; who was responsible for suburbanising this onnce peerless cityscape?

Peter Dew 
I would like to take up Ozzy Osiris's earlier question regarding the 
conversion of churches in to housing. Presumably you have the Lancaster Gate 
project in mind; very nice too: however, although the Liverpool RC Cathedral 
was once famously described as a drafty concrete wigwam, it isn't really 
suitable for Indians.

Ozzy Osiris 
Thanks so much Peter. Actually I do not have the Lancaster Gate project in 
mind at all - in fact I've never heard of it! My question is a general one 
relating to churches that are no longer economically viable due to a shrinking 
number of parishes (or more often than not creation of super-parishes) thus 
making the building surplus to ecclesiastical requirements. They are often 
subsequently turned into flats. I think although this is morally dubious, at 
least the nice old buildings are being saved. I was interested in a 
professional architectural opinon though...

Bleep43 
Being an "unplanned" city as such, how do you see expansion in London over the 
next two decades or so?

Dickon Robinson 
The London school of Economics estimates that London's population is growing 
by more than 100,000 people each year. London is therefore going to be much 
more populus but the opportunites for expanding outwards are constrained by 
green belt policies which are unlikely to be relaxed. So we are likely to see 
unfilled areas in the Thames gateway and around the major railway terminal 
filled up with new homes and thereafter London will have to expand upwards in 
order to meet continuing population growth.

Peter Dew 
What would the panel think of setting up a National Architecture Service, 
along the lines of the National Health Service, where people who needed an 
Architect could go and find one ? The intent of such a service would be to 
ensure that rich and poor have access to the same thing, neither prior 
knowledge nor funds being necessary. Making the use of Architects for the 
design of all buildings mandatory might raise the dismal standards presently 
seen throughout the UK, where the Disneyesque approach will eventually 
overwhelm us. On the other hand, I realise that Architects are perhaps to blame 
for the worst excesses of the past 50 years, and that there is a large body of 
public opinion that would prefer to do away with them altogether.

Frankie Knuckles 
Do you presume that the inefficiencies in the awarding of architechtural 
contracts would be made more effective by the imposition of perhaps the most 
ineffectual allocation system in our economic framework? Do you see rich and 
poor having access to the same healthcare? Do you not think that the poor would 
be catered for by the Bovis and Wimpy's of this world, whereas the likes of Mr 
Rogers would continue to built for the rich and famous? Also, would you want 
tax-payers money to form this? Also, in reply to your latter point, you may 
turn to architechture thoughout history as the signpost to the most powerful 
institutuional powers in the world at any given time. I would question the 
zeitgeist of excess rather than the infrastructual expression of this.

Peter Dew 
I suggest that part of the money currently spent on Planning be used to fund 
the scheme, and that Architects receive the equivalent of salaried payments 
while working there, but this is a side issue. The cause of poor design in our 
environment is poor funding, and even byepassing of those trained to perform 
the design service. I'm sorry, but would you clarify 'I would question the 
zeitgeist of excess rather than the infrastructual expression of this.' Who, 
for example, were the institutional powers at any given time that produced what 
you would consider good architecture?

Sarah Wigglesworth 
I think this is a really interesting idea. During the 90s I did some research 
into the history of the professions and what that revealed was that in the 19th 
Century the medical fraternity managed to turn what was seen as a privilege of 
the few - good health - into an issue which was seen to be something to which 
everybody should have a right. Architects have never been able to convince 
public or goverment that a good environment should be seen as a right also. I 
think a form of altruism on the part of the professionals and more discernment 
on the part of the consumer could combine to reorganise the way in which 
architecture reaches a broader public.

Frankie Knuckles 
Do you not believe that the conditions have to be right politically for such 
altruism to occur? The concept of the health service as a right for all was 
partly driven by the ill-health of conscripted soldier during the boer-war 
combined with high fatality if the working classes - to say it was altruistic 
on the part of the medical profession implies some conscienscious decision on 
their part, in my studies I have never seen this to be present - in fact the 
wish of most doctors was to keep the structure private and profits high. I 
think the drive for sympathetic building is likely to come predominantly from 
the latter point, the discerning consumer - the creation of forums where 
consumers actually have the ability to be discerning is very recent. I have 
high hopes for community-led urban regeneration projects as a means for 
providing environments reflective of our ecclectic population.

Sarah Wigglesworth 
Yes I agree on both your first points. I do think that there has to be the 
right political climate for such altruism to occur but also I agree that at the 
time not all of the medical profession was keen to lose their relatively high 
wages. A convergence of conditions brought the Health serrvice into being and 
the same could happen with a national Architecture Service. However I think the 
funding mechanisms would have to follow the consumer and there would have to be 
some government support for the infrastructure to allow good buildings to 
result. Good architecture is usually the product of time spent. As a society we 
need to value to the work of the architect more highly and be prepared to pay 
for it.

Hans van der Heijden 
I am not fond of the idea. It puts architecture in the corner of the 
unemancipated - this is quite a nostalgicperception of people needing help. I 
also think that the architectural discipline is not responsible for not 
reaching the groups you are possibly aiming at. it seems more a problem of 
those institution who play their intermediate role in a poor way: local 
authorities, housing trusts, maybe also universities & branch organisations.

Pierre d'Avoine 
I'd like to add that the way architecture works for me is that the 
inspirational buildings and environment work in two ways. In reference to Peter 
Dew, basically we have the trickle-down effect where high architecture has a 
general positive - and possibly negative - effect on architectural development, 
depending on how it's interpreted, at the same time we're inspired by 
vernacular buildings and environments in which the hand of the architect is not 
necessarily visible. Certainly, the idea of a national architecture service is 
intriguing, but there is always the dread issue of taste which needs to be 
addressed.

Joryves 
To pick up on Brix's point, I think perhaps we need a few MORE tall buildings 
around Canary Wharf to slacken the push for them in the City. Where a building 
cannot complement an historic setting, nor say anything new to an area, let's 
not push them through. London's skyline IS a precious asset - a million tourist 
photos show that - let's keep building, but be sensitive to the social cost of 
what we build where. Whether architects like it or not, they have a 
responsibility to their "audience", not just their client and practice.

Brix 
I think this is right. Location is everything - so I'm not too sure about the 
plans for tall buildings on London Bridge and Brick Lane...

Becky Lewis 
What do the panel think should be done with the Dome? 1) if money was no 
object, 2) in the real world

Dickon Robinson 
The precursor to the Dome was the great exhibition of 1851 in Hyde Park which 
lead to the creation of the great museums in that area. It is highly desirable 
that the Dome should leave a similar legacy and therefore it should be put into 
the ownership of a charitable trust in perpetually. Their job would be to 
ensure that any income that was generated from activities within it would be 
used to support the projects funded by the Millennium Commission. The actual 
use of the building is intimately related to the development of the North 
Greenwhich peninsular. Since this is only two minutes by tube from Canary 
Whalf. It is likely in due course to become an extension of that business 
district and as such, and given time, is likely to be highly profitable.

Lady Hamilton 
I live near a large number of new build housing schemes and am affronted by 
the conservatism of the modern housebuilders which includes Mock Cottage (cute 
round windows in at least two parts of house and cottage style squareish 
windows throughout), Mock Georgian, Mock Villa and even, horror of horrors, 
Mock Tudor (which is being built in Scotland bizarrely) If, as we hear 
constantly, we must sacrifice green belt land to housing surely something 
better than a testement to the belief that, stylistically, we got housing right 
about 150+ years ago could be created by the architects who actually build the 
houses that we live in? Personally, I rather like the style of houses from the 
1940's spacious, light and modern. It seems things rather regressed in the mass 
market thereafter. Why is this area of architecture so removed from modernity?

Sarah Wigglesworth 
I don't think we do have to sacrifice green belt land. We ought to fight to 
retain this important green lung and not give in to developers who find it 
easier to build here than on brown field sites. Historically housing has always 
involved an element of nostalgia and this is still the case today in the 
majority of speculative housing to which many people aspire. However, I do 
believe that there should be a range of choices available which don't 
necessarily appeal to nostalgic instincts and which respond to economic and 
environmental conditions which pertain today to that extent models of 150 years 
ago seem wasteful of space as well as nostalgic aesthetically. I think we need 
to address issues of sustainability much more thoroughly and this means 
thinking again about the profiligate use of our precious land resource.

Pierre d'Avoine 
Also in response to Lady Hamilton. The question of expansion in London over 
the next two decades. We need to have a country-wide view of how the 
environment is developed in an effective and sustainable way. I think the 
Greenbelt has been a vital strategy since its inception for the containment of 
suburban sprawl. However now we need to contemplate the development by stealth 
that takes place outside London and also develop a response in term sof the 
issue of the changing nature of farmland in this country. A sensible approach 
would include retention of farmland for production and perhaps also evolve 
scenarios for residential occupation of the same land in a harmonious way. The 
corollary of that would be utilising the existing building stock within the 
city to create an extension of allotment culture. This may sound pie in the 
sky, but there appears to be a groundswell of resistence to both 
agri-industries and the mono-cultural developments built by volume house 
builders. My basic argument is that we need to be inventive and economic with 
our use of land and the proposition of using the same plot of land for several 
different activities and uses is potentially one way of increasing density 
within the city while at the same time providing means for greening the city.

Hans van der Heijden 
The green belt issue is terribly important & I agree with sarah completely. in 
any big city the lung function is worth monitoring. Two things though: Green 
belts are not terribly interesting or useful if they remain as inaccesible 
green territory. witha rapidly changing agricultural economy there are chances 
for other ways of profiting from existing green spaces. The other thing is more 
difficult. preserving green spaces puts pressure on existing urbanised space. 
and i am not so sure that urban living is densely populated areas is a 
sustainable living environment that is appreciated by all of us. inevitably 
suburb design, low desities and banal domestic programmes can be an increasing 
task for designers. I always have the impression that this incorrect, or 
unspectular, part of urban design is easily neglected.

Sarah Wigglesworth 
I completely agree. Also in response to Pierre's answer about the green belt I 
think, particularly in Britain, that the key issues in terms of land use and in 
deprivation are going to be the low rise, low density areas. However these also 
offer an opportunity for the skillful designer because there are so few good 
examples to draw on for inspiration. The issue of husbanding small parcels of 
land in th return to a more fulfilling life seems to be an increasing priority 
for many people and this could happen in the city too.

Hans van der Heijden 
Right ! This is one of the parts of my own education in delft, netherlands, 
that i find most valuable. New nuances, of course, the increasing say that 
people demand in shaping their environemnt. and i don't think this is a 
negative thing - or obstructs architecture. Architecture has always been the 
product of negotiation and my own experience - also in Britain - is that you 
may well arrive at important results working in 'suburbs' with 'people'. it 
really is not dangerous you know.

Aardman 
What does it say about the state of architecture in this country when the 
nation's most celebrated architect can't even design a pedestrian bridge?

Sarah Wigglesworth 
It says that we should expect cutting edge designs sometimes to go wrong, this 
is the risk associated with breaking new ground. However, instead of blaming 
his engineers Foster should have admitted that.

Hans van der Heijden 
I think it is a hopeful event really. Finally something went wrong here! Only 
after many more mistakes Britain will possibly know where to go. (It may sound 
sarcastic, but it is not meant as such.)

Jonathan Glancey 
About that Wobbly Bridge; you could take the kind view and say that all 
invention requires/means some degree of risk; remember that Beauvais cathdedral 
collapsed twice before it ened up (never completed) the way it is; and, it's 
not that the bridge isn't safe: just suffers from a little low-level turbulence 
as it were

Critical Mass 
Dear Panel, Some quickies: 1. If there's one thing that bugs me, that nobody 
else seems to notice, it's the size of windows in modern private housing 
developments. They're absolutely miniscule! On the continent, huge windows 
allow lots of natural light. Why is this? 2. How soon will it be before the 
public realise that bold, modernist architecture from the Seventies [the 
Institute of Education sort] is beautiful, and that naff pink marble '80's 
office blocks are not? 3. Most importantly, don't you agree the car is the 
enemy of civic space? PS - Glancey - keep up the good work. Your column is 
essential, Rowan Moore not bad, Deyan Sudjic not so good.

Dickon Robinson 
1. I entirely agree and always ensure that our new homes have as large windows 
as possible, sometimes glazing the whole wall of the living room. The reason 
why most spec housing schemes have such small windows is because it is cheaper 
to build brick walls than windows. I suspect that private house builders 
believe that the buying public equate small windows with cottage architecture 
which is easy to sell. Frankly if we had a decent planning system that took 
sustainability seriously they would make sure that this did not happen as we 
all know daylight is free. 2. The really interesting challenge here is to 
persuade the general public that post war modern movement housing estates are 
beautiful. I think English heritage is helping to make this point by listing 
some key post war estates.

Jonathan Glancey 
Small windows in so many new buildings? because brick walls are cheap to build 
and big openings in brick walls are more expensive that big windows between 
steel girders or concrete beams ; because of really strict views about thermal 
efficiency ie, you must stay hot in the tiny rooms of your highly insulated 
house even at the expense of having little daylight . . . not very good 
answers, but I think they're right

Lady Hamilton 
The fact is that, conversions of some former industrial spaces aside, modern 
design does not seem to drip into domestic housebuilding at all. Yet people 
like Le Corbusier spent considerable amounts of time designing what they hoped 
would become mass market housing. Architects have been involved in promoting 
modern design in domestic housing before - have they been neutered by the 
perceived failures of the 60's (it is notable that many "undesirable" buildings 
from the era have been revamped and are now sought after). People embraced 
modernity with vigour in the 60's yet it seems that we and our architects have 
lost our nerve in domestic housing. How can we bring domestic housebuilding up 
to date and shed the legacy of the 60's?

Sarah Wigglesworth 
I think we have all had a collective failure of nerve, architects included. 
When you do an experiment in architecture it gets done with real people in real 
situations, unlike in the aeronautics industry where millions of pounds are 
poured into R&D before a plane even takes off. This says quite a lot about the 
relatiuve importance we give to the quality of our environment. Architects have 
allowed themselves to become scapegoats for the poor quality, badly funded 
experiments in public housing in the 1960s. Architecture reflects cultural 
values it doesn't make them.

Helen Sian Taylor 
Domestic architecture is not generally controlled by Architects- when will the 
planners & housebuilders be asked to justify their standards? plus- how did 
Jane Drew overcome the glass ceiling in the architectural profession- is she a 
good role model for a different way of practising architecture?

Sarah Wigglesworth 
Hello Helen, Planners claim that they are representing the people and that 
planning is a democratic process. House builders claim to give the public what 
the public want. In both these scenarios there is some truth but also a lot of 
self justification. However it is for the public who don't feel that this is 
particularly representative of their own views to demand something better. I'm 
not sure Jane Drew did overcome the glass ceiling. After all she was part of a 
classic husband and wife set-up and for many people her husband was considered 
the design talent whilst she was regarded as the PR person. This 
characterisation reflects many stereotypes of both males and females in the 
architecture profession. We will never really know what might have happened to 
Jane had she not been in partnership with Max Fry, and for me one of the tests 
of breaking through the glass ceiling is for a woman to succeed at her own 
practice without the help of men.

Alicma2 
Having just returned from Holland, I was struck by the quality of contemporary 
architecture throughout the country. Are there signifcant differnces in the 
planning processes between Britain and the Netherlands?

Hans van der Heijden 
Posing the question is answering it of course. there are so many. It all has 
to do with linking political ambitions, ideas on how cities might work and 
architectural elaboration. Working in Britain, we always miss a spatial 
framework to postion the design of the building in. in holland, by the way, we 
get very bored with the current extravaganza.

Dickon Robinson 
Holland is a paricularly interesting country architecturally which I think 
stems from the fact that most of the land is man made. As a result they are 
much less precious about the way they use it and are free of our arcadian 
obsession. Also the land is very flat and they depend on the architecture to 
create interest. Lastly the local authorities own the freehold of most of the 
land and use this to impose their generally enlightened approach to 
architecture on developers.

Will Howard 
With the honourable exception of Peabody all new social housing is even worse 
than private housing in design terms. Do housing associations lack the 
resources to produce decent housing or just the imagination?

Dickon Robinson 
Thanks for the compliment. Actually there are other HA's that create good 
buildings. However like most public subsidy systems the subsidy levels for new 
social housing tend to lag behind rising land and construction costs. They also 
tend to be based on costs in low density areas which makes high density schemes 
really difficult with the additional costs of lifts and so on. But in the final 
analysis the quality of the buildings any organisation creates reflects their 
ambitions, values and self confidence. If they care about the legacy they are 
creating they will find a way to create good and perhaps sometimes even great 
buildings.

Mark Whitehouse 
Do you think that the Houses of Parliament's facade has any merit? I have to 
say that I think that it is an incredibly ugly building!

Jonathan Glancey 
You mean the new Portcullis House for MPs, or the old Palace of Westminster? 

Mark Whitehouse 
The old Palace of Westminster. Also, whilst it's on my mind, what about the 
plans for the new GLA building?

Jonathan Glancey 
The old Palace of Westminster does have virtues: it had to be a big building, 
and yet Pugin dressed it in a filigree web of Gothic stonework and tracery that 
both breaks up its essential bulk and gives it a fairy tale appearance in some 
lights, especially in winter or at sunrise and sunset; as for the GLA, it's a 
curious beast, a kind of knight's helmet on the Thames; perhaps Ken and the GLA 
want to be seen as the white knights of London; the structure is pretty much 
complete - looking forward to seeing if it makes sense when complete.

Pantherxi 
Does the panel think that there is better and more good architecture now (last 
10 yrs) than in the previous 50-100? What effect do the pannel think the 
politics of Reagan and Thatcher had on Architecture?

Pierre d'Avoine 
I think there probably is, because there are more people and more architects, 
and more development taking place. However the problem is that good 
architecture does not necessarily mean good environments. In the 'post-modern' 
age in which we live, we take plurality for granted - in the way that previous 
generations didn't have to. Thus you have violent juxtaposition and clashing at 
the junctions between independent developments which sometimes can be 
exhilerating when experienced within the city, but can also lead to 
disorientation and environments which do not engage with the body politic.

Jonathan Glancey 
No. Architecture moves in a continuum with a few revolutions along the way; 
every era has its masterpieces, every generation its failures. I think the 
difficult thing is this: over the past century we have built more and more, to 
house an ever wider range of needs/functions/purposes and so we have spread our 
architectural budget thinly; also whereas we wonce spent a fortune of our 
national/local income on the design of grand houses, palaces and cathedrals, 
today we spend on so many other things instead: holidays, our own homes, DIY, 
Eninem CDs, food and even more food, fashion, cars etcÂƒ so architecture does 
suffer; that said, we have got very good at whizzing up buildings very quickly 
and when the best engineers and architects work together, the results can be 
sensational.

Dickon Robinson 
I suspect that their are more good building in the last 100 years than is 
generally recognised, Its just that so many post war building are still 
unfashionable. I feel a real vogue for sixties and seventies architecture is 
just round the corner. However the thing which always strikes me about post war 
architecture is the poor qulity of materials and the very low budgets. It 
really does seem to have taken a long time for architects to have got over that 
depressing experiance and learned to let their hair down. However they do seem 
to have seen the light and the past decade has been increasingly exciting. With 
more and more examples of really good modern buildings across the country I 
hope we are entering a virtuous circle where the general public insists that 
their community deserves buldings as good as Walsall Art Gallery etc.

Sarah Wigglesworth 
It's really difficult to know what is really good building until you can get a 
historical distance even then our opinions about good and bad are led by 
fashion and taste. One of the problems in building a great volume of buildings 
such as we do in the modern era is the huge range of building types and 
constructional techniques available all competing with one another. There are 
no absolute rights and wrongs any more. However I think this plurality is a 
good thing because it promotes debate about quality but it also has a negative 
effect in that the increasing complexity of the industry means the public are 
potentially alienated from the discussion and this isn't a good thing.

Mark Whitehouse 
Does the panel believe that the desire for Birmingham to have the tallest 
structure in Europe is the wrong way to begin a planning process? It seems to 
me that this is a statement rather than a piece of design. How does this fit 
into your own design philosophy?

Jonathan Glancey 
It's a way of getting noticed, but a bit childish; other cities have invested 
in alternative architectural strategies - Bilbao with the Guggenheim, Sydney 
with the Utzon Opera House etc - but these are show off buildings, too; but . . 
.. it's an age old way of showing that your city is better than mine; think of 
Augustus and his boast of leaving Rome a city of marble instead of brick, the 
Hitler/Speer plan to rebuild Berlin as Germania (assuming they won WW2 . . .), 
or Frank Woolworth's desire to build the tallest tower in New York or Donald 
Trump's to build the tallest apartment block (also in Manhattan)Âƒ. it's 
something that just won't go away.

Pantherxi 
When you say engage with the body politic do you mean that they are not widely 
appreciated by the body politic or that they are unsuitable for the functions 
for which they are designed or that the designs themselves are too radically 
divorced from those of the surrounding visual landscape or even that they 
alienate people? I thought Architects talked about neo -modernism now!

Pierre d'Avoine 
What I think I mean is that development is largely commercially driven and 
that notions of the civic are very difficult to include. The environmental 
matrix in which large new architectural projects are situated doesn't have the 
power any longer to be inclusive.

Brix 
What should be done about the very serious threat to London because of the 
lack of affordable housing? Do you think the mayor will make a difference?

Pierre d'Avoine 
The mayor may make a difference - it depends on his relationship with Nick 
Raynsford. The problem for London it seems is that decisions are still very 
much in the hands of central government and that the mayor's voice may not be 
heard. London is aimed to be become - if it hasn't already - an almost 
independent city state where the cost of living will ultimately exclude all but 
the very rich.

Pierre d'Avoine 
It's worth adding that the discrepency in income between rich and poor is not 
as great as in developing world countries and we are unlikely to see a massive 
influx of migrants into the city centre. However we are faced daily with the 
homeless in the centre of our cities. However they don't have the numbers to 
influence things in a major way - yet.

Sarah Wigglesworth 
I think we need a complete rethink about the subsidy to certain types of 
public or shared equity housing for low income groups. We live with the legacy 
of the Thatcher era and this means thinking laterally to overcome existing 
funding frameworks. Something about the cost of land and development in this 
country seems to keep the cost of housing really high compared with other 
European countries. I'm not sure why this is but perhaps we need to do 
something about the distribution of land and land values.

Dickon Robinson 
Yes I do think the Mayor will make a difference and perhaps already has by 
calling for all new housing schemes to include 50% affordable housing. I think 
this is anaspirational rather than literal target and has already had the 
effect of stirring up a big debate. As to how to achieve it the answers must 
include 1 A more generous public subsidy regime with more money overall and 
more per project. 2 A faster and more sympathetic planning system that supports 
modern design and high density. 3 The agressive use of compulsory purchase 
powers to assemble land where landowners with low histoic land costs are just 
sitting still waiting for land values to rise. 4 The extension of the concept 
of mixed use to sites zoned for employment use.( at present planners only seem 
to apply MU to housing sites)

Mark Whitehouse 
Given previous predictions of houses in the sky, the thought of roads being 
replaced by flight paths, a collection of bizarre metal buildings replacing 
old, historic ones, etc., what does the panel believe will be the face of 
Britain in 50-100 years?

Jonathan Glancey 
Insist that new housing developments include affordable homes - Livingstone is 
keen on this - redevelop areas that seem horrendously shabby at the moment - 
the roads up the Lea Valley/A10 etc; the dismal semi-industrial watselands 
leading up to the M1 - with houses built around parks and canals, with real 
shops, schools ans services; in other words create new bits of fully 
functioning city in areas that the wealthy would never want to go at the 
moment, yet design them to a standard that the wealthy would admire but only 
after those on low incomes have moved in rebuild our housing estates A these 
measures require the revitalisation of the public sector and the Mayor, 
although boxed in by Whitegall/Westminster can at least encourage this and make 
the right noises It's a hard one, tho'

Jonathan Glancey 
I'm off to a meeting to discuss, as it happens, affordable housing in 
London... Thanks everyone bye bye 