

Hands-on experience: Anne Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson> encourages a 
contestant on the Weakest Link to feel her breasts. Photograph: BBC

It's been quite a week for breasts on television. Anne Robinson received 16 
complaints after an outburst on The Weakest Link in which sheencouraged a 
contestant to feel the contents of her bra 
<http://www.thedailygoss.com/gossip/yikes!-watch-anne-ask-contestant-to-feel-her-boobs!/0002337/>
. Before the watershed!

And Lily Allen reportedly got one of hers out 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/tv/a93240/lily-allen-exposes-breast-on-chatshow.html>
 while interviewing comedian Paddy McGuinness on her BBC3 chat show. And who 
can forget the tabloid hand-rubbing that went on when Dancing on Ice co-host 
Holly Willoughy displayedtoo much cleavage for some people's liking 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/showbiz/latest/2008/02/04/holly-willoughby-bears-her-cleavage-again-on-dancing-on-ice-89520-20309079/>
 in a series of low-cut dresses? Put the boys back in their barracks, ladies. 
This is a family show.

I know Anne didn't treat us to an actual flash but she does spend most of the 
episode-in-question making suggestive remarks to the male contestants about the 
size of their "pepper grinders". Bromide for table two.

But it does the raise the question of television decency and the boundaries 
governing it. Over time broadcasting regulations do tend to retreat if you 
gently and repeatedly nudge them enough. Is the fact that Anne Robinson 
referred to her rack during a teatime quiz show as shocking as it would have 
been 10 years ago? Of course not.

But it is still enough to get some people's dander up. Who are these people 
who ring in to complain? Perhaps the last of a dying breed. But still theMedia 
Watch <http://www.mediawatchuk.org.uk/> organisation ploughs on, presumably 
recruiting new members only too happy to promote its message of decency and 
high moral standards.

But how long will Holly and her Willoughbys be a big issue for family 
audiences before we all become quite used to seeing acres of breast flesh 
bouncing out at us on a Saturday at 7pm? The tabloid furore over her low-cut 
dresses was obviously far more to do with printing alluring pictures of her 
than an actual moral panic. But people do still find sex shocking in the wrong 
context. A lot of fuss is made about family viewing being spoiled by references 
to violence or sex, but is it really harming us? Or are we just adjusting to a 
new level of acceptance when it comes to formerly taboo subjects?

Are we ready to open the floodgates to a tsunami of breasts and buttocks? To 
say, "what the heck. It's only skin"? Or should we maintain some boundaries 
when it comes to the veritable burlesque show our light entertainment has 
become of late?
 