
The Oscars have always been a lumbering, unwieldy beast. To win a Golden Globe 
one needs to convince an electorate of fewer than 100; to walk off with an 
Oscar, an actor, director or producer must pass muster with more than 6,000 
voters. The weight of all these members alone makes it hard for theOscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> animal to turn its head and catch 
sight of objects in its peripheral vision. Instead it appears fixated on what 
is directly in front of it: usually movies that have been hyped as worthy 
contenders from the moment the annual awards season begins at the tail end of 
each November.

There's also a particular type of film that tends to get picked up. The 
Oscarly movie is generally one with a certain gravitas that suggests it may 
stand the test of time: it might be a historical testament (such asLincoln 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149491/lincoln> or Argo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148728/argo>) or based on a famous 
literary proposition (Life of Pi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149778/life-of-pi>). It might simply be 
the latest work of a much-studied auteur (such as Michael Haneke'sAmour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/nov/15/amour-review> or Paul Thomas 
Anderson'sThe Master <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146341/master>); or 
it could be the exciting debut of a youthful, offbeat firebrand (Benh Zeitlin's
Beasts of the Southern Wild 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145827/beasts-of-the-southern-wild>).

What it does not tend to be, at least in recent years, is a movie that many 
people have actually seen outside critical circles, nor necessarily one that 
exemplifies modern filmgoing trends. In many ways, the Oscars has become as 
much of an advertisement for movies that might otherwise go under the radar as
Cannes <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/cannesfilmfestival>, Berlin, Toronto 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/torontofilmfestival> or indeed the London 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/londonfilmfestival> film festival. That also 
means it is failing to reflect the wider zeitgeist around it – a fact indicated 
by constantly falling TV ratings for the ceremony's broadcast in the US.

There is nothing new in the determined myopia of the Academy of Motion Picture 
Arts and Sciences when it comes to genre fare. The western – perhaps the 
closest equivalent to the modern-day comic-book movie – was unable to secure 
more than a single best picture Oscar win (for 1931's Cimmaron 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0021746/>) before the 90s, when Dances With Wolves 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0099348/> and Unforgiven 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XDAXGILEdro> suddenly managed the feat in the 
space of three years. How ridiculous that a genre that was once considered 
throwaway junk should finally triumph in venerable old age when it had lost 
almost all its youthful vigour. Where were the awards for Sam Peckinpah'sThe 
Wild Bunch <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0065214/>, Sergio Leone's The Good, the 
Bad and the Ugly (credited by Eastwood as he picked up his prize) or Anthony 
Mann's series of five classic westerns with James Stewart, running from 50s
Winchester '73 <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0043137/> to 1955's The Man from 
Laramie?

This year, Quentin Tarantino managed five nominations – and could yet take the 
best original screenplay award – for Django Unchained. In many ways it's a 
surprise that the maverick film-maker's blood-spattered paean to the spaghetti 
western, one of the year's best-reviewed movies, has done that well, for Oscar 
does not like violence. Martin Scorsese's Taxi Driver earned a similar number 
of nods – four – in 1976, but it would be another 30 years before the director 
won his first personal Academy Award (for 2006's The Departed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2007/feb/26/awardsandprizes.oscars20071>).

Certain types of genre movies do fare well. Peter Jackson's Return of the King 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/92716/lord.of.the.rings>, the final 
instalment in his Lord of the Rings trilogy, swept the board in 2004 with 11 
wins. Surprising? Not when you consider that despite having given the world 
Hobbits and talking trees, JRR Tolkien's Middle-earth stories are considered 
reasonably high literature thanks to the author's academic background and 
fascination with language and myth-telling. John Milius's 1982 fantasyConan the 
Barbarian <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0082198/>, which is in many ways a 
better movie, never stood a chance because it was based on a character created 
by a pulp writer and brought to the screen by an eccentric rightwing gun 
advocate.

If comic-book movies are the new westerns, then it's hard to imagine that in 
50 years time we will be remembering Danny Boyle's lovable but rather 
lightweightSlumdog Millionaire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/126911/slumdog-millionaire> ahead of 
Christopher Nolan'sThe Dark Knight 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/122806/dark.knight>, despite the former 
having swept the 2009 ceremony. (The superhero film had to be content with just 
a solitary best supporting actor gong for Heath Ledger's turn as the Joker.)

The same applies to science fiction, which is criminally overlooked year after 
year. Does anyone (even James Cameron's fiercest detractors) really believe that
The Hurt Locker's 2010 triumph 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/mar/08/oscars-2010-hurt-locker-avatar> 
over the groundbreakingAvatar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/131170/avatar> will be justifiable to our 
grandchildren in 2060? This year, one of 2012's best-reviewed films is Rian 
Johnson's cerebellum-twisting Looper, a movie that predictably failed to pick 
up a single Oscars nod despite a high-profile Toronto launch. Why? Because it 
had time travel in it?

If Argo (not even Ben Affleck's second-best movie in a still-nascent career) 
triumphs on Sunday, with Spielberg's yawnworthy Lincoln and Bigelow's 
cold-heartedZero Dark Thirty 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149492/zero-dark-thirty> bringing up the 
rear, it may be time to start praying to a new awards ceremony deity. Ang Lee's 
visually spectacular Life of Pi could yet save the day: failing that, who's up 
for staying up all night to watchthe Saturns 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/hobbit-leads-saturn-awards-nine-422530>
 in 2014?
 