
As the finale to her week-long stay in London, Arianna Huffington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington> will today chair an 
annual meeting of the Huffington Post's 11 international editors. As well as 
setting "the editorial priorities for the next year", the site's founder says 
she will reaffirm a strategy whereby "in the last year we went from being 
primarily a politics and news site to being a thought leader in how we live our 
lives".

While news and politics remains HuffPo's No 1 content category, with 40m 
monthly uniques in the US, lifestyle and wellbeing has grown from being 
insignificant to overtaking entertainment and technology to become the second 
biggest category, with 26m monthly uniques.

"We will continue to be a politics and news site that is No 1 in the States 
and continues to grow everywhere," says Huffington. "We are not in anyway 
detracting from that, but we are also going to continue to invest a lot of 
resources and time in Third Metric messages."The Third Metric – a third way of 
defining success, beyond the old metrics of money and power – 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/30/arianna-huffington-interview-find-stories-everywhere-huffington-post-news>
 is an idea set out in her new bookThrive, which she launched in the UK 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/arianna-huffington/postcard-from-london-thri_b_5392561.html>
 (at No 11 Downing Street, naturally, with George Osborne as host) during her 
London trip.

HuffPo's UK editor-in-chief, Carla Buzasi, was given the additional role of 
global director of lifestyle in January, and it was announced last week that 
the site will work with four top London media agencies to "introduce the Third 
Metric concept to their employees". Not a few eyebrows have been raised at the 
prospect of cynical, hardboiled media buyers being taught how to "make room in 
[their] lives for wellbeing, wisdom, wonder and giving" at workshops including 
yoga, massages, mindfulness sessions, "and even happiness coaching from 
happiness and wellbeing activist Susie Pearl".

Huffington has been an evangelist for getting enough sleep, turning off 
digital devices and reconnecting with family and friends ever since a "wake-up 
call" in 2007 when she collapsed from exhaustion at her desk and fractured a 
cheekbone. Yet anyone who thinks that her 14th book is about kicking back and 
taking more time off fundamentally misunderstands Thrive, and indeed Huffington 
herself.

Thrive is often described as the antithesis to another book calling for women 
to make changes in their lives, Sheryl Sandberg's Lean In. 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/atwork/2013/03/11/arianna-huffington-sheryl-sandberg-to-lean-in-first-lean-back/>
 Yet Huffington frequently appears on platforms with the Facebook chief 
operating officer, and Thrive's first endorsement is from Sandberg. Huffington, 
so fond of pets that she devotes a chapter to "furry friends with different 
benefits", uses an animal analogy to explain why the books are similar. "It is 
so easy to misunderstand," she sighs. "You also need to learn to lean back, as 
like a cat you need to lean back in order to jump higher." So sleep and rest 
are "performance enhancement tools", not an alternative to success but a way of 
achieving it.

Asked if she's a feminist, Huffington – who published The Female Woman in the 
70s, 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_female_woman.html?id=c2WzAAAAIAAJ> 
slating the "brainwashing" women's liberation movement – replies "absolutely". 
Thrive calls for a "third women's revolution" to end male-dominated workplaces 
which consider burnout "a badge of honour". Her own life, writing from home 
when her daughters (now grown-up) were small but remaining ambitious enough to 
set up her company, embodies the idea that women should be able to succeed 
financially and work at home for a period while caring for children. Her model 
of self-fulfilment still offers a marked contrast to the sisterly solidarity of 
early feminists, of course.

One of the obvious objections to the book is that it's all very well for a 
multimillionaire to write about needing to sleep more when many women on low 
incomes struggle to put food on the table. "The more you can take care of your 
own human capital, tap into your inner strength and resources, the more 
resilient you will be," is all she will say.

Perhaps the biggest criticism of Huffington is that she made her millions off 
the back of unpaid volunteers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/mar/14/comment.blogging>. 
Indeed Google her name and "unpaid bloggers" still comes up as the most common 
search term. She is adamant that she has done nothing wrong: "This fails to 
understand the nature of the internet and platforms," she says. No one asks why 
Facebook won't share some of its IPO proceeds, she says, or why contributors to 
Tumblr (sold to Yahoo for $1bn) received nothing. Asked why the Post continues 
to use unpaid volunteers, she says: "I think it's because we're the first media 
company to really elevate blogging. In 2005 people were making fun of bloggers, 
saying they were people who couldn't get a job, sitting in their parents' 
basements, but we brought in politicians and celebrities." Besides, she says, 
look at the homeless teenage blogger offered a place at Harvard and all those 
given TV shows or book deals.These few examples will not be enough to satisfy 
the 9,000 who lodged a legal appeal against the AOL deal. Their complaint was 
dismissed after the judge said the bloggers had gone into the arrangement "with 
eyes wide open". 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/12/arianna-huffington-post-sale>

She ducks a question about whether she faces more criticism as a woman but 
says ofJill Abramson's departure as editor of the New York Times, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/14/new-york-times-jill-abramson-forced-out>
 "there's no question that the language being used – that she was 'brash', 
'abrasive' – these are words almost exclusively used about women. Men tend to 
be 'driven' and 'authoritative'. There's no question that there is a double 
standard for women at the top. That language has definitely been used about me 
over the years – that I am difficult or demanding – absolutely."

There have been rumours about her departure from AOL – she signed a four-year 
contract which ends next year – but she says she intends to continue working 
with chief executive Tim Armstrong. "HuffPo is a standalone with AOL 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/07/business/media/07aol.html?_r=1&> as the 
parent company while we totally determine our editorial policies. There's one 
year left, but Tim and I want to renew it. So there's no change."

An Indian edition is due this year, and Huffington is keen on "groundbreaking" 
journalism exploring "solutions". "We've [so far] done three big projects, 
around creating jobs, women's non-profits and social entrepreneurship. We are 
prioritising [solutions] as seriously as covering corruption and speaking to 
power, which is a very big departure for journalists, because [stories like 
these were] traditionally seen as fluffy."

Her eldest daughter, who previously worked for the family firm, now has a job 
at Participant Media, the production company behind films such as An 
Inconvenient Truth, and Huffington is thrilled. "I am very optimistic about the 
future media industry. I am even optimistic about the future of newspapers."

Would she launch a business using her first name? After all, she's becoming a 
bit like Oprah or Beyoncé with no need for the surname. "I've learned never to 
rule out anything. Remember I ruled out doing another book and here we are 
discussing Thrive. But having said that, I love the combination of what I'm 
doing: HuffPost and taking the message of Thrive around the world and across 
all our international editions." And we're left with that image of a cat 
leaning back in order to jump even higher.

• This article was amended on 2 June 2014 to clarify that bloggers' case 
againstAOL <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> was dismissed
 