
In Israel, he was proudly known as "the bulldozer", but to Palestinians in 
Gaza, the West Bank and beyond,Ariel Sharon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ariel-sharon> was "the butcher".

His long record of overseeing violence, destruction and repression led many 
Palestinians to express joy at the news of the former Israeli leader's death at 
the weekend.

In the Palestinian refugee camps of Sabra and Shatila, where hundreds of men, 
women and children were massacred in 1982, an episode for which Sharon was 
later held responsible, residents celebrated. A man named Walid told the 
LebaneseDaily Star 
<http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Lebanon-News/2014/Jan-11/243825-sabra-shatila-bid-good-riddance-to-israels-sharon.ashx#axzz2qCU7fFPG>
. "My heart beats with happiness because he is dead."

Another resident, Makki, told AFP: "I was relieved when I found out that 
Sharon was dead. I think the years he spent in a coma were punishment from God 
for the crimes he committed."

The killing of between 800 and 3,500 Palestinians was carried out by Christian 
militias, but an Israeli inquiry found Sharon bore personal responsibility for 
failing to take measures to avoid bloodshed. He was forced to res ign as 
defence minister.

In Gaza, militant organisations distributed sweets in celebration of Sharon's 
death. In the 1970s, forces under Sharon's command had engaged in the 
"pacification" of the resistance in Gaza , killing Palestinians and destroying 
homes. But in 2005, less than six months before the stroke that felled him, 
Sharon controversially withdrew Israeli troops and settlers from Gaza.

Hamas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamas> spokesman Fawzi Barhoum said 
his death represented the "end of one of the most arrogant criminals in the 
region, who committed crimes against Palestinian, Lebanese and Egyptian 
people." The people of Gaza were more hopeful of victory and liberation 
following his death, he added. Members of the public in Gaza City echoed 
Hamas's sentiments.

"I am gloating over the death of Sharon. I know definitely he will be in 
hell," said 26-year-old Shireen Mortaja.

Ahmad Ajrami, 38, said: "I am sad Sharon died without being sentenced by the 
international criminal court, but I'm happy we got rid of him. All the time 
when he was in power, I wished him dead – but not that peaceful way."

Samir Kaloub, 40, said Sharon was evil "but he was loyal to his country and 
people. I wish we had a Palestinian or Arabic leader like him, to serve us as 
he served his people. We deserve someone to fight for our dignity and defend 
the Palestinian people."

In the West Bank, Said Kalifa said Sharon had committed crimes not just 
against the Palestinian people but all humanity. He recalled the killing of 69 
people – most of them women and children – and the destruction of more than 40 
homes in the village of Qibya in 1953 by soldiers under Sharon's command. "He 
lived as a coward and died as a coward," said Kalifa, 47, from Ramallah. "His 
hands are covered in Palestinian blood. The death of this tyrant is a holy day 
for the Palestinian people."

Sami Abu Shareh, a driver from the village of Abu Kash, near Ramallah, said 
Sharon was responsible for triggering the second Palestinian intifada, or 
uprising, by his deliberately provocative visit to the Muslim holy site of 
Haram al-Sharif in September 2000. "He was a man of war and was responsible for 
our suffering from 1948 until now."

Hardline Jewish settlers in the West Bank also remembered Sharon with 
bitterness for his controversial withdrawal of troops and settlers from Gaza in 
2005. Yaakov Katz, a former adviser to Sharon, told AFP: "History will not 
forget his crimes against the Jewish people."

Emily Amrusi, a former spokeswoman for the Gaza settlers, told Israel's 
Channel 2: "It is hard to forgive him. It's hard to see his merits when what he 
left behind is ruins and a split nation."
 