



Let’s wipe the slate clean,” says the singer recently dubbed the most hated 
man in indie rock 
<https://myspace.com/article/2014/10/14/ariel-pink-madonna-manager-grimes-misogynistic-comments-twitter-feud>
. “Forget you ever knew me, forget I existed. I’mAriel Pink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink>, this new artist you’ve never 
heard of, not that guy everyone hates.” It’s a nice try. Recently, the king of 
the LA freak scene has found himself at the centre of a minor media shitstorm, 
which he can’t help stirring every time he opens his mouth. “It’s not illegal 
to be racist”, “This gay marriage stuff pisses me off” and “I love 
necrophiliacs” are some of the more eyebrow-raising opinions he’s aired in 
previous interviews, sparking outrage in some quarters of the left-leaning 
indie community. Who is Ariel Pink? Either a political gargoyle who sits to the 
right of Mussolini, or a man who’s desperate not to be liked? I’ve come to meet 
him in an Italian restaurant near his home in LA’s Highland Park to try to find 
out which.

What we do already know is that Pink (real name Ariel Rosenberg) is perhaps 
the most wayward, ferociously individual artist currently working in the pop 
idiom. His albums veer perversely between musical styles, conveying childlike 
joy and ravaged nihilism, often within the course of the same song. His lyrics 
are a freeform poetry that have occasionally explored areas of transgender 
experience, and he’s been known to employ drum sounds produced with his armpit. 
His backstory has the cultish allure of the outsider artist. Holing himself up 
in the Los Angeles hills for five years at the turn of the millennium, Pink 
obsessively worked a crackpot vision: to re-imagine pop music itself. He used 
the crudest technology to splice bizarre elements – soft rock, post-punk, 
forgotten TV shows, voicemails – into dense musical gems, like someone building 
a DeLorean out of Hoover parts and stuff lying around the kitchen. His 
discography of oddity ran to bag-loads of cassettes and CDRs, several of which 
eventually found a release on Animal Collective’s Paw Tracks label.

Kurt Vile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/29/kurt-vile-wakin-pretty-daze>
credits him with reasserting the spontaneous, DIY authenticity of lo-fi 
culture, while his postmodern take on pop has found him tapped for 
collaborations by Sky Ferreira andAzealia Banks 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Azealia%20Banks&gws_rd=ssl>. Now on British 
label 4AD, Ariel’s new albumPom Pom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/nov/10/ariel-pink-pom-pom-exclusive-album-stream>
 is a dress-up box crammed with pop hooks, lush textures, silly voices and 
surprisingly affecting sincerity. But while the music is more inviting than 
ever, his refusal to toe conventional lines in interviews has made him a 
controversial figure.

So, is he a troll? “I’d like to be seen as a normal, attractive person with 
good values,” he replies, tucking into a plate of meaty pasta. So why say you 
love the Westboro Baptist Church? “Because they’re free-speech advocates.” You 
said you loved paedophiles… “Yes, like Jesus loved paedophiles. I don’t love 
them specifically. Does it make me a paedophile to love paedophiles?” He’s 
being glib, of course. There’s mischief in his grey eyes, as if he’s testing 
me, seeing if I’m going to be Bill Grundy to his Johnny Rotten.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS87mPfD_yI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS87mPfD_yI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS87mPfD_yI&media=>
I ask about his latest misadventure, in which he revealed he had been invited 
to write potential material for Madonna’s new album. His assessment of her 
“downward slide” was jumped on byGrimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/grimes>, who blasted his “delusional 
misogyny” on Twitter. “What an amazing promotional campaign this is,” he 
chuckles. “I was only repeating what Interscope told me about why they needed 
me. They’re not my opinions. It’s clickbait journalism. The media lies to us 
all the time, and we always believe the media. Then Grimes – who’s completely 
stupid and retarded to believe any of it – jumps in and has her two cents. I’m 
not a misogynist. Maybe she’s angry that I’m the male version of her, who was 
at 4AD before her.”

Yowzer! I ordered the chicken, not the beef, I think – although much later. 
Instead, I ask: don’t celebrities have a duty to be role models? “No, they have 
a duty to be people you can break down, because everyone feels ashamed for 
knowing who they are, and hates themselves for paying so much attention.” You 
disagree with celebrity culture? “No, I disagree with the masses, who see 
themselves as very passive. The American people don’t feel responsible for 
murders that happen elsewhere in the world by the US army, or that for every $2 
box of chocolates they buy their grandmother, someone dies.”

Pink has a particular tendency to pull radically insightful arguments from 
nowhere – about sensationalist media, the amorality of capitalism, liberal 
delusion – and cloak them in clangingly reactionary or inflammatory 
conclusions. For some reason, he starts talking about the president of Uruguay. 
“He lives in a hut with his wife and grows pot or whatever. He gives all his 
wealth back to the people.” What a nice man, I think, like the PC sucker I am. 
“No! He’s trying to curry favour, give everyone what they want. It’s 
machiavellian.”

There’s a strange integrity I admire in Pink’s willingness to not only deviate 
from the artist’s script of kneejerk liberalism, but to rip it up entirely. 
There’s a tyranny in orthodoxy, and the man at odds with his society is also 
freed of it. But the burden of thinking for himself, rejecting all external 
values, leads him into some strange places. Trying to steer things toward the 
positive, I ask if there’s anyone he really likes. “I love everybody. You have 
to embrace all facets of humanity; love and accept everyone as being part of 
yourself. But on the other hand we’re scared of other people, who are our 
biggest threat. Once we figure out how to stop killing each other then we can 
figure out the trees and workers’ rights. You’re not gonna figure out the trees 
when you still have people killing each other.”

Ariel confesses to another tactic: to never stop talking once he starts, so 
the interviewer cannot ask any questions. And it’s really something: even the 
most prosaic question has him spiralling into comic abstraction and wild 
theories. At times it’s like he’s improvising Zen koans on the spot: 
“Everybody’s full of shit. The more sense they make, the more full of shit they 
are.” I’m not sure if this is the most meaningful conversation I’ve ever had in 
my life, or a load of old cabbage. Does anything mean anything? “We’re all 
making castles in the sand, wonderful tapestries, an exquisite corpse. But is 
it meaningful? No. It’s dogs barking. It doesn’t mean anything beyond our 
yelping, at the pain of being alive.” Of course, he howls at this point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F15%2Fariel-pink-pom-pom-4ad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F12%2F1415794047940%2Fae45781a-15a7-4c38-8c8e-f22db17a3c47-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ariel%20Pink%3A%20'I'm%20not%20that%20guy%20everyone%20hates'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F15%2Fariel-pink-pom-pom-4ad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ariel%20Pink%3A%20%27I%27m%20not%20that%20guy%20everyone%20hates%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F15%2Fariel-pink-pom-pom-4ad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F12%2F1415794047940%2Fae45781a-15a7-4c38-8c8e-f22db17a3c47-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ariel onstage during New york Fashion Week, 2012 Billy Farrell Agency/REX 
Photograph: Billy Farrell Agency/REX 
Pink’s peculiar, scattershot worldview perhaps seems slightly less jarring 
once you’ve spent some time with his music, which flits between irony and 
sincerity, unafraid to sprawl into sonically profane territory. He eschews 
autobiographical lyrics, instead offering a fluorescent stream of subconscious 
association. There’s also much character writing in evidence on Pom Pom, 
notably the gorgeous, elegiac Picture Me Gone, a song written from the 
perspective of a middle-aged man imagining his own death, addressing his son 
from a future in which all that remains of him is digital information on an 
intangible computer server. Whereas the song preceding it is Black Ballerina, a 
grimy lo-fi funk groove in which a teenager is ejected from a strip joint for 
touching a dancer’s nipples. It’s hard to conceive of another imagination from 
which both these songs would spring.

We decide to continue our conversation over a drink. Unlike literally every 
single other person in LA, Ariel doesn’t drive, so we go next door to an empty 
sports bar. What’s the worst thing anyone’s ever said to you? “They called me a 
dork one time,” he recalls. “I never thought about myself that way, but I felt 
like a dork right then and there for taking offence to it. That’s how I deal 
with all issues – I embrace them as being the case, so I actually face them.” 
So when people say you’re a misogynist… “I am a misogynist! Yes, I have to deal 
with that.”

In this cavernous environment, he seems sadder, the grey eyes more vulnerable. 
I can start to see the guy whose parents divorced when he was two, who was 
bullied at school, who couldn’t relate to his colonoscopist dad’s professional 
milieu, who dropped out of college to live in a Hindu ashram, whose obsessive 
music-making has sometimes been a way to block out the world. “I got into music 
to hide my personality,” he admits. “I could sing in different voices, use 
cover pictures that looked nothing like me. I wish I wasn’t the singer in my 
band. Now I’m the distraction from the music. I wouldn’t like me, either.”

The sparky humour has left the conversation now. “I wish I didn’t get all this 
attention, have to do interviews,” he says. “I don’t want to be known. I’d like 
to get by without making a fool of myself, running my mouth all the time. It’s 
not helping me.” He’s wary yet resigned to his treatment in the media, 
convinced I’m going to sell him down the river when this piece appears. He 
seems clouded, troubled. “My deal with 4AD is a joke,” he announces at one 
point, in front of the woman from 4AD.

“I think I’ve given you enough,” he says finally, picking up his Camels as if 
he’s packing up a stall. I feel he’s tired of me, of interviews, of the whole 
world. As he goes to leave, he makes an untypically straightforward plea. 
“Don’t make me into a weird caricature of myself. I’m trying to be an 
individual, I’m not guarded. We should be able to air stuff without being 
hunted down.”

The most hated man in indie rock half turns back to me: “Just… say something 
nice.”

Pom Pom is out on 17 Nov; Ariel Pink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink> plays the Scala, N1, 17 Nov
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTYoQ6WLuMq4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTYoQ6WLuMq4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTYoQ6WLuMq4&media=>





 