
The death at 85 of Ariel Sharon 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-11574000>, Israel's former prime 
minister who had been in a deep coma since suffering a stroke in January 2006, 
represents an extraordinary moment of rupture in his country's history. Of the 
generation of Israeli soldiers and politicians who fought in Israel's founding 
conflicts, onlyShimon Peres  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-23559848>now remains in a 
prominent role.

Sharon's life represented a metaphor for Israel's trajectory. The son of 
Russian immigrants and born in a farming community near Tel Aviv in 1928, he 
was a teenage volunteer in the fight against British rule in thePalestine 
Mandate 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/spl/hi/middle_east/03/v3_israel_palestinians/maps/html/british_control.stm>
.

He was present at many of the key symbolic moments in Israel's development. He 
fought – and was wounded – in the1948 war of independence 
<http://www.historylearningsite.co.uk/israel_and_the_1948_war.htm> that 
Palestinians know as the Nakba – the "catastrophe". A bloody ruthlessness was 
also evident from early on when he led the infamous 1953 retaliation raid on 
Qibiya in Jordan that saw 69 Jordanians, many of them civilians, killed.

All would be overshadowed, however, by his role as a key architect of the 1982 
Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the personal responsibility a commission of 
inquiry ruled that he had for one of the worst human rights violations of that 
conflict – theSabra and Shatila massacre 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/panorama/1390979.stm> in which many 
hundreds of Palestinian refugees were murdered by Lebanese Christian 
militiamen. And it was Sharon who presided over another landmark moment – the 
dismantling, in the face of angry opposition, of Jewish settlements in Gaza.

In reality, the rupture with the past took place a long time ago in January 
2006 when Sharon slipped into the coma from which he would never awake. Within 
a handful of weeks, Palestinian politics would also be transformed with the 
landslide victory in Gaza of Hamas over the Fatah movement of his old adversary
Yasser Arafat <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yasser-arafat>. Israel – and 
its place in the world – has also changed in those intervening years.

Since the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon in 2000, Sharon's country has 
prosecuted two conflicts – against Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza – 
that largely failed in their military objectives. TheBoycott, Divestment and 
Sanctions campaign <http://www.bdsmovement.net/bdsintro>– while controversial – 
has continued to gain traction, while the election of Palestine to the UN 
General Assembly as a non-member observer in 2012, against Israeli and US 
objections, has been another key moment.

Both in domestic politics and on the wider social front, Israel has been 
forced to confront uncomfortable truths about tensions both within Israeli 
society and with the wider diaspora long overshadowed by the averred 
contingencies of national security. As the Israeli journalist and authorAri 
Shavit <http://www.haaretz.com/culture/books/.premium-1.565453>argues in his 
new bookMy Promised Land: The Triumph and Tragedy of Israel, his country has 
become a less certain place in the last decade, returning to questions Sharon's 
generation believed had been answered long ago: "Why Israel? What is Israel? 
Will Israel?"

In some respects, those such as Shavit, who began in the left Zionist movement 
Peace Now, have moved closer to Sharon's late political vision when he ordered 
the evacuation of the Gaza settlements, believing that, without a peace deal 
imminent at any time in the near future,Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> must act unilaterally to end the 
occupation of the West Bank as a moral necessity. In other ways, however, 
evidence of Sharon and his policies is still sharply in evidence, not least in 
the separation barrier that he gave approval to.

Perhaps the most significant change is the one that is least visible, a subtle 
alteration in the balance of power within both Israeli and Palestinian society 
that has seen the emergence of a newly confident economic class that is 
demanding a more normalised political state. On the Israeli side, that has been 
driven not only by its technology sector but by the discovery of its new 
offshore gas fields whose most likely customers are Palestinians and its other 
Arab neighbours.

In the final analysis, how will history judge Ariel Sharon's importance? That 
task is probably best left to an Israeli commentator,Amir Oren 
<http://www.haaretz.com/misc/writers/amir-oren-1.277>, writing in Haaretz 
immediately after his death.

"He is a person who experienced pleasure and pain, who lost a son and was 
widowed twice, who used people and organisations (the IDF, Likud, the 
Shlomtzion and Kadima parties, the settlement enterprise in the West Bank and 
Gaza) as a private launching pad for himself; who achieved maximum power but 
wasted it on petty matters."
 