
Outsider pop act Ariel Pink <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink> 
says he has been asked to write songs for Madonna’s new album. Although the 
Material Girl’s next record still sees her working with EDM DJs, Pink claims 
her label want him to come up with “edgy” material for a “return-to-values 
thing”.

“Interscope are calling me to help write Madonna’s record,” Pink recently told 
Faster Louder 
<http://www.fasterlouder.com.au/news/40859/Ariel-Pink-is-working-on-Madonnas-new-album-They-need-something-edgy>
. “She can’t just have herAvicii 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/25/avicii-review-earls-court-swedish-rave>
, her producers or whatever, come up with a new techno jam for her to gyrate to 
and pretend that she’s 20 years old ... They need songwriting. ... They 
actually need songs.”

Although Pink claims to be contributing ideas 
<http://www.nme.com/news/madonna/80352> for Madonna’s next album, Guy Oseary, 
Madonna’s manager, says he and the singer “have never heard of Ariel Pink”. “M 
has no interest in working with mermaids,”Oseary tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/guyoseary/status/521875117044158464>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fariel-pink%2Fput-your-number-in-my-phone-music-video%2F2298555%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fariel-pink%2Fput-your-number-in-my-phone-music-video%2F2298555%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fariel-pink%2Fput-your-number-in-my-phone-music-video%2F2298555%2F&media=>
According to Pink, Interscope want to reboot Madonna’s career after 2012’s MDNA
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/mar/22/madonna-mdna-review> “didn’t do 
so well”. Whereas that album was made with dance producers like William Orbit, 
Martin Solveig and the Benassi Brothers, the new one has a cast of producers, 
includingAvicii, Diplo, Blood Diamonds and DJ Dahi 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/56796-blood-diamonds-diplo-working-with-madonna>, 
whose sound is arguably a little more assertive.

Pink claims to be part of a team of “all-new songwriters”. “[Madonna’s] first 
record was so good because of the songs,” he said. “It’s been a downward slide 
[since then] ... [1998’s] Ray of Light is not cool. And all the other stuff 
she’s done after that – it’s not like it matters. It really shows a drain of 
values. People need more substance in their mac-and-cheese. People need more 
sugar or something.”

Pink’s comments may have come back to bite him, however. Since word got out of 
his statements regarding Madonna’s creative output, artist Grimes has accused 
him of asserting “delusional misogyny” that is “emblematic of the kind of 
bullshit everyone woman in this industry faces daily”. Madge herself may we 
have taken offence, according to Pink’s recent tweet:

Pink released his first album in 2002. Emerging from the lo-fi pop scene in 
Los Angeles, his real breakthrough came with 2010’s Before Today, released by 
4AD, and the subsequent LP Mature Themes. Despite this indie success, he does 
not have any major collaboration or songwriting credits.


Pink’s latest full-length, Pom Pom, is due in November.
 