
The sun burned over the red rock spires of the Navajo Nation, where thousands 
of people gathered along a miles-long stretch of road for the tribe’s annual 
parade on Saturday. Tucked away in the north-easternmost corner ofArizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona>, the cultural celebration has 
become something of a ritual for politicians seeking the support of the Navajo 
people.

On one float, perhaps for the last time, Arizona’s native son John McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain> drew cheers as he passed. Not 
far behind, Ann Kirkpatrick, the three-term congresswoman from northern Arizona 
who is seeking to unseat him in the nation’s marquee Senate race of the year, 
introduced herself to the crowd in Navajo, then in English.

Women poised to lead Democratic return to power in the Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/25/senate-women-democrats-majority-power>
At this stage, a victory for the Flagstaff congresswoman would be a stunning 
upset over McCain, who’s survived in the Senate since 1987, when he succeeded 
Barry Goldwater. But Kirkpatrick relishes the role of David to McCain’s Goliath.

“Nobody in DC thinks I’m going to win,” Kirkpatrick told the Guardian, 
flashing a playful smile. “But I’m going to win this.”

The Arizona Senate race is among a handful of down-ballot elections where 
Democrats believe Donald Trump’s long shadow could scramble the calculus. 
McCain, the 2008 Republican presidential nominee and a party statesman, is by 
hisown <http://www.politico.com/story/2016/05/trump-latinos-mccain-222810> 
admission facing the “race of my life” with Kirkpatrick earning the distinction 
of being his toughest challenger yet.

“This is among the most competitive races that we’re looking at this cycle,” 
said Lauren Passalacqua, spokeswoman for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign 
Committee (DSCC), which is helping Kirkpatrick organize and fundraise.


Polling averages show McCain with a 13-point lead 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/senate/az/arizona_senate_mccain_vs_kirkpatrick-5455.html>
, though somesurveys have 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/docs/2016/PPP_Arizona_June_2016.pdf> shown 
the race in a near tie. An NBC/WSJ/Marist poll taken after McCain won a 
decisive primary victory last month showed the senator with a 19-point lead.

Supporters say Kirkpatrick is the ideal Democrat for a demographically 
changing red state – and the person best positioned to take on McCain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fann-kirkpatrick-arizona-democrat-john-mccain-senate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13567e8ef5d895b9c18d64403d2b71a5ca9f7b57%2F0_116_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arizona%20Democrat%20aims%20to%20unseat%20McCain%3A%20%E2%80%98Nobody%20in%20DC%20thinks%20I%E2%80%99ll%20win%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fann-kirkpatrick-arizona-democrat-john-mccain-senate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arizona%20Democrat%20aims%20to%20unseat%20McCain%3A%20%E2%80%98Nobody%20in%20DC%20thinks%20I%E2%80%99ll%20win%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fann-kirkpatrick-arizona-democrat-john-mccain-senate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13567e8ef5d895b9c18d64403d2b71a5ca9f7b57%2F0_116_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 A child looks at campaign signage during an event for Representative Ann 
Kirkpatrick in Tuba City, Arizona on 13 August 2016. Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
“When I worked with Ann it was clear, she puts people over politics,” said 
Jessica O’Connell, a former campaign manager for Kirkpatrick and now the 
executive director of Emily’s List, a group dedicated to electing pro-choice 
women that has endorsed the congresswoman. “Arizona voters aren’t looking for 
labels – they’re looking for a leader who will stand up for them and their 
values, and that’s what Ann will do.”

A gun-owning Democrat and pro-choice Roman Catholic, Kirkpatrick blurs strict 
party and ideological lines. She also readily admits to voting for Arizona’s 
maverick – once, in 1998.

Kirkpatrick is also battle-tested from running four grueling congressional 
races in eight years. She currently represents a district larger than the state 
of Iowa and significantly more diverse, which her campaign says gives her an 
organizational edge.

“The timeline says a lot about the type of person Ann is,” said Michael Frias, 
Kirkpatrick’s former chief of staff. “She made the decision to run before the 
Trump phenomenon ... To make a boxing analogy, she decided to take on the 
champ, she is not waiting for the champ to retire.”

•••


Wearing moccasins and a large turquoise broach, Kirkpatrick zigzagged across 
the parade route, handing out campaign stickers and candy. She stopped often to 
chat with constituents, embracing those she knew personally. On more than one 
occasion the truck pulling her float paused for her to catch up.

“We need fresh ideas!” Kirkpatrick said into the microphone. “Food stamps, 
general assistance, child care, Social Security, Access, Medicaid and Medicare, 
Indian health services funding, mental health services and tribal sovereignty. 
That’s what this election is about. Ahéhee. Thank you.”

By contrast, McCain, wearing a Navy hat and a blazer, waved to the crowd from 
his campaign float, flanked by a security detail. Two Navajo code talkers rode 
with him.

“Look! It’s John McCain,” a woman squealed. He waved to her, and then turned 
to pose for a group taking his picture with their iPhones.

Kirkpatrick readily admits her campaign’s biggest challenge is to raise her 
public profile in the state. With less than 30 days to go before early voting 
begins , a new poll found 30.4% of likely Arizona voters did not know enough 
about Kirkpatrick to have an opinion of her. Only 7.8% of respondents said the 
same of McCain.

“She’s been running for 15 months and she’s just now running ads to introduce 
herself to voters,” said Jim Waring, a former McCain aide and and a state GOP 
senator. “With just 30 days before voting starts, I don’t see how you close 
that gap.”

Her campaign is running statewide ads and ramping up outreach in the 
metropolitan areas outside her district, mainly Phoenix and Tucson. One new ad 
tells the story of Kirkpatrick’s cowboy boots, which she bought with the money 
she earned working as a waitress in college and still wears. The boots are part 
of her “Arizona First” campaign message, meant to draw a contrast with McCain, 
who she said represents Washington.

McCain’s delicate dance with his party’s nominee is Kirkpatrick’s greatest 
line of attack, and she’s on the offensive.


“There was a time when McCain was a maverick and a straight talker,” 
Kirkpatrick said, counting herself among those who once supported the senator. 
She said his refusal to denounce Trump, especially afterhe questioned McCain’s 
heroism in Vietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/19/donald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-prisoner-of-war>
 andinsulted a Gold Star family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/30/donald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech>
, shows that 30-plus years in Washington has changed the man who built a 
reputation as someone who challenges party orthodoxy. The senator was captured 
and tortured as a prisoner of war.

“People can’t believe he didn’t stand up to Donald Trump when Donald Trump 
insulted him,” Kirkpatrick said. “People tell me, if he won’t stand up for 
himself, he won’t stand up for us.”

Democrats might be able to yoke some vulnerable Republican senators to Trump, 
but not McCain, says former Arizona senator Jon Kyl, a Republican who served 
alongside McCain.

“His cake is pretty well baked,” Kyl said of McCain’s reputation in the state. 
“The big question – and the one that could make a difference – is whether Trump 
has an impact on who shows up to vote. ”

Backlash to Trump has mobilized voter registration efforts in the state, 
especially among Latinos and young people who are more likely to register as 
Democrats or independents. Meanwhile, Clinton’s campaign has sensed an 
opportunity to win the state for the first time in two decades. Her campaign 
recently opened two new field offices and is launching a six-figure ad-buy, 
while the DNC isgrowing its presence 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/dnc-expands-footprint-arizona-georgia-utah-n641611>
 in the state as well.

Since winning their primary last month, McCain’s campaign has trained its fire 
on Kirkpatrick, labeling her “too liberal for Arizona” while pitching himself 
as the state’s best check against a liberal administration.

“Although she has spent her three unremarkable terms in Congress siding with 
her party bosses at every opportunity, Arizonans either don’t know her or don’t 
support her record of serving as a rubber stamp for the liberal establishment,” 
said Lorna Romero, a spokeswoman for McCain’s campaign, in an email.

But liberal isn’t how Kirkpatrick’s constituents view her, says Fred Solop, a 
political scientist with Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff, though he 
noted that with a fundraising powerhouse and sky-high name recognition, McCain 
can certainly drive the narrative.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fann-kirkpatrick-arizona-democrat-john-mccain-senate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f93e339e0d3b5271b28f5433fe21a5df431e9c2%2F0_28_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arizona%20Democrat%20aims%20to%20unseat%20McCain%3A%20%E2%80%98Nobody%20in%20DC%20thinks%20I%E2%80%99ll%20win%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fann-kirkpatrick-arizona-democrat-john-mccain-senate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arizona%20Democrat%20aims%20to%20unseat%20McCain%3A%20%E2%80%98Nobody%20in%20DC%20thinks%20I%E2%80%99ll%20win%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fann-kirkpatrick-arizona-democrat-john-mccain-senate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f93e339e0d3b5271b28f5433fe21a5df431e9c2%2F0_28_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Ann Kirkpatrick at a Navajo Nation parade. Photograph: Courtesy of Ann 
Kirkpatrick 
“Her reputation in the district and her actual voting record are fairly 
moderate,” Solop said. “She has worked across the aisle and has broken with the 
Obama camp on multiple occasions.”

From the sidelines of the parade route, Wilfred Segodi watched his children 
dive to catch the pieces of candy Kirkpatrick’s team tossed as they passed.


Segodi, a Democrat from Many Farms, Arizona, said he hadn’t heard of 
Kirkpatrick before and planned to vote for McCain in November.

“He’s been there the longest,” Segodi said matter-of-factly. “We know we can 
count on him.”

On the opposite side of the road, Danita Ryan, of Flagstaff, cheered 
enthusiastically for Kirkpatrick’s float. Ryan said she was especially 
motivated to vote this year because of Trump, who she finds dangerous and 
offensive.Despite not knowing much about the Democrat, Ryan said she plans to 
vote for Kirkpatrick for one simple reason.

“She’s not John McCain,” Ryan said. “I think it’s time for some new blood in 
Congress.”

Meet the challenger

Ann Kirkpatrick was born in 1950 in the small town of Whiteriver, part of the 
White Mountain Apache Indian Reservation in eastern Arizona.

Though her family is not of Native American ancestry, her parents both found 
work in Whiteriver and decided to stay and raise a family there. Her father ran 
the local general store and her mother taught public school.

“I thought I was Apache for a long time,” Kirkpatrick said. Like the other 
children in her town, Kirkpatrick learned to ride a horse and speak Apache. She 
later learned Navajo and Mandarin and is conversational in Spanish, French and 
Greek.

Growing up, Kirkpatrick said she never dreamed one day she might become a 
lawyer or legislator – and certainly not a US senator. “I wanted to have 12 
kids and be a mom,” Kirkpatrick said sheepishly. “I was told that girls don’t 
go to college.”

But Kirkpatrick did go to college, at the University of Arizona in Tucson, and 
after a brief interlude working as a teacher, she returned for law school. 
After graduation, Kirkpatrick she became Coconino County’s deputy county 
attorney, the first woman to hold the position. It’s a distinction that would 
have resonance if she wins in November.

Despite electing four female governors, Arizona has never sent a woman to the 
Senate – a fact Kirkpatrick said didn’t cross her mind until after she entered 
the race.

“My husband and I were on a long drive and I said: ‘Has there been a woman 
senator in Arizona?’ And he said: ‘Well, your question is your answer.’”

In 2004, Kirkpatrick said she hadn’t considered politics when a group of 
friends and community leaders invited her to lunch and encouraged her to run 
for the state legislature.

“I never had thought about running for office,” Kirkpatrick said, but her 
friends persisted.

“They said: ‘We know your background, we think you can bridge both cultures, 
can you run?’” she said, adding with a noticeable hint of pride: “Nobody 
thought I’d win, but I did.”

Kirkpatrick seems to like playing the underdog. 

“All my life I’ve been told I can’t do things and I’ve overcome all those 
obstacles,” Kirkpatrick said.

In 2008, she won her first congressional race, becoming the US representative 
for her district. Two years later, she lost in a rough-and-tumble race against 
Republican challenger, Paul Gosar, the congressman who made national headlines 
when he boycotted Pope Francis’s address to lawmakers last year.

The district was redrawn, and Kirkpatrick ran again in 2012. She won that race 
and returned to Capitol Hill. Not long after, she and Gosar traded rivalry for 
camaraderie. Together they teamed up on a handful of bills and earned the
distinction 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2013/08/ann-kirkpatrick-paul-gosar-arizona-095651>
 “oddest couple in Congress”.

In May 2015, Kirkpatrick surprised Arizona’s political establishment when she 
announced she would challenge McCain in what would be his sixth and possibly 
last election.

“Ann loves Arizona – she is very kind and she’s very warm,” said Frias, her 
former chief of staff. “But anybody that doubts Ann’s ability to stand up for 
herself and go toe to toe with anyone, including a sitting senator, is deeply 
underestimating her.”
 