
After reaching a peak for the year last week, shares in Arm have been sliding 
back ahead of its first quarter results next Wednesday.

The chip designer is down 22.5p or 2% at 985.5p in early trading on Friday, 
amid a slowdown in the smartphone market. Analysts said there was little 
expectation that the company would unveil anything at its results which would 
boost sentiment. Broker Stifel issued a hold recommendation, with analyst Lee 
Simpson saying:

We continue to see Arm as a high quality tech story, but with little risk of 
new fundamental upside catalysts for the second and third quarter of 2016. 
Sales growth is still evident (up 18%/10% in 2016/2017), and we see scope for 
outperformance on..consensus, although mainly on dollar strength (the dollar 
strengthened 6%-7% versus the pound since last quarter).

The slowing growth in smartphones is well known now and is mitigated by a 
strong product cycle (64 bit CPUs). Networking markets share is expanding, but 
costs are rising (especially for servers, Internet of Things). Given our only 
small rise in estimates (mainly in line with foreign exchange), we maintain our 
hold rating.

Simpson added:

We think investors are only marginally less concerned with the smartphone unit 
growth slowdown in 2016 (Stifel estimate only around 4% unit growth this year 
to 1.49bn), but we don’t think future Arm value is in question. Post MWC [last 
month’s Mobile World Congress in Barcelona], we think Arm has little new to say 
for the near term other than comfort with consensus and a need to keep ticking 
up operating expenditure levels for longer-term investment and hiring. That 
said, we still think a lot of work is on-going for the mid-to long-term promise 
and still believe the business sits well relative to this (Networking, Internet 
of Things, Machine Intelligence, etc.).
 