
ARM <https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> Holdings has agreed to 
be sold to Japan’s SoftBank for £24.3bn, in a deal that will see Britain’s most 
successful technology company transferred to foreign ownership to capitalise on 
the growth of “the internet of things”.

The Cambridge-based group, whose microchips are used in the iPhone and more 
than 95% of all smartphones, said its board would recommend the all-cash deal 
to shareholders.

SoftBank will pay £17 a share – 43% more than ARM’s closing share price on 
Friday and 41% more than ARM’s all-time high closing share price. ARM 
shareholders will also received an interim dividend of 3.78p a share.

ARM share price 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jul/2016-07-18T14:30:56/embed.html>
The deal will trigger multimillion pound windfalls for many ARM board members, 
including the chief executive, Simon Segars, whose shares are worth more than 
£11m, and the chief operating officer, Mike Muller, whose stake is valued at 
£21m.

SoftBank's ARM deal shows Masayoshi Son is in no rush to retire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/softbank-arm-deal-masayoshi-son-retirement-technology>
SoftBank said buying ARM would help make it a leader in the nascent internet 
of things <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet-of-things>, which 
enables objects such as fridges, cars and buildings to collect and exchange 
data.

Although ARM is best known for its link to the iPhone, fewer than half the 
15bn microchips produced to its design last year were used in smartphones. The 
rest were used in the many everyday devices that now require processing power, 
such as washing machines and televisions.

Stuart Chambers, the chairman of ARM, said: “This is a compelling offer for 
ARM shareholders, which secures the delivery of future value today and in cash. 
The board of ARM is reassured that ARM will remain a very significant UK 
business and will continue to play a key role in the development of new 
technology.”


If the deal goes through, the acquisition will deliver one of Britain’s most 
successful companies into overseas hands. Theresa May’s new Conservative 
governmenthas promised to block foreign takeovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/14/putting-the-industry-back-into-departmental-business>
 if they harm the public interest but ARM and SoftBank had discussions with the 
government before the announcement.

The deal was hailed by the new chancellor, Philip Hammond, who said: “Just 
three weeks after the referendum decision, it shows that Britain has lost none 
of its allure to international investors. Britain is open for business – and 
open to foreign investment.”


What is the Internet of Things and how does ARM fit in?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/18/what-is-the-internet-of-things-arm-holdings-softbank>
He added: “Softbank’s decision confirms that Britain remains one of the most 
attractive destinations globally for investors to create jobs and wealth. And 
as ARM’s founders will testify, this is the greatest place in the world to 
start and grow a technology business.”

SoftBank, whose business spans telecoms, the internet and robot technology, 
has promised to at least double ARM’s UK workforce of 1,600 and to increase 
headcount outside the UK over the next five years. ARM, which employs 4,064 
people worldwide, will keep its Cambridge base and top management and will 
operate as an independent business, SoftBank said.

ARM shares rose 43% to £16.99, in line with the offer price, suggesting 
investors see a rival bid as unlikely given the hefty premium and commitments 
made by SoftBank to secure an agreed deal.

 The deal would be one of the largest in European technology to date, and 
SoftBank’s largest ever, bigger than the £17bn acquisition of a controlling 
stake in wireless operator Sprint in 2013, a deal that left the group with 
hefty debts. SoftBank said it would pay for the acquisition out of existing 
cash and a loan arrangement with Japan’s Mizuho Bank.

ARM: Britain's most successful tech company you've never heard of
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/29/arm-cambridge-britain-tech-company-iphone>
 SoftBank made its offer less than a month after the Japanese group’s founder, 
Masayoshi Son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/softbank-arm-deal-masayoshi-son-retirement-technology>
, scrapped plans to leave the company. He said at the time he wanted to develop 
Sprint and complete the transformation of SoftBank into an internet investment 
powerhouse.

Son said: “ARM will be an excellent strategic fit within the SoftBank group as 
we invest to capture the very significant opportunities provided by the 
internet of things. This investment also marks our strong commitment to the UK 
and the competitive advantage provided by the deep pool of science and 
technology talent in Cambridge.”

The deal comes weeks after Britain voted to leave the EU, battering sterling 
and strengthening the yen. However, the rise in ARM’s share price since 23 June 
has more than offset the weakened pound.


A spokesman said the deal made ARM 7% more expensive for SoftBank. 

SoftBank bought UK imaging specialist Apical earlier this year, a company that 
specialises in technology to allow computers to analyse images – replicating 
human vision using software.
 