
Workers at ARM <https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> Holdings, 
Britain’s biggest technology company, could share a payout worth almost £400m 
if Japanese group SoftBank completes its takeover attempt.

Small print in SoftBank’s offer for ARM shows that 22.4m outstanding share 
awards have been granted in employee incentive schemes at the British company.

Given that SoftBanks’s bid is priced at £17 per share, this means that ARM 
employees could share as much as £380m, although the timing of the payout is 
likely to be spread out and could be used to encourage talented engineers to 
stay at the company.

ARM employs 1,600 people in Cambridge, where its headquarters is located, and 
about 4,000 worldwide. Some of the biggest share awards would be made to 
executives at ARM, who are also part of separate incentive schemes. Simon 
Segars, chief executive, could collect £11m, while Mike Muller, the chief 
technology officer, is in line for £21m. The potential payout for employeeswas 
first reported by the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/business/arm-managers-to-make-millions-from-takeover-05wkppxlr>
 (paywall).

The £24.3bn takeover of ARM Holdings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
 could yet be in doubt after investors in SoftBank gave it the thumbs down.

Shares in SoftBank fell by more than 10% in Japan on Tuesday as investors and 
analysts expressed concerns about theprice of the deal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/tech-giant-arm-holdings-sold-to-japanese-firm-for-24bn>
and the increasing debt of the telecoms and tech group.

The acquisition of ARM would be the biggest deal yet for SoftBank and its 
charismatic founder,Masayoshi Son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/softbank-arm-deal-masayoshi-son-retirement-technology>
, but SoftBank already has $113bn (£86bn) of debt. “A fresh acquisition is not 
what the market wants from SoftBank,” Mitsushige Akino, the chief fund manager 
at Ichiyoshi Asset Management, told Reuters. “It’s Mr Son’s style to keep 
expanding, but isn’t he stretching too much?”

Hermann Hauser, who helped to found ARM in 1990, said that SoftBank’s debt 
mountain meant that some of the money earned by ARM could be used to pay 
interest or reduce debt, rather than be invested back in the company. “If [ARM 
were] allowed to remain independent, all that cash could be ploughed into 
further development, now some of it will have to be spent on servicing debt,” 
Hauser said.


Son dismissed concerns from SoftBank shareholders at a press conference in 
London on Monday. “If the investors do not like it, they will sell,” he said. 
“I am the largest shareholder in SoftBank. I share the same interest as the 
other shareholders.”

Later, in a conference call with investors, Son invoked Star Wars to try to 
persuade them to back his plan and invest in SoftBank. “If you listen to the 
force, this is the best company to invest in the debt,” he said.

Son owns 19% of SoftBank and has faced criticism about his deals before, 
notably in October 2012 when the company revealed a $22bn plan to take control 
of US mobile phone network Sprint. This was the last time that SoftBank’s 
shares fell as heavily as they did on Tuesday, when they closed down 10.3% to 
¥5,387 (£34.70), their lowest since March.

Neil Campling, an analyst at Northern Trust Capital Markets, said Apple, 
Intel, Qualcomm, Microsoft and Google could emerge as rival bidders for ARM. 
“Softbank themselves did a poor job explaining the rationale on the conference 
call in our view and it seems to have been an opportunistic strike.

“ARM is an awesome asset we think and, if they execute and keep the culture as 
promised then, in 10 years time it may look to be a masterstroke. But short 
term is a different matter.

“The other thing is: there is no break-up fee, no lock in. ARM has opened the 
doors to a counter in our view. And the more we think about it the more likely 
and sensible it is for others to run the rule over this.”
 