
The little robot makes odd beeps as it spins around the room, detecting fires 
with its thermal sensors and extinguishing flames with a strong blast of air.

Its mission accomplished, the beeps die down and the machine comes to an 
abrupt halt.

Rather than being the brainchild of experienced engineers in a hi-tech lab, 
the firefighter robot was designed by Armenian schoolboys Rafael and Sahak 
Sahakyan – brothers aged 18 and 14.

It is one of several inventions to come out of Armenia’s youth robotics 
programme, which aims to establish engineering groups in every school by 2019. 
Already there are 121 after-school clubs, catering for pupils between 12 and 18.

The government hopes the scheme will improve the quality of engineering 
education and encourage inventors of the future.

At the brothers’ school in Gyumri, one of the poorest cities in Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>, more than 20 pupils gather after 
lessons every week to design and create robots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Farmenia-robotics-school-pupil-engineers-reinvent-the-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ed9729f774b8e1d0174dca16bee434ae7110c85%2F57_7_1832_1099%2F1832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Armenia's%20school%20pupil%20engineers%20seek%20to%20reinvent%20the%20robot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Farmenia-robotics-school-pupil-engineers-reinvent-the-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Armenia%27s%20school%20pupil%20engineers%20seek%20to%20reinvent%20the%20robot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Farmenia-robotics-school-pupil-engineers-reinvent-the-robot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ed9729f774b8e1d0174dca16bee434ae7110c85%2F57_7_1832_1099%2F1832.jpg>
 Rafael and Sahak Sahakyan with their firefighter robot. Photograph: Suren 
Stepanyan 
“When I was little, every day my friends would go out after school to play 
football while I would go home and take apart electrical gadgets to find out 
how they worked,” says Rafael Sahakyan.

His dedication bore fruit. The brothers’ invention will be entered into 
Armenia’s annual robotics contest, in which schoolchildren from across the 
country compete against each other.

Instructor Rafael Hekimyan said the project helps children develop independent 
thinking and will breed a new generation of engineers.

“For a country like Armenia which does not have great natural resources, 
information technology is a good opportunity to develop the economy,” he said.

The Union of Information Technology Enterprises, which runs the scheme, said 
the initiative had grown from a few experimental groups into a national 
programme.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Farmenia-robotics-school-pupil-engineers-reinvent-the-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9bd8e7e0855d85f533b1653d0a17151766d7e2%2F142_121_2780_1668%2F2780.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Armenia's%20school%20pupil%20engineers%20seek%20to%20reinvent%20the%20robot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Farmenia-robotics-school-pupil-engineers-reinvent-the-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Armenia%27s%20school%20pupil%20engineers%20seek%20to%20reinvent%20the%20robot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Farmenia-robotics-school-pupil-engineers-reinvent-the-robot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9bd8e7e0855d85f533b1653d0a17151766d7e2%2F142_121_2780_1668%2F2780.jpg>
 Armenian schoolchildren compete at the national stage of World Robot Olympiad. 
Photograph: PanARMENIAN Photo Agency 
“Many parents asked us to expand the programme, as they could see the benefits 
for children,” said Karen Vardanyan, the union’s executive director.

To develop the software the clubs use the Scratch and Turtle programming 
languages, with open source code created by Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology.

“Scratch is a free programming language and online community where you can 
create your own interactive stories, games, and animations,” said Vardanyan.

Emil Tarasyan, the deputy economy minister, said the clubs solved several 
problems at once.

“The government has proclaimed IT to be a priority sector for Armenia but to 
fulfil this potential we need properly trained professionals,” he said. “That 
is why we are focusing on school-age children. We think the 12 to 18 age group 
is the best to target.”

Rafael and Sahak Sahakyan, who are from a family of engineers, built their 
robot together. Rafael was responsible for programming the software while his 
younger brother made the hardware.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Farmenia-robotics-school-pupil-engineers-reinvent-the-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febd719ac03059431751b19768cb19eeedc5fb04a%2F264_119_1549_929%2F1549.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Armenia's%20school%20pupil%20engineers%20seek%20to%20reinvent%20the%20robot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Farmenia-robotics-school-pupil-engineers-reinvent-the-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Armenia%27s%20school%20pupil%20engineers%20seek%20to%20reinvent%20the%20robot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Farmenia-robotics-school-pupil-engineers-reinvent-the-robot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febd719ac03059431751b19768cb19eeedc5fb04a%2F264_119_1549_929%2F1549.jpg>
 Rafael Sahakyan shows a friend the secrets of coding. Photograph: Suren 
Stepanyan 
“It wasn’t easy,” says Sahak. “We had to give a life to an inanimate piece of 
iron. Every day we tried new solutions to improve the robot. We had many 
failures but we hope to perfect in the next few months to enter the 
competition.”

Armenians step up their demands in a fourth summer of protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/30/armenia-hostage-police-station-fourth-summer-of-protest>
Top inventions from Armenian school clubs

1. A mine-sweeper robot that can detect and detonate unexploded mines 


2. Cleaner robots that can pick up litter

3. A firefighter robot with thermal sensors that can locate and extinguish 
flames

4. The first-aid robot that delivers medical supplies in dangerous conditions

5. A line-follower robot <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lJqSpM5CsHA> that 
traces a specified route.
 