
That thousands of Yerevan residents should take to the streets, as they have 
done every day this past week, is no real surprise. It is, after all, the 
fourth summer in a row that mass protests have gripped the Armenian capital.

In 2013, demonstrators protested price hikes 
<http://www.eurasianet.org/node/67312> for public transportation. In 2014 it 
was pension reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/10/thousands-protest-against-government-armenia>
. In 2015, what started as a protest against higher electricity bills became 
the so-calledElectric Yerevan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/01/armenia-yerevan-electricity-protests-russia>
 movement that Russian state-controlled media hyperbolically compared to 
Ukraine’s Maidan.

Armenian police clash with demonstrators as hostage stand-off continues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/armenia-police-clash-demonstrators-hostage-drama>
But this summer’s protest is different – not so much in form, but in 
character. No longer are the demands social and economic; now the ultimatum is 
regime change. Yerevan residents are rallying to voice their support for an
armed militant group that seized a police station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/armenia-police-clash-demonstrators-hostage-drama>
 in the Erebuni district on July 17.

The militants are demanding the release of all political prisoners and the 
resignation of the president, Serzh Sargsyan. They call themselves “the Sassoun 
daredevils” after the title of a medieval Armenian epic about the strongmen of 
Sassoun – a historic region of the country – and their struggle against Arab 
invaders.

Among these latter-day daredevils are two heroes of the 1992-1994 Karabakh war 
between Armenia andAzerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> – 
Pavlik Manukyan and Araik Khandoyan. Both are renowned throughout Armenia and 
the international Armenian diaspora.

Most daredevils members support The Founding Parliament movement 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/armenia-founding-parliament-explainer-sefilian/27865671.html>
, the main opposition force in the country. One of their first demands was the 
release of Jirair Sefilian, leader of The Founding Parliament, who was arrested 
in June.

A consensus has formed that the authorities use their monopoly on violence for 
personal gain

The daredevils released all their hostages on 23 July on the condition that a 
press centre be erected in the compound they control. But the authorities 
responded in the usual way for a former Soviet republic.

 State-controlled television made no mention of the takeover of the police 
station for the first two days. Police dispersed supporters with excessive 
force. Video cameras captured riot police kicking demonstrators who had fallen 
to the ground.

Road workers suddenly decided to lay new asphalt in front of the presidential 
palace and all official government spokespeople seemingly disappeared. Only on 
22 July, five days after the armed conflict began, did a notice appear on the 
president’s website condemning the militants.

Two days ago it was reported that the militants had once again taken in 
hostages, though this information is disputed and difficult to verify.

The national security service has called the takeover a terrorist attack, but 
the number of Armenians who disagree with that assessment is growing daily.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Farmenia-hostage-police-station-fourth-summer-of-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2be3449162cb6be5126d68dacc08f1032675bfad%2F0_307_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Armenians%20step%20up%20their%20demands%20in%20a%20fourth%20summer%20of%20protest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Farmenia-hostage-police-station-fourth-summer-of-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Armenians%20step%20up%20their%20demands%20in%20a%20fourth%20summer%20of%20protest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Farmenia-hostage-police-station-fourth-summer-of-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2be3449162cb6be5126d68dacc08f1032675bfad%2F0_307_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Police officers detain a protesters during demonstration in Yerevan 
Photograph: Reuters 
There is a deep aversion to violence in the country. The bloody ethnic 
conflict with neighbouring Azerbaijan and theterrorist attack against the 
parliament <https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/oct/29/iantraynor> in 1999, 
when masked gunmen killed eight deputies, is still fresh in people’s minds. Yet 
many Armenians have come round to supporting the daredevils.

Armenia is also too small for corruption and crime to remain hidden. A 
consensus has formed that the authorities use their monopoly on violence for 
personal gain. People remember how President Serzh Sargsyan came to power by 
suppressingmass protests that followed presidential elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/20/4> in 2008. They remember how 
police used force to disperse the protesters, causing the deaths of eight 
demonstrators and one soldier.

The Founding Parliament movement has never advocated the use of force to 
achieve a regime change, and the seizure of the police station seems to be a 
gesture of despair from some of their veteran members.

For years, Jirair Sefilian and his supporters took to the streets with 
placards, recorded video messages, traveled around the country in caravans and 
used every possible peaceful means of protest available. As a result, they were 
arrested, given hefty prison sentences and beaten by people in civilian clothes.

Armenia celebrates 25 years of independence in 2016, although it is difficult 
to find a single citizen who would characterise the country as free and 
independent. According to official statistics, more than 600,000 people 
emigrated fromArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia> during those 
years; unofficially, it may have been as many as a million.

Like Ukraine, Armenia was slated to sign an association agreement creating a 
free-trade zone with Europe in November 2013, but after a closed meeting with 
Vladimir Putin in Moscow, Sargsyan announced that he was rejecting integration 
withEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in favour of joining 
the Russian-led Eurasian Economic Union.

Azerbaijan-Armenia conflict: patriotism prevails on both sides
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/azerbaijan-armenia-nagorno-karabakh-patriotism-prevails-on-both-sides>
Over the past decade, Armenia has handed Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> control over many of its strategic 
facilities, including the Armenian nuclear power plant, Armsberbank (the state 
bank that later became a branch of Russia’s VTB bank), the Hrazdan thermal 
power plant, and many other assets.

And yet, over the past five years, Russia has sold Azerbaijan, Armenia’s main 
foreign enemy, weapons worth more than $4bn 
<https://themoscowtimes.com/articles/russia-will-continue-selling-weapons-to-azerbaijan-and-armenia-rogozin-52489>
. Azerbaijan used those Russian weapons during a four-day clash with Armenia in 
April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/03/azerbaijan-armenia-conflict-europe-instability-nagorno-karabakh>
 that resulted in the deaths of more than 100 Armenian soldiers.

A consensus is forming in Armenian society that corruption and the 
authoritarian regime are the main problems facing the country, and that they 
are destroying the economy and threatening Armenia’s sovereignty. The 
groundswell of support for the Sassoun daredevils, taking in everyone from 
retirees to youth carrying smartphones, is an indication that the ruling elites 
are not in for an easy ride.

Grigor Atanesian is editor of Russian Esquire. This article first appeared on 
The Moscow Times 
<https://themoscowtimes.com/news/armenia-revolts-forget-social-protest-people-demand-regime-change-54745>

 