
Hollywood studio 20th Century Fox has denied reports that Arnold 
Schwarzenegger will play the main villain in James Cameron's Avatar sequel 
<http://variety.com/2013/film/news/fox-denies-arnold-schwarzenegger-avatar-2-rumor-1200615471/>
.

The occasionally incisive Latino Review blog said on Monday 
<http://latino-review.com/2013/09/exclusive-guess-who-is-gonna-play-the-bad-guy-in-avatar-2/>
 that the former governor of California would reunite with hisTerminator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/88018/terminator> director on the 
long-gestating followup to thehighest-grossing movie of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/131170/avatar>. Cameron is planning 
three new films set in the same solar system as the forest moon of Pandora, 
where the action took place in his 2009 box-office megalith.

"No truth to this," a Fox representative told Variety. However, the trade 
bible said casting had just got under way for the new film, and Schwarzenegger 
might still be on a list of potential stars.

More established Hollywood sites routinely rubbish scoops by upstart rivals in 
the blogosphere. More often than not they turn out to be right to do so, but 
Latino Review has occasionally struck gold in the past. While the site 
predicted recently that Christian Bale would return as Batman for a sequel to
Man of Steel <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148371/man-of-steel> (the 
role eventually went to Ben Affleck), it correctly revealed thatMarvel Studios' 
next film would be based on the Guardians of the Galaxy comic 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/marvel-movies-iron-man-3-guardians-galaxy-leak-352022>
 before the film company officially announced it last year.

Meanwhile, Schwarzenegger has been joined by Kelsey Grammer in the next 
instalment of Sly Stallone's enduringly popular 80s action throwback sagaThe 
Expendables <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/131950/expendables>. 
Grammer will portray Bonaparte, an ex-mercenary who helps the Expendables in 
their mission, in The Expendables III. According to Deadline, the role was 
originally earmarked for Nicolas Cage.

Grammer, the former star of TV comedies Cheers and Frasier, will join an 
ensemble cast that already 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/09/kelsey-grammer-joins-beefcake-brigade-in-the-expendables-3/>
 includes Stallone, Jason Statham, Harrison Ford, Mel Gibson, Antonio Banderas, 
Jet Li, Dolph Lundgren and Wesley Snipes.
 