
Just weeks after it was announced that art history A-level was to be dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/12/last-art-history-a-level-axed-after-michael-gove-cull-of-soft-subjects>
 – an act described by the historian Simon Schama as“a big dull axe wielded by 
cultural pygmies” <https://twitter.com/simon_schama/status/786315776244539392> 
– the government has said that the qualification will be saved after all.

Goodbye art history A-level, you served the elite well | Jonathan Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/art-history-a-level-subject-private-schools-kenneth-clark>
An array of leading figures from the art world, including artists Anish 
Kapoor, Jeremy Deller and Cornelia Parker, as well as the Tate gallery’s 
director, Nicholas Serota, lined up to offer warm words welcoming Thursday’s 
reprieve. “[It is] a huge relief to hear this news,” said Kapoor. “Art and art 
history are the study of what inspires and guides the poetic in us. How could 
we imagine an education without them?”

“A good day for art and culture,” said Deller, who has said that the subject 
was his favourite A-level. “Art history is the study of power, politics, 
identity and humanity. It makes perfect sense to keep the exam.”

“As a working-class girl, receiving free school dinners, I studied art 
history,” said Parker. “It has hugely enriched my life and career, and 
hopefully those of countless students I passed the knowledge on to, during the 
15 years I spent teaching at art school. Now more than ever, as we face Brexit, 
we have to fully understand what our cultural capital is and how we can best 
use it. We should be widening our cultural knowledge, not shrinking it.”

Dr Gabriele Finaldi, director of the National Gallery, said: “The arts are one 
of the great strengths of the UK and I am pleased that A-level provision in art 
history will not be interrupted for students starting sixth form in 2017. The 
National Gallery is keen to work with schools that already offer, or are 
thinking of introducing, the history of art in their teaching.”

And from Charles Saumarez Smith, secretary and chief executive of the Royal 
Academy: “On behalf of the Royal Academy of Arts and the royal academicians, we 
are delighted that the art history A-level exam has been saved. Art history 
teaches rigorous analytical skills and requires students to engage not only 
with art but with history, literature, politics, languages and the sciences.”


There was somewhat less excitement about the news that the statistics A-level 
– also due for the chop, but without the high-profile fan base – will also be 
retained. What’s more, archaeology A-level – also due to be scrapped – remains 
dead and buried, despite the best efforts ofTony Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/17/scrapping-archeology-classics-a-levels-barbaric-tony-robinson>
, wearing his Time Team hat.

The schools standards minister, Nick Gibb, announced in a written ministerial 
statement that new A-levels in art history and statistics are being developed 
by the Pearson exam board for teaching from next September. (Of archaeology, 
there was no mention.) “We believe there is value in having a broad range of 
high-quality choices available to A-level students, and our intention has 
always been that there should continue to be A-levels available in these two 
subjects,” said the minister. “I am therefore pleased that the Pearson exam 
board has confirmed that it intends to develop new AS andA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> in statistics and a new A-level 
in history of art for teaching from September 2017.”

Rod Bristow, president of Pearson in the UK, added: “The response from the 
public, from teachers and from young people shows many have a real passion for 
these subjects. We’re happy to help make sure they remain available.”

Pearson’s intervention follows widespread outrage across the art world and 
education sector when it emerged in October that AQA, the last exam board in 
England offering art history A-level, would bedropping the subject  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/12/last-art-history-a-level-axed-after-michael-gove-cull-of-soft-subjects>
from 2018.


There has been a low uptake – this summer just 839 students sat the A-level 
exam, which is only offered in a handful of state schools but is more widely 
available in the private sector. AQA, which had been trying to draw up a new 
specification as part of the government’s revised qualifications, pulled out 
saying there were too many difficulties establishing grade boundaries and 
finding examiners with enough experience.

In response, a star-studded campaign to save the threatened A-level, led by 
the Association of Art Historians with the support of the mighty Courtauld 
Institute of Art, the University of York, the National Gallery, Tate and the 
Royal Academy of Arts, was mobilised attracting enormous coverage.


Even a former education secretary Michael Gove, whom some have blamed for the 
threat to the art history A-level,rushed to its defence (and his own) on Twitter
 <https://twitter.com/michaelgove/status/786684609580892164?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
. He said its demise was nothing to do with his drive to improve rigour in 
qualifications; if properly taught, art history“stretches minds and expands 
sympathies,” 
<https://twitter.com/michaelgove/status/786686385134641152?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
he said.

Late on Thursday, as news of art history’s reprieve filtered through, a 
crestfallen Mike Heyworth, director of the Council for British Archaeology, 
could not hide his disappointment. “I don’t fully understand their reasoning as 
to why they’ve taken on these subjects but not archaeology. We think there’s a 
very strong case.”

Uptake of archaeology is even smaller than that of art history at A-level. 
Nevertheless campaigners on its behalf have collected 12,000 signatures calling 
for it to be given a stay of execution and Heyworth hopes to have a meeting 
with Pearson to discuss options. And archaeology’s chief cheerleader, Tony 
Robinson, is certainly not ready to give up the fight yet. “Venceremos!” he 
tweeted defiantly.

Jeremy Deller on his art history A-level
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fart-history-a-level-saved-from-being-axed-after-high-profile-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ab77a6f9293754ce871b85ded2c54b5d54933bb%2F0_300_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20history%20A-level%20saved%20after%20high-profile%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fart-history-a-level-saved-from-being-axed-after-high-profile-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20history%20A-level%20saved%20after%20high-profile%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fart-history-a-level-saved-from-being-axed-after-high-profile-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ab77a6f9293754ce871b85ded2c54b5d54933bb%2F0_300_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 British artist Jeremy Deller. Photograph: Stefano Rellandini/Reuters 
I studied art history as an extra A-level – my other subjects were English, 
economics and history. Art history was my favourite. It was a bit of a godsend.

'A miserable and short-sighted decision': readers defend axed art history 
A-level
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/13/a-miserable-and-short-sighted-decision-readers-defend-axed-art-history-a-level>
It wasn’t studied by many people at my school. There were four students in my 
class and one of the other students is now the director of the National Gallery 
(Dr Gabriele Finaldi).

The study of art history is the study of humanity. As a subject it was 
distinctive taught in a different way – a discipline that was about looking at 
things, rather than just rote learning of dates and quotations. It was more 
subjective and there was a lot more enjoyment in it because of that. It was a 
lot more grownup.

It’s given me a lot. I didn’t do art at school. We had an art department but I 
didn’t study art. This was my opportunity to get as close to art as possible 
without actually making it. It’s a subject that teaches you about the way ideas 
travel around the world. On me, at least, it has a positive, civilising 
influence.

Saving the art history A-level is a start but there’s a general narrowing of 
opportunity in the curriculum that cannot be a good thing. It’s something you 
would have expected 100 years ago – not now. We need to push for these other 
subjects to survive.

Archaeology [which has also fallen under the axe in the A-level curriculum, 
with no reprieve as yet] has never been more popular in terms of its profile in 
TV shows and interest in personal history and genealogy. There’s a huge hunger 
for these subjects. Why they should be taken off the curriculum is a mystery. 
It can only be about money.

Jeremy Deller was talking to Sally Weale 
 