
A beheading and a wedding; some lines from a song by Nico 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nico>; a satyr, a cherub and Queen Victoria’s pet 
Pekingese. The more I look (and there doesn’t seem all that much to see at 
first), the more Danh Vo’s art troubles me. Amid the exhibition’s reaches of 
elegant emptiness at theMarian Goodman gallery 
<http://www.mariangoodman.com/exhibitions/2015-01-15_danh-v/> in London are 
little islands of delicacy and violence, histories, blasphemies.

Given away by her father, the bride wore a gown of ivory satin, made with a 
fitted bodice embroidered with seed pearls. Her veil of rosepoint lace belonged 
to the bridegroom’s mother. The greyed, half-tone New York Times portrait shows 
MissBarbara Pierce 
<http://www.firstladies.org/biographies/firstladies.aspx?biography=42> looking 
like a movie star (it is December 1945), as she marriesGeorge Herbert Walter 
Bush <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/george-bush-senior> of the Naval Air 
Arm, the future president of the United States. The framed newspaper cutting 
goes otherwise unexplained.

Talking in the gallery before the show’s opening, Vo 
<http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/exhibitions/past/exhibit/5488> remarked 
that he found the newspaper notice in Bush’s presidential archive. He likes 
such places, Vo said, and the bride looks beautiful.

A collector, a rummager and a bricoleur, Vo is an arranger of ruins and 
fragments. There are stories and connections here, but Vo prefers to let the 
fragments speak for themselves. This is frustrating, as everything in his work 
has a story at least as complicated as his own. His family escaped from Vietnam 
in 1979, in a boat built by the artist’s father, Phung Vo, when Danh was four. 
Rescued at sea by a Danish merchant ship, the family ended up in Copenhagen. Vo 
will represent Denmark at the next Venice Biennale.

Near the gallery entrance hangs a hand-drawn copy of an 1861 letter that an 
imprisoned French catholic missionary, St Jean Théophane Vénard, wrote to his 
father from Tonkin, in Vietnam, days before his execution.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjan%2F21%2Fdanh-vo-marian-goodman-gallery-review-encounter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421857000534%2Fb03f15ab-bd08-4fa7-9770-f6b805c9b8eb-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20among%20the%20ruins%3A%20Danh%20Vo's%20perverse%20empires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjan%2F21%2Fdanh-vo-marian-goodman-gallery-review-encounter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20among%20the%20ruins%3A%20Danh%20Vo%27s%20perverse%20empires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjan%2F21%2Fdanh-vo-marian-goodman-gallery-review-encounter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421857000534%2Fb03f15ab-bd08-4fa7-9770-f6b805c9b8eb-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Untitled (2015) Last letter by St. Jean Théophane Vénard to his father before 
he was decapitated, copied by Danh Vo’s father, Phung Vo. 
At the time, Vénard was being kept in a cage. His handwritten letter, in 
beautiful script, has been copied out by the artist’s father, who does not read 
French and who scrupulously reproduced it in blue ink, by hand, as though he 
were copying a drawing. He has copied it many times and, for the sum of €300, 
mails it to anyone who purchases this unlimited Danh Vo edition.

“A slight sabre-cut will separate my head from my body,” Vénard writes, “like 
the spring flower which the Master of the garden gathers for His pleasure. We 
are all flowers planted on this earth, which God plucks in His own good time: 
some a little sooner, some a little later … I, poor little moth, go first. 
Adieu”.By all accounts, Vénard was brave to the last 
<http://catholicfire.blogspot.co.uk/2009/11/saint-of-day-st-jean-theophane-venard.html>
.

Phung Vo accompanied his son to London, and has also drawn, in large gothic 
script, a few lines from the late German singer Nico’s 1970 songAfraid 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kqT4ELCNgiA> (from the album Desertshore) on 
the gallery floor. As the show goes on, the thin pencil lines will become 
scuffed and erased as people walk over them. I hardly noticed them at first: 
“Cease to know or to tell or to see or to be your own/ Have someone else’s will 
as your own”.Nico’s song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jj5ocuIKGH0> has been 
covered by Antony Hegarty and Throbbing Gristle. In Vo’s work too, what goes 
around comes around, in unlikely ways.

There are cuts everywhere – dismemberments, separations, reconciliations, 
marriages of objects and images. They form unlikely conjunctions. There’s more 
than one kind of wedding.

Here is a 2nd-century marble torso of Apollo, sliced lengthways using a 
diamond saw, and wedged into an old wooden crate whose sides bear the logo of 
Carnation milk. The smooth, cut surface of the torso has that same glistening, 
creamy whiteness as evaporated milk. This may be happenstance. Tins of the milk 
were crated up and shipped around the world from the US at the beginning of the 
20th century. It came, Carnation said, from contented cows. Vo loved it as a 
child. In a similar crate, this time for Johnny Walker whisky, sits part of a 
wooden, 17th-century cherub’s head.

Empires drank the whisky and supped the sickly milk. Neither are the ambrosia 
their manufacturers would have us believe. Both have colonised the world. 
Colonisation and migration are themes throughout Vo’s work. This includes 
Catholicism (Vo’s parents and grandparents are Catholics), hence the gothic, 
ruined carved Madonna, whose crowned bust sits on a little shelf of discarded 
plywood, balanced upon a pair of legs from a 2,000-year-old Roman marble 
sculpture of a child. Alarmingly, this little confection is calledYour Mother 
Sucks Cocks in Hell <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rxofWN8BAoc>, perhaps the 
most offensive line from William Friedkin’s 1973 movieThe Exorcist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-exorcist>, spoken by a demonically 
possessed Catholic child. The Virgin’s face looks deathly, staring out on to 
the street from the window ledge where she sits.

Another line from Friedkin’s movie, “Dimmy, why you do this to me? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=heQVL2u4AfQ>”, is the title of an amalgam of 
the hips and buttocks of a Roman satyr and the lower part of the same Madonna’s 
worm-eaten oak torso. The last flakes of the blue and red paint that once 
adorned her nestle here and there in the fissured wood, an ungainly dark mass 
on smooth marble legs. The satyr has at some point been castrated. Only the 
testicles remain. This perverse, sacred and profane object stands on a polished 
steel plinth. The material disjunctions are as startling as their amalgamation.

Across the gallery is a copy of a 19th-century photograph of a Pekingese dog, 
one of several rescued (if that is quite the word) by British and French 
soldiers who looted the Summer Palace in Beijing in 1860, during the second
opium war <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second_Opium_War>, after the emperor 
fled. The emperor’s aunt, who looked after the dogs, killed herself when the 
soldiers came.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjan%2F21%2Fdanh-vo-marian-goodman-gallery-review-encounter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421857133779%2F97bc383d-c032-4a94-b9d7-4274b1ce7658-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20among%20the%20ruins%3A%20Danh%20Vo's%20perverse%20empires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjan%2F21%2Fdanh-vo-marian-goodman-gallery-review-encounter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20among%20the%20ruins%3A%20Danh%20Vo%27s%20perverse%20empires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjan%2F21%2Fdanh-vo-marian-goodman-gallery-review-encounter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421857133779%2F97bc383d-c032-4a94-b9d7-4274b1ce7658-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Queen Victoria’s Pekingese, Looty 
One of five dogs, the first to be seen in the west, was given to Queen 
Victoria, who named it, with a certain wit, Looty 
<http://granitestudio.org/2009/03/26/looty-the-purloined-pekingese/>. In the 
photograph the dog sprawls on a chair, looking dumbfounded, or just plain dumb. 
Victoria received the dog around the time of the French missionary’s execution.

A constellation hangs suspended from the skylights and over the stairs: 
pitchforks, stirrups and horseshoes, a two-handed saw, a hoe that looks like a 
stooping falcon, iron traps, pincers from the forge, hinges. All these 
implements – one imagines their use in building a nation – hang between 
opened-up industrial cardboard boxes, emblazoned on one side with an earlier 
version of the American flag (with only 13 stars), and on the other with the 
corporate logos of Coca-Cola, Sony, Colgate and Coffee Mate. The flags and 
logos have all been picked out in gold. The cardboard flags turn lazily in the 
draught. You have to be careful not to clunk yourself in the face with the 
lower-hanging bits of ironware. As well as colonising the world with corporate 
brands, America colonised itself, building a nation and wreaking havoc on its 
natives and its ecology.

Back downstairs, a fragment of a fluted Roman column lies crosswise on its 
original base, the parts bundled together with the straps of the industrial 
sling that carted it in here, as if an attempt to hoist it erect had been 
abandoned. Thinking ofShelley’s sonnet Ozymandias 
<http://www.online-literature.com/shelley_percy/672/>, I look on and despair, 
standing on Nico’s desert shore.
 