
Art Spiegelman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/art-spiegelman> has called 
Russian bookstores’ decision to stop selling copies of Maus – his Pulitzer 
prize-winning graphic novel about the Holocaust – the “harbinger of a dangerous 
thing”, as authorities move to remove Nazi insignia ahead of the 70th 
anniversary of the allied victory in the second world war.

Moscow’s major bookstores have withdrawn copies of Spiegelman’s book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/27/russian-stores-pull-holocaust-graphic-novel-maus-over-swastika-on-cover>
 – which includes a Swastika on its cover – in an attempt to comply with a law 
banning Nazi propaganda. The 70th anniversary of Victory Day is 9 May.

“It’s a real shame because this is a book about memory,” Spiegelman told the 
Guardian. “We don’t want cultures to erase memory.”


Philip Pullman on Art Spiegelman's Complete Maus
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/18/fiction.art> 
Maus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/23/art-spiegelman-maus-25th-anniversary>
, which won a Pulitzer in 1992 and was published in Russian in 2013, is an
anti-fascist narrative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/18/fiction.art> about the Holocaust 
told through the memories of his father, a Polish Jew who moved to the United 
States. The novel portrays Jews as mice and Germans as cats.

The book’s removal is apparently in response to a recent crackdown by Russian 
authorities on Nazi insignia. In December,Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> passed a law forbidding “Nazi 
propaganda”, and since then authorities have reportedly raided toy stores and 
antique shops believed to carry the paraphernalia.

“I don’t think Maus was the intended target for this, obviously,” Spiegelman 
said. “But I think [the law] had an intentional effect of squelching freedom of 
expression in Russia. The whole goal seems to make anybody in the expression 
business skittish.”

Spiegelman said it was particularly ironic that an explicitly anti-fascist 
book should be swept up under the law. “Stalin, after getting us into helping 
start world war two … was probably responsible for making the Russians liberate 
a lot of those camps that helped my father survive,” the author said.

“A tip of the hat for Victory Day and a middle finger for trying to squelch 
expression,” he said.

Next week, Russia will celebrate the 70th anniversary of victory over Nazi 
Germany in the second world war with a Victory Day parade in Moscow.The US and 
many European nations have declined to attend the celebration over criticism of 
Russia’s role in the Ukraine conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/15/moscow-defiant-victory-day-parade-european-kim-jong-un-9-may-russia-ukraine>
.

Varvara Gornostayeva, the chief editor at Corpus, the book’s publisher, told 
AFP that major bookstore chains were taking it off their shelves and internet 
sites.

“There is no Nazi propaganda in it. This is a book that should be on the 
shelves on Victory Day,” Gornostayeva argued.

Spiegelman said that this was not the first time his book has faced 
censorship. When Maus was being published in German, he said his publicist had 
to find a way around a law that banned Swastikas on books that weren’t serious 
historical works. Spiegelman said he felt so strongly that the cover remain 
unchanged that he included this stipulation in all his publishing contracts.

In the end, Spiegelman’s publicist was able to convince the German culture 
ministry that the graphic novel was a serious work, and the book went on to be 
a success there, as well.

But Spiegelman said Russia should not to be singled out for censorship: “This 
is a terrible time to express oneself.”

He pointed to the attacks on Charlie Hebdo magazine in France and the exile of 
whistleblower Edward Snowden as examples of how freedom of speech is under 
threat in the west as well.

“I think of Snowden as one of the more important freedom-of-expression issues 
of our time,” he said. “A righteous whistleblower is being forced into exile … 
in a country that is far less able to allow free expression than the one he was 
trying to improve.”
 