
It was a dusty old shop, but the shelves were full of tins and one of them in 
particular appealed to me. I walked to the counter, waited for a shop assistant 
and, when no one came, I did a Winona and left.

A pretty ordinary incident, you might think, until you learn that the "shop" 
was an exhibit on the fringe of the Venice Biennale and that the tins bore 
labels advertising contents you do not find in the Bonanza store in Balham. 
There were cans of "hope", "unexpected joy", "strange despair", "compassion" 
and other interesting produce.

I'm not normally one for toilet jokes, but I'm afraid that the tin I wanted to 
buy contained a family-sized portion of "hard turd".

We decided that the point of the artwork was to suggest how consumerism 
packages everything, even the abstract, and puts it up for sale. But you can't 
can hope and you can't can passion (although you can can laughter). The artist 
was commenting on the way our aspirations are exploited and mangled by 
capitalism.

What was the significance of the lack of a shop assistant? Probably he had 
gone for lunch - it was in Italy after all - and we were therefore guilty of 
art theft.

The offending tin has sat among the Campbell soups in my cupboard ever since. 
Sometimes I produce it hoping to get a laugh, but I never do. I can't bring 
myself to throw it away - that would be like binning a book - and I don't 
expect they would want it down at the charity shop.

It occurred to me that you could, in theory, can a hard turd, and that, if the 
artist was enormously earnest, as many are, he or she (I never knew) might 
genuinely have crammed a concentrated stool into a tin.

Shaking it gives no clue, although I know the can contains something that is 
not liquid.

So there my hard turd sits, and every time I open the cupboard it challenges 
me. I need to get a drunk with a can opener.

Until then I shall continue to regret my incursion into shoplifting and art.
 