
Ceramics artist Richard Slee <http://www.richardslee.com/> once named Disney's 
Fantasia among his many inspirations. Brooms and buckets don't dance in his 
work – it's more like the sorcerer's apprentice has waved a wand around an 
animation cell and brought it to vivid 3D life. His creations are cartoonish – 
from an oversized wooden peg hammered into a tree stump, to black boots as 
smooth and round as giant eggs – and his glazes are impossibly lush.

Slee's love for cutesy characters and a high-gloss finish has often seen him 
aligned with pop art maestroJeff Koons 
<http://www.jeffkoons.com/site/index.html>. Yet his work has a resolutely 
British quality, more mantelpiece bric-a-brac than The Disney Store. 
Appropriated Rabbit, his lustrous tangerine-hued bunny with buck-teeth and 
half-moon eyes, is based on a jumble-sale find. Cheap and cheerful figurines 
have starred in a number of his works:Wheelbarrow of the Medusa 
<http://media.vam.ac.uk/vamembed/media/versions/uploads/new_images/70172-large_custom_290x353_04080497.jpg>
, where his daughter's cast-off ornaments are stacked up on a yellow ceramic 
wheelbarrow, riffs on the desperate survivors clinging to the raft in
Gericault's famous painting 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Raft_of_the_Medusa>.

Known as the "wizard of studio ceramics", over the last three decades Slee has 
emerged as one of British craft's most compelling figures, and has only 
recently focused his activities on the art world. Having immersed himself in 
the methods of 18th-century porcelain producers such as Wedgwood, he opened his 
first studio in 1980. But while his handcrafted forms are renowned for their 
exacting finesse, his output has been anything but traditional. The now 
destroyed Anvil, one stand-out work from the 80s, turned the blacksmith's 
striking block into a breakable ceramic target in a comment on the futility 
felt living under Margaret Thatcher amid socialism's ruins.

The slide "from utility to futility 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/people/r/richard-slee/>" (as his 2010 V&A show was 
titled) is a recurring concern. Slee's current London exhibition, Camp 
Futility, sees him turn a sensibility steeped in postwar suburbia to the lost 
world of America's frontiersmen and mining industries. Here, large black 
moustaches cover one wall like pantomime props. Beneath this a camp scene 
unfolds around a ceramic fire, whose smoke has turned solid and rises in a 
phallic plume. Saucy, suggestive shapes abound – from a long pink recorder by 
the fire to skewered sausages. Meanwhile, a series of saws on workbenches have 
ceramic handles in bright sky blue or midnight purple.

Pairing the mass-produced with the handmade, the functional with the ornate, 
Slee wryly suggests different kinds of fragility and obsolescence, particularly 
of masculinity built on DIY. Gorgeous they may be, but the decorative surfaces 
and sexual throb speak of buried frustrations.

Why we like him: For his jaunty bit of social satire, Acid Toby 
<http://ualresearchonline.arts.ac.uk/696/1.haslightboxThumbnailVersion/Acid-toby-400.jpg>
, a traditional British Toby Jug sporting the yellow smiley face of the rave 
era.

Getting messy: While Slee admires the smooth, slick Koons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/koons>, his favourite artist is the 
original Los Angelino bad boyPaul McCarthy 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/artists/20/paul-mccarthy/images-clips/>, renowned 
for his ketchup and chocolate sauce-splattered abject performances, which 
savage consumer culture.

Where can I see him? At Studio Voltaire 
<http://www.studiovoltaire.org/home.htm>, London to 26 May.
 