
Reading this on mobile? Click here for the video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/video/2012/aug/09/7>

Pushwagner <http://www.pushwagner.no/>'s magnum opus, the graphic novel Soft 
City <http://www.mkgallery.org/exhibitions/>, is as feverish as a nightmare 
acid trip. Across 154 now-yellowing original sheets, in thin pen lines, a 
numbed world unfolds in relentlessly repetitive detail. It pictures identical 
family units en masse, going about identical lives, in apparentlyinfinite 
identical flats and offices <http://creativeface.net/files/mag/12084410680.jpg>
, in tower blocks that stretch upwards and outwards forever.

The story is simple and circular: get up, take a pill, kiss the baby, go to 
work, punch in, punch out, go home, kiss the baby, go to sleep. Everyone 
frogmarches to the same rhythm, ruled by the clock (if you're late, you're 
fired). Everyone drives – the multistorey car park is a major fixture. 
Everyone's happy: for Soft City inhabitants, the mind is as much a prison as 
the routine lifestyle and oppressive architecture. There is no sky; there is no 
way out.

Soft City was created in the 1970s, fuelled by a dystopian vision the artist 
shared with his friend and mentor, the counter-culture novelistAxel Jensen 
<http://www.axel-jensen.no/>, whose celebrated science fiction books he 
illustrated. The graphic novel then disappeared for decades, in which 
Pushwagner's life went on a downward spiral from making art to marital 
breakdown, heavy drug use and, in the late 1990s, two years sleeping rough.

In his native Norway, the septuagenarian is now a celebrated square peg, as 
notorious for his wild lifestyle as he is for his unforgiving comic art. 
Literally "picked up from the gutter" by his manager, Stefan Stray, he's only 
been more widely appreciated in the last decade. The recently rediscovered Soft 
City was one of the standout works in the 2008Berlin Biennale 
<http://bb5.berlinbiennial.de/>, while a Norwegian documentary released last 
year chronicled his topsy-turvy life <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1941627/>.
 Driven crazy … Hariton Pushwagner's Almost There, from A Day in the Life of 
Family Man (1980). Photograph: Jim Hensley 
All of Pushwagner's work builds on Soft City's core themes, which are rooted 
in classic dystopian sci-fi. Think of the mechanised underworld ofFritz Lang's 
Metropolis <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0017136/>, or the social classes 
polarised byBlade Runner 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76627/blade-runner>'s soaring 
skyscrapers. His 1990 painting seriesApocalypse Frieze 
<http://www.mkgallery.org/news/article/2012_06_29/pushwagner_opening/s_1> 
focused on military factories churning out war machines and carnage.A Day in 
the Life of Family Man 
<http://www.mkgallery.org/img/news/131/f/haritonpushwagner-almostthere.jpg>, a 
wickedly funny set of pink, grey and black silk screenprints conceived with 
Jensen in 1980, brings billboard advertising, surveillance technology and 
TV-as-placebo into the picture.

Indeed, with the recent rapid rise of power with a friendly face – from Ikea 
villages to self-policing social media – his vision feels more and more 
prophetic.

Why we like him: For the fiendish work Jobkill 
<http://img.listen.no/copper/albums/userpics/10006//normal_exhibition00_popup.jpg>
, the central painting in Apocalypse Frieze. Revellers dine and dance on the 
decks of an armoured battleship, sailing on a sea of bones. The landscape is 
black with tanks, police vans and fighter planes, and parachuting soldiers fill 
the sky.

Name game: Hariton Pushwagner is a moniker that the artist, born Terje Brofos, 
adopted in 1970. It's a nod to Hare Krisna and Eastern philosophy, and push 
wagons or shopping trolleys.

Where can I see him? At Milton Keynes Gallery <http://www.mkgallery.org/> 
until 2 September 2012.
 