
The young Berlin-based artist Ellen Gronemeyer's paintings look more like 
barnacled slabs of coastal rock than something made by human hands. Typically, 
they are rugged with pigment, slowly built up in fine flecks like so many 
accretions of silt and sea life. From a distance, they have the steely sheen of 
granite, but get up close and speckles of vibrant colour glint brightly.

Within the grizzled paint, scenes emerge that could be plucked from dreams or 
fairytales. Gargoyle faces gape like creatures trapped in stone; boys and girls 
are lost in landscapes thorny with brushmarks. There are women with pointed 
faces in Harlequin coats, and sensible-looking sorts in spectacles or 
beribboned twin-sets, who all sprout cats' whiskers. Some of Gronemeyer's 
creations have bug eyes and grin like comic book characters while others have 
no features at all.

Sometimes black paint is scratched and scoured to reveal lurking layers of 
colour, as with theArt Brut paintings of Jean Dubuffet 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/artist.php?artist_id=1633>. Gronemeyer's 
exuberant use of oils also recall the churning canvasses of German 
neo-expressionists likeGeorg Baselitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/sep/18/art> or Anselm Kiefer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/anselm-kiefer>. Yet far from an epic 
address to her country's history, her painting feels personal and singular and 
she often works on a small scale, scarcely bigger than a sheet from a storybook.

Many of the new works in Gronemeyer's current show, I Have a Difficult 
Childhood, are looser, flatter and lighter than her best-known output. There 
are dancing acrobats that are closer to the fluid, lively lines ofQuentin 
Blake's <http://www.quentinblake.com/en/> children's illustrations than the 
Brothers Grimm. But like all good fairytales, this whimsy has a double edge. 
The children's heads that amass like birthday balloons in Saunalandschaft, with 
party streamer curls of paint, recall the spectral female faces thatoutsider 
artist and spirit medium Madge Gill 
<http://madgegill.com/Category/Pencil-and-Ink-Drawings/Crowd-of-Faces> was 
compelled to draw. InTunnelblick 
<http://www.greengrassi.com/Artists?aid=11&eid=124&eiid=11>, a tunnel of a 
mouth opens wide in a wail. Meanwhile, the title of a thickly pasted image of a 
mad, monstrous face translates as I'm Invading Again. Cartoon googly eyes seem 
to peer from everywhere.

The keyhole is one of Gronemeyer's recurring motifs, full of sexual and 
psychological implications: a thing to unlock doors or be peeked through. 
Looking goes deep in this work, whose riches must be seen at close quarters to 
be fully appreciated.

Why we like her: For the enigmatic Gruppenspiel, or "group game", which 
apparently depicts a schoolgirl choir. All turn their heads towards an 
invisible choirmaster, except for one girl in the top right who stares in the 
opposite direction, her attention mysteriously caught.

Going slow: Unsurprisingly, Gronemeyer's intense paintings take time and her 
shows have been few and far between. Thanks to recently becoming a mother, 
she's shifted gear, creating faster, flatter works alongside the encrusted 
canvasses.

Where can I see her? At Greengrassi <http://www.greengrassi.com/>, London, to 
28 July.
 