
The Delhi-based trio Raqs Media Collective 
<http://www.raqsmediacollective.net/> are Jeebesh Bagchi, Monica Narula and 
Shuddhabrata Sengupta. To describe them as artists doesn't quite cut it. They 
make videos, high-tech objects, installations and online projects exploring a 
world reshaped by globalisation, from the blazing lights of India's rapaciously 
evolving cities to the shabby gloom of a Tyneside dock. Since they founded
Sarai, their Centre for the Study of Developing Societies 
<http://www.sarai.net/practices/media-forms>, in Delhi in 2000, they've reached 
far beyond art's usual bounds, developing media projects with local 
communities, conducting urban research, editing a journal and curating 
international exhibitions.

In Raqs's recent work, the hard reality of industrial forms, economic systems 
and regulated global time clash with more mysterious realms of human feeling 
and history's ghosts. Their 2009 installation Escapement features the kind of 
giant clocks you find in airport lounges and train terminals, all impersonal 
big white faces in metallic hubs. Each is set to the time of a major 
international city, plus a few from myth and imagination, including Babel and 
Shangri-La. Yet they tick not through hours but personal experience, the day's 
mood making drastic changes from guilt to nostalgia, ecstasy to anguish. The 
effect is twofold: revealing the unruly humanness belied by the orderly 
timetables that trade and transport demand, while suggesting that the 
standardising force of globalisation attempts to box in human experience.

There's a similar imposition of state control on personal identity shown in 
Untold Intimacy of Digits, a digital animation in their current show Guesswork. 
Here, the digits of a giant handprint are slowly clasped and unfurled. 
Uncovered by the collective inUCL's archives <http://www.ucl.ac.uk/>, the 
handprint belonged to Raj Konai, a Bengali peasant who, in 1858, was commanded 
by a government official to put hand to paper as a means of identification, in 
an attempt to manage colonial Britain's wayward subjects. It found its way to
Francis Dalton <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Galton>, a eugenicist and 
explorer, becoming a key part of his research into identification, which 
foreshadowed fingerprinting.

Waving at us from global capitalism's earlier days, his hand conjures images 
of the hand of the state literally impressing itself on its subject's skin. In 
spite of this attempt to catalogue Konai, his newly animated palm multiplies in 
ghostly palimpsests, keeping the life written in its lines an enigma. Given the 
introduction of new forms of identity tagging fromIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> to the UK, the message Konai signals 
seems especially pertinent: identity cannot be so easily quantified.

Why we like them: For their film The Knots That Bind Are the Knots That Fray 
<http://www.frithstreetgallery.com/works/view/the_knots_that_bind_are_the_knots_that_fray>
. In a canny reversal of Joseph Conrad'sHeart of Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9781847490896/heart-of-darkness>
, where the Thames is compared to the wilds of the Congo, stout-legged 
shipbuilding cranes are shown departing the violet haze of a Newcastle dock, on 
their way to a new life serving the advanced industry of an Indian shipyard.

What's in a name? Raqs comes from the Persian, Arabic and Urdu word for the 
visionary state attempted by whirling dervishes.

Where can I see them? At Frith Street Gallery <http://frithstreetgallery.com/>
, until 12 April 2012.
 