
Walking around Anthea Hamilton's installations can feel like you've stumbled 
onto a theatre set without a script. There are plenty of cues but you have to 
keep improvising the lines. They typically feature cut-outs of women's legs in 
wood or Perspex. There might be artfully arranged prop-like objects including 
food, or kimonos, hanging like costumes, ready to be stepped into. Then there 
are her blown-up images of yesteryear's body beautiful: Amazonian gym queens, 
pouting pin-up boys and hunks with luscious hairy chests. It's always sexy, 
funny and formally seductive.

Yet what to make of this young British artist's weird conjunctions? The heap 
of buckwheat for instance, echoing the cut-out silhouette of a dark-eyed man 
with a fulsome chest rug reclining in a low-cut swimsuit? This, astonishingly, 
turns out to be the young Karl Lagerfeld, long before the ponytail, big collar 
and gloves. It's a shock: another Karl behind another image. A more whole 
version, like the wholesome food he's paired with? Maybe. The associations 
Hamilton tempts us into making feel as provisional as the props and wheel-on, 
inch-thin theatre scenery the work resembles.
 Astonishing â€¦ Karl Lagerfeld Bean Counter by Anthea Hamilton.. Photograph: 
Andy Keate/Courtesy of the artist 
Massive images of the sweatband-clad head of disco icon John Travolta 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bC8aCymVnwo> welcome visitors to her current 
show Sorry I'm Late, where they're pasted over the towering walls of the 
entrance corridor. He also bounces around as a screensaver on a series of 
screens aping the kind of clocks you find in banks, reporting the time across 
the world. Disco might have originated as a subculture that brought together 
African American, Latino, gay and psychedelic communities of New York City, 
but, as Hamilton implies, it's Travolta's image that now dominates. Yet shown 
in profile, in stony pixelated grey and on a monumental scale, he starts to 
resemble other ideals of male beauty: a classical bust, a Greek god.

Sometimes Hamilton paints gallery walls with the deep blue of Chroma key video 
paint, as it's known in the movie business where it serves as a backdrop for 
action that will later be superimposed into other settings. There's a similar 
sense that things might go anywhere, with the alter-universes she conjures into 
being. It's a place where culture, identity and sexuality are always in flux, 
ready to be reinvented.

Why we like her: For Leg Chair, built from Perspex cut-outs of her own flexed 
legs, with a rice cake at the crotch. It's a deliciously absurd spin on sexist 
precedents, includingAllen Jones's notorious sculptures 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/jones-chair-t03244/text-catalogue-entry> 
depicting semi-clad women doubling as furniture, the nudeChristine Keeler 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christine_Keeler> hiding behind a chair back, and 
Sharon Stone's crotch shot on a swivel chair in Basic Instinct.

Strange Fruit: One of Hamilton's favourite paintings is Still Life with 
Quince, Cabbage, Melon and Cucumber by the 17th century Spanish artist Sanchez 
Cotan. Its fruit and veg hanging against a black void seem fit to burst with 
metaphor, though its original intention was mathematical: a sequence recording 
decay.

Where Can I See Her? At First Site <http://www.firstsite.uk.net/>, Colchester 
to 25 November. Her performanceKabuki, is at Tate Tanks 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern-tanks/music-and-live-performance/anthea-hamilton-kabuki>
, SE1, 5 October.
 