
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view video
 <http://vimeo.com/34837992>
Jennet Thomas <http://jennetthomas.wordpress.com/>'s films conjure delirious 
parallel universes in everyday Britain's most mundane corners. People shop in 
Sainsbury's, watch daytime TV and eat packed lunches from Tupperware boxes. Yet 
in this Looking Glass world, what we take for granted is quickly turned inside 
out. Preachers, teachers and quasi-political pundits with bright yellow or 
purple skin harangue its denizens with songs and slide presentations; the 
beliefs and rules they champion are full of promise, but always obscure.

"All suffering soon to end," pronounces the sinister character who doorstops 
an elderly couple in the 2010 film of this name, with his wig, skin and clothes 
the colour of a1960s comic-book villain 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purple_Man> and his dialogue taken from a 
Jehovah's Witness leaflet; 2007's The Black Tower presents a lineup of 
converts, their faces painted gold as though shimmering with illumination. 
Whether this is of the divine or artistic variety is a moot point. What's 
caused their new way of thinking could be a stain or a pattern. It's certainly 
addictive.

Building on a tradition of surreal British satire that goes back to 
film-makers such asLindsay Anderson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/sep/19/drama> or screenwriter Dennis Potter
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2007/sep/12/greatinterviews>, Thomas 
draws attention to the tacit systems that shape daily life, whether the body 
language of authority figures or the empty rhetoric of institutions. Her 
latest, School of Change, takes the "credit system" – and other economic or 
marketing jargon now used in education – and creates an Orwellian high school 
musical where everything comes down to a number.

It's a black and yellow world in which schoolgirls, teachers, classrooms and 
even food are colour-coded like danger signs. As with Potter's TV shows or 
Anderson's O Lucky Man!, Thomas's films have often featured characters who 
burst into song. Here, she ups the ante with a toe-tapping repertoire 
co-created with composerLeo Chadburn <http://www.simonbookish.com/>. Lyrics 
that at first sound like the product of agame of Consequences 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exquisite_corpse> say much about a system that 
deems an inner life of knowledge and creativity as something quantifiable.

Yet Thomas prefers poetry to straight send-ups. In School of Change, girls sit 
in class with scarecrow versions of themselves and live in fear of "hard 
weather", which can lob off limbs. Her films are always too strange to be 
directly mapped on to specific social issues. More than this, it's our 
assumptions about reality itself that she brings tumbling down.

Why we like her: Thomas's films are screened in installations that bring more 
than the mise en scène to 3D life. Coming face-to-face with a real-life yellow 
schoolgirl is a deliciously disconcerting experience.

Home-girl: To really up-end the everyday, Thomas films in locations full of 
personal significance, from her parents' suburban house to her old school.

Where can I see her? At Matt's Gallery 
<http://www.mattsgallery.org/artists/thomas/exhibition-2.php>, London, to 29 
July.
 