
Francis Upritchard's rainbow-skinned figures may have stooped shoulders, 
sagging bellies and bald heads, but they never stop dancing. These 
hand-modelled, marionette-sized creations bend their knees and wave their arms, 
raver-style, absorbed in trance rhythms only they can hear. Others around them 
strike tai chi or meditation poses. But they all keep their eyes shut, refusing 
to connect.

They're normally rendered naturist nude (but for the occasional tie-dye cloak) 
then painted all over: anything from bright purple toharlequin patterns 
<http://www.katemacgarry.com/uploads/1729_n.jpg>. They could be the descendants 
of an off-grid commune, evolved in the wake of a nuclear disaster so their skin 
has taken on hippy hues. Or are they wandering minstrels from the middle ages? 
They seem both ancient and futuristic, as if they've not only tried to buck the 
system but have moved outside of time altogether.

Born in New Plymouth, New Zealand, in 1976, the now London-based Upritchard 
grew up in a hippy environment where the local hub of crafters and alternative 
therapists was offset by the oil industry. The failure of the 1960s peace and 
love dream, bringing in the "me" generation in place of a communally minded 
world, is one of the key ideas behind her figurines.

Upritchard made a name for herself in the early 2000s by turning consumer tat 
into ritualistic objects – a biscuit jar reworked as a funeral urn; an ancient 
Mummy whose tributes include a pack of B&H instead of a gold bar. She often 
referenced tribal cultures like New Zealand's Māoris. Turning the tables on 
colonial anthropologists, she drew analogies between the cheap trinkets 
westerners amass and talismans and amulets traditionally used to protect 
against evil spirits.

Her clay figures made a splash on the international scene in 2009, when she 
represented New Zealand at the Venice Biennale, suggesting a shift away from 
her interest in magic objects and folk beliefs towards doomed ideals and 
utopian dreams.

Why we like her: For the mysterious soldiers in her current show, A Hand of 
Cards 
<http://membership.contemporaryartsociety.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/NOTTINGHAM-EDIT.jpg>
. Inspired by British history and myth, including the Bayeux tapestry and Robin 
Hood, they wear chainmail or white costumes with billowing sleeves, striking 
balletic fighting poses. They seem locked into war, as if elegantly 
choreographed by an invisible puppet master, though who they are fighting is 
unclear.

The word: Upritchard often invites novelists to write stories about her work, 
in the catalogues that accompany her shows. These have includedDavid Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2010/apr/11/observer-profile-david-mitchell>
 andHari Kunzru <http://www.harikunzru.com/>, while Ali Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alismith> is the latest to rise to the 
challenge.

Where can I see her? At Nottingham Contemporary 
<http://www.nottinghamcontemporary.org/> until 30 September 2012.
 