
Tales grow very tall in Alexandre Singh's writing, talks, plays and 
installations. Take his deceptively dry-sounding Assembly Instructions lecture 
series, where things rarely fit together in the way you'd expect. Here, free 
association might spin the floorplan of Ikea into a map of all human knowledge, 
or posit the leads in Sex and the City as present-day incarnations of Romantic 
heroes.

Singh's analogies always make a strange kind of sense, though. His 1,000-page 
tome, The Marque of the Third Stripe, for instance, is a typically elaborate 
fantasy about Adidas man –Adi Dassler 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adolf_Dassler> – creating his iconic shoe with 
the dark arts. Yet it makes an astute observation about the link between 
current commodity fetishism and age-old magic totems.

This young, New York-based Englishman's slippery yarns seem the perfect medium 
for the Wiki age, weaving fact and fiction, textbook lore, mythologies and 
flights of fantasy. But Singh doesn't want us to forget that stories have 
always been shifty. His long talks, done from memory, hark back to theancient 
Homeric tradition <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homer#Problems_of_authorship> 
where poets would recount epics, passing the tales – which would be reshaped by 
each new teller's elisions and embellishments – from generation to generation.

Staying alert to double-meaning and duplicity underscores The Dialogues of the 
Objects, Singh's pre-recorded short plays, which are currently on show in 
London. Here, objects lit-up on pedestals discuss the meaning of things in 
voiceover. This includes two packs of cigarettes, a father and son, who find 
their perfectly planned universe rocked by an ashtray's revelation that the 
lights in the sky where cigarettes go to die are in fact halogen lamps.

However far-fetched, Singh's stories all create their own convincing logic, 
illustrating that uniquely human ability to find connections and rationalise 
just about anything. As a box of matches having its soul weighed at the gates 
of the underworld asks: "Who's to say in this day and age when up is down and 
wrong is right? […] Now everything's become, well, so relative."

Why we like him: For his installation The School for Objects Criticised, 
inspired by Moliere's similarly-titled riposte to his critics,The School for 
Wives Criticised <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_School_for_Wives>. Here, 
objects including a feminist toaster and a neo-post-Marxist bleach bottle have 
a heated dinner party debate about an art show they've just seen, which bears a 
striking similarity to the work we're looking at.

Impossible is nothing: Singh's Adidas-themed works were inspired by his love 
for the brand. It's the only shoe he ever wears.

Where can I see him? In Weighted Words, Zabludowicz Collection 
<http://www.zabludowiczcollection.com/>, London until 10 June.
 