
A topsy-turvy sensuality tumbles through Daria Martin's seductive films. In 
her 16mm productions from the past decade, pale flesh has writhed against 
sweeping banisters, been caressed by robots and shared the pain of electronic 
goods. It's not just people who find themselves caught up in inter-species 
mismatches.Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> mediums mingle 
and psychological states are given a tactile reality.

The UK-based American artist has described her films as "daydream machines". 
They're spaces where fantasies can be freely let loose. And it's creating odd 
couplings of people and things, dalliances with art, dance and film history, or 
crafting cinematic love letters to outdated culture, that Martin is interested 
in.

Trained as a painter, she first made her name with a trilogy of films that 
brought modernist art into a realm of playful make-believe. Birds, from 2001, 
translatesOskar Schlemmer's Bauhaus ballet costumes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xMDtwC76HjA> into a hand-painted, 
knocked-together set with retro-futuristic fancy dress, in which Martin's cast 
strike campy tableaux vivants. It's a sweet but not uncritical daydream, about 
living in another age, and highlights modernism's ill-conceived love of pure 
geometric forms at the expense of actual living people.

Since then, Martin's films have moved beyond the private world of the studio 
set and such specific references to art history. Her work Loneliness and the 
Modern Pentathlon is like a loosened-up take onLeni Riefenstahl 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/pictures/0,,1267862,00.html>, turning the archaic 
high point <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pentathlon> of early 20th-century 
Olympics into a freeform journey of beautiful bodies in nature. Harp Strings 
and Lava realises a friend's childhood nightmare as a fresh encounter between a 
woman and the sounds and surfaces of objects, from snarled threads to crinkling 
skins. As in a fever dream, it's as if textures could be heard or noises felt.

Continuing the sensory jumble, in Martin's latest film, Sensorium Tests, she 
exploresmirror-touch synaesthesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/mar/19/i-feel-other-peoples-pain>
, a rare, recently diagnosed disorder, where people physically experience 
touches levied on other people and things. A hand brushing the velvet back of a 
sofa might be felt on a sufferer's own body, and even acts seen on screen can 
be experienced.

Martin's recreation of the original synaesthesia lab tests – a simple set-up 
where a woman's face is touched in rhythm with hands patting an electric fan or 
hi-fi speaker – crackles with psychological ambiguity. Sharp, paranoia-inducing 
glances between the scientists, a confusion of skins both organic and man-made, 
the vivid colours of a poster, or the weft and warp of fabric in closeup take 
us right inside the synaesthete's hyper-sensitive mind.

Why we like her: Soft Materials, where the pint-sized, wonderfully ad hoc 
"embodied artificial intelligence" creations of a Zurich lab – exposed circuit 
boards, angel hair sensors and taped-together plastic limbs – mimic the bodies 
of Martin's performers.

New wave: Rita Tushingham 
<http://www.screenonline.org.uk/people/id/465090/index.html>, star of 1960s 
British classics such as A Taste of Honey, plays the mysterious coach in 
Loneliness and the Modern Pentathlon.

Where can I see her? MK Gallery <http://www.mkgallery.org/>, Milton Keynes, 
until 8 April.
 