
Nowhere Boy, the debut feature film from artist Sam Taylor-Wood, has been 
chosen as the closing night film at this year'sLondon film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/londonfilmfestival>. A portrait of John 
Lennon's early years, Nowhere Boy was described by LFF artistic director Sandra 
Hebron as "less a biopic and more a love-story … as accomplished as it is 
moving, and will ensure the festival ends on a high note".

The film is written by Matt Greenhalgh, whose script for Control, the study of 
Joy Division frontman Ian Curtis, won much praise two years ago. Nowhere Boy 
stars Aaron Johnson as the young Lennon and Thomas Sangster as a teenage Paul 
McCartney.Kristin Scott Thomas plays Lennon's Aunt Mimi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/08/john-lennon-biopic>, while 
Anne-Marie Duff is his mother, Julia.

Taylor-Wood today called the making of the film "one of the most transforming 
experiences of my life". However, the production has not been trouble free – 
earlier this year legal action was threatened by writer Geoffrey Giuliano, who 
claimed uncredited co-authorship of Greenhalgh's chief source material: Imagine 
This, by Lennon's half-sister, Julia Baird, published in 2007. Giuliano claimed 
the memoir was largely based on a book he had co-written with Baird in 1988, 
John Lennon, My Brother, andinstructed his lawyers to secure a 50% share of the 
film's earnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/apr/15/john-lennon-sam-taylor-wood>
.

But the claim was dismissed as untrue by the film-makers. "It's nothing to do 
with us. I haven't heard from anyone's lawyers," 
<http://screenterrier.blogspot.com/2009/06/nowhere-boy.html>Nowhere Boy's 
producer, Kevin Loader, said in June.

Last week, the festival's opening film was announced as Fantastic Mr Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/28/fantastic-mr-fox-open-london-film-festival>
, Wes Anderson's long-awaited stop-motion adaptation of Roald Dahl's children's 
tale.

The BFI London film festival runs from 14-29 October.
 