
It's rare that art as apparently spartan as Thea Djordjadze's can be so 
tantalising. The thin wooden or metal frames and glass vitrines that frequently 
star in her sculptural assemblages suggest a minimalist sensibility and evoke 
the pristine, poker-faced displays of museums. Yet these elements of her art 
rub shoulders with more worn-in, personal fare, including rugs, reconfigured 
furniture and rough, hand-moulded lumps of uncooked clay. Things look fragile 
and faded, like relics from a lost civilisation.

Djordjadze's materials are worked fast and arranged intuitively, with an eye 
for colour, texture and lines drawn through space that hints at her early 
training as a painter. Growing up informer communist Georgia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Georgia_%28country%29> has also left its mark on 
the Berlin-based artist's sensibility. Her work often features the country's 
local carpets, while its pared-back appearance and flimsy materials echo the 
clean, definite forms of eastern-bloc architecture, belying a shaky political 
regime. In place of modernist purity, she creates poetic, allusive arrangements 
of objects, hinting at stories that never sit still.

As sagas sa 
<http://hecuba.tumblr.com/post/28497574817/thea-djordjadze-as-sagas-sa-2012-documenta-13>
, her contribution to the current Documenta (13), uses the perfect setting for 
her sculptural micro-universe: a cavernous greenhouse emptied of plant life, 
with a gravelly dry-dirt floor and stained panes. It's like a cross between 
some millennia-old museum's vitrine and a wasted version of the 
vegetation-filled glass domes travelling through space, in the 1970s sci-fi 
classicSilent Running <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0067756/>.

Wandering through the installation she's created in response to the site, 
you're in a self-contained world. Tableaux of furniture, glass cases and 
paint-smeared blocks of foam suggest the enclosed realms of both domestic life 
and theatrical display. A faded, cheap, gauzy fabric hangs across one end of 
the arid greenhouse like a stage curtain, or a waterfall.

All these objects soon start to shapeshift in your head. A sharp rectangle and 
square become a neatly geometric bed and pillow. Yet for all its minimalist 
precision, the piece is made of squidgy, vulnerable foam and smeared with gooey 
white pigment. It's unnervingly physical, begrimed, sexual. The plastic chair 
sitting at its foot might be a nurse at a sickbed, or the aggressive master to 
this passive, prone form.

With dust underfoot and in your lungs, it's like being in an ancient burial 
chamber, and yet those urgent white plaster smears are very much in the present 
tense. There's the electric sensation that all is held in suspense, while 
perpetually shifting between one state and another.

Why we like her: For Deaf and Dumb Universe, which echoed the chic glass and 
steel architecture ofBerlin's Neue Nationalgalerie 
<http://bb6.berlinbiennial.de/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=177&Itemid=1&lang=en>
, with blocky foam chairs tottering on black spidery legs, lumpy bits of clay 
perched on clean white shelving, and a metal frame shaped like a wendy house.

Two Heads: Beyond her solo projects, Djordjadze has long collaborated with her 
friend and former teacher, feminist art iconRosemarie Trockel 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosemarie_Trockel>

Where can I see her? At Documenta (13) 
<http://d13.documenta.de/#/research/research/view/as-sagas-sa-2012> in Kassel, 
Germany, until 16 September, andSprueth Magers <http://spruethmagers.com/home>, 
London, until 29 September.
 