
Until recently Sam Dargan's paintings displayed a grim lineup of middle 
management grunts, battered priests and hollowed-out delinquents: a politically 
disenfranchised gang rendered with a sense of humour as black as a lifetime's 
worth of leaky ballpoint pens. In one such work, blindfolded suits in various 
states of undress staggered around the sea's edge, like the survivors of a stag 
do that has gone wrong. In another, the dead eyes and ingrained frown of an 
office worker belied the cute cat face someone had painted over his leathery 
features and five o'clock shadow.

In these earlier paintings life looks relentlessly bleak, be it the cinematic 
desolation of a wrecked car on a blasted heath, a grey stone staircase 
spiralling to nowhere, or the hopeless humdrum walls of a prefab office. But 
Dargan's beef is not with the office jobsworth – a figure whose fortitude might 
be seen as brave as much as infuriating. Rather, it's a hopeless system of 
dead-end jobs and political powerlessness he wants to challenge.

While the last 10 years have seen the Royal College graduate hone an angry 
polemical vision, his latest works – large, comely landscapes – take a new 
direction. They're still painted in Dargan's precise graphic style, with each 
blade of grass picked out and every silhouetted tree as defined as a razor cut. 
Yet there's a sense of joy in the sweeping vistas. The clue to the paintings is 
in their long titles, variously referencing moments when socialist dreams 
briefly seemed possible, like the ill-fatedParis Commune 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris_Commune>, or the English Diggers 
<http://www.british-civil-wars.co.uk/glossary/diggers.htm> movement of the 17th 
century.

These nature-loving Protestant reformers established their first commune at St 
George's Hill 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St_George%27s_Hill#Residents%20in%20Surrey> in 
Surrey. Now, in a twisted kind of progress, it has been turned into a private 
estate with a golf and tennis club, which has been home to the likes of Kate 
Winslet and Elton John. Dargan references this in a painting of a lovely empty 
wilderness, though, on closer inspection, the idyllic cottage perched on the 
horizon turns out to be on fire.

Similarly ominous is a painting of a forest of birches, a strip of asphalt 
disrupting the bucolic scene in a reference to theRed Army Faction's 
<http://www.baader-meinhof.com/> murder of former SS officer Hanns Martin 
Schleyer whose body was found in a car boot on a woodland roadside. Look hard 
and you can find a snaking striped tie and an abandoned shoe in the foliage. 
Devoid of people, Dargan's acerbic wit has mellowed in these paintings. 
Instead, they balance the covert threat of violence with the beauty of a 
promised land.

Why we like him: For his wall painting depicting the events of the Paris 
Commune in the style of a Ladybird book,which graced the loo at South London 
Gallery in the summer of 2011 
<http://artscream.files.wordpress.com/2010/08/slg.jpg?w=640>.

Yesterday's heroes: Dargan puts his new interest in history and landscape down 
to two key influences:Alex Butterworth's chronicle of anarchist history, The 
World That Never Was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/11/world-that-never-was-alex-butterworth-book-review>
 and 19th-century Russian Romantic painting.

Where can I see him? At Rokeby <http://www.rokebygallery.com/>, London until 
11 August.
 