
The organza that forms the backcloth to Jessica Rankin's embroideries barely 
seems able to take the weight of her glittering metallic threads. It's as fine 
as mist, as fragile and apparently insubstantial as thought. Yet this gossamer 
material can support cascades of loose, twirling gold and quartz-coloured 
silks, carefully sewn scraps of landscapes, stitched star maps and black, 
blocky words. Surreal, collaged snatches of overheard chatter, quotes from 
books, or Rankin's own fleeting reflections appear without pause: 
THINANDSKYSTRETCHES; EARLYDARK; SHALL END IT.

Abstract and landscape painting are two comparisons frequently levied at the 
Australian-born, New York and Berlin-based artist's embroideries; so too are 
concrete poetry and Chinese calligraphy, forms of writing where the visual 
quality is as important as what's being said. Born in Sydney in 1971 to a poet 
mother and painter father (David Rankin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Rankin>), her interest in words and 
abstraction date back to her childhood, although she was first taught to sew by 
her babysitter. She turned back to embroidery after graduating from art school 
in the US, building on the innovations of 70s feminists who'd brought new life 
to traditional women's work, developing her own distinctive voice at the same 
time.

Needlework might be methodical and repetitive, but it's great for letting the 
mind wander. Tapping into this, Rankin's embroideries are like mental maps, 
working through recollections, impressions of places and immediate experience. 
In her early work Hinterland, from 2007, words fall vertically down the canvas 
like spider's threads beneath the outline of mountains; here, she also weaved 
together reminiscences of a trip to the Australian countryside, her son's 
drawings of train tracks and the experience of creating the embroidery in a 
barn full of creepy crawlies. It comes on like memory, a tumble of language and 
images – but slowly and painstakingly realised by the sewer's hand.

Why we like her: For her current show, Skyfolds 1941-2010 
<http://whitecube.com/exhibitions/jessica_rankin_skyfolds_1941-2010_hoxton_square_2012/>
, which is full of glimmering silvery embroidery that suggests torrential 
downpours, ghostly visions or abstract expressionist paintings. By contrast, 
vast works on paper, such as A Line in the Air, resemble embroidery but turn 
out to be drawings. Dense patches of circular pencil marks accumulate around 
tiny bare white dots, like a thicket of gorse, a cloud, fungus spores or the 
dark universe brooding between the stars.

Pot boilers: Rankin's been inspired by all sorts of writing, from Apollinaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/17/little-auto-guillame-appolinaire-nicholas-lezard>
 to the ghost stories ofMR James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/oct/30/aldeburgh-ghost-james?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and Chinese scrolls. One of her major touchstones, though, is Lunch Poems by 
the New York school figurehead and art criticFrank O'Hara 
<http://www.frankohara.org/>. This brilliant collection of impressionistic 
verse – meshing reflections on pop, city life and art – was written during, and 
with a view to be easily read, in the lunch break.

Where can I see her: White Cube, Hoxton Square, London 
<http://whitecube.com/exhibitions/>, to 7 July.
 