
Love and longing aren't subjects many artists are interested in these days. 
Sentiment comes cheap in throwaway pop songs and in advertising. Which makes
Dirk Bell <http://www.saatchi-gallery.co.uk/artists/dirk_bell.htm>'s 
fuzzy-edged quixotic work, tackling the big, tangled, ineffable stuff, a bold 
anomaly. The German artist stirs up a dust cloud of feelings, dreamy visions 
and strange esoteric symbols to freshly coat and confuse the 21st-century world.

Bell typically builds associations across radically diverse works. This might 
include drawings as delicate and intricate as a cobweb, sketched on yesterday's 
newspaper, and paintings salvaged from street markets, where Bell's own ghostly 
forms embrace those of forgotten artists. Yet this mysterious fare, blending 
past and present, real and fantastical, is paired with hard-edged creations.

The mood shifts rapidly, from the gentle touch of gauzy drawings to the harsh 
slap of bright, messy paint. References and symbols might resurface across 
eccentric assemblages of junk-shop finds, light works and, most recently, 
industrial-looking metal text sculptures and paintings that fold the letters of 
the word "love" into a self-enclosed logo like the VW icon.

Bell's current London show, Soft is Hard (Work), explores the real and the 
fake â€“ be that an original artwork and a digital reproduction, an event and its 
memory, or a beloved and our fantasies. Its centrepiece is an idiosyncratic 
constellation of found detritus and the painstakingly hand-worked. A bald, 
partially-limbed mannequin reclines on a gutted black leather couch, rescued 
from the street. Swirling shapes coat its body in a silvery graphite skin, 
while two red teapots are positioned like planets orbiting the sun of an old 
lamp. (One of Bell's references here is Tarkovsky's 1972 metaphysical sci-fi 
filmSolaris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/feb/12/featuresreviews.guardianreview11>
, in which a space traveller meets the double of his dead wife.)

Behind this, a huge drawing hangs, its layered forms coming in and out of 
focus. Here the chequered pattern of the couch resurfaces, dissolving into 
Bell's Love icon as it unfurls across the paper. At the drawing's centre stands 
a Blakean figure, beneath occult symbols of an eye and a crescent moon. Images 
and ideas shimmer and dissolve; everything seems in flux, uncertain, just out 
of reach.

Why we like him: For Untitled 2012, a reworked reproduction of what was once 
consideredRembrandt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/rembrandt>'s 
greatest achievement,The Man With the Golden Helmet 
<http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,960416,00.html>, before it 
was attributed to one of his students and denigrated as an art historical 
also-ran. He transforms his fake of a fake into a trippy evocation of 
introspective reverie, fusing the original dark figure with a spectral waif 
based on a photo of aPina Bausch <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/pinabausch> 
dancer.

Street art: Bell finds many of the old paintings he uses at Mauerpark 
<http://www.mauerpark.info/>, the legendary flea market in his native Berlin.

Where can I see him: Sadie Coles 
<http://www.sadiecoles.com/artists-web-app/bell>, Audley Street, London W1, to 
16 June.
 