
Thomas Zipp's installations of paintings and sculptures are the heavy metal of 
the art world: transgressive, blackly comic and trained on what the German 
artist has described as "the weirdness of mankind". Fascinated by people who go 
against the grain, try to change the world or buck the system, he offsets 
historical figures from the wilder side of art and music with those from 
science, religion and politics.

Zipp creates fantastical environments that conflate the dreams and nightmares 
of bygone eras. Whether installing the beds, shower rooms and rubber cells of 
an old psychiatric ward, or creating a black and white interpretation of an 
iconic surrealist painting, his work has the antiquated feel of old photos or 
musty sheets. His paintings and sculptures come in a careworn palette of ash 
white, granite grey and lots of black – as if they've spent the past hundred 
years darkening in a backroom somewhere.

The lynchpin for it all is the early 20th century, that pivotal moment when 
modernist artists and scientists imagined a new, better world – and so did the 
Nazis.Otto Hahn <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otto_Hahn>, the Nobel laureate 
considered "the father of nuclear chemistry", has been a recurring figure in 
Zipp's work, alongside other German world-changers such as the 15th-century 
Protestant monkMartin Luther <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Luther>, 
whose division of Europe, the artist has suggested, makes him a proto-Hitler 
figure. Disfigured with black scribbles or pins stuck in their eyes in his 
violent, gothic portraits, these ambiguous icons don't escape history's ire.

The angry moralist is just one role Zipp plays, however: the joker and the 
ecstatic artist visionary are other favourites. His 2008 show White Dada is a 
good example of his double-edged approach. Here,Dada-style 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dada> montages and defaced pictures included a 
textbook description of electric shock therapy and images of drugs of the 
medical, non-recreational kind. Meanwhile, dead plants, including long-stalked 
poppies, sprouted from vases. Equating Dada's boundary-pushing artistic and 
narcotic experiments with the psychiatric institution, Zipp suggests that art 
is yet another box for controlling social aberration.

Why we like him: White Dada's centrepiece was a Victorian-era lecture hall. A 
dark wood amphitheatre circled a white bust resembling one ofJacob Epstein 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/servlet/ArtistWorks?cgroupid=999999961&artistid=1061&page=1>
's machine-age marble sculptures and an incongruous drum kit, where Zipp's band 
played a screaming set on the show's opening night. But once the gig was over, 
it left a bad feeling in the gut: modern art's radicalism is lost to the past, 
and our attempts at non-conformity ring hollow.

High on your own supply: For Zipp, painting is a lot like taking drugs – they 
both "suck you in and open you up to new points".

Where can I see him? At Alison Jacques 
<http://www.alisonjacquesgallery.com/exhibitions/77/works/>, London until 31 
March.
 