
Stepping into one of Laura Buckley's installations is a disorienting 
experience: her fusions of sounds, images and objects seem to turn our thoughts 
inside out. The video footage is invariably humdrum: hopping sparrows, a 
reddish sun filmed from a train window, kids at the beach, an escalator ride. 
But beamed from projectors in low-lit rooms on to spinning Perspex or mirrored 
shapes, the familiar imagery refracts into dizzying constellations. The world 
spins and splinters, falling in and out of step with soundtracks where plucked 
strings and snatches of conversation melt into hard, industrial hums and static.

The Galway-born, London-based artist started out as a painter, and has 
described her work as painting with light. As a student in the early 2000s, 
Buckley began shredding paintings of the reflections in puddles and creating 
sculptural installations by painting on MDF and rolls of wallpaper. Keen to 
escape the bounds of the canvas and bring the outside world into her work, it 
was an organic progression to move on to mirrors and film. Much of what she 
shoots is ad hoc, and her installations fuse the dazzling perceptual play of
Olafur Eliasson <http://www.olafureliasson.net/studio.html> or James Turrell 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Turrell>'s environments with photographer 
Wolfgang Tillmans <http://tillmans.co.uk/>'s grungier style. Her distorted 
melodies, inspired by experimental musicians fromMy Bloody Valentine 
<http://www.last.fm/music/My+Bloody+Valentine> to John Cage 
<http://johncage.org/>, are similarly crafted from what she picks up around her.

Buckley's current installation, Fata Morgana, is a walk-in kaleidoscope: a 
giant, hexagonal tunnel with whirling mirrored walls and thrumming noise. 
Frenzied and enchanting by turns, images of everything from glittery fairy 
dolls to barbed wire dances to a strange music – where children's laughter, 
traffic and strings come together in lulling harmonies.

It feels like Buckley has taken what happens in our heads – that hazy muddle 
of fleeting thoughts and memories, background noise and half-caught sensory 
impressions – and cast it in three dimensions.

Why we like her: For her 2010 installation Waterlilies. Buckley's beguiling 
vision of pond life features wires snaking across the floor around discs made 
of Perspex and mirror, which gently rotate like fat lilypads. Video footage and 
lights ripple watery reflections on the walls, while the sounds of piano 
tinkling, water dripping and fragments of conversation conjure liquid everyday 
experience.

Child's Play: Buckley was first switched on to video when she bought a camera 
to film her baby daughter. "Becoming a mother made me less self-conscious and 
opened me up to allowing a lot more colour and feeling into my work," she says.

Where can I see her? Fata Morgana is at Cell Project Space 
<http://www.cellprojects.org/>, London to 26 February. The closing event on 25 
February features a collaborative performance with Andy Spence from the bandNew 
Young Pony Club <http://www.myspace.com/newyoungponyclub>.
 