
Raphael Hefti <http://www.raphaelhefti.ch/>'s experiments push industrial 
processes and materials to the max – and take us back to a time when people 
mistook science for magic. His work includes fashioning steel pipes that 
shatter like glass, and pyrotechnic daredevilry where entire mountain 
landscapes are illuminated by magnesium flares sent soaring into the sky at 
3,000C. In spite of such god-like exploits, the young Swiss artist is less a 
would-be Dr Frankenstein than a champion of the overlooked.

Born in 1978, Hefti started out as an apprentice specialising in electronics, 
before studying industrial design, photography and art. It was during his long 
sessions experimenting in the workshop that he developed a fascination for 
mechanical processes – particularly the amazing things that can happen when 
stuff goes wrong. His Damascene moment came when he saw a steel hammer break 
like a vase when it was accidently dropped in the brittle phase between two 
heating stages. While this event clearly had no place in the workaday world, it 
was something he could embrace as an artist. In 2010, he looked back to that 
workshop smash and created the first of his brittle steel bars, Replaying the 
Mistake of a Broken Hammer.

Hefti often works with factory craftspeople to divert things from their normal 
functions. In his current London solo debut, Launching Rockets Never Gets Old, 
giant panes of museum glass are propped against the walls of an airy gallery 
like magic mirrors. Instead of providing an invisible barrier between the 
public and the precious objects held in display cases, Hefti's glass is vividly 
coloured in hues of deep pink, blue and gold. It's a gorgeous effect created by 
amplifying the very process that normally makes the glass less noticeable: 
anti-reflective coating which the artist has had applied in many layers. 
Thinking far, far outside the box, he disrupts production line logic to create 
dazzling artistic feats.
 Experimental art ... Raphael Hefti's Lycopodium, 2011 was made by burning 
spores of the plant on photo paper. Photograph: Raphael Hefti/Ancient and 
Modern Gallery 
Why we like him: For his series of photograms Lycopodium 
<http://www.fluxiagallery.com/?page_id=2734>, where rainbow moonscapes are 
wrought by burning the spores ofLycopodium 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lycopodium> plants on photographic paper. Common 
to Scandinavia, the spores are highly combustible, so the plant is also known 
as "witches' powder".

Atomised: Hefti's dream collaborator would be Dr Peter Jenni, the man behind 
theAtlas Experiment <http://atlas.ch/>, which is investigating the origins of 
the universe at the legendary Large Hadron Collider at Cern in Switzerland.

Where can I see him? Launching Rockets Never Gets Old 
<http://www.camdenartscentre.org/home/>, at Camden Arts Centre, London to 18 
March 2012.
 