
Nina Beier <http://www.ninabeier.com/>'s work is as unstable as a keg of 
dynamite, if a whole lot quieter. The Danish artist's sparse, pared-down 
offerings have included fading photographs, a wall painting that was redone 
daily and a sculpture recreated via a game of Chinese whispers. Her Dust 
Painting is literally a pile of dust-coloured pigment, which gets traipsed all 
over the gallery on the soles of people's shoes. As unassuming as it first 
appears, her art is an elusive, restless thing, with scant regard for the 
beautiful picture frames that often attempt to contain it.

Until recently, Beier was best known for the work she made with fellow Dane 
Marie Lund <http://www.ica.org.uk/17225/Artists/Nina-Beier-and-Marie-Lund.html>
. The duo's quirky interactive projects rewrote the unspoken rules of museum 
behaviour, from subtle changes such as getting a guard to grow his beard long 
to raucous disruptions where gallery-goers break the silence and vigorously 
applaud. In the past few years, however, she's increasingly put objects 
centre-stage â€“ albeit ones that have a habit of disappearing.

Always changing, eroding or being remade, Beier's creations give the lie to 
the stamp of permanence bestowed on artworks by frames, glass cases and gallery 
walls. Her works' origins can be equally hard to pin down. For her 2010 show 
withinArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Basel Statements, the 
major art fair's special section for younger artists, Beier employed an actress 
to recreate a sculpture she'd destroyed, using nothing more than a verbal 
description of the lost work. Far from a straightforward bit of outsourcing, 
with the actress effectively playing the artist, it set off a tail-chasing game 
exploring artistic intent, originality and reproduction.

This is more than art about art, however: Beier's playful approach snares big, 
timeless themes, including loss, ageing and death.Shirts vs Skins 
<http://www.laurabartlettgallery.co.uk/Exhibition-187/press/current>, her 
current London show, stages a face-off between frail, mortal humanity and the 
objects we design to outlive us. It's a tragicomedy Beier delivers with the 
lightest of touches, as with her glass cabinet boasting a spare display of her 
retired father's recent golfing trophies. The Blues, a series of outmoded shots 
of hair models taken from a Copenhagen hairdresser, is particularly droll, full 
of tousled highlights and razor-cut slanting fringes. But these photographs are 
hardly frozen in time: long-term display in the salon window has drained the 
pictures' colour spectrums to washy blues. They're like a reverse Dorian Grey: 
portraits that age with their subjects.

Why we like her: For her series Fatigues, which looks like stain paintings in 
rolling blues and mauves. In fact they're sections of hardwearing, 
stain-resistant carpet, with the kind of eye-popping patterns familiar from 
tube seats and the foyers of public buildings, which the artist has submitted 
to strenuous chemical dyes.

Catch him if you can: One of Beier's hair models is none other than a teenage 
Leonardo Dicaprio <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio>.

Where Can I See Her? At Laura Bartlett Gallery 
<http://www.laurabartlettgallery.com/>, London WC1, until 31 March.
 