
Jacob Hashimoto <http://jacobhashimoto.com/>'s rooms, filled with tiny rice 
paper and bamboo kites, are like walk-in paintings. Handmade hexagons and ovals 
cascade from ceilings in carefully orchestrated layers, with pockets of colour 
opening up as you move beneath them. The discs are either left gauzy white, 
rendered in bright cartoon shades, or covered in patterns. Together they 
suggest cloudscapes, oceans or sweeping mountains: a vision of lovely nature at 
odds with their manmade geometric forms. And, as with a raindrop in a storm or 
a pixel in a computer game, the single unit works in harmony with the whole.

The kites give Hashimoto's work an immediately Japanese look. Yet it would be 
wrong to assume this American artist of Japanese-Irish descent was especially 
interested in eastern references. His inspirations span the globe and various 
references are called to mind: fromAgnes Martin 
<http://timothytaylorgallery.com/exhibitions/agnes-martin/>'s abstractions 
inspired by the pale, gleaming landscape of New Mexico, to the rudimentary 
pixelated graphics of old-school Nintendo games. Taking a break from kites,his 
2008 Tree sculptures 
<http://www.okaygreat.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/01/tree1.jpg>, where trees 
bolted together from lengths of wood were filled with pearly plastic 
balloon-sized balls, took their cues from both kids' climbing toys you get in 
playgrounds and sacred Shinto trees covered in paper prayers.

The centrepiece of his London debut pairs clouds of pale rice paper with 
sunbursts of yellow, flashes of turquoise and sections of motley patterned 
discs that look like crazy 1960s wallpaper. While the patterns Hashimoto uses 
have sometimes suggested classic Kimono designs or Japanese family crests, his 
targets and stripes might equally be drawn fromJaspar Johns 
<http://www.nga.gov/exhibitions/2007/johns/target.shtm>'s target painting or 
Frank Stellar <http://www.moma.org/collection/artist.php?artist_id=5640>'s 
hard-edged abstractions.
 Jacob Hashimoto, Infinite Expanse of Sky and Superabundant Atmosphere (2008) 
Born in 1973, Hashimoto has said that experiencing the evolution from analogue 
to digital, from the physical world of vinyl records and typewriters to CDs and 
then invisible data streams, has had a major impact. It's a transition made 
tangible in his modular constructions, which are a bit like CGI projections, 
handmade and brought to 3D life.

Why we like him: For On the Nature of Heroes, one of his dizzying wall pieces, 
where kites are densely strung on narrow looms. Here, curling blue waves vie 
with black calligraphic swirls and bright plaid.

Come fly with me: Hashimoto started making kites to get through a summer of 
artist's block, flying his creations during walks through his local park in 
Chicago.

Where can I see him? At Ronchini Gallery 
<http://www.ronchinigallery.com/current-exhibitions/> in London, to 28 August.
 