
It feels odd saying this, but the 5% cut to Arts Council England's grant in aid
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jun/14/department-culture-spending-cut>
 resulting from the comprehensive spending review was a respectable outcome in 
tough times. It's an acknowledgement of the value that the arts add to society 
– culturally, educationally, economically and in terms of enlightenment.

There are, of course, incalculable benefits to a nation's culture (how can we 
barter with our own sense of self as a nation?) but at times like this, the 
pragmatic arguments for investment are compelling.

Arts organisations, museums and libraries – so much more lean these days and 
hardly the subsidy junkies some out-of-date commentators like to huff and puff 
about – were worth £5.9bn to the national economy in 2011 and generated a 
further £7.9bn in culture-related tourism. Now, with the spending round 
settled, it's our responsibility to use what resources we have with efficiency 
and flair to allow culture and talent to thrive.

Today Arts Council England (ACE) announces a three-year, application-based 
investment process to run from 2015 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/news/arts-council-news/we-announce-our-2015-2018-investment-plans/>
. More details of this will be released in the autumn. At that time, we will 
also make available details of all our funding programmes.

We believe that a three-year approach is essential to enable organisations 
plan for the long term: and knowing the full range of options available, from
national portfolio 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/our-investment/funding-programmes/national-portfolio-funding-programme/>
 ormajor partner museum 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/our-investment/funding-programmes/renaissance/renaissance-major-grants-programme/renaissance-major-partner-museums/>
 funding toGrants for the Arts 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/apply-for-funding/grants-for-the-arts/> 
and other strategic programmes, will help applicants gauge which funding 
streams are best suited to their needs.

As with our last investment round, the application process will result in some 
organisations not receiving funding while others may see their funding go up or 
down. We'll also be welcoming applications from new organisations. There is no 
benefit in 'salami-slicing' and spreading the funds too thinly to make a 
substantial difference to anyone. This process is the only way that we can 
ensure a vibrant cultural landscape across the whole of the country, and that 
we really do create the conditions in which culture can do the best it can.

ACE is scarcely the only public body obliged to pass on a reduction in 
funding. Local authorities face some very difficult decisions, and we at the 
Arts Council empathise with those at the receiving end of cuts, and those with 
the invidious task of deciding where the knife should fall. Inevitably the arts 
will come under scrutiny. Some local authorities have already implemented large 
reductions to arts budgets, with profound effects on museums and libraries also.

While I understand their dilemma, I would urge local authorities to consider 
not just the cost of funding the arts but what they give back now – and what 
more they could give with further encouragement. Local economies need visitors 
and local culture is a vital draw. There are authorities who share this view. 
Wakefield Council has committed £100,000 over three years to the wonderful
Yorkshire sculpture triangle <http://www.ysculpture.co.uk/> of the three 
museums and sculpture parks inspired by the rich heritage of Barbara Hepworth 
and Henry Moore.

Meanwhile, Lincolnshire, East Lindsey, with whom we have forged a successful 
partnership through our Grants for the Arts andCatalyst programmes 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/our-investment/funding-programmes/catalyst-arts/>
, has made the courageous and far-sighted decision to increase its base budget 
for cultural events nearly six-fold, from £60,000 to £350,000. This reflects 
the success it has had in attracting visitors through an inventive series of 
festivals, from itsWolds Words <http://www.woldswords.org.uk/> literary 
festival to the SO Festival, which has grown from a small event in Skegness 
into a 10-day celebration of music and performance across multiple venues. East 
Lindsey believes this investment will increase footfall for local businesses 
outside the holiday season, create jobs and help develop a more sustainable 
local economy.

ACE also has a passionate interest in the future of our local libraries – 
those great, democratic resources of learning, which are often community 
strongholds too. Through ourLibraries Development Initiative 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/our-investment/funding-programmes/libraries-development-initiative/>
, we have worked with partners in local government to find ways to keep 
libraries alive, both as beacons of learning and as community hubs. To give one 
example: earlier this year, Derby piloted a free weekly job club at Derby 
Central Library. ACE funding then enabled a partnership with the local arts 
centre, Derby QUAD, to produceArtswork 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/funded-projects/case-studies/artwork-derby-libraries-development-initiative/>
, a course to help build self-esteem in jobseekers.

We do not want to lose our public spaces: our libraries, museums, theatres and 
arts centres. Necessity may be the mother of invention, but what happens next? 
The inventor needs an investor; the artist needs an exhibition. Even the 
burgeoning digital practitioner requires more than abstract space to work in. 
Our national ingenuity and creativeness is remarkable by any comparison – but 
it requires a roof under which to grow, and some financial certainties to back 
up the considerable commitment of its practitioners.

We share a lot of interests with partners in local authorities, with whom we 
collaborate on individual projects as well as on funding our national portfolio 
organisations and major partner museums. In the autumn, as details of our 
investment strategy are released, we will be entering into serious discussions 
with local authorities to make sure that we all understand the implications of 
funding cuts to our shared investments.

We cannot fill all the gaps left by cuts in local authority funding, and we 
will be looking to develop and strengthen relationships with those partners who 
share our belief in the value of culture.

Those partnerships will be broad and we will encourage the sector to think 
imaginatively about how partnerships might unlock new ways of doing things and 
of reaching people. Earlier this week I was at a meeting on how cultural 
organisations can create a grand alliance of creative advantage and 
enlightenment with higher education – the possibilities are there and are being 
realised from the ground up. We'll be looking to organisations to come to us 
with interesting propositions for similar partnerships.

There have been tough times before, and each time the arts have emerged 
stronger. Since its foundation in the 1940s, the Arts Council has been through 
many changes, and seen many revolutions of the wheel. Our mission remains 
steadfast: to champion excellence and to make great art available to all. The 
wheel of fortune will turn again: let us work together and plan for the future 
of the arts in England.

Alan Davey is chief executive of Arts Council England  
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals>.
 