
adriennepye <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10179347>

Anxious to know how you plan for organisations to explore and consolidate 
audiences without ongoing support from audience development agencies? For many, 
ticket revenue will become even more crucial, for example.

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10180986>

1.04pm

@adriennepye

We want to make sure more people experience and are inspired by the arts and 
we recognise the role that audience development agencies have played in 
building audiences, but National portfolio funding is probably not the best 
relationship for the Arts Council to have with audience development agencies. 
Remember they all have funding for next year and we'll be talking to them about 
how we can best work with them in the future, and on what. Getting more people 
to experience the arts is clearly a passion of ours, and is at the heart of 
everything we do.

interace <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10178639>

How do you respond to the still valid criticisms that the Arts Council is 
still subsidising middle class entertainment for the wealthy who can well 
afford full prices rather than truly democratising the arts? And that there is 
still a disproportionate funding bias towards London ahead of other regions?

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181056>

1.07pm

@interace

We fund all kinds of art forms and we're not ashamed of it. We fund everything 
from symphony orchestras, opera and the National Theatre to small local groups 
and ensembles, who are the life blood of the arts in this country. They all 
connect, they are all important, they are all about the integrity and 
excellence of the art form involved. And it is this ecology of national, local, 
small and large that we have tried to preserve. London is the home to many of 
our national arts institutions, whose reach extends to audiences across the 
whole country, but I agree we need to strike a balance and we have tried to do 
just that.

orchestralover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10178836>

I would like to ask Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-davey> 
some questions posed anonymously by one of our leading orchestra managers on 
Norman Lebrecht's blog, Slipped Disc this morning.

The Arts Council promised not to salami slice, though that's exactly what it 
did to all the major Symphony orchestras.

1. Where's the evidence of any real orchestral strategy for the country?

2. Now that the Arts Council have set the grants for the next four years, 
what's the point of employing a Music Department? What's it going to DO?

3. How many more years of monitoring and assessing are there to be without any 
real change in structure of the orchestral scene which has been fundamentally 
the same for half a century?

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181154>

1.12pm

@orchestralover

It's important to realise that there is more to our orchestra strategy than 
the eight symphony orchestras. In respect of them, we have had 8 strong bids 
from 8 orchestras performing really well at the moment. This hasn't always been 
the case. National Council debated this and decided that now was not the time 
to make major change in the number of orchestras we fund, particularly as they 
are all working at full capacity and on a very lean business model, that means 
we get a lot out of the money we put in. I do want to look, over the next four 
years, at how we realistically fund them to be the best they can be. Change for 
change's sake wouldn't be a good thing to do, as we would be in danger of 
wrecking a rich inheritance that forms the backbone of musical life in this 
country.

jpjsavage <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10178497>

What strategy or framework will you adopt to ensure that all recipients of ACE 
funding design, deliver and maintain quality educational programmes to support 
of their wider work?

Thanks for the opportunity!

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181225>

1.16pm

@jpjsavage

Work with children and young people was one of the goals we asked arts 
organisations to apply against, and this will be something we will talk to 
organisations about who mentioned this in their applications, as we discuss 
their funding agreements over the next few months. We have also given funding 
of around £10 million to a number of bridge organisations to connect arts 
organisations with children and young people in schools ad communities. And 
don't forget our Artsmark scheme that raises standards in schools who take the 
arts seriously and Arts Award - a really good Duke of Edinburgh-like scheme for 
the arts.

Miasma <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10179642>

Alan – three questions:

1. Would you agree that while this NPF funding redistribution has been very 
transparent, fair and well thought out, ACE has missed an opportunity to think 
more radically about arts funding and answer the questions of what public money 
really should be used for?

2. Would you also agree that too much of your funding goes on buildings, the 
infrastructure of running arts companies, education/outreach/access programmes 
that are superficial and only produce statistics, and supporting work that is 
essentially commercial (though it may not be successfully so)?

3. Finally, if the arts really do bring in £3 for every £1 spent, then why are 
you subsidising this commercially successful operation? Either there are very 
viable parts that don't need funding at all, or for those that need the initial 
investment, you're missing an opportunity to use some of your funds as venture 
capital, take the return , and use that to fund what really is culturally 
valuable, but not economically viable: eg R&D for artists to do cutting edge 
work, nurturing and development of new artistic talent, and access schemes so 
those who can't afford it (and especially young people) are encouraged to 
experience the arts (as opposed to funding companies to do "education/outreach" 
work which, as we all know, is part of the "dance of deception" with funders to 
actually get money for core costs).

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181375>

1.22pm

@Miasma

In answer to your three questions:

1. We set out a framework for our funding in October of last year. That was 
the framework we were funding against this time. And on our web site are 
explanations of what we are doing in each art form. We will be refining these 
over the next few months and coming up with a strong statement of what we are 
going to achieve in the next four years and how it contributes to the next ten 
years for the arts in this country. I think we have never been as clear as this 
before.

2. We do spend money on buildings but we spend more money on what goes on in 
them. We want to encourage better use of these buildings and we announced a 
Capital programme yesterday which we want to be more about sustainability of 
existing buildings that new builds. We need to make sure our infrastructure 
works as hard as it can.

3. Public funding makes the arts possible in many instances. It allows 
experiment; it drives developments that often have commercial spin-off. I don't 
apologise for that – that's a good mixed economy.

walpole <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10180005>

Are the big uplifts in visual arts to Local Authority galleries (MIMA, Towner) 
a response to reduction in local authority funding? Would be good to know that 
there isn't the moral hazard here of rewarding councils who reduce funding.

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181431>

1.25pm

@walpole

No, we have always said we will not replace Local Authority funding. Some of 
the funding decisions we have made are conditional on Local Authority support. 
We will spend the next year in negotiations with some Local Authorities.

simhog1989 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181489>

I am about to graduate with a Drama BA and throw myself into the world of 
theatre but I am highly concerned about how the cuts are going to affect my 
career. What advice would you give to those of us about to embark on artistic 
careers in the current economic climate?

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181489>

1.27pm

@simhog1989

I think we have managed to protect, as far as we can, the network of regional 
producing theatres and also funded some really innovative theatre companies who 
are doing some remarkable things in all kinds of places. I believe British 
theatre is strong, and will continue to be strong over the next four years, and 
an inspiring place to work in. I think we're going to see the continuation of 
brilliant work even after the difficult decisions we made yesterday.

theotherwayworks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10180905>

Mr Davey,

ACE pledged to support "great potential" in its new portfolio as well as 
"great track-records". A scan of the new members and knowledge of many non-RFOs 
who applied and were unsuccessful (including ourselves) suggests that ACE did 
not act on this. This is a portfolio for short-term gain, but that forgets to 
plant the seeds for the coming decade and beyond. What caused this crisis of 
confidence?

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181623>

1.33pm

@theotherwayworks

I believe we have invested in potential with young organisations such as High 
Tide, who we believe have the ability to go on and develop in more remarkable 
ways, or the Aurora Ensemble, who present challenging music in new ways. Plus 
we've also freed up the Lottery funded Grants for the Arts fund, which is open 
application and which is where individual artists and small arts organisations 
who are truly innovative can apply. Big organisations who are in the new 
National portfolio can't apply to this fund, which is worth £48 million a year. 
So we have funded potential and we can fund still more applications as yet 
undreamed of.

emmaca <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10180908>

Can you please explain the need to give huge increases of funding to so many 
similar type companies, and then cut 100% of funding to rural touring theatre 
companies, like Northumberland Theatre company, Forest Forge and Oxfordshire 
Theatre company? Why not share the funding, all taking a slight decrease and 
keep the companies that are producing fantastic work?

You have cut so many rural touring theatre companies – and yet you give them 
fantastic reports: it makes no sense. Why do you not value the work that they 
are taking out to the smaller communities? They are keeping a sense of 
community in this country and you have just destroyed that!

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181715>

1.36pm

@emmaca

Funding for rural touring has actually been strengthened. We support a large 
number of rural touring circuits such as Rural Arts North Yorkshire, Take Art 
in Somerset and Live and Local in Warwickshire. The National Rural Touring 
Forum has had a big increase in funding to support rural touring across the 
country. So while we were unable to offer funding to some organisations, these 
examples – and there are many more – show that we have a strengthened 
commitment to touring in rural areas.

WomenandTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10180075>

What can ACE do about improving the public perception of the subsidised arts 
sector? Many are questioning why the arts deserve public money at all, and we 
need ACE now more than ever to help us stand together as a sector to justify 
the work that we do.

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181872>

1.44pm

@WomenandTheatre

Actually the public has a good perception of the arts but often they don't 
realise what is publicly funded. 76% of the public thinks funding the arts is a 
good thing. Politicians, however, don't feel as confident about speaking about 
their love of the arts as they do about, say, sport. I think we have a gap in 
public discourse of the arts in this country. That's something I want to 
change. We will be telling the story of our investment over the next four years 
in a clear way and we'll be looking for ways to enable public leaders and 
commentators to be able to talk about the arts in a way that isn't full of 
jargon; isn't full of figures that make no sense; but just talks about the arts 
and what they do for people and their lives. We've got to be more 
straight-talking about what we do, so that public leaders don't feel 
embarrassed about advocating for the arts

garythomas <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10178954>

I appreciate the difficult decisions, but the process doesn't seem completely 
"transparent" to me, and nor does the "intellectual framework".

I wonder how "the best mix of organisations in terms of ... artform" can 
exclude animation – the artform that my (hitherto ACE funded) organisation 
specialises in.

Animation is interdisciplinary, cross-sectoral, something the UK is 
internationally respected for, award winning, digital, and has a predominantly 
young audience.

But I can't see any animation organisation on your list, and I'd like to ask 
at which stage of the process, and what part of the intellectual framework, was 
the decision to exclude an entire artform from the portfolio?

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181984>

1.47pm

@garythomas

Animation is included in the funding decisions we announced yesterday. Yes, 
it's right that there is no single body dedicated to this work but galleries we 
fund, and moving image companies such as Film London, Lux and Film and Video 
Umbrella cover animation as part of their work. Remember the National portfolio 
isn't the only funding avenue. Grants for the arts is an open applications 
Lottery funded programme, through which we have recently made a large grant to 
a Animate, a specialist animation company.

sanguinman <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10180917>

How will you measure success?

After the scrapping of NI9 and NI11 what do you have in place to accurately 
assess the impact of this intervention (funding round).

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10182155>

1.54pm

@sanguinman

Having fought, while in my previous job in DCMS, for the NI11 measure, I would 
be the first to say that it wasn't sophisticated and was barely adequate in 
capturing anything about what the arts do. It was better than nothing but too 
crude to be of real use. We've got rid of the previous box-ticking approach. 
Now we have a more sophisticated approach based on peer assessment, 
self-assessment, funding agreements and a range of qualitative and quantitative 
research, that will give us a rounded picture of success. We've learned from 
experience that over mechanistic, usually instrumental, measurements do not 
begin to describe the true value of the arts.

mthephilosopher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10178309>

Why, at a time of cuts, are institutions such as the Royal Opera House etc. 
paying vast sums of money for "star" performers? Surely the role of the arts 
council should be to nurture the arts, not subsidise the millionaire lifestyles 
of "star" singers, conductors, performers?

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10182250>

1.58pm

@mthephilosopher

Institutions like the Royal Opera House and the orchestras operate in an 
international market and there is pressure on publicly funded institutions all 
over the world to get best value for money in what they pay performers. The 
Arts Council can't compel organisations to operate in a closed market, as that 
would mean they would lose their international standing. I agree it is our role 
to nurture talent and up-and-coming performers and that is what we do through 
organisations like the National Opera Studio and others including English 
National Opera, who are credited with the development of many fine young 
singers in this country.

HummDrumm <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10178434>

What was it like playing with Hawkwind ?

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10182312>

2.01pm

@HummDrumm

What was it like like playing with Hawkwind? It was all a dream ... and then I 
woke up.

kw1330 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10181752>

Can we get some answers about Artsway, onedotzero, Kinetica Museum and digital 
media provision in this country which has been decimated by over half.

A no reply will just add to the harm done already.

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10182431>

2.06pm

@kw1330

I don't believe we have "decimated" digital media provision. We are supporting 
a huge range of organisations who focus on media arts and digital work – AV 
Festival, Watershed, Lighthouse, FACT, to name a few. Outside the portfolio, we 
announced a couple of weeks ago a partnership with the BBC that looks at 
building digital capacity across the arts sector. In respect of the 
organisations you mention, we had to make some extremely difficult decisions 
and many strong applications have had to be turned down. 2011-12 is a 
transitional year for Artsway and others and we'll work with them to explore 
other funding options available to them, such as Grant for the arts.

wesg <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10178313>

Nothing long winded from me.

What is art? And who gets to decide what's in and out?

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10182529>

2.09pm

@wesg

Art is the best way of expressing what it is to be human. Exactly what is art 
is the subject of a proper and profound debate; it's something we should have 
an open discussion about as a society and I hope we'll be doing that in the 
next few years.

audra19 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10182367>

Given that bookchain stores only offer anthologies, dead white male poets and 
Carol Ann Duffy while few independent bookstores will stock poetry (for fear of 
ending up with badly written self or vanity published poetry), how can you 
justify cutting funding to the Poetry Book Society without a proper, executable 
plan to assist poetry publishers in the distribution of poetry books to readers?

Who is going to fund and administer the T S Eliot prizes?

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10182699>

2.17pm

@audra19

We received a large number of strong applications from poetry organisations. 
The Poetry Book Society's application included good proposals which address our 
goals, including the TS Eliot Prize and the public readings by the shortlisted 
poets. However, in our judgment, it didn't seem to have the potential to reach 
as many people as other applicants. As I said yesterday if we turn someone 
down, it's not the end of their relationship with the Arts Council, and we want 
to talk to the PBS – especially about how we ensure the continuation of the TS 
Eliot prize. We are spending more on literature overall, and our support for 
poetry is, I think, really strong – supporting publishers and young poets, and 
enabling more people to be able to experience poetry.

Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10182741>

2.19pm

I'm going to have to sign off now. Sorry I couldn't answer every question – as 
there were a lot! As I said, I think debate on the arts is healthy and thanks 
for joining in.

All the best,

Alan
 