
Any arts organisation that receives public money will have to show it is 
reaching out and improving access for young people from disadvantaged 
backgrounds, ministers have said.

The government published its white paper on culture 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/culture-white-paper> on Tuesday, 
the first sinceJennie Lee’s groundbreaking report in 1965 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/feb/23/jennie-lee-policy-arts-white-paper-funding>
, with which the former will undoubtedly be compared.

The Conservative culture minister Ed Vaizey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-vaizey>, who launched the white paper, 
said it had access at its heart. “Our arts, heritage and culture should be fit 
for all – not just the privileged few. Culture opens doors, improves social 
mobility and has a huge impact on life chances,” he said.

“This bold new vision will put culture firmly at the heart of everyday life 
and ensure that everyone, no matter what their background, can access and enjoy 
our incredible arts and culture. It can also help us discover untapped talent 
that could become Britain’s future stars in these vibrant sectors.”

The white paper sets out an expectation, for the first time, that any museum, 
theatre, gallery, opera house or arts group that receives British government 
money “should reach out to everyone, regardless of their background”.

Arts Council England <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>
 has the job of ensuring this happens and reporting back to government.

A “cultural citizens programme” was also announced to give thousands of 
children from the lowest socioeconomic groups behind-the-scenes access to the 
arts.

One of the liveliest arts policy debates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jun/14/peter-bazalgette-london-not-threat-regional-arts-funding>
 at the moment is culture in the regions, stoked by fears over local authority 
spending cuts. There is also pressure on Arts Council England to spend a 
greater proportion of its money outside London.

The white paper is proposing a “great place scheme” to encourage funders, 
councils, universities and arts organisations from the same area to come 
together to make culture a core part of local policy planning.

“Culture should never be considered an add-on or a fringe activity,” Vaizey 
said. “A whole host of organisations would benefit from a closer relationship 
with culture.”

He announced a review into the museums sector, examining local and regional 
museums and focusing on digital services and storage. It is the first 
government review of museums for 10 years and will be completed by 2017.

Vaizey announced his consulted widely across the arts sector since announcing 
the prospect of the white paper last summer. The report is more a statement of 
belief than a document proposing major structural changes. Vaizey accepted it 
might not be seen as radical: “There are lots of radical things you can do 
which might potentially frighten the horses … it is not my natural instinct to 
upend things.”

One marked difference between the two white papers is that Vaizey is not 
proposing significant amounts of money for the arts, unlike Lee who increased 
the Arts Council’s grant by 30%.

The shadow culture secretary, Maria Eagle, said arts and culture faced “real 
threat” under the Conservatives.


“The Arts Council’s core grant in aid will have been cut by 36% between 2010 
and 2015,” the Labour MP said. “And by 2019 [the Department for Culture, Media 
and Sport] will have to find its share of £3.5bn of further cuts in 2019-20 to 
make the chancellor’s budget plans add up. Across the country, local authority 
funding is under even greater pressure.”

Arts Council England’s chair, Sir Peter Bazalgette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/peter-bazalgette>, called the white paper 
“a vote of confidence in the arts and cultural sector and the contribution it 
makes to all our lives”.

It was also welcomed by the Creative Industries Federation 
<http://www.creativeindustriesfederation.com/>, although said there were gaps. 
The chief executive, John Kampfner, said: “We welcome all new ways of working 
to ensure the resilience and long-term success of arts institutions across the 
UK. We believe that growth and success will, however, be put on a stronger 
footing only when linked much more closely to the provision of education and to 
an all-embracing plan for funding and finance.

“We are disappointed that this white paper does not emphasise the 
inter-connectedness between creative industries companies and arts 
organisations, and that it does not make the case more strongly for arts 
teaching in schools.”
 