
Arvo Pärt is 80 today <http://www.arvopart.ee/en/>. And, to celebrate the 
music of arguably the world’s most popular composer of contemporary classical 
music I’ve put together a list of five of hisleast known pieces 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dAh4cBW389k>. The point, dear reader, is to 
introduce some of Pärt’s early music that belongs, I believe, squarely in the 
canon of Pärt’s finest compositional achievements, but which isn’t represented 
enough in compilations, nor does it ever feature on the soundtracks to films, 
TV shows, and documentaries. Soundtracks which have, in my view, sometimes 
reduced and traduced Pärt’s accessible yet austere music of recent decades.

A guide to Arvo Pärt's music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/jun/18/arvo-part-contemporary-music-guide>
Pärt’s serene but pain-wracked and tortuously hard-won “tintinnabuli” style (I 
meanmusic like this <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RYypmgIYOVQ>) has become a 
too-cheaply bought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2008/may/29/timetogivepartarest> 
musical signifier of emotional extremes, when the music itself is more 
mysterious and more powerful than any of the dramatic narratives it is so often 
forced to accompany.

Instead, here are five of those pre-tintinnabuli pieces  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4_dHvI72RoI>. And then, once you’ve got your 
ears around those, I’ve also included another five of Arvo’s finest
tintinnabulatory creations <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7vdgZAJVnes>, works 
that you might well know, but perhaps not in their entireties.

Symphony no 1 (1963)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdAh4cBW389k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdAh4cBW389k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdAh4cBW389k&media=>
Here’s the piece that will jolt you out of the idea that Pärt’s music can be 
reduced to a single style or mode of utterance. Modernist but deeply 
communicative, starkly constructed but speaking with absolute clarity, his 
first symphony is music of multi-lithic (as opposed to monolithic) power.

Perpetuum mobile (1963)

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdAh4cBW389k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdAh4cBW389k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdAh4cBW389k&media=>
And here is a four-minute distillation of Pärt’s Soviet-era modernism, which 
grows with an inescapable and implacable foment of musical momentum.

Cello Concerto: Pro et Contra (1966)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4_dHvI72RoI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4_dHvI72RoI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4_dHvI72RoI&media=>
Yes, there may be weird accommodations with and quotations of baroque styles 
in this piece, but that only throws its granite-hewn textures of gloriously 
vibrant dissonance into greater relief.

Credo (1968)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3mfg6-qGdw4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3mfg6-qGdw4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3mfg6-qGdw4&media=>
The shock here is manifold: firstly, in setting a religious text in Soviet 
times, in quoting Bach, and in fusing a wild diversity of styles into a 
12-minute explosion of musical and spiritual energy. Hear it atthe Last Night 
of the Proms <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ehnrzc/acts/ardmzc> to see what I 
mean!

Symphony no 3 (1971)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwojU_ExRFFo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwojU_ExRFFo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwojU_ExRFFo&media=>
In hindsight, the Third Symphony sounds like a staging-post on the way to the 
radical simplicity and starkness of Pärt’s most celebrated later music. But it 
finds an idiom all of its own in an interzone between modernist energy and the 
meditative resonances of his tintinnabuli pieces.

...and five of his best tintinnabuli works

Für Alina <https://www.youtube.com/watch?t=7&v=8as_BN5h5YQ> – Pärt’s 
tintinnabulation in its purest form;Tabula Rasa 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vu1BcNeebMI>, his unforgettable double 
concerto; the choral icons ofPassio <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BRrJ2MXwmRQ>
 and theBerliner Messe <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=86PLoBQH6fM>, and the 
more recent and orchestrally ambitiousFourth Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2DJUN2M3D-E>.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2DJUN2M3D-E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2DJUN2M3D-E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2DJUN2M3D-E&media=> 