
A discussion last night at London's LRB bookshop <http://www.lrbshop.co.uk/> of
Adam Thirlwell's Multiples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/16/multiples-stories-languages-thirlwell-review>
 –an elaborate game of Chinese whispers involving multiple translations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2013/aug/20/neil-gaiman-peter-james-style-edinburgh-podcast>
 – drew in a distinguished international line-up, with the novelistTash Aw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/mar/15/tash-aw-life-in-writing>, the 
Chinese writerMa Jian  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ma-jian>and the 
Italian authorFrancesco Pacifico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/24/story-purity-francesco-pacifico-review>
 joining the chatter.

But the high point came when AS Byatt revealed that she had written a two-star 
Amazon book review underthe username ASD 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/pdp/profile/A288W53HR02AQO/ref=cm_aya_pdp_profile>.

Amazon, you may remember, has been having a bit of a clamp-down on author 
reviews, after last year'sspate of sock-puppetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/03/rj-ellory-secret-amazon-reviews>
, with authors on both sides of the Atlanticclaiming that their reviews had 
been removed. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/booknews/9738552/Author-backlash-over-Amazons-new-online-review-crackdown.html>

In the US, crime writer Steve Weddle had a lengthy run-in with Amazon, which he
gleefully reported on his blog Do Some Damage 
<http://dosomedamage.blogspot.co.uk/2012/10/amazonreview.html>, after they 
declined to run his review of a novel by a friend.

No such problems greeted Byatt's web reviewing debut on 26 April 2012. But it 
would be hard to suggest any improper personal connection, since the authors in 
question were anonymous.

Her subject? The Oxford Essential German Dictionary 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/review/R2BIC6BPDHF0SJ/ref=cm_cr_rdp_perm>.

Her review?

I bought this dictionary to replace my 1997 compact Oxford-Duden, which has 
come to pieces with use. I am translating a short story from German to English 
(not a particularly difficult story) and found that this dictionary is entirely 
useless for this kind of work. Its vocabulary is very limited and concentrated 
on immediately modern and day-to-day "useful" translations. It has virtually no 
synonyms. I found myself looking up words on line rather than in the 
dictionary. it isn't simply the fact of it being a pocket dictionary. The 1997 
Oxford-Duden was perfectly adequate for reading Thomas Mann and Goethe in bed. 
This is really only for students learning German. There must be readers like me 
who have quite good German but need a portable dictionary from time to time.

The piece that Byatt was translating was Julia Franck's "Mann Werden" – a 
Richard Middleton story which had already been translated by Javier Marías and 
Andrew Sean Greer as part of the Multiples project.

Attentive readers of Multiples will have noticed that Byatt had already outed 
herself in an author note, writing: "I became so incensed with [the dictionary] 
that I wrote the only bad Amazon review I have ever written—indeed the only 
Amazon review I have ever written."

When Thirlwell checked out the review, he was amused to discover that nearly 
everyone else had given it a 4 or 5 star review, "with the exception of one 
other 2 star review, from someone called BikerClive."

While it's charming to think of a literary alliance between Dame Antonia and 
BikerClive 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/pdp/profile/A3MCOB349ZKR1F/ref=cm_cr_pr_pdp>, it's 
sad to report that Byatt's perspicacity on the subject of dictionaries has yet 
to be recognised by other users of the shopping website. Her review has yet to 
receive a single "helpful" vote. And her "Top Reviewer Ranking" languishes at 
2,358,920.
 