
According to Dorothy Parker, men don't make passes at girls who wear glasses. 
Silvia Farina Elia, of course, has no need to abide by such advice and the 
Italian duly crashed shot after shot pastElena Baltacha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/elena-baltacha> for a 6-1, 6-0 third-round 
victory that brought an abrupt end to the British player's inspirational 
Australian Open run. But, as was remarked afterwards, few losers have ever 
looked quite so happy.

Of course, Baltacha was disappointed. She had, in her own words, got her "arse 
kicked". But, when she stepped on court for the first of her three qualifying 
matches last week, she would have happily settled for this.

It was the second time the 21-year-old Ukrainian-born Baltacha had reached the 
third round of a major but there was no real comparison with 2002 at Wimbledon 
where she had the luxury of a wild card to sweep her past the qualifying bun 
fight. "I've done it myself this time and it's so much more rewarding. I think 
I've recognised what I'm capable of - I've dug deep and I know I can get 
better. That's exciting."

Her ranking will rise around 60 places to the mid 120s, with the prospect of 
getting into better-quality WTA tournaments and of entering the main draws for 
the remaining three majors as of right, assuming she builds on the experience 
and success of the last 10 days here .

It is a fearsomely competitive and crowded world she is entering. At the start 
of every year's austral summer a new crop of teenage wannabes emerges, all of 
them super-determined to make a mark. Because of her illnesses during her 
teenage years Baltacha now has little time to lose, though she was finally 
beaten by a player 11 years her senior.

Baltacha's main asset is her exuberance and never-say-die spirit but she will 
need to develop much more in the way of variety if she is to progress 
significantly. In the men's game the top 100 is the benchmark; in the women's 
it is the top 50. Farina Elia, the No15 seed, was well aware that Baltacha 
could be dangerous if she was allowed to get into her own rhythm. The Italian 
made doubly sure that she mixed up the angles and the pace of her shots and it 
all proved too much for the British No1.

"I didn't know what to do in the end. I haven't played anyone ranked that high 
outside of Wimbledon and she was just too good. She's unbelievably quick and 
awesome," said Baltacha. The latter is not a word the Italians themselves 
reserve for Farina Elia and served to emphasise the immense gap that remains 
between what Baltacha has achieved this week and what lies ahead.

"I know I need to get quicker visually together with my leg speed. I need to 
know where I am on the court better and what I'm meant to be doing next. My 
serve has gone a bit funny - I mean, to be honest, I could go on and on and on 
about my weaknesses. But I feel there is a lot more to come and I would have 
felt that even if I had lost in the first round of qualifying."

There is no doubt that Baltacha will stay loyal to her current coaches, Alan 
Jones and Jo Durie, who stuck by her when the times were tough, lending support 
and encouragement. However, there is an argument for bringing in someone with a 
little more experience of the game outside the parochial confines of the 
British scene.

It is vitally important that Baltacha receives the right advice and the 
correct coaching. Having built up a head of steam, having established the 
momentum, she now needs to press on, although she does not appear to be 
receiving those signals.

"Alan [Jones] has kind of said 'Let's not rush ahead' and I know this isn't my 
last chance to get into the top 100. I will have a lot more opportunities and 
I'm not going to get trapped into thinking 'Oh my God, I'm nearly there.' I'm 
not going to do that."

It is to be hoped she is right, and it has to be borne in mind that she has 
already fought her way through considerable health difficulties.

Martina Navratilova yesterday took a swipe at the American trainer Pat 
Etcheberry for pushing Belgium's Justine Henin-Hardenne, the currently injured 
reigning champion, too hard.

Nobody would wish to see Baltacha pushed beyond her limits or the expectations 
to be pitched too high. These have been a marvellous few days, and a great 
experience. Now the hard work really begins.

The leading seeds in the bottom half of the draw all went through with some 
ease, with the prospective quarter-finals between Serena Williams and France's 
Am√©lie Mauresmo, and the all-Russian face-off between Maria Sharapova, the 
Wimbledon champion, and Svetlana Kuznetsova, the US Open champion, still in 
place.
 