
Two weeks ago, the Cannes film festival was preparing to unroll its red carpet 
beneath a double shadow. First was the threat of terrorism –then deemed strong 
enough to warrant 500 extra police officers and hugely-tightened security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/10/cannes-remains-vigilant-as-festival-opens-amid-fears-of-terror-attack>
. The second was the persistent criticism levelled at the festival that it
discriminates against female directors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/07/female-directors-seize-limelight-cannes-film-festival-andrea-arnold>
. Just three of the 21 films in competition this year were made by women 
(though that’s still a healthier ratio than in Hollywood).

But as the festival enters its final weekend, both clouds are dispersing. Any 
terror attacks appear to have been averted, and two of the best-reviewed movies 
in contention were made by women (Andrea Arnold’sAmerican Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold-mislays-map-but-us-roadtrip-still-sweetly-intriguing>
 and Maren Ade’sToni Erdmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/13/toni-erdmann-review-long-german-comedy-is-slight-biting-little-miracle>
).

And, as the credits have rolled, so evidence has mounted to indicate a larger 
shift – on screen, rather than behind the camera. Twelve of those 21 films 
feature a female protagonist, most of them with bigger fish to fry than mooning 
over men. As well as those films by female directors, the festival has 
premiered Olivier Assayas’sPersonal Shopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/personal-shopper-review-kristen-stewarts-psychic-spooker-is-a-must-have>
, starring Kirsten Stewart as a psychic PA, the Dardenne brothers’The Unknown 
Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/18/the-unknown-girl-review-dardennes-brothers-cannes-2016?CMP=twt_a-film_b-gdnfilm>
, about a female inner-city doctor, Park Chan-Wook’s adaptation of Sarah 
Waters’ Fingersmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/the-handmaiden-review-park-chan-wooks-lurid-lesbian-potboiler-simmers-with-sexual-tension>
,Ma Rosa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/18/marosa-review-brillante-mendoza-cannes>
, about an impoverished mother fighting crime in Manila,Aquarius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/aquarius-review-rich-and-mysterious-brazilian-story-of-societal-disintegration>
, in which a 65-year-old woman fends off housing developers and Pedro 
Almodóvar’sJulieta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/julieta-review-pedro-almodovar-ties-himself-down-with-fractured-melodrama>
, about a woman seeking to reconnect with her estranged daughter. The final 
film, screening on Saturday, is Elle, Paul Verhoeven’s drama starring Isabelle 
Huppert as the CEO of a video games company.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fas-cannes-closes-a-new-breed-of-female-lead-emerges-empowered-careerist-and-gender-neutral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54135acd6c7d2338ad5ff212fd1a7c18a3bca6c8%2F195_0_4411_2649%2F4411.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20Cannes%20closes%2C%20a%20new%20breed%20of%20female%20lead%20emerges%3A%20empowered%2C%20careerist%C2%A0%E2%80%93and%20'gender-neutral'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fas-cannes-closes-a-new-breed-of-female-lead-emerges-empowered-careerist-and-gender-neutral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20Cannes%20closes%2C%20a%20new%20breed%20of%20female%20lead%20emerges%3A%20empowered%2C%20careerist%C2%A0%E2%80%93and%20%27gender-neutral%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fas-cannes-closes-a-new-breed-of-female-lead-emerges-empowered-careerist-and-gender-neutral%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54135acd6c7d2338ad5ff212fd1a7c18a3bca6c8%2F195_0_4411_2649%2F4411.jpg>
 Hard at work … Kirsten Stewart in Personal Shopper 
What links most of these women is that their careers, or their causes, are 
key; romantic attachments largely relegated. Even in the quasi-romances –Loving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/loving-review-civil-rights-tale-marries-heartfelt-drama-with-too-much-restraint>
 by Jeff Nichols, Sean Penn’sThe Last Face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/the-last-face-review-sean-penn-charlize-theron-crass-romance-cannes>
 – the women enjoy more airtime, and are at their most keenly-drawn when it 
comes to their activism, rather than their love lives.

Friday saw the emergence of perhaps the most formidable of this new breed of 
female heroines: Jesse, played by Elle Fanning, the teen supermodel at the 
heart of Nicolas Winding Refn’sThe Neon Demon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/the-neon-demon-review-nicolas-winding-refn-makes-zoolander-3-but-erotic-and-evil>
. The director described how the film, his first with a female lead, allowed 
him to “live out my perverse dream of being a 16-year old girl, which I think 
every man has inside them”. When he first met Fanning, he said, his first 
thought was “Oh my God, you’re me”; though he was keen to stress that the actor 
needed to “take the lead”, given his distance from her age and gender.

Nicolas Winding Refn: society has become necrophiliac as the internet merges 
death and beauty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/nicolas-winding-refn-society-has-become-necrophiliac-as-the-internet-merges-death-and-beauty>
What Refn has done in The Neon Demon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-neon-demon>, however, is to wholly demote 
the focus offered to his male characters. “I wanted to make all the men like 
the girlfriends in other movies. All the women are the focus; everything else 
is secondary. I wasn’t particularly interested in the men’s world but in order 
to create a story, we needed the ‘girlfriends’ to toss in here and there.”

Refn’s gender-reversal is taken one stage further by Maren Ade, whose 
three-hour German comedyToni Erdmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/toni-erdmann> is the current frontrunner to 
win the Palme d’Or on Sunday. The film is the story of Ines, a serious, 
successful businesswoman in her mid 30s whose larky father pays a visit. Ines 
is, by and large, emotionally, intellectually and sexually self-sufficient. 
That she is a woman seems an afterthought rather than a mission statement.

“Maybe it’s best to think of Ines,” says the director, “as a contemporary, 
gender-neutral character – much like a man who cries now and then and has 
father issues.”

The current debate can be frustrating, adds Ade, “especially when it’s given 
so much weight. As a woman I’m used to identifying with male characters. When I 
watch a James Bond movie, I’m not just the Bond Girl, I’m James Bond too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fas-cannes-closes-a-new-breed-of-female-lead-emerges-empowered-careerist-and-gender-neutral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22f29f45ae9e588e8c31aa1e857f8c79a6d8f475%2F0_120_2953_1773%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20Cannes%20closes%2C%20a%20new%20breed%20of%20female%20lead%20emerges%3A%20empowered%2C%20careerist%C2%A0%E2%80%93and%20'gender-neutral'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fas-cannes-closes-a-new-breed-of-female-lead-emerges-empowered-careerist-and-gender-neutral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20Cannes%20closes%2C%20a%20new%20breed%20of%20female%20lead%20emerges%3A%20empowered%2C%20careerist%C2%A0%E2%80%93and%20%27gender-neutral%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fas-cannes-closes-a-new-breed-of-female-lead-emerges-empowered-careerist-and-gender-neutral%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22f29f45ae9e588e8c31aa1e857f8c79a6d8f475%2F0_120_2953_1773%2F2953.jpg>
 Working girl … the Dardennes brothers’ La Fille Inconnue 
Yet for Melissa Silverstein, founder and publisher of campaigning website 
Women and Hollywood <http://blogs.indiewire.com/womenandhollywood/>, Toni 
Erdmann was the exception, rather than the figurehead for a new wave of 
empowered, evolved, gender-irrelevant characters. “Ines is the best of a 
working woman,” she says. “The compromises for success, what you have to leave 
behind, the different kind of choices you have to make compared to men.”

BFI funding chief: ‘Awards voters must consider diversity as well as quality’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/bfi-funding-chief-awards-voters-must-consider-diversity-as-well-as-quality>
 The glut of male-directed, female-led movies may have “forced the 
conversation on gender into this festival,” thinks Silverstein, but that is 
scant compensation for the increase in women’s stories which more women behind 
the camera would likely bring.

Her sentiments find an echo in the words of one of the male directors who has 
been bucking the trend for decades: Pedro Almodóvar, whose back catalogue 
features scores of leading ladies.Speaking at the festival on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/pedro-almodovar-hollywood-diabolical-sexism-women-cannes>
, the Spaniard denounced what he saw as the US industry’s continuing 
“diabolical sexism”. “With those movies ... if a woman appears, their function 
is to prove that the hero is not a homosexual,” he said. “Hollywood is losing 
an enormous opportunity when it doesn’t actually create these good roles for 
women of all ages.”

The general mood as the sun sets on this year’s Cannes is that few films have 
emerged which are set to be future classics. Yet the lessons the festival may 
hold for wider cinema could have a far longer legacy.
 