
Another day and another of Gordon Brown's ministerial goats reaches the end of 
his tether. This week Lord Darzi, the super-surgeon who joined Brown's 
"government of all the talents" (hence "goats") in June 2007, resigned to 
return to the operating theatre he never quite left. Digby Jones, roly-poly 
ex-director of the CBI, also came and rapidly went. Lord Malloch-Brown, ex-UN 
(un)diplomat and sometime "alpha dog" of American attack politics, quit last 
week. Of Brown's four 2007 goats only Admiral Alan West survives as minister 
for security at the Home Office.

Outsiders were meant to show how the boss was not a mere tribalist. Does their 
brief tenures discredit the whole idea of tethering a few unelected goats to 
the ministerial team? No, though it does highlight the weaknesses.

"No loyalty" and "too keen to get back to making money", say MPs, who think 
they should have the jobs which the goats got.

"It shows the political class still has distinct skills," a senior Cameroon 
murmured cheerfully on hearing of Darzi' s exit. Scapegoats or escape goats?

Each case is different. Some of Jones's Tory chums suspect he wanted the 
peerage more than the job.

Clever Malloch-Brown was too big a fish to swim happily in David Miliband's 
pool and though he had family reasons for leaving, he seems to have relieved 
frustrations by revealing that Brown's government is more "chaotic" and 
"short-termist" than many he has known in the developing world.

Darzi is in a league of his own, a keyhole cancer surgeon for whom the 
overused Brownite label "world-class" is for once appropriate.

He was recruited specifically to use his vast prestige to conduct the Next 
Steps Review, the drive for bottom-up quality within theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

"No point in brilliant treatment if patients don't get their lunch the next 
day," he told staff on roadshow tours. His first progress report, Our Journey 
So Far, was published a fortnight ago.

His task done, Darzi can return to the day job. While a versatile Lords 
minister, he was also spending a day or two a week in theatre.

In any case, in the limited talent pool that is the 646-strong House of 
Commons there have always been goats, always will be.

Lord Kitchener was a bad gimmicky appointment as war minister in 1914, the 
press magnate, Lord Beaverbrook, better in 1940.

The 20th century's greatest goat was Ernest Bevin, trade union boss turned 
wartime labour minister and cold war foreign secretary.

When Harold Wilson tried to repeat the trick in the 60s with Bevin's heir, 
Frank Cousins, it failed â€“ as Margaret Thatcher's use of Lord (David) Young did 
not.

New goats are lured into Labour's "big tent" all the time. In 1997, Tony Blair 
had lords Sainsbury, Simon and Adonis. Brown has Lady Vadera and Paul Myners 
and has just recruited Lord Sugar.

Shrewd or ludicrous? MPs are not yet sure. Odd though, that a government so 
keen to abolish appointed peers should need to appoint so many as ministers.
 