
Will this be the year Arizona turns blue? It’s a question Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> ask every four years, only for 
the state to stay a deep Republican red.

In 2016, they sense a real opportunity. Sean Spicer, a spokesman for the 
Republican National Committee, predicts states like Arizona and Georgia will 
remain fire-truck red – and that even to ask the question again is akin to “
believing Lucy won’t pull the football 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=055wFyO6gag>” away from Charlie Brown.

But this has been a presidential election year unlike any other in modern 
history, and Democrats see an opportunity as golden as the hair atop the head 
of the Republican nominee,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Ftrump-ohio-democrats-working-class-voters-anywhere-but-washington&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%2C%20trade%20and%20racism%3A%20economic%20decay%20is%20dividing%20Ohio%20Democrats%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Ftrump-ohio-democrats-working-class-voters-anywhere-but-washington>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%2C%20trade%20and%20racism%3A%20economic%20decay%20is%20dividing%20Ohio%20Democrats%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Ftrump-ohio-democrats-working-class-voters-anywhere-but-washington&media=>
Trump, trade and racism: economic decay is dividing Ohio Democrats – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/21/trump-ohio-democrats-working-class-voters-anywhere-but-washington>
“Anticipation is high this year,” said Enrique Gutiérrez, a spokesman for the 
Arizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> Democratic party. “You 
can feel the excitement in our volunteers, at phone banks and training. It’s 
really boosting morale for Democrats and for our supporters here in the state.”

Opinion polls show Clinton within striking distance of Trump in Arizona and 
Georgia, traditionally conservative states now in the churn of major 
demographic change. Clinton trails Trump by justtwo points 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/az/arizona_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-6087.html>
 in Arizona; according to the RealClearPolitics.com polling average, a 
smattering of recent surveys show her with a small edge. In Georgia, the 
average has Trump leading byfour 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/ga/georgia_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson-5968.html>
.

Republicans see opportunities in Nevada, where averages show the race in 
effect tied 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/nv/nevada_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-6086.html>
, and Iowa, where Trump leads by morethan four points 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/ia/iowa_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-5981.html>
.

Since the second world war, Arizona has given its handful of electoral votes 
to just one Democrat: Bill Clinton in 1996.

Hoping to re-create that magic, Hillary Clinton’s campaign recently opened two 
new field offices and launched a six-figure ad buy; the Democratic National 
Committee isexpanding its presence 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/dnc-expands-footprint-arizona-georgia-utah-n641611>
 in the state as well. Through a coordinated effort, Democrats have 27 field 
offices and 160 officers, not including volunteers.

“We thought it would be 2020 [when we had a chance], but the dynamics of this 
presidential race have just leapfrogged expectations,” said Gutierrez. “We did 
not expect Arizona to be in play this early.”

Arizona key facts 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=AZ> 
Over the past year, Democrats have outpaced Republicans in registering new 
voters. Since October 2015, Democrats have registered 100,000 andRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> 80,000, according to data 
from the office of the Arizona secretary of state.

But there are still more Republicans than Democrats in the state and GOP 
voters have a stronger turnout record. There are 1.9 million Republicans 
registered in Arizona, just over 1 million Democrats and 1.6 million undeclared.

“Last month, Trump came here, to Arizona, to give his immigration speech,” 
said David Waid, a Democratic strategist and former state party chair. “You 
don’t come in and work a state if you think there’s no way can it can go into 
the Democratic column.”

Trump gave a fiery speech in downtown Phoenix on 31 August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/donald-trump-vows-to-deport-millions-during-first-hour-in-office-in-hardline-speech>
, dashing hopes among moderate Republicans and his Hispanic supporters that he 
would soften his views on immigration. He reasserted his plan to build a border 
wall paid for by Mexico and declared that criminals would be deported while 
everyone else would have “to return home and apply for re-entry”.

Waid said that if Democrats could improve Latino voter turnout in Arizona by a 
few percentage points, Republicans up and down the ballot would be in trouble. 
In 2012, Latinos accounted for 18% of all votes cast, up from 16% in 2008.

Republicans still hope to woo Latino voters by stressing values like the 
importance of family and religion that they believe can resonate.

Democrats have struggled to mobilize Latino voters, engagement failing to keep 
pace with the sharp increase in eligible Latino voters. But Trump has driven 
record-setting numbers of citizenship applications and a surge in voter 
registration among Hispanics concerned about his hardline stance on immigration 
or turned off by his remarks about a federal judge of Mexican origin.

Arizona Democrat aims to unseat McCain: ‘Nobody in DC thinks I’ll win’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/14/ann-kirkpatrick-arizona-democrat-john-mccain-senate>
“Latinos want to vote this year. We’re seeing that across the state,” said 
Pita Juarez of One Arizona, a Phoenix-based coalition of Latino voter 
registration groups.

The group’s Viva the Vote campaign had hoped to register 80,000 voters before 
November. Juarez said the group has surpassed that goal and is on track to meet 
a new goal of 120,000.

“Arizona is in play if the Democrats want it to be,” said Chuck Coughlin, 
Republican strategist and head of the political consulting group HighGround.

In the short term, Arizona could swing in the presidential election depending 
on the resources Clinton and the Democrats invest, Coughlin said. But in the 
long term, whether the state goes Democrat or remains Republican will be 
determined by how the GOP remakes itself after the election – especially on the 
issue of immigration.

“The Arizona electorate is ground zero for the immigration debate,” he said. 
“We’ve been baptized in this issue; we know what real answers are.

“The wall is not real answers,” he said, adding that Mexico is the state’s 
biggest trading partner. “It’s about building a secure economic and social 
relationship with our neighbors. Voters here know that.”
 