
Asafa Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell> has described his 
18-month doping ban as "unfair and unjust" and confirmed his intention to 
appeal to the court of arbitration for sport.

The sprinter was banned on Thursday by a disciplinary panel of the Jamaican 
Anti-Doping Commission following his positive test for the stimulant oxilofrine 
at last summer's Jamaica national championships. The ban is backdated to the 
time of the offence, meaning Powell will be eligible to compete again in 
December.

The ruling on the 31-year-old comes two days after his training partner 
Sherone Simpson was also given an 18-month ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/08/sherone-simpson-18-month-drug-ban>
 after testing positive for the same stimulant at the national championships. 
Powell, who held the 100m world record between 2005 and 2008, said in a 
statement: "This ruling is not only unfair, it is patently unjust. Panels such 
as these, I understood, were assembled to allow athletes who consciously or 
unconsciously come into conflict with the rules of sport a chance at equitable 
redemption. Unfortunately, this was not the case."

Powell claimed that he took a legal supplement, Epiphany D1, which was 
contaminated with oxilofrine. His statement continued: "My team commissioned 
two private laboratories that confirmed that oxilofrine was present in the 
supplements, despite it not being listed as an ingredient on the bottle nor on 
its website.

"I would also like to share that, upon realising that the supplement contained 
oxilofrine, my team made contact with both the World Anti-Doping Agency (Wada) 
and the United States Anti-Doping Agency (Usada), who not only ordered samples 
of the supplement from the manufacturer, but also tested and confirmed our 
findings.

"The Usada has also since issued a warning on their website for athletes to 
avoid the product as it contains banned substances. This is the first time in 
nearly 12 years of being in the sport and over 150 tests that I have had an 
adverse finding. It is for a stimulant, a stimulant that is only banned during 
competition and experts have declared has no performance-enhancing effects.

"Sanctions for a stimulant and this kind of infraction usually range from 
public warnings to a ban of three months, six months in the most extreme cases. 
I was and am still more than prepared to accept a sanction that is in line with 
the offence. Instead, nine months later, what has been handed down is clearly 
not based on the offence nor the facts surrounding it. My team has begun 
preparations for an appeal to the court of arbitration for sport in Switzerland.

"I want to reiterate that I have never knowingly taken any banned substances. 
I did all the necessary checks before taking Epiphany D1 and it is my hope that 
the CAS will prove to be a more open and fair avenue for the review of all the 
facts in my case â€“ facts and truth that were not taken into consideration at my 
initial hearing."

If upheld, the ruling means Powell will miss this summer's Commonwealth Games 
in Glasgow. He won the 100m gold medal at the 2006 Games in Melbourne and has 
been a gold medallist at the Olympics and world championships in the sprint 
relay.

But Great Britain's former marathon world record holder Paula Radcliffe 
believes it is always the athlete's responsibility. "He should really run 
everything through the system before he takes it," she said. "Whatever the 
length of the ban I think the fact a high-profile athlete's got caught because 
of supplements should send a warning out. It should send out a warning to 
people not to cheat that you can get banned for four years but it doesn't 
always work, does it?

"We're not a sport that's saying: 'OK we're just going to sweep the problem 
under the carpet and not bother trying to improve it the testing or trying to 
catch people.' We are doing that so you are going to then pay the price in 
terms of the sport taking a media hit when you do catch people, but at least 
you know the sport is trying to make itself a clean sport."
 