
Asafa Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell>, the fastest man 
over 100 metres in the world this year, has pulled out of the event at the 
world championships because of a groin injury. Powell's withdrawal means that 
the four top-ranked 100m sprinters in the world will be missing from the 
competition. Tyson Gay is out with a hip injury, while the Jamaican Steve 
Mullings and the USA's Mike Rodgers have both been provisionally suspended 
after failing drugs tests.

The 100m final on Sunday was set to be the centrepiece of these Championships 
with Powell expected to pushUsain Bolt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/usainbolt>, who was all but unbeatable at 
Berlin in 2009, for the gold. By his own admission Bolt is "not in tip-top 
shape", and his fastest time this year, 9.88, places him only joint-sixth 
fastest in the world. Powell had run a full tenth of a second quicker. But now 
the only man left standing who has been faster than Bolt is Richard Thompson of 
Trinidad & Tobago, who won silver behind the Jamaican at the Beijing Olympics.

Powell had spoken of this as being the competition where he could "go lower 
than 9.7", but doubts began to surface about his fitness when he withdrew from 
the Diamond League meeting at Crystal Palace two weeks before the start of the 
world championships. He has been suffering with a groin strain ever since he 
ran at Budapest on 30 July, but he had tried to keep his likely withdrawal a 
secret. The news broke accidentally when he pulled out of Jamaica's 
pre-championships team press conference. His replacement in the 100m, Michael 
Frater, let slip that he "had not been expecting to run the 100m here but 
unfortunately Asafa couldn't make it".

Bolt suffered with an achilles tendon injury towards the end of 2010, and his 
scoliosis, a curvature of the spine he has suffered with since birth, troubled 
him over the winter. He says he is not "in 9.5 shape," but is still determined 
to win a second world title. "A lot of people have said that I'm a legend but I 
don't look at it like that at the moment. But in two years â€“ I'm working on it. 
This world championships is going to be the first step to becoming a legend so 
it's very important. A lot of people have won championships, a lot of people 
have broken records, but few people have repeated that year in year out, 
especially in the sprints."

Powell's agent explained that the athlete had "received all sorts of 
treatments over the past two weeks in the hope of being prepared to run the 
100m here in Daegu but today [Thursday] Asafa made the final decision not to 
run. He feels he would not be at 100% and may have trouble coming back after 
each round". He may still run in the relay, but that will be small consolation 
to a manwho told the Guardian recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/aug/20/asafa-powell-usain-bolt>: "I've 
been starving myself for nine years. I'm ready to win."
 