
An unprecedented scheme to buy and demolish Canberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra> homes riddled with 
asbestos could begin as early as next week after parliament approved $750m for 
the project.

But ACT senator Kate Lundy acknowledged it wouldn’t end the anguish felt by 
more than 1,000 homeowners who fear they or their children could one day die 
from having lived in their contaminated homes.

The Senate on Thursday approved legislation to make $750m in federal funds 
available to the ACT government to buy back and destroy 1,021 homes insulated 
with loose-fill asbestos provided by a contractor called Mr Fluffy.

Another $250m will be loaned in the next financial year for the project, which 
is expected to take five years to complete.

Lundy thanked parliament for quickly approving the loan but said it would 
offer little solace to those living in perpetual fear that they had inhaled the 
deadly fibres under their own roof.

As someone living with asbestos in her lungs from her days as a removalist, 
Lundy said she understood the impact this “toxic legacy” has had on her 
community.

“The deeply devastating toll upon Canberrans has primarily been an emotional 
one, borne of their sense of responsibility for those affected and for the 
wellbeing of their family and friends,” she said.

Lundy, at times emotional, told the story of a Canberra man with mesothelioma, 
whose wife and two dogs died of cancer. He now fears his children will suffer 
the same fate.

ACT Liberal senator Zed Seselja said everybody in Canberra knew somebody 
affected by the Mr Fluffy crisis, including people who only learned recently 
that their home was contaminated.


“Words can’t express how stressful such a discovery must be,” he said.


Even though the ACT government hopes to clear the contaminated blocks and 
resell the land to recoup costs, the project is expected to have a major toll 
on the territory’s budget.
 