
Ashley Giles has been appointed as Lancashire’s cricket director and head 
coach,the county have confirmed on their website 
<http://www.lccc.co.uk/lccc/ashley-giles-unveiled-lancashires-new-cricket-director/>
.

The former England limited-overs coach and Ashes-winning spinner fills the 
vacancy created after the Lancashire stalwartMike Watkinson stepped down from 
his position as cricket director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/06/ashley-giles-coach-director-lancashire>
.

A statement on Lancashire’s website said: “Lancashire County Cricket Club is 
delighted to announce the appointment ofAshley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> as its cricket director and 
head coach.”

Giles said: “Lancashire is a massive club with a rich pedigree and history, 
and I am thrilled by the prospect of coaching them.

“Emirates Old Trafford is a stunning international venue with excellent 
facilities, and I cannot wait to work with the players and staff.

“It is our intention to return to Division One – but our main aim is create 
something both successful and sustainable, which a club with such an incredible 
history deserves.”

Giles’ twin role suggests the veteran club captain Glen Chapple will not be 
combining the responsibility of leading the team on the field next season and 
coaching off it.

The task facing Giles will be to revive Lancashire’s fortunes, after they were 
relegated from LV County Championship Division One on the final day of the 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/26/lancashire-relegated-middlesex-old-trafford>
in last month’s shoot-out with Middlesex at Old Trafford.

Giles, 41, was England’s limited-overs coach between 2012 and the start of 
this year.

He missed out to the former Lancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> coach Peter Moores when the 
England and Wales Cricket Board combined the posts in charge of the Test and 
limited-overs teams six months ago.

Giles had a successful period coaching Warwickshire after retiring as a player.
 