
Ashley Giles has left Lancashire to return to his former club, Warwickshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc>, as the sport director. In 
his new role the former England spinner will oversee all the county’s 
professional teams as well as the academy, high performance and development of 
excellence programmes.

Cricket commentator Mark Nicholas leaves hospital after health scare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/cricket-commentator-mark-nicholas-hospital-boxing-day-test>
Giles, who served as director of cricket at Edgbaston between 2007 and 2012, 
told the county’s website 
<http://warwickshireccc.com/news/ashley-giles-appointed-warwickshire-ccc-sport-director/>
: “The new role at Edgbaston is a great opportunity and I am delighted to 
return to Warwickshire.

“ Whilst I have a lot of history with the Bears and have previously enjoyed 
success as a player and a coach, this is a brand new challenge and I look 
forward to meeting up with all the players and the new management team in 
January.”

The 43-year-old played for Warwickshire for 13 years and, following his 
retirement in 2007, became the director of cricket, leading them to the 
championship title in 2012. In November of that year he left to becomeEngland’s 
limited-overs coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/nov/28/ashley-giles-england-head-coach> 
before taking over as the head coach and cricket director at Lancashire two 
years later.

He won the T20 Blast at Old Trafford and led the county to promotion to 
Division One of the County Championship in his first year.

Giles said: “I thoroughly enjoyed my time at Lancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> and I would like to thank the 
club’s chairman, Michael Cairns, and the board for the opportunity to work as 
director of cricket at such a great club. I am also very grateful for their 
understanding and for agreeing to release me from my contract so that I can 
take up this new role with Warwickshire and move back to the Midlands, where my 
family have remained.”

Giles’s appointment is part of an overhaul at Edgbaston, with Jim Troughton 
joining as first-team coach, Darren Franklin as head of women’s cricket and 
Paul Greetham as elite performance manager.

Warwickshire’s chief executive, Neil Snowball, said: “It’s a very exciting 
time for Warwickshire CCC, with Ashley’s appointment completing the new 
structure of our senior management team at Edgbaston.

“ Ashley has enjoyed great success as a coach and director of cricket and this 
new expanded role will allow him to apply his experience and expertise across 
the organisation and to develop the Warwickshire and Birmingham Bears teams at 
all levels.

“I would like to express my thanks to Lancashire County Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Club for their understanding and 
for agreeing to release Ashley from his contract to be able to take up this new 
role at Edgbaston.”

Giles’s contract at Lancashire had been due to run until 2018, and the county 
said in a statement: “Over the last 12 months the board and staff at Lancashire 
County Cricket Club have supported Ashley and his family during a difficult 
period due to the time Ashley’s role has kept him away from his wife and family.

“After lengthy discussions the board has agreed to give further support to 
Ashley’s personal circumstances and has given him permission to discuss a move 
to his home county in the best interests of his family.”

Warwickshire finished sixth in the County Championship Division One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/countychampionship1stdivisioncricket> in 
2016, one place ahead of Lancashire.

Lancashire have reacted quickly, naming the former players Glen Chapple and 
Mark Chilton as acting coach and acting assistant coach respectively. Chapple 
took 985 wickets for the Red Rose county during a 24-season playing career.

A Lancashire statement said: “The interim appointments will enable the club to 
assess future options and preferred coaching structure.”

The Lancashire director Paul Allott added: “We are delighted to promote two 
exceptional coaches to the vacant interim positions. Glen and Mark are former 
captains who know our club and the cricket world well, they have great skills 
and are proud Lancastrians. The board will give them our total support during 
the coming months.”
 