
Ashley Giles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> looks set to be 
named as Lancashire’s new coach and cricket director after the departure of 
Mike Watkinson was confirmed on Monday.

Giles has been out of work since Peter Moores was appointed to succeed Andy 
Flower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/19/england-cricket-team-cricket> by 
the England and Wales Cricket Board in April, a decision that cost Giles his 
previous position in charge of the one-day and Twenty20 teams.

Lancashire’s captain, Glen Chapple, had been a strong contender to take over 
on a permanent basis having been in charge for most of the 2014 season. 
However, the club chairman, Michael Cairns instigated what he has called a 
“root and branch” investigation into what went wrong and Chapple is now 
expected to continue as a player for another season, with Giles and the former 
Surrey coach Chris Adams thought to have been interviewed to replace Watkinson 
this week.

Giles was seen as a strong favourite to take over as Somerset’s director of 
cricket last week before that post went to Matthew Maynard instead. Yet the 
41-year-old former spinner’s experience in charge of Warwickshire – whom he led 
to the County Championship title in 2012 – and England appear to have tipped 
the balance in his favour this time.

Watkinson’s departure brings to an end a 32-year association with Lancashire 
that has included spells as player, captain and coach, before becoming cricket 
director in 2009. “After enjoying a long and successful career atLancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> County Cricket Club, I am now 
looking forward to a new challenge and would like to wish all the players and 
staff at the club all the best for the future,” he said.

Watkinson was part of the management team which in 2011 brought Lancashire 
their first outright County Championship title since 1934. Relegated the 
following year, they won immediate promotion back to the top flight as Division 
Two champions in 2013.

However, Lancashire lasted only one season back in Division One before being 
relegated last month as they finished second-bottom to Northamptonshire.

Cairns said: “I would like to place on record our sincere gratitude to Mike 
Watkinson for his long-term service of Lancashire CountyCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Club as player, captain, cricket 
manager and cricket director.

“On behalf of everybody connected with LCCC I would like to wish Mike well 
with his future endeavours.”
 