
Ashley Giles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> has suffered 
another coaching snub, this time from Somerset, who have preferred the former 
Glamorgan captain Matthew Maynard as their new director of cricket.

Maynard, 48, had a spell on the England coaching staff under his former 
Glamorgan coach Duncan Fletcher, and has since worked with Twenty20 franchises 
in South Africa and the Caribbean Premier League. But his appointment ahead of 
Giles, who was also interviewed two weeks ago having applied for the vacancy
left by Dave Nosworthy’s return to South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/29/dave-nosworthy-somerset-director-of-cricket>
, still comes as a major surprise.

“We are delighted that Matt has been appointed as our director of cricket and 
he will have direct responsibility for coaching the 1st XI,” said theSomerset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/somerset> chief executive, Guy Lavender, in 
an official statement. “His track record speaks for itself and he has a wealth 
of leadership experience, coaching knowledge and passion for the game. I have 
every confidence that he will build on our strong foundations and the winter 
period provides a great opportunity for him to prepare the squad for a 
successful 2015. I know he will receive a very warm welcome from all the 
coaching and playing staff, as well as our Members and supporters.”

Maynard added: “I am absolutely delighted to be appointed as the director of 
cricket at Somerset CCC. It’s a huge honour. It will be a new challenge for me 
and one that I am looking forward to very much. I’m very excited about being 
involved with such a talented group of players and I can’t wait to get started.”

Giles has been out of work since England appointed Peter Moores to succeed 
Andy Flower as coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/19/england-cricket-team-cricket>, a 
decision which cost him his previous position in charge of the one-day and 
Twenty20 teams. But he must now be a strong contender for the vacancy left by 
Moores at Lancashire. Glen Chapple took over on a temporary basis for most of 
the 2014 season, but Lancashire have indicated that they will be advertising 
the position afterbeing relegated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/26/lancashire-relegated-middlesex-old-trafford>
.

The ideal solution, with Chapple remaining comfortably their best bowler even 
at the age of 40 and ruling out the possibility of continuing as player coach, 
would seem to be for him to play on as an assistant to a new head coach. 
Conveniently, he goes back a long way with Giles, the pair having toured 
Australia together with England A in 1996.
 