
Equipment rental may not be the most obvious sector for a bid battle, but that 
is what is happening at the moment withLavendon, which hires out aerial work 
platforms.

UK group Ashtead has teamed up with Belgium's TVH Services to launch a 115p a 
share, Â£183m cash offer for Lavendon, topping a previous TVH bid of 111p made 
in December. Under the terms of the offer,Ashtead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ashteadgroup> will acquire Lavendon's UK 
business while TVH gets the European and Middle Eastern operations. The two 
said they would not raise their offer unless due diligence showed Lavendon was 
doing better than current market expectations. Lavendon immediately rejected 
the bid, saying it was opportunistic and undervalued its business.

Analyst Philip Sparks at Evolution Securities said investors should consider 
accepting the offer, but said the bid could flush out a rival offer from a 
private equity bidder. He said:
 Lavendon has a relatively young fleet compared to many of its competitors, 
thus it could slash its capital expenditure for a few years and generate huge 
amounts of cash. The downside is that the fleet would age and possibly damage 
the long-term value of the company, but even so a financial buyer might see an 
interesting opportunity here. If private equity does not make a counter bid, 
Lavendon's management will have to make a very strong case for remaining 
independent. We have cut our target price from 120p to 115p and bring back our 
recommendation from add to neutral.

As for Ashtead, he said the company's move had come as a surprise, and would 
use funds in the slow growing UK market which could be better used to 
accelerate growth in the US:
 Two days ago Ashtead announced its first acquisition in four years; this 
excited the market as it signalled Ashtead's return to expansion in the US. We 
are not sure that today's news will be so well-received. Buying Lavendon would 
increase Ashtead's exposure to the UK at a time when the US offers much better 
growth potential. While the price offered looks fair, it is not a steal. The 
recommendation stays buy for now, but we would not be surprised to see 
Ashtead's shares pause for breath while investors assess the bid in detail.


Lavendon shares have dipped 5p to 110.25p while Ashtead is down 4.6p at 165.4p.
 