
Ange Postecoglou <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> says 
everything he’s done over the past 12 months as Socceroos coach has been geared 
towards winning the Asian Cup – and he’s ready to do it.

On day one of Australia’s pre-tournament camp in Melbourne, the Socceroos 
coach was talking up his side’s ability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/08/asian-cup-2015-provisional-socceroos-squad-of-46-named-by-ange-postecoglou>
 to make an impact both on and off the pitch.

It’s hard to know what the bigger task might be: lifting the cup or shining 
brightest in a busy Australian sporting summer.

The cricket Tests will give way to the one-day tri-series in mid-January just 
as the Asian Cup ramps up, with anAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> v India match at the SCG 
potentially coming up against a semi-final involving the Socceroos at ANZ 
Stadium.

The Asian Cup final also clashes with the women’s final of the Australian Open.

But Postecoglou is not one to shy away from a fight, and is embracing the twin 
challenges before his team and the sport.

“That’s why I love Melbourne,” he said of the sporting precinct and calendar.

“We’ll be looking to make the Asian Cup the biggest tournament in the next 
month or so in this country.”

“We’ve done a lot of build-up to it and it’s great to see the players finally 
in.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpostecoglou-australia-socceroos-squad-asian-cup-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F23%2F1400832133930%2FSocceroos-train-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ange%20Postecoglou%20says%20Socceroos%20must%20be%20ready%20to%20win%20Asian%20Cup%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpostecoglou-australia-socceroos-squad-asian-cup-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ange%20Postecoglou%20says%20Socceroos%20must%20be%20ready%20to%20win%20Asian%20Cup%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpostecoglou-australia-socceroos-squad-asian-cup-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F23%2F1400832133930%2FSocceroos-train-016.jpg>
 Ange Postecoglou on Asian Cup 
Postecoglou was joined by veteran Mark Bresciano at AFL club Collingwood’s 
training facilities on day one of their pre-Cup camp.

Bresciano is one of 11 players from the 23-man squad to report for duty so 
far, with several players to finish their club playing commitments shortly.

Gathering the playing group together for the first time is a significant step 
for Postecoglou, who says he’smore prepared for the continental competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/19/ange-postecoglou-ready-asian-cup-despite-japan-loss>
 than last June’s World Cup.

“It’s been a pretty hectic 12 months but ... I’m pretty comfortable with where 
we sit,” he said.

“The World Cup was all a bit rushed, we only had three games in the build-up, 
I was still getting to know the players and the players me.

“I’m a lot more comfortable now ... the whole feeling of the place (is) a bit 
more at ease with what we’re trying to achieve.”
 