
Q My best friend, living in America, has asked me to be maid of honour at her 
Florida wedding in June. She's emailed me photos of her bridesmaid dresses, 
which are a bit Vegas hooker out on the town: metallic snakeskin purple, ankle 
length, halter-neck, with a fishtail skirt. I'm a size 10/12, only 5ft 1in with 
scars on my shoulders which I always cover. I would look like a shiny misshapen 
bag of pudding in one of these dresses. My friend's told me I can choose my own 
outfit as long as it's dark-coloured and ankle-length. I can't go into a bridal 
shop as I'm in the middle of a divorce, so could you suggest a dress for under 
£200? I want to look good, as it's the first time I've seen my American friends 
since I split from my husband.
Ann 

A The fashion police need to arrest your friend. I know many brides fear being 
outshone by her bridesmaids, but is there really any need to go to such drastic 
measures? Joking aside, this is tricky. It's her big day, but you need to feel 
comfortable as you'll be on show, too. You're in luck - the maxi dress is still 
around for this spring/summer, and there are plenty of full-length frocks in 
pretty fabrics such as chiffon, silk and satin. And bearing in mind this 
bridesmaid palette, I'd go for a berry tone. Try Debenhams, which has a large 
selection of designs, especially in the Debut range. This label has dresses in 
shades from wine to purple in a full-length, strapless design (£90-£110), which 
you can wear with a shrug to cover your shoulders (www.debenhams.com 
<http://www.debenhams.com>). Coast (www.coast-stores.com 
<http://www.coast-stores.com>) also has a beautiful maxi dress (Amy, £115) and 
duchess satin maxi-dress (Divine, £195). As you're petite, look at calf-length 
dresses, too. They may be more flattering. Good luck!

·  If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email ask.jo@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
 