
This month marks the 50th birthday <http://www.asterix.com/birthday/> of 
France's most popular comic book. Back in October 1959, writer René Goscinny 
and illustrator Albert Uderzo had their first comic strip published in the 
magazine Pilote. The comic featuredAsterix and Obelix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/oct/26/pass-notes-asterix>, two 
inseparable and delightfully complementary characters from a small village in 
Brittany renowned for "sticking it to the man" by resisting Caesar's colonial 
ambitions. Asterix and Obelix's adventures did suffer from some ups and down 
along the way, most notably after Goscinny's death in 1977, but their 
popularity never did fade: the comic books sold more than 325m copies worldwide 
and have been translated into 107 languages.

Reading the many articles attempting an analysis of our little Gaulois' 
success story in the British and American press, it seems thatAsterix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> became, to its many international 
adult readers, an emblem of the rebellious and somehow undisciplined character 
of the French. A small village is being relentlessly attacked by an impossible 
and uncrushable force, and yet its spirit will not be crushed.

The storyline draws many parallels from last century's postwar developments, 
in which France changed rapidly and drastically as it lost its colonies, went 
through important periods ofsocial unrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/may1968>, adopted 
globalisation and finally joined forces with other European countries, jumping 
headfirst in the economic waves of capitalism in a bid to modernise the union. 
In the light of France's abdication to free market rules, one could be excused 
for thinking Asterix's message a bit passé:cultural hegemony 
<http://polisci.osu.edu/faculty/mcooper/ps597readings/Meunier.pdf> is stronger 
and more threatening by the day. Fewer people than ever arespeaking or learning 
French <http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/fhs/v022/22.4gordon.html>, and what used 
to make Franceremarkable 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/books/non-fiction/article6326468.ece>
, from artisan food tocarefully crafted wines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/apr/07/france-wine>, is quietly 
brushed away to make room for the next generation of international chefs. In 
other words, France may fear its cultural identity is at stake, but it has 
effectively already capitulated to bigger forces long ago.

I don't doubt that many adults find Asterix's adventures likeable for those 
very reasons: there's something endearing about the French and theirillusions 
de grandeur, in which they like to think of themselves as the underdogs putting 
up a righteous fight for the survival of their perceived uniqueness. I fear the 
French are too often guilty of clinging to obsolete historical landmarks, most 
of which paint a picture of their country as having an important and respected 
say in world culture – from international diplomacy to food, fashion and art. 
This is a vestige of the past, and yet Asterix charmingly perpetuates this 
comfortable illusion of control for many a French reader: they're depicted as 
feisty, fun-loving patriots with a culture and spirit ofrésistance that can't 
be obliterated, even under duress.

But perhaps looking at Asterix through a politico-cultural prism is to do it a 
disservice. I for one was much too young a reader to ponder the books' hidden 
metaphors, but still enjoyed the series immensely (that is, up until Goscinny's 
death – the following books, written by Uderzo, were sadly not up to their old 
standards). Asterix followed me through my childhood, and the comic books could 
be found in almost every room in my house, from the toilet to the living room, 
in which I also had Asterix's adventures on video (I also pestered my mother to 
take me to theAsterix theme park 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parc_Ast%C3%A9rix> near Paris, but my pleas never 
worked). As a kid, I liked the plots' simplicity and took pleasure in seeing 
clueless Romans being beaten every time.

Fifteen years later, I enjoy the comic books in a different, perhaps more 
cautious way. I still marvel at the play on words and caustic wit, and reading 
theEnglish translation 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_translations_of_Asterix#Lost_in_translation>
 is surprisingly enjoyable – many even claim it is better than the French 
original.Comparing characters' names 
<http://www.asterix-obelix.nl/index.htm?hjh/dos-engl.html> and other details 
makes for an entertaining pastime. I do raise an eyebrow or two at the blatant 
chauvinism and racist undertones (although as far as racist stereotypes are 
concerned, Asterix is way lessblatantly offensive 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/columnists/india_knight/article2076264.ece>
 than its Belgian competitor,Tintin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tintin_in_the_Congo#Controversy>). I will admit 
to having no patience for the fantastically popular recent movie adaptations 
(in which national treasure Gérard Depardieu plays Obelix with gusto). But if 
anything, it proves the Asterix brand is doing extremely well in its native 
country – the most recent film,Asterix at the Olympic Games 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asterix_at_the_Olympic_Games_%28film%29>, grossed 
$23.4m in France in its opening weekend (it also says a lot of the French's 
insatiable taste formediocre nationalist movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/feb/25/awards-and-prizes-oscars>
).

That said, perhaps Asterix is best left to children. We adults always tend to 
ruin good fun by analysing it too much.
 