
In his first performance back on a Johannesburg stage, 82-year-old Athol Fugard
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jun/03/athol-fugard-playwright-apartheid-documentary>
 is a white-bearded, cardigan-clad dynamo, crackling and fizzing with 
theatrical life force.

Later that night, leaving the Market Theatre 
<http://www.bdlive.co.za/life/entertainment/2014/08/05/on-the-stage-the-beauty-of-a-shadow>
, he suddenly looks his age, sunken beneath a flat cap and seeking to exit 
un-trumpeted through the draughty foyer. Perhaps he is pushing himself too far.

Yet the following morning, in a discreet guest house down a discreet street, 
Fugard is firing again.South Africa’s greatest ever playwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/31/once-upon-a-life-athol-fugard>
 turns out to be also one of its most likeable. Ebullient and gregarious, 
sprinkling my name into a few of his answers with never a false note, he 
settles into a seat on a veranda overlooking a manicured garden, lights a pipe 
and is interviewed against a ripple of birdsong; it is a scene that could be 
taken from one of his recent elegiac works.


“Even as we sit here talking, a few of the remaining brain cells are dealing 
with and thinking about and keeping on a back burner another play I want to 
write,” he smiles. “It’s slowly, slowly surfacing and taking shape.”

Like the artist Paul Klee, he says, he prefers to work on small canvases. But 
his words moved mountains in apartheid South Africa. Works included The Blood 
Knot, MasterHarold and the Boys <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yS1Pl9VTZ_4> 
and The Road to Mecca and collaborations with actors John Kani and Winston 
Ntshona including The Island – set in the notorious Robben Island prison – and 
Sizwe Banzi is Dead,recently revived at the Young Vic in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/16/sizwe-banzi-is-dead-review>. 
Fugard won a Tony for lifetime achievement. A recent Market Theatre platform 
event billed him as a “Legend”, using a capital “L”.


“I couldn’t hit a nail in straight if I tried,” he admits. “But pen in hand 
and blank paper, yes, I know exactly who I am, why I am who I am and what it is 
all about.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Fathol-fugard-prejudice-racism-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407844228804%2F090c439b-a7e3-49e2-bc24-4c70299cb2f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Athol%20Fugard%3A%20'Prejudice%20and%20racism%20are%20still%20alive%20and%20well%20in%20South%20Africa'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Fathol-fugard-prejudice-racism-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Athol%20Fugard%3A%20%27Prejudice%20and%20racism%20are%20still%20alive%20and%20well%20in%20South%20Africa%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Fathol-fugard-prejudice-racism-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407844228804%2F090c439b-a7e3-49e2-bc24-4c70299cb2f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jimmy Akingbola (Winston) and Daniel Poyser (John) in The Island at London’s 
Young Vic theatre. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
He is not so well known as an actor, despite a distinguished turn as Jan Smuts 
in Richard Attenborough’s Gandhi <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0083987>. His 
current role, in the semi-autobiographicalThe Shadow of the Hummingbird 
<http://markettheatre.co.za/shows/watch/the-shadow-of-a-hummingbird>, will be 
his last, he insists. “I’ll never go on to the stage again because it’s hard 
enough now. It was hard stepping through that door last night and going out and 
facing a Johannesburg audience. But I must say, all of you were very generous, 
giving us back the energy were trying to send. It was good tennis.”

Fugard fought the liberation struggle as playwright and impresario. He 
organised a multiracial theatre company, supported a boycott of South African 
playhouses in protest at audience segregation and was a scourge of the white 
minority regime. In 1961, in The Blood Knot, he and Zakes Mokae became the 
first black and white actors toappear together on a public stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/nov/10/zakes-mokae-obituary>. Mokae 
would be a close friend and creative partner.

“I remember taking a train from Cape Town to Johannesburg where we were going 
to do the play, The Bloodknot, and Zakes had to travel third class and I was of 
course white and could travel first class. What do you do? Don’t go? No! The 
dilemma of having to accept the compromises in order to get the work done to 
raise the issues that white South Africans were reluctant to raise – the issues 
that were happening in the country.


“I ended up having to carry Zakes’s passbook – that was a dreaded document – 
because he had refused to carry it. So I said, ‘You give it to me,’ because you 
are going to end up in jail and he did many times when he was by himself and I 
had to bail him out.”

According to urban legend, he says, Nelson Mandela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nelsonmandela> acted in a production of The 
Island during his long imprisonment on Robben Island. Mandela was released in 
1990 and elected in 1994, serving one five-year term. It was the opening act in 
a new democratic South Africa, but now the king is dead, there are many who 
fear this is playing out a tragedy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Fathol-fugard-prejudice-racism-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407844440124%2F00be5bb7-b134-4380-9cc8-c7b8549ded52-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Athol%20Fugard%3A%20'Prejudice%20and%20racism%20are%20still%20alive%20and%20well%20in%20South%20Africa'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Fathol-fugard-prejudice-racism-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Athol%20Fugard%3A%20%27Prejudice%20and%20racism%20are%20still%20alive%20and%20well%20in%20South%20Africa%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Fathol-fugard-prejudice-racism-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407844440124%2F00be5bb7-b134-4380-9cc8-c7b8549ded52-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Thabo Mbeki, then South Africa’s president, speaks with Nelson Mandela at the 
funeral of renowned anti-apartheid activist Walter Sisulu in 2003. Photograph: 
Alexander Joe/AFP/Getty Images 
“It’s sad from that halcyon, golden period of Nelson’s one and only term as 
president,” says Fugard, who has never voted for the African National Congress 
(ANC), explaining his view that writers should remain outsiders. “I think one 
of the tragedies is that he didn’t taken on a second term and entrench his 
vision, because lip service is paid to it but the reality is anything except 
what Nelson himself envisaged forSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>.

“Starting with Thabo Mbeki, who followed him. Thabo was responsible for one of 
the most colossal tragedies in our recent history, which was his blindness to 
the reality of Aids.That killed thousands of South Africans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/27/south-africa-aids-mbeki>, 
possibly more than the machinations of the nationalist government ever did. 
That’s not just me saying that.

“After Thabo, we end up with Jacob Zuma. Oh my god. The level of corruption in 
high places. Every administration or municipality or provincial government, 
people have got their hands in the cookie jars. It’s frightening. There just 
doesn’t seem to be any end to it. During the apartheid years, if there was one 
man who really I thought yes, you are what the future should be about, it was 
Cyril Ramaphosa, when he was head of the miners’ union; and he’s now 
vice-president to Zuma?”

The ANC faces a new, noisy rival in parliament in the form of Julius Malema’s 
Economic Freedom Fighters 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2014-06-18-the-7-times-julius-malema-dished-it-out-during-his-maiden-parliamentary-speech>
, pushing a radical agenda for the nationalisation of mines and seizure of 
white-owned land. Fugard adds: “I do think that over the next few years he is 
going to become more significant. The ANC has got to measure their achievements 
against what Malema is saying. I think it’s healthy that Malema is sitting in 
parliament.”

Malema has been accused of inflaming racial tensions and jeopardising 
Mandela’s grand project of reconciliation. That project is far from complete, 
according to the octogenarian. “Prejudice and racism are still alive and well 
in SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. No question about 
it. We made real attempts in the past to try setting up something that will 
deal with that issue. How do you take prejudice out of a human heart?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Fathol-fugard-prejudice-racism-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407844870666%2F1946cb75-f325-4385-89b3-65f27f829738-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Athol%20Fugard%3A%20'Prejudice%20and%20racism%20are%20still%20alive%20and%20well%20in%20South%20Africa'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Fathol-fugard-prejudice-racism-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Athol%20Fugard%3A%20%27Prejudice%20and%20racism%20are%20still%20alive%20and%20well%20in%20South%20Africa%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Fathol-fugard-prejudice-racism-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407844870666%2F1946cb75-f325-4385-89b3-65f27f829738-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Julius Malema (c) greets suporters in Ngcingwane, in the Eastern Cape province 
of South Africa, in April. Photograph: Gianluigi Guercia/AFP/Getty Images 
“The truth of the matter is that as admirable as it was with the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission, you can’t legislate two of the biggest mysteries in 
terms of being a human being. One is a genuine act of forgiveness and the other 
is a genuine confession and we tried to legislate those into existence and set 
up a court, but it doesn’t work.”

Such sentiments have prompted many to leave the country. So too the high rate 
of crime – Fugard was burgled recently. In The Shadow of the Hummingbird, he 
plays a South African academic who has moved to California, a journey he made 
himself, though unlike some exiled writers he did not sever links with his 
“fiercely beautiful” home.

“I’ve never left South Africa, even though I have spent more and more time in 
America doing my plays there because I found American audiences and theatres 
very generous in terms of my work. At 82, you’ve got to make a few decisions 
about your life. Certainly one of them is to try and take stock of it. I am in 
the process of doing that and I just felt the time had come to return to the 
one country that I can truly call home. And here I am.”

For the dramatist, there is always the possibility of catharsis, redemption, a 
new king. Fugard says he admires Arthur Miller – with whom he perhaps shares a 
rage at social injustice – Eugene O’Neill and Tom Stoppard and he believes the 
finest play ever written is Sophocles’ Oedipus Rex.

“I have never arrived at the point of dark despair, which quite often happened 
to me during the apartheid years, but I am by nature an optimist,” he reflects. 
“I’m always able to rally my thoughts and feelings and believe in some 
possibility in the future, and now in South Africa, which will never get as 
dark as it was during the apartheid years, I just encounter time and time again 
the new generation of young South Africans – white, black, whatever colour – 
and they embody Nelson Mandela’s dream.

“They are living visible evidence that all is not and never will be lost 
because this new generation has really got its hands on the possibilities in 
the future. At the age of 82 I find myself in the enviable position of knowing 
that even if senility sets in tomorrow, I will die believing that South Africa 
will get it right.”
 