
An MRI on DeMarre Carroll’s left knee showed no structural damage, and he 
hopes to play for Atlanta in Friday night’s Game 2 against Cleveland in the 
Eastern Conference semi-finals, Carroll’s agent said on Thursday.

Mark Bartelstein said that Carroll has only a knee sprain and “maybe a little” 
bone bruise. Carroll celebrated the news on his Twitter feed.
DeMarre Carroll (@DeMarreCarroll1) 
THANK YOU GOD!!! #BLESSED <https://twitter.com/hashtag/BLESSED?src=hash> 
#JunkyardDog <https://twitter.com/hashtag/JunkyardDog?src=hash> #ATLHAWKS 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ATLHAWKS?src=hash> https://t.co/lIGU7Poofs 
<https://t.co/lIGU7Poofs>
 <https://twitter.com/DeMarreCarroll1/status/601414491100819456> May 21, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/DeMarreCarroll1/status/601414491100819456> 
Bartelstein said Carroll will receive treatment for the soreness in hopes of 
playing against the Cavaliers in Game 2. “Last night was a sleepless night,” 
Bartelstein said. “We’re all feeling very fortunate this morning.”

Carroll’s knee appeared to buckle as he was driving to the basket with about 
five minutes leftin the 97-89 loss to the Cavaliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/20/eastern-conference-finals-lebron-james-and-jr-smith-lead-cavaliers-to-victory>
. Carroll couldn’t put pressure on the leg as he was helped off the floor. The 
fear was Carroll had suffered a significant injury that could end his 
postseason. Instead, Bartelstein said Carroll was headed to the Hawks’ facility 
following the MRI.

“He’s going to get treated around the clock for the next 36 hours, and then 
we’ll see how he feels,” Bartelstein said. “I know DeMarre. He’s going to do 
everything he can to get himself ready to play.” Hawks coach Mike Budenholzer 
was expected to discuss Carroll’s status later on Thursday.

The prospect of losing Carroll for a significant portion or the remainder of 
the series was daunting for the Hawks. Carroll was the team’s primary defender 
on Cleveland star LeBron James and has emerged as a top scorer in the 
postseason.

At 6ft 7in, Carroll provides the size needed for the difficult matchup against 
James, who led the Cavaliers with 31 points in Wednesday night’s game.

Carroll was Atlanta’s leading scorer in the first two rounds of the playoffs 
with 17.1 points per game. He had five points and two steals before the injury.

If Carroll can’t return for Game 2, Kent Bazemore may play a more prominent 
role. Bazemore filled in for Carroll on Wednesday night and helped lead a late 
comeback that fell short. Bazemore is a guard and could have difficulty 
matching up against James for an extended period.
 