
It’s pretty safe to say that there won’t be any documentaries commemorating 
this round of the NBA playoffs, which endedon Wednesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/28/warriors-beat-rockets-to-make-their-first-nba-finals-since-1975>
 when the Golden State Warriors eliminated the Houston Rockets in Game 5 of the 
Western Conference finals. That was the more competitive of the two series: the 
Cleveland Cavaliers completed their sweep over the Atlanta Hawks in the Eastern 
Conference finals on Tuesday.

The conference finals weren’t completely forgettable affairs. In the West, the 
battle between the two players who led the NBA MVP voting – Golden State’s 
Steph Curry and Houston’s James Harden – made for an entertaining subplot, 
particularly back in Games 1 and 2 when it looked like Harden had a chance to 
swing the series. There were a lot of scary injuries 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=phseTbZFWkk>, although thankfully nothing 
career-threatening. The Hawks managed to stage a comeback in game 3 of the 
Eastern Conference Finals, before a visibly exhausted LeBron Jamessnuffed it out
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/24/limping-lebron-james-leads-cavaliers-to-victory-over-hawks>
 in overtime.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaLEe3u8zDWk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaLEe3u8zDWk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaLEe3u8zDWk&media=>
And that’s about it. While the games may have been more competitive than the 
W-L record indicates, there’s no escaping the fact that the losing teams 
combined to win exactly one game: Houston’s128-115 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/26/houston-rockets-stay-alive-nba-finals>
 in Monday’s game 4. And that game wasn’t remotely entertaining for anyone who 
wasn’t a Rockets fan.

For the Rockets and the Hawks, it’s probably for the best that these series 
ended up being forgettable, because that’s not how these two teams should be 
remembered. Years from now, no one will remember how this series went for the 
Rockets, but they’ll remember how they got there.

The Rockets had no business even making it this far. It was only a few weeks 
ago that the Rockets were down 19 points in the third quarter ofan elimination 
game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/18/the-clippers-are-still-the-clippers-and-hope-made-the-pain-of-defeat-worse>
 against the Los Angeles Clippers. The Rockets, of course, pulled off a near 
miraculous rally to steal that game, setting up a Game 7 at home where they 
easily vanquished a stunned and demoralized Clippers team.

That’s how this entire season has gone for the Rockets. Houston spent last 
offseason tryingand failing 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nba/2014/07/19/free-agency-winners-losers-rockets-cavaliers-heat-wizards-lakers/12894773/>
 to find a third star player to go along with Harden and Dwight Howard. 
Instead, Carmelo Anthony and Chris Bosh stayed with their old teams. If 
anything, the Rockets seemed to have taken a step back after losing Chandler 
Parsons to their in-state rivals, the Dallas Mavericks. Meanwhile, Harden 
opened himself up to ridicule by declaring himself the “best basketball player 
alive” inan interview 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/eye-on-basketball/24667857/james-harden-says-hes-the-best-basketball-player-alive>
 with ESPN.


The Rockets were expected to have a tough time competing in the increasingly 
talent-rich Western Conference. Instead they entered the postseason as the 
second seed and made it past the second round of the playoffs for the first 
time since 1997. At times, Harden really did look like the best basketball 
player alive.

Unfortunately for him, so did Steph Curry, who beat Harden out for league MVP. 
Which brings us to the main reason that, despite the deflating ending, the 
Rockets should count this season as a success: the Rockets were the victims of 
bad timing. Houston ended up having their best season in decades at the exact 
same time that Curry and the Warriors were possibly having one of the best 
seasons than anyNBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> team has ever had.


There is no need to use the words “maybe” or “possibly” regarding the 2014-15 
Hawks, this was the franchise’s most successful season since moving to Atlanta 
in 1968. They went undefeated throughout the entire month of January, sent four 
out of five starters to the All-Star Game and won a franchise record 60 games 
in the regular season.

Yes, Atlanta’s season ended when they got swept in the conference finals by a 
Cavaliers team that was playing without Kevin Love, and with only like 40% of 
Kyrie Irving. Their series ended in blowout fashion in Tuesday’s118-88 loss 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/nba/post/_/id/3659/the-atlanta-hawks-next-flight>. 
That’s burying the lede here though. This was the first time in their history 
the Hawks had even made it to the Eastern Conference finals.

Plus, it wasn’t like the Hawks were that much healthier than the Cavs. Kyle 
Korver suffered a postseason-ending ankle injury in Game 2 against the 
Cavaliers, the same game where DeMarre Carroll tooka scary-looking spill 
<https://vine.co/v/eA9lqzd5B3Z> in the series, which also saw Kyle Korver 
suffering a postseason-ending ankle injury. Meanwhile, Paul Millsap and Al 
Horford were limited by injuries that sapped their effectiveness.


The Hawks’ most dramatic injury happened away from the basketball court. Right 
before the playoffs, key bench player Thabo Sefolosha was injured by the NYPD 
in the aftermath of a nightclub altercation that didn’t even involve him. 
Atlanta’s postseason plans could very well have been seriously altered by what 
some say was aracially motivated 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/208009/nba-player-missing-playoffs-because-nypd-broke-his-leg-why-sports-media-silence>
 incident of police violence.

The Sefolosha injury was a surreal, but somehow fitting, end to the Hawks’ 
improbable regular season. Last summer, reports of racially insensitive remarks 
forced out Hawks co-ownerBruce Levenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/08/bruce-levenson-atlanta-hawks-email-sterling>
, who stepped down, andGM Danny Ferry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/09/atlanta-hawks-luol-deng-race-slur>
, who was and remains suspended. At the time, the consensus was that these 
scandals, and their up-in-the-air ownership status, would pose a challenge for 
the Hawks.

Of course, just the opposite happened. The Hawks put together their most 
successful campaign in team history when nobody was really sure who was in 
charge. Ferry, the individual who probably deserves the most credit in putting 
this team together, had been all but exiled just a few months before.


Maybe this whole Hawks campaign should be a cautionary tale of assuming that 
players themselves are affected all that much by whatever is going on with 
ownership and the front office. Or maybe the chaos helped, the team started to 
struggle right aroundApril 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/basketball/hawks-sold-new-owners-850-million-article-1.2195597>
 when a group led by Antony Ressler ended up buying the team for $850m. Perhaps 
they should have held off on the sale for another two months.


There’s a school of thought among a certain segment of fans that anything 
short of making the NBA finals counts as a failure. It’s a ridiculously unfair 
standard to hold: it would mean 28 NBA teams fail every year. Yes, things ended 
badly for the Hawks and Rockets but only one team per season earns a truly 
happy ending. It shouldn’t take away from what these teams accomplished.

 