
As forecast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/17/atos-fit-for-work-tests-contract>
,Atos Healthcare  <http://www.atoshealthcare.com>has left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/27/atos-quite-work-capability-assessment-contract-early>
 its controversial £100m-a-year contract with the Department for Work and 
Pensions to deliver the work capability assessment, the notorious "fit for 
work" test that for its numerous critics has become a grim byword for 
out-sourced state incompetence and callousness.

There will be some relief among campaigners that Atos has quit but most 
understand that while the French-owned company may have been thelightning rod 
for public anger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/joepublic/2011/jan/31/kettling-disabled-protesters-welfare-reform?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 over disability benefit reform it was ministers and the state who both brought 
in the test and designed and enforced the norms and regulations by which it is 
delivered.

Two questions arise: why, after years of mounting concern about Atos's 
performance and the accuracy and safety of the WCA has it taken so long for 
matters to come to a head? And second: does Atos's departure signal a desire on 
the part of ministers to genuinely reform a process that few outside of the DWP 
– whether campaigners, GPs, MPs, or benefit claimants – consider to be either 
humane or fit for purpose?

Ministers indulged in the usual political blame game on Thursday morning: the 
WCA wasa bad contract inherited from Labour 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-vote-office/March_2014/27%20March/32-DWP-Atos.pdf>
. But one of the earliest acts of this government, back in November 2010, was 
to extend the Atos contract for a further five years. It was Coalition 
ministers who decided on a huge and rapid expansion of the test, in May 2011, 
to re-assess 1.5m existing incapacity benefit claimants, despite apparent
warnings from their own expert advisor, Professor Malcolm Harrington, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/16/ministers-ignored-advice-fit-for-work-tests>
that the rollout should be delayed until what he described as an "inhumane and 
mechanistic" test could be further refined.

A long list of reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/feb/23/government-reform-disability-benefits>
, campaigns andinquiries 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/cmpubacc/744/744.pdf>
 over the past three years testify to the terrible human consequences of that 
austerity-led dash to pull vulnerable people off incapacity benefit as a way of 
driving down welfare spending. In the post-industrial working class communities 
where incapacity benefit take up was highest the WCA became a kind of terror: 
for years, claimants had been told they were too sick to work; now they would 
be tested and if they failed, their already slender weekly income would be cut 
by 30%. Not merely did they face being pitched into deep poverty overnight but 
they would endure the stigma of being labelled a "scrounger".

The widespread distress among claimants caused by the re-assessment of 
incapacity benefit was rapidly picked up in GPs surgeries, welfare advice 
bureaux and food banks. After anattempted suicide in a Merseyside jobcentre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jun/20/jobcentre-supervisors-suicide-risk-benefit-claimants>
, DWP staff were warned by officials to be "empathetic" towards individuals 
affected by the changes. Alarmingly, the WCA cropped up withregularity at 
coroner's inquests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2011/nov/16/do-public-spending-cuts-kill>
, where fear of imminent re-assessment, or depression brought on by being 
declared fit for work, was increasingly noted as a factor in the deaths of 
vulnerable people.

There is no firm evidence that the WCA drives people to take their life but 
this weeka report by the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/26/woman-killed-herself-benefits-mental-health-watchdog>
 concluded that the test directly led a woman with a history of stress related 
depression to take her own life. She died less than a month after an Atos 
assessor declared her fit for work, resulting in her £94.25 a week benefit 
income being cut to £67.50. "There wasn't anything else which we could identify 
that would lead us to believe that there was any other factor in her life that 
resulted in her decision to end her life," said the commission. The WCA, the 
commission concluded, was flawed. The DWP disagreed. It declared that its 
systems were "largely robust and correct."

WCA appeals tribunals tell a different story. The WCA – dubbed by one MP as a 
"crude computer test" – is notorious for delivering seemingly incomprehensible 
decisions. Tales ofclaimants with terminal cancer who are found fit for work 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-19433535>, for example, have 
become a stock local newspaper story. There have been over 600,000 appeals 
against fit-for-work decisions in recent years, clogging up tribunal courts and 
costing the taxpayer over £60m a year. Nationally, four out of 10 appealed 
decisions succeed. Where claimants have expert representation this figure 
rockets. Oxfordshire Mindreported recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/25/benefit-cuts-welfare-linked-mental-health>
 that a startling 98% of WCA appeals taken up by its advisors on behalf of 
mentally-ill clients were successful.

Nonetheless it was not until relatively recently that Atos and the government 
dropped the fiction that all was well. In January, Atos boss Joe Hemming told a 
sceptical committee of MPs: "We have a real passion for delivering services to 
the citizen in a way that continues to satisfy the way the citizen wants to be 
served." But tensions between government and Atos had come to a head last 
summer. The DWP had raised concerns about Atos's performance; for its partAtos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> was desperate to leave a contract 
that it considered both undeliverable and a public relations disaster.

The disability minister, Mike Penning, said on Thursday morning that Atos will 
quit the WCA before its contract ends in August 2015 (although it will continue 
to operate a separate WCA contract in Northern Ireland). The decision will not 
affect Atos's other big government welfare contract, to carry out the Personal 
Independence Payment assessments (although theNational Audit Office has raised 
concerns <https://www.nao.org.uk/report/personal-independence-payments-pip/> 
that this contract also is running into serious problems). There are few signs 
that the government sees the WCA problem as anything other than a technical 
contracting issue. Outsourcing giants Serco and G4S are believed to be in the 
frame to replace Atos.

Campaigners, on the other hand, believe that Atos's departure alone will 
result in little material change to the WCA. No government is likely to abandon 
the principle of incapacity benefit re-assessment but they will seek a root and 
branch review that ensure that the test becomes more sensitive and puts the 
individual first, rather than welfare cash savings. "The test should be more 
than an exercise in getting people off benefits," said the Scope charity chief 
executive Richard Hawkes: "It should make sure disabled people get the 
specialist, tailored and flexible support they need to find and keep a job."
 