
Adam Helfant, the ATP chairman, has confirmed that the governing body will not 
be re-investigating Andre Agassi's positive drugs test in 1997 and cannot 
impose retrospective sanctions. In his recent autobiography Agassi admitted 
that after testing positive for crystal meth he lied to avoid a ban by blaming 
a contaminated drink for the presence of the substance in his body.

The ATP has come in for criticism, including from the World Anti-Doping 
Agency, and Helfant, who said he had a "very frank conversation" with the 
former world No1, admitted the episode has been "regrettable".

He said: "The ATP's policy is we don't comment on doping matters unless a 
doping violation is found and that will continue to be our policy but I thought 
some perspective was in order. I asked an outside law firm to go through the 
records from 1997 so I had all the facts.Andre Agassi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> has admitted he failed a drugs 
test in 1997 and regrettably he then lied about it. Even more regrettably he 
got away with it.

"In compliance with the ATP's anti-doping policy, no disclosure was made. If 
we had revealed that test it would have been in contravention of the rules at 
the time. There has been a lot of speculation about whether the ATP would 
reopen the case but we cannot do that because he's no longer playing on the 
tour. We have responded to Wada but what was said will remain between us and 
will not be made public."

The ATP's current drugs policy has come under fire from the top players, 
notably Andy Murray and Rafael Nadal, who feel Wada's whereabouts rule – where 
athletes must make themselves available for testing throughout the year – is 
unfair. Helfant said: "The whereabouts programme was originally meant for 
out-of-competition testing and it's a programme that's one size fits all. So 
the question is how should it be applied to a sport that's in competition 
nearly all the year? We are in conversation with Wada about the technical 
issues."

The length of the season also continues to be a major issue and the even later 
staging of this year's Tour Finals means the top players will have almost no 
time off before they begin training for the start of the new season in January.

Murray, the world No2, said: "Everybody thinks the same. We finish the year 
December 6 and then start the next season on January 1. That's the calendar and 
right now we are suffering. The ATP and the players are talking and we have got 
to work hard. Maybe not for us but for the next generations we can change 
things."

Helfant admitted there is no likelihood of the calendar changing radically in 
the near future. "It's a nice problem to have but I'm definitely sympathetic to 
the view that our season is too long," he said. "We'll continue to talk to the 
players and see what we can do but I don't promise that there's an easy 
solution."
 