
 Meeting Room F in the basement of Toronto's Hyatt Regency hotel has no 
windows. It has coffee and cookies and the groggy chuckle of an extractor fan. 
It is 11am at the fag-end of last autumn's film festival. In the corner is a 
whiteboard in search of a mantra, and a big bin.

And then suddenly Audrey Tautou, too: nose to knees in red satin, eyes like 
Minstrels, skin like milk. She could be a hologram, a creature from another 
world – specifically, Cannes, where the film she's talking about today first 
premiered and where, earlier this year, shehosted the festival's opening and 
closing ceremonies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/apr/14/audrey-tautou-french-love-amelie> 
with perfect grace andmaximum gamine 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/26/cannes-2013-palme-d-or-live>.

Yet Tautou is not a person to feel out of place. Rather, she is a fish out of 
water who changes the temperature of whatever pond she's in. Questions are 
asked in English; she responds, through the translator, in French. The 
arms-length sense of her responses cannot completely be put down to 
this filtration. 

No, she says, there was nothing in particular that made her and the director 
Claude Miller <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/apr/06/claude-miller> 
compatible, other than that they were. "I think that when you have that really 
strong desire to work with someone it's because, instinctively, you feel you 
have a certain kinship." Yes, hisdeath a month after finishing the film 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/apr/05/claude-miller-petite-voleuse-dies> 
has added to her passion to promote it. "I know how much he wanted people to 
see it." She blinks: sweetly fierce, impressively French.

The film is Thérèse Desqueyroux 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154496/therese>, a strict, rather 
brilliant chamber piece in which she plays a minted heiress in the 1920s, 
destined from childhood to shack up with boring Bernard (Gilles Lellouche), 
brother of her childhood pal Anne, and in line to inherit his own whopping 
estate. Together their families will have claim over a fair chunk of France, 
mostly smothered in pine trees. But Thérèse's apparent conservatism, especially 
in the face of Anne's fling with an unsuitably Jewish hottie, masks a desire 
for a life less patriarchal. So she starts adding a splash of arsenic to 
Bernard's nightcap. 

The François Mauriac novel on which the film is based unfurls flashback-style; 
Miller dismantled the architecture and made it linear. "It makes you think, it 
destabilises you," says Tautou. "What is mysterious and moving about the film 
is that it asks questions but doesn't provide answers."

Presenting the chronology in a straightforward way adds to a sense of easeful 
sin: as Anne slips into sex, so Thérèse slides into crime. "She says she's in a 
tunnel with no end. For her, this is a legitimate defence. She doesn't see any 
other solution to this imprisonment. Before shooting, I asked myself at what 
point she became morally culpable. Bernard is no monster. I asked Claude and he 
said: 'No, no, she does not feel guilty. She has pride in herself. No pity for 
the stupid, please.'" Tautou herself chips in as the translator stops, to 
strengthen the sentiment. "For idiots," she smiles.

It is 12 years since Amélie <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/89588/amelie>
, still the role with which she is most associated – despite a raft of dramas 
and comedies in France, and playing the direct descendant of Christ inThe Da 
Vinci Code <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/112366/da.vinci.code>. Thérèse 
Desqueyroux is a firm swerve away from sweetness: bitter and gritty, puckered 
and troubled, almost until the very final shot. In the flesh Tautou is all 
poise, but the sympathy she feels for her character runs deep. If she offered 
you a coffee, you might think twice before knocking it back.

Tautou quashes the notion it's a time-specific tale. Society continues to 
compel people into unhappy marriages, she says, even in the west. "In certain 
environments young adults can't choose their lives because of family pressure. 
In the bourgeoisie there is still a sense you will marry within that milieu."

Perhaps all marriages involve some element of imprisonment? Tautou stonewalls. 
Thérèse initially sees marriage as a way out of mental anguish, after all. "She 
says: 'My head is too full of ideas, and I want marriage to stop that.' She 
feels that the virtue of marriage is to discipline her. She is trying to 
convince herself it is a salvation. What she wants is the freedom to be able to 
express herself."

Next up: another classic of French literature – Boris Vian's Foam of the Daze, 
adapted by Michel Gondry asMood Indigo 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mood_Indigo_%28film%29>. Tautou is Chloé, who 
falls ill when a lily begins to bloom in her chest. So, a woman ruled by nature 
rather than one whose identity is predicated on land ownership. "It's true that 
in Michel's film there is an encroaching of nature on everything; the disease 
is taking over her body. With Claude, it's a much more materialistic view. 
There is no room for poetry in Thérèse's world."

Yes, it's curious that a film in which the environment is so crucial presents 
it so pragmatically. "It's just a sign of their wealth. Claude chose to film it 
that way; he wanted to show the rigidity and austerity of the pine forests, 
also perhaps as a metaphor for what's hiding under the bark." She fixes me with 
a bright look. "Everything has meanings. Nothing is said without intent." 
Later, I look up what does lie beneath the bark of a pine tree. It is, it turns 
out,a potent antioxidant 
<http://berkeley.edu/news/media/releases/98legacy/02_05_98a.html>, a chemical 
that deactivates free radicals. Just try it, trees. Just try it.
 