
This month on The Reading Group, we're going to do something a little 
different.

Like thousands of others – hundreds of thousands of others – we on the 
Guardian books desk can't wait to read Alan Garner'sBoneland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fantasy/9780007463244/boneland>, 
thelong, looooong-awaited follow-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/jul/12/alan-garner-alderley-edge>
 toThe Weirdstone of Brisingamen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780007355211/the-weirdstone-of-brisingamen>
 andThe Moon Of Gomrath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780007127870/the-moon-of-gomrath>
.

Boneland is released at the end of the month, and as excitement builds, we're 
going to read through the first two books. If you're a fan like me, it should 
be a great way to refamiliarise yourself with the stories. I'm also hoping to 
convert plenty of new readers to Garner's wild old magic as we go along.

There's going to be a great deal to discuss about the books, the mythology 
they draw on and why they still appeal so much after all these years. We'll 
also be able to talk about the experience of reading children's literature in 
general – or indeed, whether books as splendid as Garner's should be thought of 
as children's books at all. I'm also hoping to bring in a few good surprises 
along the way and do please post any suggestions you might have in the comments 
below.

In the meantime, to whet your appetite have a read of this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/feb/26/alan-garner-weirdstone-brisingamen>
 anda look at this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2010/oct/08/alan-garner>.

Excitingly, we're also going to give away 10 copies of Boneland when it comes 
out. The first 10 people from the UK to post an "I want" in the comments below 
will get one. Although, don't forget to email in to 
ginny.hooker@theguardian.com afterwards. We can't track you down ourselves! On 
that note, we're still waiting for a few people to write in about The 
Immoralist. It would be a shame to let such a wonderful book go to waste. If 
you claimed one, don't forget to write in!

And finally, never fear: democracy and the sorting hat will return next month.
 