
After a jury found James Holmes guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/16/aurora-shooting-james-holmes-murder-trial-verdict>
 on Thursday of 165 charges related to the 2012 theater shooting rampage in 
Aurora, Colorado – including 24 counts of first-degree murder – the question 
jurors now face is whether Holmes should be sentenced to death for his crimes.

The jury will begin considering Holmes’s fate on Wednesday. Court officials 
said they expect the sentencing phase of his trial to last up to a month.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Faurora-shooting-james-holmes-death-penalty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0298cc8c1db4fd1b58a8ccea010436559dc601a%2F747_0_1464_2197%2F1464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aurora%20jury%20to%20consider%20James%20Holmes's%20mental%20illness%20in%20death%20penalty%20decision&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Faurora-shooting-james-holmes-death-penalty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aurora%20jury%20to%20consider%20James%20Holmes%27s%20mental%20illness%20in%20death%20penalty%20decision&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Faurora-shooting-james-holmes-death-penalty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0298cc8c1db4fd1b58a8ccea010436559dc601a%2F747_0_1464_2197%2F1464.jpg>
 James Holmes in 2013. Photograph: Andy Cross/AP 
The vast majority of victims’ family members who spoke with the media on 
Thursday said they want to see Holmes executed, even as a few expressed moral 
ambivalence about capital punishment.

“I hope I can do everything I can to see that this guy’s Colorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> privileges are taken away,” said 
Tom Sullivan, whose son Alex was killed in the attack. “That he no longer gets 
to breathe the sweet air us Coloradans get to breathe any more.”

Robert Sullivan (no relation), whose six-year-old granddaughter Veronica 
Moser-Sullivan was killed in the theater, was asked what he’d like to see in 
the penalty phase. “I think the death penalty. Definitely.”

Katie Medley, whose husband Caleb was severely wounded and nearly died in the 
attack, agreed. “As a family, we’d like to see the death penalty,” she said. 
“But that comes with its own problems.”

Indeed, capital punishment is a national moral and legal quandary. The United 
States is one of the only western countries to still allow executions, putting 
it in thecompany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/mar/29/death-penalty-countries-world>
 of countries like China, Iran and Saudi Arabia. Within the US, 19 states ban 
the practice, a number that has grown substantially in recent years. Seven of 
those 19 states have opted to outlaw the death penalty since 2007.

Colorado is not one of them. Though executions are rarely employed, the state 
still permits the death penalty. Since 1977, just one person has been put to 
death in Colorado, and only three people currently sit on death row.

One of those individuals, Nathan Dunlap was set to be executed in 2013 for 
killing four people in a Chuck E Cheese in 1993. Though Dunlap had exhausted 
all his appeals, Governor John Hickenlooper gave Dunlap a “temporary reprieve”, 
which remains in effect. “I don’t think government should be killing people who 
are no danger to society, no risk to society,” Hickenloopertold 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/politics/politicsnow/la-pn-hickenlooper-defends-colorado-death-penatly-case-20141102-story.html>
 the Los Angeles Times in 2014, effecting an all-but-official moratorium during 
his governorship.

But Colorado will elect a new governor in 2018. A poll 
<http://www.denverpost.com/election/ci_26515352/poll-death-penalty-not-major-factor-colorado-voters>
 last year found two-thirds of Coloradans support the death penalty, and it 
became a tough issue for Hickenlooper during his narrowly successful 
re-election campaign. If Holmes is sentenced to die, his execution date 
(assuming it survives appeals) would not come for at least a decade, and under 
a different governor who could issue a similar reprieve to Holmes.

On top of that, Colorado might have trouble even obtaining the drugs necessary 
to perform an execution, since a European-led boycottlimited access to the drugs
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/19/death-penalty-boycott-drugs-execution-new-low>
.

When the jury weighs Holmes’s fate, one of the primary issues the jury will 
tackle is whether his mental illness is enough of a mitigating factor that he 
should be spared the death penalty. In 2002, the US supreme court ruled that it 
is unconstitutional to execute a person who is intellectually disabled. Someone 
is generally considered intellectually disabled if they have an IQ less than 75.

However, one of the most vexing questions legal scholars currently face is 
whether people who are mentally ill but not intellectually disabled should be 
treated the same. After all, many people with mental illness like schizophrenia 
are also highly intelligent. One of them is James Holmes.

“No court has yet held that people with severe mental illness are exempt from 
the death penalty,” Christopher Slobogin, a professor of law at Vanderbilt, 
said. In addition, he noted, juries tend to be less sympathetic to defendants 
with mental illness than those who are intellectually disabled, either because 
they may not believe the defendant’s affliction, or because they view accused 
murderers with mental illness as more dangerous and unpredictable than those 
with developmental disabilities.

Slobogin agrees with the jury’s finding that Holmes is legally sane, but 
nonetheless believes he should be spared the death penalty. “I think there’s a 
strong argument to be made that people who are severely mentally ill should 
certainly be exempt as well,” he said. “Because of his delusions and 
hallucinations, Mr Holmes is at least as impaired as those people who are 
intellectually disabled.” Even though the jury found Holmes to be legally sane, 
his mental illness will still be among the factors they will weigh when 
determining his fate.

Boston Marathon bomber unlikely to be executed – even if jury votes for death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/27/boston-marathon-dzhokhar-tsarnaev-death-penalty>
Of the victims’ family members who delivered public remarks after the verdict 
on Thursday, the only one who didn’t expressly call for the death penalty was 
Tom Teves, whose son Alex was among the 12 people Holmes killed. “All I care is 
that he wasn’t back on the street to kill somebody else’s kid,” he said. 
“Because you know what? It sucks to have your kid dead. It sucks and it will 
never stop sucking.”

It has not been uncommon in other tragedies for victims and their families to 
come out against the death penalty. Two parents who lost their eight-year-old 
son in the Boston Marathon bombingtook out a front page op-ed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/17/boston-bombing-victim-dzhokhar-tsarnaev-death-penalty>
 asking prosecutors not to seek the death penalty. Similarly, former 
representative Gabby Giffordsopposed 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/07/29/gabrielle-giffords-shooter_n_5631597.html>
 sentencing her own shooter to death.

Still, most friends and family members of the Aurora shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/aurora-shooting> victims want to see 
Holmes executed, even those who otherwise oppose the death penalty. Jansen 
Young, who survived the theater shooting when her boyfriend Jonathan Blunk 
shielded her with his body at the expense of his own life, told reporters that 
she’s reluctantly in favor.

“I’m not personally for the death penalty, but I’m fighting for it because 
it’s what Jonathan would have wanted.” Marcus Weaver, who attended the movie 
with his friend Rebecca Wingo, who was killed, also said he’s personally 
opposed to capital punishment, but that this shooting was “so heinous” that 
“the death penalty is the only penalty that fits the crime”.
 