
A gunman who killed 12 people when he opened fire in a Colorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> movie theater during the 
screening of a Batman film has been condemned to spend the rest of his life in 
prison.

James Holmes was sentenced to life imprisonment without parole but was spared 
the death penalty after jurors failed to reach a unanimous verdict on executing 
the murderer.

Holmes stood with his hands in his pockets as Judge Carlos Samour Jr read the 
jury’s decision, which was reached after about six and a half hours over two 
days. In order for a death sentence to be handed down all 12 jurors must be 
unanimous in their decision.


“We the jury do not have a unanimous final sentencing verdict,” Samour Jr read 
as shock swept the audience of victims and their family members. “As a result 
the court will impose a sentence of life imprisonment without the possibility 
of parole.”

Colorado theater shooting: 12 shot dead during The Dark Knight Rises screening
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/20/colorado-theater-shooting-dark-knight>
“Shit,” a loved one of one of the victims in the audience whispered under her 
breath after it became clear that Holmes would not be sentenced to death. One 
man in the audience leapt up and ran out of the courtroom after Samour read the 
first of 24 sentencing verdicts.


Many who stayed behind wept in their seats, shaking their heads in disbelief 
at the verdict. The parents of Jessica Ghawi, 24, who was killed in the Aurora 
theater shooting, both joined hands with Josh Nolan, another theater victim who 
was left badly wounded. He closed his eyes and hung his head down.

The gunman’s parents held each other as they stood a few feet behind him 
during the sentencing announcement. Holmes, clad in a gray button-up shirt, sat 
motionless.

It is not yet known how the nine women and three men of the jury ultimately 
voted on each count. However, under Colorado law, in order for a death sentence 
to be handed down all 12 on the panel must be unanimous in their decision.

Prior to Samour’s pronouncement victims and family members exchanged hugs, 
knowing it would be their last time together in Courtroom 201 after an 
emotionally taxing three-month trial. District attorney George Brauchler had 
appeared upbeat, chatting with guards outside the courtroom.

Holmes’s defense team had offered a guilty plea if prosecutors agreed not to 
seek the death penalty. That offer was rejected, leading to a multi-million 
dollar trial that ultimately brought the same result.

The trial now moves to a sentencing hearing beginning on 24 August.

The outcome was surprising to many who had followed the trial. Twice during 
the three-part sentencing phase jurors indicated they were moving towards a 
death sentence. Polled by Quinnipiac Universitylast month 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2015/07/28/jurors-in-aurora-theater-shooting-trial-allowed-to-stay-despite-exposure-to-lafayette-shooting-news/>
, nearly two-thirds of Colorado voters said they supported a death sentence for 
Holmes.


Holmes was found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/16/aurora-shooting-james-holmes-murder-trial-verdict>
 guilty on 17 July of 165 separate charges, including murder in the first 
degree. At issue was not whether Holmes perpetrated the shooting rampage on 20 
July 2012 but rather whether his schizophrenia had rendered him legally insane 
at the time of the killings, as his defense team unsuccessfully insisted. 
Twelve people were killed and 70 others injured in the shooting.

Following the guilty verdict last month the trial entered the sentencing 
phase. For three weeks jurors heard testimony from victims and their family 
members, as well as Holmes’s mother and father. “Schizophrenia chose him. He 
didn’t choose it,” Arlene Holmes told jurors on 29 July. “I still love my son. 
I still do.”

Numerous members of the jury were moved to tears when victims told their 
stories on the stand, including Ashley Moser, who lost her six-year-old 
daughter Veronica Moser-Sullivan and suffered a miscarriage in the attack.

“You cannot get them justice and you should not seek it,” district attorney 
George Brauchlersaid 
<http://www.denverpost.com/theater-shooting-trial/ci_28597264/jurors-begin-deliberating-aurora-theater-shooting-trial>
 during his closing remarks in the sentencing phase. “But you can get justice 
to this act. And to him. To James Eagan Holmes justice is death. It’s death.”

Defense lawyer Tamara Brady countered: “The deaths of all of those people 
cannot be answered by another death.”

“Please, no more death,” she told the jurors. “He will be punished. He will be 
punished severely and he will be punished for the rest of his life.”

Before releasing them to deliberate, Samour imparted on jurors the weight of 
their task. This “may well be the most serious and important decision you ever 
have to make” he said 
<http://www.foxnews.com/us/2015/08/06/closing-arguments-to-being-in-james-holmes-sentencing-trial/?intcmp=hplnws>
, and insisted that they each use “their own individual reasoned moral 
judgment” in deciding Holmes’s fate.

Historically capital punishment has been used sparingly in Colorado; only one 
person has been executed in the Centennial State since the death penalty was 
reinstated four decades ago.



Some victims’ family members, like Jansen Young and Marcus Weaver, who were in 
the theater, had argued for Holmes’s execution in spite of their typical 
opposition to the death penalty. “I’m not personally for the death penalty but 
I’m fighting for it because it’s what Jonathan would have wanted,” Young, the 
girlfriend of slain victim Jonathan Blunk,told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/17/aurora-shooting-james-holmes-death-penalty>
 reporters after Holmes was found guilty in July.

Holmes’s sentence was handed down amidst ongoing debate about capital 
punishment and mental illness. Though the supreme court of the United States 
declared in 2002 that it is unconstitutional to execute people who are 
intellectually disabled – typically having an IQ score of less than 75 – the 
question of sentencing death people who are mentally ill but not mentally 
disabled remains unsettled among legal scholars.
 