
Three years ago, during a midnight screening of the Batman film The Dark 
Knight Rises, it took James Holmes just 90 seconds to fire 76 rounds in a 
crowded Aurora movie theater. On Tuesday, in acourthouse just a few miles away 
from that Colorado city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/19/aurora-colorado-theater-shooting-prosecutors-james-holmes>
, it took Judge Carlos Samour Jr far longer than that to read out the names of 
the 12 people Holmes killed and the 70 he injured that night.

Some of those victims and many of their family members were in the public area 
on Tuesday, listening mostly in silence as Samour instructed jurors on the 
charges against Holmes for perpetrating the July 2012 massacre. The prosecution 
and defense laid out their closing arguments, before handing over Holmes’s fate 
to the jury. Their deliberations are scheduled to begin on Wednesday morning.

Inside the courtroom, a few family members stood and chatted with one another 
as they waited for closing arguments to begin. Most sat in the court’s theater 
seats, strangely reminiscent of those in the Century Aurora 16 cinema where the 
attack took place, and silently stared ahead.

Laying out gut-wrenching details in his closing arguments, from the 
steel-penetrating bullets used to the shots at those who tried to escape in 
order to scare others out of following, the district attorney, George 
Brauchler, methodically built the case that Holmes was guilty of first-degree 
murder for the 12 people he killed and attempted murder for the 70 he injured.

To do that, though, he would need to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that 
Holmes was not insane at the time of the rampage. (Unlike many states,Colorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> places the burden of proving 
sanity on prosecutors.) In an attempt to show Holmes’s awareness and 
premeditation, Brauchler walked the jury through the defendant’s Google chat 
transcripts, writings, and meetings with counselors which discussed killing 
others. “That guy was sane beyond a reasonable doubt,” Brauchler said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Faurora-shooting-trial-james-holmes-closing-arguments-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436968671216%2F117e84b1-dadf-4977-814b-847b76009796-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aurora%20shooting%3A%20James%20Holmes's%20fate%20in%20jury's%20hands%20after%20closing%20arguments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Faurora-shooting-trial-james-holmes-closing-arguments-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aurora%20shooting%3A%20James%20Holmes%27s%20fate%20in%20jury%27s%20hands%20after%20closing%20arguments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Faurora-shooting-trial-james-holmes-closing-arguments-verdict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436968671216%2F117e84b1-dadf-4977-814b-847b76009796-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sandy Phillips, whose daughter Jessica Ghawi was killed in the 2012 Aurora 
movie theatre massacre, carries a T-shirt commemorating the 12 people killed in 
the attack, outside the Arapahoe County district court following the day of 
closing arguments. Photograph: Brennan Linsley/AP 
Throughout his closing remarks, not once did Brauchler mention Holmes by name, 
pointedly referring to the defendant each time as “this guy” or “that guy”. 
Every few minutes, though, he stopped discussing Holmes and instead put the 
name of a victim on his accompanying PowerPoint presentation, often with photos.

One of the them, Josh Nolan, sat in Courtroom 201 as Brauchler showed photos 
of wounds that he suffered during the shooting. Nolan wept silently, clenching 
a walking cane against his side. A large scar on his arm was still visible.

When Brauchler discussed one of the deceased victims, 23-year-old Micayla 
Medek, her grandmother Marlene Knobbe began sobbing. “I’m just glad it’s over,” 
she told the Guardian afterward. Her mother, Rena Medek, agreed. “Now the 
grieving can begin.”

Though less polished than the district attorney, public defender Dan King used 
his closing arguments to make a forceful case that Holmes was not guilty by 
reason of insanity. He told the jury to rise above the gory and emotional 
details of the shooting and instead focus on Holmes’s lengthy history of mental 
illness.

“Accept that mental illness exists,” King pleaded to the jury. “You can’t just 
ignore the fact that he was mentally ill.” He argued: “We don’t blame people 
for getting cancer,” and yet “we in this country seem to be in denial about 
mental illness.” Holmes “inherited the disease from his family”, King said.

All four psychiatrists who evaluated Holmes agreed that he had some form of 
schizophrenia. But the two court-appointed forensic psychiatrists, Jeffrey 
Metzner andWilliam Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/28/aurora-shooting-trial-prosecutors-building-case-james-holmes-was-sane>
, argued that Holmes was legally sane at the time of the attack, while two 
psychiatrists with the defense team, Jonathan Woodcock and Raquel Gur, 
disagreed.

Many of the victims’ family members were perturbed at Holmes’s insanity 
defense. “One million people have mental illness in this country,” Medek told 
the Guardian. “Not all of them kill people.”

Sandy Phillips, whose daughter Jessica Ghawi was among the 12 who were killed, 
agreed 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/jimdalrympleii/closing-arguments-begin-in-trial-of-colorado-theater-shooter>
, arguing that mental illness wasn’t a good reason for Holmes’s actions. “I 
really think it’s a disservice to the mentally ill to project it that way.”

A number of the victims’ family members said they were pleased with the 
prosecution’s performance. “We really like them,” Medek said. “They’re really 
nice people.” Another standing in line to get back in the courtroom told a 
passing Brauchler: “You rocked it.”

After hundreds of hours of testimony and proceedings, the jury’s nine women 
and three men are now charged with deciding Holmes’s fate. If they vote to 
convict, prosecutors have said they willseek the death penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/19/aurora-shooter-james-holmes-parents-letter-death-denalty>
. Colorado currently has just three individuals on death row and the state has 
only executed one person in the past 38 years.

Back in the courtroom, Brauchler was given the last word of the trial. He 
blasted Holmes’s insanity defense, arguing that his thought process was 
rational and his actions were premeditated.

“Sane. Sane. Sane. Guilty.” Brauchler closed, standing just feet from where 
the defendant sat. Holmes slowly twisted in his chair.
 