
Queensland’s education department will take charge of schooling in the 
troubled Indigenous community of Aurukun following repeated unrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/aurukun-teachers-evacuated-after-alleged-carjacking-in-indigenous-community>
.

The state government on Tuesday announced it would adopt all 27 
recommendations from areview into the far north Queensland community’s school 
system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/aurukun-imported-syllabus-partly-to-blame-for-school-closure-says-former-principal>
.

One key recommendation was that the Department of Education and Training would 
take the lead in the delivery of education services in Aurukun.

Aurukun teachers evacuated after alleged carjacking in Indigenous community
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/aurukun-teachers-evacuated-after-alleged-carjacking-in-indigenous-community>
But premier Annastacia Palaszczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk> insisted 
that did not mean Indigenous leader Noel Pearson, who had run the Cape York 
Aboriginal Academy through his Good to Great school program and its direct 
instruction model, was being sidelined.

The Good to Great program would work alongside the national curriculum, she 
said.

“The joint arrangement is an acknowledgement that direct instruction does work 
in some remote locations,” Palaszczuk said. “What we found with this report 
into Aurukun, is there needs to be a bit more focus on the national curriculum, 
but also on culture.”

Palaszczuk said Aurukun elders wanted students to learn more about Wik 
culture, which would be included in the school improvement action plan to be 
overseen by the education department.

The review was sparked by violence from a group of young people in which the 
school’s principal, Scott Fatnowna, was carjacked twice in as many weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/26/aurukun-elders-say-group-of-teenagers-controlling-government-like-puppeteers>
.

Aurukun: Noel Pearson's syllabus partly to blame for school crisis, says 
former principal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/aurukun-imported-syllabus-partly-to-blame-for-school-closure-says-former-principal>
Palaszczuk said Fatnowna would join other teachers returning to the school 
when term three began next week, while interim principal Matt O’Hanlon would 
remain in the community in a mentoring role for the rest of the year.

The government will add year 7 and 8 classes to the school, following feedback 
from the community.

“We do acknowledge that, for some young children, it is extremely difficult to 
go to boarding school leaving behind their parents and their friends,” 
Palaszczuk said.

“And boarding school is not necessarily the best option for all children.”

Education minister Kate Jones said a recommended independent financial audit 
into the school was about finding value for money, not because there were any 
examples of misappropriation of funds found.

 