
“We don’t say the A-word here anymore,” a social worker once told me when I 
dared to ask why there are hardly any adoptions in Australia.

But, with our foster care system in crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/labor-criticises-85m-reform-plans-for-foster-care-homes-after-girl-x-failures>
, it’s time to talk about an alternative option for the increasing number of 
children removed from their home due to abuse or neglect.

Adoption <https://www.theguardian.com/society/adoption> is so tainted by its 
dark history in Australia that it remains a taboo. To many, it conjures images 
of rich white couples sauntering into orphanages, picking out the cutest brown 
babies and whisking them away before the impoverished birth mothers know what’s 
happened.

Queensland proposes new laws for same-sex couples to adopt children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/06/queensland-proposes-new-laws-for-same-sex-couples-to-adopt-children>
In reality, many ordinary Australians spend years fighting bureaucracy and 
making sacrifices to earn the right to take care of traumatised children nobody 
else wants.

It is appropriate that National Adoption Awareness Week in Australia coincides 
with Hillary Clinton’s likely election as president.

Clinton helped transform the US child protection system to favour (permanent) 
adoption of children in preference to (temporary) foster care.

In her 1996 book, It Takes a Village, she expressed concern at the number of 
kids yo-yoing between different homes. She highlighted the need to “make 
decisions about terminating parental rights of abusive parents more quickly, 
rather than removing and returning abused children time and again”.

Her work underpinned the Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997, signed by the 
then president, Bill Clinton. The new law provided for fast-tracking of 
decisions on permanency for children. Importantly, the reforms included 
provisions for financial assistance for both birth families (to help them keep 
their kids) and adoptive families (for post-care support).

The Washington Post hailed the act as “the most significant change in federal 
child protection policy in almost two decades 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/national/daily/april99/fosterlaw011898.htm>
” because it turned an adult-focused system into one that made child safety a 
“paramount concern”. The new law led to a big drop in the number of children in 
foster care and a corresponding rise in those adopted.

Australia has moved in the opposite direction. The number of children in 
foster care has skyrocketed – there are now 43,000 kids living without a 
permanent home. Many spend their entire childhood being handballed from one 
placement to another before transitinginto juvenile justice 
<http://vcoss.org.au/documents/2013/06/Insight.CheStockley.Final_.pdf>. Yet 
there were fewer than 100 foster care adoptions last year and just seven 
outside NSW.

Adoption is not viable for all foster kids. Some have been so damaged by 
constant moves andre-abuse in care 
<https://www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/case-study/cde18d1b-fade-43f4-83f4-46e9af48b543/case-study-24,-march-2015,-sydney>
, they’re now unable to settle in a family home. Others remain emotionally 
attached to birth families and could be returned if it weren’t for our woeful 
underfunding of social support services.

But there’s a third subset of children whose parents are deceased, 
remorsefully abusive or simply unwilling to care for them. In most states, 
adoption is not pursued even for them.

This is typified by the case of the former AFL player Brad Murphy, who grew up 
in state care because his dad was in jail and his mum didn’t want him. He 
desperately wanted to be adopted by his loving foster parents but the Victorian 
government wouldn’t allow it because his birth father wouldn’t provide consent.

Adoption at all-time low in Australia 'because of focus on family reunion'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/17/adoption-at-all-time-low-in-australia-because-of-focus-on-family-reunion>
Murphy remained in the oxymoronic state of “permanent care”, where care rights 
are granted to one family for 18 years. Such rights can be challenged in court. 
He was in constant fear of hearing a knock on the door from someone who might 
take him away. He felt he never truly belonged to anyone. His athletic prowess 
and determination allowed him to become a rare foster care success story but 
he’s aware of four others who transited through his home that have since taken 
their own life.

Australia’s pre-1980s history of forced adoptions – where Aboriginal and 
single women were coerced into handing over their babies and denied future 
contact – helps explain today’s status quo. NSW has been the only state to 
pursue pro-adoption reforms and this led to criesthat government is once again 
trying to steal children 
<http://www.wlsnsw.org.au/wp-content/uploads/Child-protection-Open-letter-to-Minister-Gowardf.pdf>
.

But adoption as practised today is different from the past. Laws mandate 
transparency and contact with birth families is maintained wherever possible. 
Indeed, there is so much rigour and paperwork that an adoption takes, on 
average, four years to process, according to the lobby group Adopt Change. This 
deters many prospective adoptive parents. If state bureaucrats are trying to 
steal children, they ought to appear on an episode of World’s Dumbest Criminals.

Four years is a long, uncertain time in the life of child. There is an urgent 
need for laws, practices and attitudes to change to put children’s interests 
first and enable timely processing of adoption for those who want it. On this 
issue, we are 20 years behind Clinton. Our most vulnerable children should wait 
no longer.

National Adoption Awareness Week is between 6 and 12 November.
 