
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has pledged Australia will ratify the second stage of the Kyoto protocol – a 
move that underlines Australia’s change in attitude towards international 
climate talks but is unlikely to make any practical difference to reductions in 
emissions.


Experts said formal ratification of Kyoto 2 – which includes Australia’s 
minimum target to reduce emissions by 5% by 2020 that the government says it is 
already on track to meet – would have a limited real world impact.

But officials and long-term observers of the talks said the announcement sent 
a positive signal at the start of two weeks of talks inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> that aim to clinch the next 
international climate deal, for reductions out to 2030. It was met with some 
applause from the conference floor.

A Potato in Paris: how one climate denialist potato dreams of representing 
Australia | First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2015/nov/30/a-potato-in-paris-how-one-climate-denialist-potato-dreams-of-representing-australia>
In a day of promises designed, in the words of the French president, François 
Hollande <https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande>, to give the 
conference “a drive and ambition commensurate to the challenge” Turnbull also 
joined at the last minute a US initiative to double public and private research 
and development spending on clean energy technology, which in Australia’s case 
means an additional $100m in government spending over five years.

And he announced that $1bn from Australia’s existing aid budget would be 
directed towards projects that reduce emissions or help countries adapt, 
including the $200m already committed by the Abbott government to the Green 
Climate Fund.

The environment minister, Greg Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/greg-hunt>, said ratifying Kyoto 2 
sent a “very, very powerful symbol to the world” and also helped Australia meet 
its minimum 5% target by “carrying over” the amount by which it exceeded a very 
lenient target under the first Kyoto agreement.

Turnbull, speaking to the media after a sidelines meeting with Bill Gates, 
said he came to Paris “in a spirit of realistic optimism” and believed the 
meeting would result in a successful deal.

But he also said the government had no plans to increase its minimum 2020 
target, even though it has inscribed tougher targets into the UN agreement 
under specific conditions that the independent Climate Change Authority says 
have been met.

COP21: world leaders at Paris climate talks – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2015/nov/30/cop21-world-leaders-at-paris-climate-talks-in-pictures>
Turnbull was also equivocal about whether he would have to increase the longer 
term Abbott government target for the agreement being negotiated in Paris – to 
reduce emissions by between 26% and 28% compared with 2005 levels by 2030, 
saying that would depend on the ambition of the global community.

Labor leader Bill Shorten, who is also in Paris, accused the government of 
coming with a message of hope but Tony Abbott’s old policies.

“Ratifying Kyoto 2 is fine as far as it goes ... but it’s not exactly setting 
the world on fire,” he said. Labor has promised to consider a reduction of 45% 
by 2030, based on 2005 levels.

He accused the government of “playing accounting games” by using existing aid 
funding for its $1bn climate financing promise.

Bill Hare, chief executive of Climate Analytics, said Australia’s promise to 
ratify Kyoto 2 was “largely incidental to this meeting, which is all about the 
next step after 2020”.

But the veteran observer of international climate talks said it would 
underline what negotiators had already noticed – “a quite noticeable change in 
attitude and demeanour from Australia” in international climate talks.

Erwin Jackson, the deputy chief executive of the Climate Institute, said the 
promise could have some tangible effects, including making it easier for 
Australian businesses to access international climate markets if Australia 
tightens the requirements of its Direct Action policy, and opening Australia to 
world pressure to move to the higher Kyoto 2 targets it had promised if other 
countries also acted – up to a 25% cut in emissions.

In his allotted speaking slot Turnbull delivered an international version of 
his domestic message of optimism and faith in innovation and technological 
advances.

“From Australia we come with confidence and optimism,” he said, adding that 
Australia was confident the conference would “secure our future” because of our 
“great optimism and faith in humanity’s genius for invention”.

World leaders brought both specific promises and persuasive rhetoric to the 
day of speed-speeches in two simultaneous sessions – with leaders’ attendance 
scheduled at the start of the conference to “turbocharge” talks, rather than at 
the end, as it was in the disastrous Copenhagen meeting in 2009.

I’ve seen 21 years of COP failures. Paris needs to deliver action, not talk | 
Adil Najam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/30/25-years-cop-failures-paris-climate-change-pakistan-binding-agreements>
The recent Paris terrorist attacks were used by many as a rallying point – 
with the US president, Barack Obama, saying the meeting was an “act of 
defiance” and the attendance of so many leaders a “rejection of those who would 
tear down our world”.

Obama cited his new research and development initiative – “Mission Innovation” 
–and foreshadowed a new spending promise for least developed nations including 
low-lying Pacific Islands.

He told the meeting it could be the “turning point” in the world’s response to 
a threat that “could define the contours of this century more than any other”.
 