
Rarely has a player – male or female – dominated a World Cup final like Carli 
Lloyd did as USA won the third world title in Canada last year. The attacking 
midfielderscored a hat-trick inside 16 minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/07/carli-lloyd-womens-world-cup-best-performance>
 with the star of the show doing exactly as she pleased during the first half, 
as if a central figure in a video game.

After match-by-match improvement over the course of the tournament, Lloyd 
dominated physically and even mentally on the big day to become a World Cup 
winner. And on Monday she sat among the biggest names of world football in 
Zurich, being named 2015 women’s world player of the year.

Carli Lloyd: complicated, inconsistent ... and officially the world's best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/11/carli-lloyd-complicated-inconsistent-and-by-far-the-worlds-best>
The bright lights of Zurich’s Kongresshaus are a far cry from 2003 when a 
deflated Lloyd was reconsidering her life as a footballer. It was then that an 
unlikely looking saviour, from the even more unlikely locale of Preston in 
Melbourne’s northern suburbs, serendipitously crossed paths with Lloyd.


For the past 13 years James Galanis has been Lloyd’s personal trainer, 
football tutor and even life mentor. The pair have had almost daily contact for 
over a decade, be it on the training ground or by phone. And Lloyd is the first 
to point to Galanis as making the difference in a career which continues to 
reach high after high.


Yet the pair’s initial meeting followed a set of circumstances that would have 
been considered too outlandish even for Hollywood script writers. Galanis found 
himself in an unpretentious New Jersey neighbourhood visiting his then 
girlfriend whom he had met on holiday in Greece. Kicking a ball around the 
front yard, he was approached by a passer-by who was seeking 11th-hour 
assistance for a local soccer camp. Galanis found himself addicted to the 
coaching bud and became associated with local club Medford Strikers SC, where 
his holistic methods proved highly fruitful.


Galanis soon became an esteemed presence for his coaching at the club and one 
November 2003 evening Lloyd’s father approached Galanis on the sideline as the 
autumn rain drizzled down. “My daughter needs you,” said Steve Lloyd. Galanis, 
a self-confessed football tragic, proved to be the perfect man for the job.

Though it may seem hard to believe now, the young Carli Lloyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carli-lloyd> was once a player only 
partly committed to her trade, and one lacking in confidence at the highest 
level. Lloyd was cut from youth national team duties and even considered 
throwing it all in.

 Galanis takes up the story. “She was a great player when she was young,” he 
says. “Playing locally she could get through with 60 or 70% fitness and effort. 
When she reached Under-21 level she met the rest of the Carlis throughout the 
US. That is the mentality she had when she came to me.

 “I discovered a player with great technical skills, and very savvy without 
the ball, but lacking in mental toughness and physical power. I said to her 
‘you can become one of the best players in the world if you turn your 
weaknesses into strengths’. Everyone else at the time, including Carli, thought 
I was nuts.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Faustralians-abroad-james-galanis-mentor-to-the-best-womens-footballer-on-the-planet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71f3aadb331e7261a0f14f25a12246a2715ceccb%2F0_0_3174_3198%2F3174.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20James%20Galanis%2C%20mentor%20to%20the%20world's%20best%20women's%20footballer%20%7C%20Pete%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Faustralians-abroad-james-galanis-mentor-to-the-best-womens-footballer-on-the-planet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20James%20Galanis%2C%20mentor%20to%20the%20world%27s%20best%20women%27s%20footballer%20%7C%20Pete%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Faustralians-abroad-james-galanis-mentor-to-the-best-womens-footballer-on-the-planet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71f3aadb331e7261a0f14f25a12246a2715ceccb%2F0_0_3174_3198%2F3174.jpg>
 Carli Lloyd and James Galanis have forged a strong bond during their 13 years 
working together. Photograph: Mel Evans/AP 
 The aspects of Galanis’s methods include physical, mental, tactical and 
character-building work. Galanis’s driven approach and obsessiveness soon 
rubbed off on Lloyd.

 “I discovered a player that has the will that a champion needs,” Galanis 
says. “It can be minus 20 degrees outside, and I have her do 15 400 metre runs. 
She will do it unhesitatingly, and is willing to do whatever needs to be done. 
Every time she is home (free of club and national team commitments) we work 
three to six hours a day. We train Christmas, Thanksgiving, Easter, all of 
them.”

 That’s right, three to six hours a day. “You know why?” asks Galanis 
rhetorically. “Because no one else is doing it. We clock in more hours than 
everyone else. And that is also a psychological thing for Carli.”

 Galanis has never been paid for his work with Lloyd. For him reward comes in 
Lloyd’s successes – and there have been many.

 “We started with four phases,” said Galanis, who still sounds like he could 
be back in his native Melbourne. “First phase was foot in the door, which 
finished with the winning goal in the Beijing Olympics gold-medal match. The 
next phase was to become an established international player which finished 
with two goals in the London Olympics. The third phase was supposed to end this 
year, which was to become the best player in the world.

 “So now we have added a fourth phase and I have told Carli ‘you are among the 
greats now, and you have five years to become the greatest’.” Few would 
confidently bet against Lloyd doing just that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Faustralians-abroad-james-galanis-mentor-to-the-best-womens-footballer-on-the-planet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F039c3cd6515e8128c2632c75eb6bfbe2a10f4ff9%2F0_0_4156_2903%2F4156.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20James%20Galanis%2C%20mentor%20to%20the%20world's%20best%20women's%20footballer%20%7C%20Pete%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Faustralians-abroad-james-galanis-mentor-to-the-best-womens-footballer-on-the-planet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20James%20Galanis%2C%20mentor%20to%20the%20world%27s%20best%20women%27s%20footballer%20%7C%20Pete%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Faustralians-abroad-james-galanis-mentor-to-the-best-womens-footballer-on-the-planet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F039c3cd6515e8128c2632c75eb6bfbe2a10f4ff9%2F0_0_4156_2903%2F4156.jpg>
 Carli Lloyd accepted Fifa’s world player of the year award at a glitzy 
ceremony in Zurich on Monday. Photograph: Mike Hewitt - FIFA/FIFA via Getty 
Images 
 While Lloyd rightly takes all the spotlight, there was a rare moment of 
glamour for Galanis this week as he attended the Zurich ceremony alongside the 
recently engaged Lloyd. It is of course, a world away in every sense from 
working-class Preston, and a daily kick-about with friends at the school or 
local ground, Connor Reserve. The home venue of former National Soccer League 
club Preston Macedonia was an unlikely learning ground for a South Melbourne 
fan of Greek heritage.

Galanis played briefly for South Melbourne in the NSL, but mostly he featured 
for many years with distinction for Clifton Hill and Northcote City in the 
Victorian State League.


 “I grew up watching South Melbourne and the person I looked up to was Oscar 
Crino,” Galanis says of the richly-skilled Socceroos No10 from the 1980s. “The 
rest of the time I wanted to be a combination of Diego Maradona and Bruce Lee,” 
he adds with a laugh.

 Galanis spent a couple of his crucial formative years learning from one of 
the all-time greats – Hungarian legend Ferenc Puskas. Galanis, somewhat 
improbably, found himself the go-to youngster for the Galloping Major while 
operating his academy team. Greek-speaking Puskas found he could not only rely 
on Galanis for translation, but also as an instructor and leader amongst fellow 
teenagers.

 Galanis said the influence of Puskas sewed a seed that is still sprouting 
today. The Hungarian’s influence on Lloyd’s career might be indirect, but the 
link on the football family tree is there.

 Little wonder Galanis describes Lloyd being short-listed for the Puskas 
award, for the best goal of 2015 for her spectacular strike from half-way in 
the World Cup final, as having “special meaning”. The goal may have missed the 
top award but it will remain one of women’s football’s most iconic moments. 
Conceivably the coming years will see it become even “the” most iconic.

As for Galanis, he, much like fellow former South Melbourne player and current 
Socceroos boss Ange Postecoglou, realised as he got older that coaching was his 
true calling. “I would almost put myself in the mind of my coaches,” said 
Galanis of his playing days. “Most of my coaches would say I would make a good 
coach sometime.”

 Galanis is now comfortably settled in New Jersey. He has been director of the 
Medford Strikers for 10 years and the club is now renowned as an institution 
that focuses on life skills and a broad-minded approach, as well as the game’s 
technical basics. “We work on the mind down, rather than the other way.”

 He coaches as many as 10 teams at the club at any given time, and also runs 
his own private soccer academy. More recently Galanis has started working with 
USA World Cup-winning defender Julie Johnston and richly talented Colombia 
forward Yoreli Rincon, both of whom enjoyed breakthrough success during 2015.

 A few years back Galanis had a stint at the helm of now defunct professional 
club Atlanta Beat, but it seems his calling is away from the spotlight.

 “I hope I can inspire other coaches,” adds Galanis. “I have never thought 
about money, only putting in everything and see what comes out.”


 What has come out is currently the greatest women’s footballer in the world. 
 