
Roger Federer made swift progress into the second round of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> today with a routine win 
over Slovakia'sLukas Lacko. The world No2 and defending champion at Melbourne 
Park barely broke sweat as he cruised to a 6-1, 6-1, 6-3 victory.

Lacko was a determined opponent but was simply outclassed by the 16-times 
grand slam champion, who showed glimpses of brilliance to thrill a crowd on Rod 
Laver Arena who may otherwise have felt short-changed to have seen the day 
session wrapped up in under five and a half hours.

"I thought I played great," Federer said. "I thought it was a good match. I 
don't think he played too bad himself. I saw some talent in him and that's why 
I was really happy I chose the tactic early on to pressure him. That it worked 
was great and I'm obviously very happy."

The sixth seed Andy Roddick enjoyed an equally emphatic start, beating Jan 
Hajek 6-1, 6-2, 6-2, while GaÃ«l Monfils staged an astonishing recovery from two 
sets and 5-2 down to overcomeThiemo De Bakker of Holland.

De Bakker looked poised to complete the best win of his career at a grand slam 
when he served for the match at 5-3 but the moment got to him on the Hisense 
Arena, which allowed Monfils to storm back. The 12th-seeded Frenchman broke 
again to claim the set before running through the fourth and fifth to clinch a 
6-7, 2-6, 7-5, 6-2, 6-1 triumph.

"I just tried to make him struggle and make him earn the win," Monfils said. 
"I think he got tight and then started to struggle physically. And when you 
find the solution you have to dive on it."

Mardy Fish was another seed to hit back from a seemingly desperate position, 
the American overcomingVictor Hanescu 2-6, 4-6, 6-3, 7-5, 6-3.

Juan Monaco, the 26th seed, made untroubled progress into round two despite a 
late change of opponent. France'sJulien Benneteau had to withdraw at the last 
moment due to an infected finger, handing lucky loser Simon Greul an unexpected 
opportunity. The German could not profit from it, however, as the Argentinian 
Monaco won 7-6, 7-6, 6-2.

There were two notable upsets early on day one with the 18th seed Sam Querrey 
and the 23rd seedNikolay Davydenko both going out. Querrey fell in a marathon 
five-set contest againstLukasz Kubot while the former world No3 Davydenko was 
eliminated byFlorian Mayer 6-3, 4-6, 7-6, 6-4.
 