
Television <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> budgets might be 
tight, but Australian viewers are still set for a bumper year of new Australian 
drama in 2017. Favourite faces including Claudia Karvan, Hugo Weaving, Justine 
Clarke and Alex Dimitriades star in new projects, while the ABC uncovers 
emerging Indigenous talent and SBS tells untold stories. Also, biopics. Lots of 
biopics.

Newton’s Law, ABC 

Starring: Claudia Karvan, Brett Tucker, Toby Schmitz, Miranda Tapsell, 
Georgina Naidu
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3313eca44e7d2fbf9e951e37e01866d3a5284117%2F0_0_4796_3197%2F4796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20TV%20to%20watch%20in%202017%3A%20big%20names%2C%20new%20talent%20and%20classic%20stories%20revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20TV%20to%20watch%20in%202017%3A%20big%20names%2C%20new%20talent%20and%20classic%20stories%20revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3313eca44e7d2fbf9e951e37e01866d3a5284117%2F0_0_4796_3197%2F4796.jpg>
 Claudia Karvan stars in new Australian legal drama Newton’s Law, coming to ABC 
in 2017. Photograph: ABC 
Helmed by and starring Claudia Karvan (Secret Life of Us, Love My Way), this 
major new original series from Aunty was developed from a concept by Deb Cox 
and Fiona Eagger – the same pair who brought you Miss Fisher’s Murder Mysteries 
and The Gods of Wheat Street.

In it, Josephine Newton (Karvan) is a suburban solicitor juggling her career, 
a failing marriage and motherhood, whose practice is burnt to the ground by an 
angry client. Her love interest and old friend (Lewis Hughes) persuades her to 
return to the bar at Knox Chambers – and it’s her legal travails that make up 
the bulk of the drama.

Also starring in this eight-part series – described as a cross between 
SeaChange and Rake – is popular Indigenous actress Miranda Tapsell and veteran 
actor Andrew McFarlane. We’re excited because it combines the glamour of the 
bar with the everyday dramas of a small town – which has echoes of the 
fictional Pearl Bay.

Seven Types of Ambiguity, ABC

Starring: Hugo Weaving, Alex Dimitriades, Leeanna Walsman, Xavier Samuel, 
Anthony Hayes, Andrea Demetriades, Susie Porter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F646dbbfca0b089e979e769577185ce9db40ffe60%2F0_0_3508_2339%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20TV%20to%20watch%20in%202017%3A%20big%20names%2C%20new%20talent%20and%20classic%20stories%20revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20TV%20to%20watch%20in%202017%3A%20big%20names%2C%20new%20talent%20and%20classic%20stories%20revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F646dbbfca0b089e979e769577185ce9db40ffe60%2F0_0_3508_2339%2F3508.jpg>
 Hugo Weaving as Dr Alex Klima in Seven Types of Ambiguity. Photograph: Ben King
Another ABC drama we’re looking forward to – the star-studded cast alone is 
sufficient reason to tune in.

The series is based on Australian author’s Elliot Perlman’s 2003 novel of the 
same name, which is narrated by seven different characters whose lives 
intersect. Like The Slap, another ABC drama based on a book, each episode 
builds up the intrigue around what happened to a child – in this case, a 
seven-year-old boy who goes missing.


The Warriors, ABC 

Starring: Lisa McCune, John Howard, Vince Colosimo, Nelson Baker, Gordan 
Churchill
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b111c825fb8bd35e210d98b56ca4343752cf0c5%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20TV%20to%20watch%20in%202017%3A%20big%20names%2C%20new%20talent%20and%20classic%20stories%20revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20TV%20to%20watch%20in%202017%3A%20big%20names%2C%20new%20talent%20and%20classic%20stories%20revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b111c825fb8bd35e210d98b56ca4343752cf0c5%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
 Gordan Churchill as young football recruit Maki in The Warriors. Photograph: 
ABC 
In keeping with the ABC’s diversity theme 
<http://about.abc.net.au/speeches/a-diverse-abc-is-a-strong-abc/> for 2017, The 
Warriors is the story of two young Indigenous football players (newcomers 
Nelson Baker and Gordan Churchill), who are plucked from their modest lives to 
play in the big league in Melbourne.

With McCune as the team’s communication manager, Howard as the club president 
and Colosimo as the coach, the comedic drama will follow the two recruits as 
they pack up and move interstate to the busy city, where they discover lives 
are very different there.

The show has a fine pedigree, coming from the minds of Tony Briggs (The 
Sapphires) and Robert Connolly (Paper Planes, Barracuda); the writing and 
directing team are exclusively Indigenous too, including Briggs, Jon Bell 
(Cleverman), Beck Cole (Black Comedy) and Catriona McKenzie (The Circuit, 
Redfern Now and The Gods of Wheat Street). It promises to be great fun for fans 
of football and comedy.

SBS unveils refugee and asylum-seeker dramas for 2017 as Viceland launches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/sbs-unveils-refugee-and-asylum-seeker-dramas-for-2017-as-viceland-launches>
Sunshine, SBS

Starring: TBC

SBS has an unusually strong drama slate in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/sbs-unveils-refugee-and-asylum-seeker-dramas-for-2017-as-viceland-launches>
, and Sunshine is one of the key picks. The four-part drama crime series hones 
in on a South Sudanese refugee, Jacob Chagai, who arrives in Australia with his 
surviving family members, and grows up in Melbourne.

Chagai is a star on the basketball court, and sets his hopes on an American 
college sporting scholarship which could send him to the NBA – until he is 
wrongly accused of an assault and has to fight for his innocence.

Sunshine marks the first time a drama has spotlighted the South Sudanese 
refugee community in Australia, and comes at an interesting political moment 
for the issue. Early days, but certainly one to watch out for.

Safe Harbour, SBS

Starring: TBC

Details are scant on this one too – but it sounds like it has a similar vibe 
to Nicole Kidman’s classic 1989 movie, Dead Calm.

Safe Harbour is a psychological thriller about a fateful meeting between a 
group of asylum seekers trying to get to Australia, and a group of Australian 
holidaymakers on their way to Indonesia on a yacht. The Australians try to help 
the asylum seekers, towing them back to Australia and “leading to a tragic 
series of events that return to haunt them four years later”.

Written by Belinda Chayko, Matt Cameron and Phil Enchelmaier, and produced by 
Matchbox Pictures, the four-part series is exactly the type of project onlySBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs> can tackle – and it’s expected to 
provoke much debate.

Hoges: The Paul Hogan Story, Seven

Starring: Josh Lawson, Justine Clarke, Ryan Corr, Laura Gordon
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK8x-KnhqLCo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK8x-KnhqLCo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK8x-KnhqLCo&media=>
2017 is the year of the biopics. Australians both celebrated and notorious 
will be given the treatment – Roger Rogerson, Olivia Newton-John, Chopper Read 
and Alan Bond – butour pick from this bunch is The Paul Hogan Story, which 
stars Josh Lawson as Hogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/30/paul-hogan-miniseries-cast-biopic-crocodile-dundee-star>
 and Justine Clarke as his long-suffering first wife Noelene.

Co-written by Marieke Hardy, we’re hoping this will be as much fun as Seven’s 
Molly,which won Samuel Johnson an Aacta this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/07/aacta-awards-2016-mel-gibsons-hacksaw-ridge-wins-major-awards>
 for his title role.

Paul Hogan miniseries: cast announced for biopic about Crocodile Dundee star
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/30/paul-hogan-miniseries-cast-biopic-crocodile-dundee-star>
Other promising biopics include miniseries House of Bond about business tycoon 
Alan Bond (Ben Mingay), with Rachael Taylor playing his second wife Diana Bliss.

And finally Nine is hoping for more Underbelly success with its take the 
notorious gangsterMark “Chopper” Read 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/09/mark-chopper-read-obituary>.

Blue Murder: Killer Cop, Seven 

Starring: Richard Roxburgh, Toni Collette, Dan Wyllie, Aaron Pedersen, Matt 
Nable, Emma Booth
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd74d363010616af5900eae19f641d336e094136d%2F0_143_2128_1273%2F2128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20TV%20to%20watch%20in%202017%3A%20big%20names%2C%20new%20talent%20and%20classic%20stories%20revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20TV%20to%20watch%20in%202017%3A%20big%20names%2C%20new%20talent%20and%20classic%20stories%20revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd74d363010616af5900eae19f641d336e094136d%2F0_143_2128_1273%2F2128.jpg>
 Richard Roxburgh as Roger Rogerson in Blue Murder: Killer Cop, the sequel to 
1995 series Blue Murder. Photograph: Seven 
Killer Cop is the 20-years-later sequel to the highly acclaimed ABC drama Blue 
Murder (1995), which finished with crooked cop Roger Rogerson being expelled 
from the NSW police force. Richard Roxburgh reprises his role as Rogerson,who 
was recently jailed for the murder of 20-year-old student Jamie Gao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/02/roger-rogerson-and-glen-mcnamara-given-life-sentences-for-of-jamie-gao>
, and he’s joined by a stellar supporting cast.

This is about as contemporary as drama gets: Roxburgh was on location in 
Sydney as the murder trial was taking place earlier this year. If it’s half as 
good as Blue Murder, it will be well worth a look.

Wake In Fright, Ten

Starring: TBC

More than 45 years after the critically acclaimed movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/14/wake-in-fright-rewatching-australian-films>
 starring Gary Bond and Jack Thompson, comes this small-screen adaptation of 
Kenneth Cook’s classic Australian novel.

The two-part telemovie will be directed by Kriv Stenders (Red Dog); it tells 
the story of young school teacher John Grant who gets stranded in the small 
outback mining town of Bundanyabba.

The making of Wake in Fright: 'I wanted people to watch the film and be 
sweating'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/17/wake-in-fright-director-ted-kotcheff>
A psychological thriller, Wake in Fright will start filming in February in 
Sydney and Broken Hill. The director of the original, Ted Kotcheff, has been
muted in his encouragement 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/movies/are-they-mad-wake-in-fright-director-ted-kotcheff-on-tv-remake-of-his-classic-20161118-gss9ek.html>
.

Picnic at Hanging Rock, Showcase

Starring: TBC

Commissioned by Foxtel for its Showcase channel, this six-part series has a 
similarly unenviable task to Wake In Fright: in this case, living up tothe 
classic 1975 movie adaptation directed by Peter Weir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/23/picnic-hanging-rock-rewatching-australian-films>
, starring Jacki Weaver and John Jarratt.

The production is making headlines before the first scenes have even been 
shot: the Australian production industry hasuniversally slammed the producers 
<http://tvtonight.com.au/2016/12/cinematographers-join-dissent-over-hanging-rock-director.html>
 for importing Canadian director Larysa Kondracki to work on the 2017 series, 
thereby snubbing a local director.

Based on the 1967 novel by Joan Lindsay, the TV take is written by Bea 
Christian and Alice Addison, and produced by FremantleMedia. It follows a
successful stage production which premiered at Malthouse Theatre in Melbourne 
in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/03/picnic-at-hanging-rock-review-vanishing-schoolgirls-haunt-a-new-generation>
.

Olivia Newton-John bio-drama, Seven

Starring: Delta Goodrem 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98e25ab7b24dd17db7c3ad76c5d02a349a256f22%2F0_0_1200_774%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20TV%20to%20watch%20in%202017%3A%20big%20names%2C%20new%20talent%20and%20classic%20stories%20revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20TV%20to%20watch%20in%202017%3A%20big%20names%2C%20new%20talent%20and%20classic%20stories%20revisited&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhugo-weaving-claudia-karvan-miranda-tapsell-and-richard-roxburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98e25ab7b24dd17db7c3ad76c5d02a349a256f22%2F0_0_1200_774%2F1200.jpg>
 Delta Goodrem is scheduled to play Olivia Newton-John in a new Channel Seven 
biopic. Composite: Getty Images/Cinetext 
With Delta Goodrem in the title role, this project was set to begin filming in 
Victoria in December and is already the subject of tabloid speculation: there 
are rumours Newton-John herself has been trying to shut it down, angered at the 
production and the casting.

“The story of Olivia Newton-John will chart her remarkable path through one of 
the world’s toughest industries, and provide a glimpse into the extraordinary 
achievements of one of Australia’s most loved icons,” a statement from Film 
Victoria said.

Goodrem, who also stars in House Husbands on Nine and is a coach on The Voice, 
has a very busy year ahead.



 