
Roger Federer is through to the second round of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> a relieved and rattled man. 
He came so close to going out in the second round today against the brilliant 
but brittle FrenchmanGilles Simon that he could struggle to re-establish his 
aura in the remainder of the tournament.

As to what happens to him after this tournament, nobody now can be sure. This 
was desperate stuff, admittedly enhanced by Simon playing at the very limits of 
his skills.

Simon came from two sets down to take the match into a fifth before Federer 
closed it out with two breaks of serve to go through 6-2, 6-2, 4-6, 4-6, 6-3 in 
three hours and 13 minutes that seemed like much, much longer.

Lovers of high drama did not want it to end; Federer's huge army of fans, for 
once, wanted it to end as quickly and as cleanly as possible.

Yet, even when he broke Simon midway through the final set to go 5-2 up, his 
supporters in the Rod Laver Arena felt uneasy. They were further put out when 
Simon broke back to force the Swiss to serve for the match at 5-3 – which he 
duly did. Just.

This was desperate stuff. Federer triumphed through his strength of will 
rather than his customary dominance of his opponent.

"He's a great player," Federer said of Simon. "Matches against him don't come 
easy. It's my first win against him [in three attempts], they always goes the 
distance. Hopefully I don't play him anymore! I really enjoyed myself out here 
tonight.

"I wasn't playing poorly to lose the third and fourth set. Gilles really took 
it to me. Today I got lucky and I'm happy I'm still in the tournament."

He smiled in victory. Inwardly, he must have at least asked himself how he 
could be so extended on a stage that he calls his own.

There was drama all the way to the end. At match point, Federer tried a drop 
shot – and the ball dribbled agonisingly back on to his side of the net for 
deuce. He finished a high-quality rally with a back-hand volley at the net, for 
a fifth match point. He then aced him and the deed was done.

Whatever his post-match declaration of satisfaction, those left in his side of 
the draw, including his opponent in the third round on Friday, the Belgian 
Xavier Malisse, will feel just a little more comfortable when they look across 
the net at him from now on.

This was Federer's biggest scare in a slam since the first round of Wimbledon 
last year when he struggled to beat the 60th ranked Colombian Alejandro Falla 
5-7, 4-6, 6-4, 7-6 (7-1), 6-0.

There were whispers then that he was showing the first signs of decline in a 
career in which he had won a record 16 grand slams.

We will learn in the coming week or so if this was another blip, or the 
beginning of the end.

Fernando Verdasco saved three match points on his way to a stunning victory 
over Serbia'sJanko Tipsarevic in the second round of the Australian Open. The 
ninth seed looked to be on his way home at two sets down and again when 
Tipsarevic served for the match in the fourth set when leading 6-5.

But Verdasco hung on, saving one of the match points with a stunning running 
pass down the line from way out of the court, and eventually came through 2-6, 
4-6, 6-4, 7-6, 6-0.

Verdasco will now play Kei Nishikori, the young Japanese player who beat 
Germany'sFlorian Mayer 6-4, 6-3, 0-6, 6-3.

Novak Djokovic advanced to the third round but made hard work of the Croatian 
Ivan Dodig. The No3 seed toiled through the opening two sets as Dodig held his 
own before finally upping his game to record a 7-5, 6-7 (8-10), 6-0, 6-2 
victory in two hours 21 minutes.

Andy Roddick, the eighth seed, overcame a tight first set to see off Igor 
Kunitsyn 7-6, 6-2, 6-3 and the American was pleased to have got through in a 
little over two hours. "It could have got uncomfortable today if that first set 
had got away," he said.

"You always try to convince yourself it is a good thing to get through a tough 
set like that, but going into the match, if you're given an option, you want it 
to be as easy as possible every time."

Tomas Berdych, the 2010 Wimbledon finalist and sixth seed, beat Germany's 
Philipp Kohlschreiber 4-6, 6-2, 6-3, 6-4, while the 17th seed Ivan Ljubicic saw 
offBenoît Paire 6-3, 6-7, 6-4, 7-6.

Berdych will meet the Frenchman Richard Gasquet next. Gasquet beat countryman 
Adrian Mannarino in straight sets.

Mardy Fish is out, though, after losing to Spain's Tommy Robredo. The 16th 
seed started well before Robredo upped his game to go through courtesy of a 
1-6, 6-3, 6-3, 6-3 triumph.

Men's singles results, day three

Sergiy Stakhovsky (Ukr) bt Lukasz Kubot (Pol) 6-3, 6-4, 6-4

Kei Nishikori (Jap) bt Florian Mayer (Ger) 6-4, 6-3, 0-6, 6-3

Tommy Robredo (Sp) bt (16) Mardy Fish (US) 1-6, 6-3, 6-3, 6-3

(6) Tomas Berdych (Cz) bt Philipp Kohlschreiber (Ger) 4-6, 6-2, 6-3, 6-4

(8) Andy Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> (US) bt Igor 
Kunitsyn (Rus) 7-6 (7), 6-2, 6-3

(28) Richard Gasquet (Fr) bt Adrian Mannarino (Fr) 6-3, 7-6 (7-4), 6-4

(17) Ivan Ljubicic (Cro) bt Benoît Paire (Fr) 6-3, 6-7 (2), 6-4, 7-6 (7-5)

(9) Fernando Verdasco (Sp) bt Janko Tipsarevic (Ser) 2-6, 4-6, 6-4, 7-6 (7-0), 
6-0

Robin Haase (Net) bt (26) Juan Mónaco (Arg) 6-4, 6-4, 3-6, 6-2

Xavier Malisse (Bel) bt (25) Albert Montañés (Sp) 6-4, 6-0, 6-1

(14) Nicolás Almagro (Sp) bt Igor Andreev (Rus) 7-5, 2-6, 4-6, 7-6 (12-10), 7-5

(29) Viktor Troicki (Ser) bt Nicolas Mahut (Fr) 6-4, 6-2, 1-6, 6-3

(19) Stanislas Wawrinka (Swi) bt Grigor Dimitrov (Bul) 7-5, 6-3, 6-3

(3) Novak Djokovic (Ser) bt Ivan Dodig (Cro) 7-5, 6-7 (8-10), 6-0, 6-2

(12) Gaël Monfils (Fr) bt Frederico Gil (Por) 6-4, 6-3, 1-6, 6-2

(2) Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> (Swi) bt 
Gilles Simon (Fr) 6-2, 6-3, 4-6, 4-6, 6-3
 