
It’s a cold, dreary February morning in the city of Frankfurt, Germany, yet 
Emily van Egmond is all smiles. The Matilda’s beaming grin rarely disappears 
throughout the morning, an indication of the driving factor behind what has 
been an incredible rise in football.

International debut at 15, netting a World Cup goal at 17, W-League player of 
the year – it sounds like she has enough career highlights for a lifetime. Yet 
Van Egmond is onto her next target, Europe and Olympic gold, all at the tender 
age of 22.

Football has always been Van Egmond’s life, not just her job, and the way she 
approaches both is refreshing. The Newcastle girl has stuck close to her roots 
and sports the stereotypical warm, laid-back, and hard-working attitude 
synonymous with the Hunter region. It has led her to FFC Frankfurt, last 
season’s Champions League winners, and a full-time professional contract, which 
has given her security not often afforded to women footballers.

“Personally, I try not to look at it like that. You play because you love it,” 
Van Egmond says. “But when a massive European club like [Frankfurt] comes 
knocking, it’s an absolute no-brainer.”

Australians Abroad: Elise Kellond-Knight, the Matilda making her way in 
Germany | Pete Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/15/australians-abroad-elise-kellond-knight-the-matilda-making-her-way-in-germany>
Van Egmond is one of only two Matildas plying their trade in Europe, with her 
and Elise Kellond-Knight (FFC Turbine Potsdam) signing contracts for the 
2015-16 season before the FIFA World Cup in Canada last year. Both players 
shone in aMatildas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/matildas> side that 
became the most successful Australian football team at a World Cup by 
progressing to the quarter-finals, falling to a late goal to eventual finalists 
Japan.

And the national team is just days out from its next big test – qualifying for 
the Rio Olympics. The Matildas will have to navigate an incredible five games 
in 10 days during qualifiers in Japan and only two teams from six will head to 
Rio. Australia kick off the challenge with an opening fixture against the hosts 
on February 29.

Van Egmond blows her lips at the prospect of facing the Japanese, under no 
allusions about the quality of her opponents. Despite Japan losing to the 
United States 5-2 in the World Cup final, they are undoubtedly the world’s most 
technically adept team.

“They absolutely dominated our game [at the World Cup]. They only managed to 
get that late, late goal, but from a football perspective they were on another 
level,” Van Egmond admits. “They are a powerhouse and it’s going to be a 
difficult game, I’m not going to lie. But they’re beatable. We just have to 
make sure we win all the remaining games. It’s survival of the fittest. It’s 
going to be hectic.”

The Matildas have experienced renewed support from the general public since 
the World Cup and in a huge boost for the women’s game, Australian network 
Seven will broadcast every qualifying game. It is another chance for the 
Matildas to capture the country’s imagination.

“It’s great exposure,” Van Egmond says. “The biggest thing that turned heads 
was how much support we got from back home [during the World Cup]. The number 
of people that jumped on board was awesome. I don’t think the girls were 
expecting that. But now we’ve got to qualify for the Olympics.”

Matildas coach Alan Stajcic is already targeting silverware in Brazil, showing 
how much his team’s confidence has grown since matching the world’s best at the 
World Cup. “We’re reaching for the stars,” he said earlier this month. “Our 
goal is not really to qualify, it’s to get a medal at the Olympics. With the 
squad of players we’ve selected I’m pretty confident we can do the job.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Faustralians-abroad-matilda-emily-van-egmond-making-a-mark-in-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9243361c0c2488a643a9655d520a97f508046384%2F0_26_3000_1804%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Matilda%20Emily%20van%20Egmond%20making%20a%20mark%20in%20Europe%20%7C%20Janek%20Speight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Faustralians-abroad-matilda-emily-van-egmond-making-a-mark-in-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Matilda%20Emily%20van%20Egmond%20making%20a%20mark%20in%20Europe%20%7C%20Janek%20Speight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Faustralians-abroad-matilda-emily-van-egmond-making-a-mark-in-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9243361c0c2488a643a9655d520a97f508046384%2F0_26_3000_1804%2F3000.jpg>
 1. FFC Frankfurt - Team Presentation
FRANKFURT AM MAIN, GERMANY - AUGUST 11: Emily Van Egmond poses during 1. FFC 
Frankfurt Team Presentation at Stadion am Brentanobad on August 11, 2015 in 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (Photo by Simon Hofmann/Bongarts/Getty Images) 
Photograph: Simon Hofmann/Bongarts/Getty Images 
With the men’s team, the Olyroos, failing in their bid to reach the Olympics, 
having an Australian representative would be huge for football, especially the 
women’s game. “Hopefully, fingers crossed, we qualify for the Olympics,” Van 
Egmond says. “And then hopefully the 2019 World Cup is going to be even better 
as well.”

Van Egmond shares her coach’s sentiments, however, not content with the 
newfound confidence the Matildas have when playing the world’s best teams, she 
wants Australia to push on.

While a new collective bargaining agreement negotiated with FFA last year – 
which saw the Matildas reluctantly boycott two high-profile games against world 
champions the US – has given women footballers a deserved pay bump, Van Egmond 
has challenged her teammates to prove they deserve the increased recognition.

“Luckily I haven’t had to experience it, but I know some of the girls find it 
tough,” Van Egmond says. “To balance a nine-to-five job, be available for 
training in the afternoon, plus a game on the weekend, and then all the 
national team duties – it’s hard. But it’s important now that with what the FFA 
have given us, we can also match that level of professionalism. I think the 
players need to look at themselves in the mirror a little bit and say, ‘am I 
doing everything I can to be better and fitter for the national team?’.”

This brutal honesty is one trait which has undoubtedly pushed Van Egmond to 
Frankfurt, where she rubs shoulders daily with Germany internationals Simone 
Leudehr, Saskia Bartusiak and Dzsenifer Marozsán, as well as Japanese star Yuki 
Ogimi and Canadian Sophie Schmidt, with whom she rooms.

Van Egmond has slowly forced her way into the starting line-up after taking 
the first few months getting used to her new surroundings and has witnessed a 
marked increase in her development.

While acknowledging Australia’s W-League “serves a purpose for the 
up-and-coming younger players”, she says the difference between European or US 
football is unquantifiable. “It’s like zero to a thousand, like that,” Van 
Egmond explains the leap in quality with a click of the finger. “You can’t 
really compare it. You train something like three to four times a week [in the 
W-League], but here you train twice or sometimes three times a day. It’s worlds 
apart.”

“The reality is that clubs overseas have great players, and that’s only going 
to benefit our players. I think it’s really important that the girls are trying 
to play in a full-time environment year round.”

Van Egmond says the introduction of Melbourne City’s women’s side, which won 
the premiership-championship double in its debut season, is exactly what 
Australian football needs to move to the next level. “The way they have come to 
the league and shown a level of professionalism… the resources they’re chucking 
into the women’s game. It’s phenomenal,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Faustralians-abroad-matilda-emily-van-egmond-making-a-mark-in-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6910319dd01eb77dbf5cfdb58e42beee253c1e1%2F113_306_1631_2065%2F1631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Matilda%20Emily%20van%20Egmond%20making%20a%20mark%20in%20Europe%20%7C%20Janek%20Speight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Faustralians-abroad-matilda-emily-van-egmond-making-a-mark-in-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Matilda%20Emily%20van%20Egmond%20making%20a%20mark%20in%20Europe%20%7C%20Janek%20Speight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Faustralians-abroad-matilda-emily-van-egmond-making-a-mark-in-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6910319dd01eb77dbf5cfdb58e42beee253c1e1%2F113_306_1631_2065%2F1631.jpg>
 Soccer: Women’s World Cup-Australia at Sweden
Jun 16, 2015; Edmonton, Alberta, CAN; Australia midfielder Emily Van Egmond 
(10) reacts after the game against Sweden in a Group D soccer match in the 2015 
FIFA women’s World Cup at Commonwealth Stadium. The match ended in a 1-1 draw. 
Mandatory Credit: Erich Schlegel-USA TODAY Sports Photograph: Erich 
Schlegel/USA Today Sports 
“But the challenge is now for the rest of the clubs to meet City’s standards. 
In order for the W-League to grow and go onto the next level the rest of the 
clubs have to catch up.”

Van Egmond also called on the FFA, who she admits has done much for the 
women’s game, to continue pushing the standard higher. “At the moment it’s a 
three to four month league, it’s not good enough. The FFA need to decide 
whether they want to take those next steps. And that means building towards 
playing two full rounds. That goes for the national team too. Do they want 
national team players playing in that league or do they want them overseas? 
That’s the big question.”

Van Egmond’s own journey to Germany has required a lot of hard work, as well 
as a deep love for the game, fostered at an early age through her father, Gary 
van Egmond, who represented the Socceroos and as head coach led the Newcastle 
Jets to their maiden A-League title in 2008.

His guiding words of advice have been present throughout her career – she even 
moved to Canberra United when he took up a job with the AIS – and Van Egmond 
has found it hard to shake him off – he recently took up a coaching role with 
the Matildas.

“I can’t get rid of him,” Van Egmond jokes. “A lot of it’s been with him. As a 
kid, everything was with dad. It hasn’t always been peachy, there’s been tears 
and what have you. There are times when I just don’t want to hear it. The truth 
hurts. But I’ve been really lucky to have someone so close to me involved in 
the game at a high level.”

Her father’s analytical mind has clearly been passed down, with Van Egmond’s 
on-field game as a No10 based on finesse and critical thinking as well as grit 
and determination. Van Egmond’s passing range is her major strength, with an 
ability to dictate play and pull off a killer defence-splitting ball. Her 
shooting is also a highlight, with a few sweetly hit long-range efforts already 
a feature in highlights reels.

Later this week, Van Egmond once again takes the field in green for the 
Olympics qualifiers, representing the Matildas as one of her country’s most 
experienced players. The general public have become enamoured with the 
Matildas, impressed with their positive, attractive play, matched with undying 
commitment and passion.

Last year was a turning point for the national team, and Van Egmond sees it as 
a chance for the Matildas to become world beaters. Olympic gold, if the team 
qualify, is the aim, while victory at the 2019 World Cup is the next target.

 “Everything is evolving so quickly,” she says. “Teams are getting so much 
better because countries are putting more resources into their national teams. 
It’s constantly going up and up and up. It’s hard to say [whether the Matildas 
are over-performing], but it would be interesting to see how far we can go if 
we put more resources into the game.”

There is definitely room for improvement as far as investment in the women’s 
game is concerned, though as Van Egmond says the players have to match the 
professionalism. Continuing their rise through the Olympics will be yet another 
sign of that progression.

“I think there’s so much potential in our team, because we’re so young,” Van 
Egmond says. “[The] majority of the girls haven’t even been to the Olympics, so 
that’s a big motivation right there. We have to qualify for the Olympics, and 
then who knows. We need to steer our potential in the right direction for 2019.”
 