
The east coast of Australia could be hit by a second round of damaging storms 
this weekend with a low pressure system forecast to dump heavy rainfall on 
southern Queensland and northernNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales>.

The Bureau of Meteorology said on Wednesday that it was too early to tell 
whether the system would bring storms to rival those thatcaused significant 
damage, widespread flooding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/03/queensland-and-nsw-braced-for-gales-and-up-to-300mm-of-rainfall>
 andkilled up to seven people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/07/eastern-australia-storms-four-missing-in-tasmania-after-floods-hit>
 in Sydney, the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania last week.

“There is still uncertainty about the timing and extent of the impacts, but we 
have increasing confidence in a widespread rainfall event developing over 
southern and eastern Queensland, and inland northern New South Wales,” Andrew 
Tupper, director of the bureau’s national operations centre,said on Wednesday 
<http://media.bom.gov.au/releases/275/potential-for-more-severe-weather-in-eastern-states/>
.

Tupper said areas from Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> to Tasmania could be 
affected by very heavy rainfall, damaging winds and dangerous surf, depending 
on how the system develops.

He said it was “not unusual to have east-coast lows develop in fairly quick 
succession”, but it does make things more difficult for emergency services, who 
in NSW have just handed off the clean-up operation to recovery agencies.

“We are pretty much done and dusted with that … we would just be asking our 
people to get some rest and prepare for some weather this weekend,” NSW State 
Emergency Service (SES) spokeswoman Becky Gollings told Guardian Australia.

“We are still waiting on a clearer picture from the BoM as to exactly what is 
going to pan out on the weekend, it’s still unclear at this stage, but 
obviously we’re expecting some wet and windy weather.”

Eastern Australia storms: three dead and more missing as wild weather hits 
coast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/06/sydney-nsw-australia-storms-weather-flooding-dead-missing>
If the forecast rain did result in more flooding, Gollings urged people not to 
drive through high waters. Instead, she said, anyone stuck in their car in 
floodwaters should call triple zero and wait.

Three of the four people confirmed dead in last week’s floods were found in 
their cars – two in New South Wales, and one in the ACT. The fourth, a 
75-year-old Tasmanian woman, died when her home was inundated.

Two more men have been missing in Tasmania since 6 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2016/jun/09/tasmanian-floods-fears-mount-for-two-missing-men-as-waters-recede>
, and are presumed dead. One of the men had driven his car through a flooded 
road while delivering catalogues with his wife. She was found clinging to a 
tree and rescued by helicopter the following morning.

Police are yet to confirm whether the body of a man found at Whale Beach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/11/mans-body-found-in-ocean-near-bondi-beach>
 in Sydney’s northern beaches on Sunday was that of American student Endicott 
Ackerman who was swept off rocks at Bondi during the storm.

Gollings said SES volunteers in NSW rescued more than 300 people from 
floodwaters last week, many of whom were trapped in cars.

“Fast-flowing water, even 30cm deep, can wash cars and trucks away,” she said. 
“Don’t get yourself into that situation.”

Authorities in Tasmania <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania> 
are still dealing with the aftermath of the floods, which have devastated 
farmland and swept away more than 1,000 cattle.

The Environmental Protection Agency of Tasmania has begun clearing up the dead 
livestock, but warned that they might not all be found.

“There’s quite a few ended up in Bass Strait and may end up washing up along 
the coastline,” director Wes Fordtold the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-15/big-cattle-clean-up-begins-after-flood-deaths/7510586>
. “It might be roughly a third of those animals would be found on land, maybe a 
third of them have disappeared out to Bass Strait, maybe a third of them will 
never appear again.”

The Tasmanian and New South Wales governments have provided emergency funding 
to affected households.

As of last week the damage bill was $74.3m, but a spokesman for the Insurance 
Council of Australia said that was expected to rise.
 