
It is no great surprise that Sam Robson became a Test cricketer. Eight years 
ago, the Sydneysider was opening the batting for Australia Under-19s and was 
handed a contract by New South Wales. His father had played professionally and 
his brother was a real talent, too. But no-one can have envisaged the Marist 
College Pagewood student would open in a Test match wearing the Three Lions and 
not the Baggy Green.


That is what came to pass last year when Robson, whose mother was born in 
Nottingham, made his England debut against Sri Lanka at Lord’s, the very ground 
where he has plied his trade since he arrived on those shores as an inquisitive 
and ambitious teenager.

Aussies Abroad: Hayden Smith, the universal athlete | Gavin Willacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/09/aussies-abroad-hayden-smith-the-universal-athlete>
His Middlesex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> team have had a 
fine season, finishing runners-up to Yorkshire in the County Championship and 
as the season drew to a close, Robson passed 100 first class matches, aged just 
26. He wasn’t aware that he did so with a fine batting average of 51 – and a 
bowling one of 49. By the unwritten rules of cricket, that misleadingly defines 
him as an all-rounder, not that his left arm turns over much these days. 
Personally he has had a challenging 2015, averaging less than 31 and falling 
short of 1,000 runs. Playing for England again seems as far away as the Harbour 
Bridge.

“It’s been a bit of a funny season really,” says the right-handed batsman. I 
would have liked more runs. I got 170 or 180 against Durham early in the 
season. They’re the scores that stand out for selectors and I haven’t done that 
enough. There were a few matches in a row where I got 70 and that’s not good 
enough as you need to turn those into big hundreds.”


Born into a cricket family, his father Jim, who now manages the indoor centre 
at the SCG, played three seasons in English cricket, and first grade cricket 
for 20 years at University of NSW – “I actually played with dad for a whole 
season, in fourth grade for UNSW, which was wonderful” – Robson was among the 
most talented teenagers in Australian cricket. But a major bottleneck ahead of 
him on the road to stardom saw him choose a different route altogether.

“I was in Australia Under-19s and I had a rookie contract at New South Wales,” 
explains the St George Illawarra Dragons rugby league fan. “They had an 
extraordinarily strong side at the time: Philip Hughes, Usman Khawaja, Steve 
Smith, Simon Katich, Shane Watson, Michael Clarke. If they weren’t playing for 
Australia they were playing for New South Wales. At 18 years of age I wasn’t as 
good as those guys.

“I came over in 2008 and had a trial with Middlesex. I just loved everything 
about the English game: Lord’s, the second XI set-up, three or four hits a 
week. I thought this was too good to be true. So when they offered me a 
contract it was a no-brainer. It was no great drama in Australia – I was under 
the radar.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Faustralians-abroad-sam-robson-the-boy-from-sydney-turned-england-test-player%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F517f9e30e297b23986592bed01a8f781664a74c5%2F0_154_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Sam%20Robson%2C%20the%20boy%20from%20Sydney%20turned%20England%20Test%20player%20%7C%20Gavin%20Willacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Faustralians-abroad-sam-robson-the-boy-from-sydney-turned-england-test-player%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Sam%20Robson%2C%20the%20boy%20from%20Sydney%20turned%20England%20Test%20player%20%7C%20Gavin%20Willacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Faustralians-abroad-sam-robson-the-boy-from-sydney-turned-england-test-player%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F517f9e30e297b23986592bed01a8f781664a74c5%2F0_154_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Sam Robson says he is loving his time in London, ‘a great place to live’. 
Photograph: Jordan Mansfield/Getty Images 
Robson made his first team debut at the end of that season and scored a first 
class hundred in his second year. His opening partners have mainly been the 
Australia Test opener, Chris Rogers, and the then England skipper, Andrew 
Strauss. “Chris helped me enormously – he still does. Seeing how he operates, 
how he goes about his business, his mindset. That rubbed off on me. He just did 
the basics right, which is how you become a top player. Same with Andrew 
Strauss. As England captain he would come back to play for us and take it just 
as seriously as a Test match. The focus he had on maintaining his game stuck 
out for me. It’s just being professional.”


Having averaged 47 in 2013, Robson got noticed by the England selectors. A 
successful Lions tour led to a call-up for the full England Test side. “I was 
brought up in Australia and I love it, but I’ve spent all my adult life here, 
played all my cricket in the English set-up. I am product of county cricket so 
I was proud to be selected for the Lions and then the Test team. It really was 
a dream come true.

Being involved with England was awesome. I know there’s certainly another 
opportunity there

“It was just incredible, a whirlwind,” admits Robson, whose younger brother 
Angus now plays for Leicestershire. “My whole life has led to this so when the 
call came it was unbelievable. It was overwhelming the first week. The build-up 
dragged on. It was a relief when the match actually started.”


He failed three times but hit 127 in his third Test innings in a defeat at 
Leeds. That secured his place for the series with India. Having started with 
59, his next six innings brought him just 106 runs and the selectors’ axe fell. 
Robson went the same way as every other batsman given the role of partnering 
captain Alistair Cooke since Strauss retired.


“I felt like I was batting in the middle of a party. All the attention, all 
the eyes on you. Once you’re out there for a little while you get used to it 
and it’s great, like any other match. That’s what you play for: to play in 
games when you are under pressure with the spotlight on you and all the media 
coverage. Opening in Test matches is tough work. It requires different skills 
and a different approach – but I have always done it, it’s just what I do.”


Everywhere you turn at Lord’s you are greeted by images of England cricket. 
Giant billboards of Stuart Broad, lists of great feats over the years, the ECB 
badge, the Ashes ... It would be enough to drive lesser characters potty. 
Instead Robson derives inspiration from it.

“I love being based at Lord’s – it’s outstanding. Being involved with England 
was awesome. I know there’s certainly another opportunity there. I need to 
score a lot of runs. It’s as simple as that.”

Robson doesn’t even get to perform when 25,000 pack Lord’s for Middlesex’s T20 
games on summer Thursday evenings as his slim frame and steady innings-building 
is considered unsuitable for the big bash format. Instead he bats in front of 
three-figure crowds when the late morning temperature is barely into the teens 
as the English season kicks off in early April and ends in late September. But 
he has no intention of heading back to Sydney any time soon, other than to see 
friends and family at Christmas.

“I love living in London,” says Robson, who lives a couple of miles north of 
Lord’s with a flat-mate from outside the cricket bubble. “I love the buzz – 
socialising, having a beer in town, going for lunch somewhere I haven’t been. 
There’s a lot to do here. It’s a great place to live. I’m very lucky being a 
professional cricketer. I am well aware how spoilt I am.”
 