
Once viewed as the future of both the Brisbane Broncos and the Maroons, Joel 
Moon has carved out a successful life and a long list of trophies on the other 
side of the world in England. Growing up in regional Queensland, rugby league 
is a religion. Devotion to the state’s Origin team, and in the 1990s the 
all-conquering Broncos, was demanded. Raised on the Sunshine Coast, a 
footy-loving Moon was no different. “I always supported the Broncos, dad loved 
them,” he tells Guardian Australia. “It was a bit of a big thing to play for 
them, one of my big goals.”

Moon was your archetypal schoolboy footy star, tipped for great things from 
his teen years. His Morayfield State High School team contained current Broncos 
Matt Gillett and Jack Reed, and he was signed by Brisbane at the age of 16. He 
played for Queensland at Under-19 level and was also selected for the 
Australian Schoolboys.

Australians Abroad: Phil Bailey, the former NRL player turned union coach | 
Gavin Willacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/01/australians-abroad-phil-bailey-the-former-nrl-player-turned-union-coach>
In 2006 Brisbane were coached by Wayne Bennett and the team featured the likes 
of Darren Lockyer, Shane Webcke and Petero Civoniceva. Breaking into that 17 
would be no mean feat for the teenager. Moon made his debut in round 14 of the 
2006 season, just three weeks after his 18th birthday, and played twice more 
that year as the Broncos romped to a grand final win over Melbourne. “It was 
massive, the whole team was chockfull of big names,” he says. “Even just to 
play three games that first year, they won the premiership. To be part of that 
was pretty special.”

But as the next two seasons rolled on, Moon struggled to cement one position 
in the Broncos match-day squad. A natural footballer, his versatility would 
serve to be his undoing. He was shunted from five-eighth to the centres to 
halfback and often to a utility role off the bench. Unseating the icon that was 
Lockyer from the five-eighth position unsurprisingly proved impossible. “I was 
a bit on the bench, a bit in the centres and just to get into the team was a 
buzz for me,” Moon reflects. “I was moving around a bit, anywhere he [Bennett] 
wanted me to play I’d play. When one was injured I would fill in there. I just 
filled the utility role.”

After just three years at Red Hill his time was over. The New Zealand Warriors 
came calling with the offer of a regular first-grade spot and a fresh start 
across the ditch. But leaving the Broncos was difficult. “It was tough because 
when you play you think you’ll be there for life. But that’s not how rugby 
league goes sometimes and everyone moves around. So I thought everyone does it 
so I better do it, get out and explore and try and further my career somewhere 
elsewhere.”

The Warriors struggled in his first year and finished in 14th place. “The year 
I went there I struggled at six so I went back to the centres for the next two 
years. It was a tough year that one. When you’re at 6 and you’re not going 
well, it’s hard. A lot of the stuff falls on you. But the next two years were 
good.”

Moon’s move to the centres helped him produce his best NRL form. In 2010 the 
Warriors finished fifth and reached the semi-finals. The following year he was 
picked in the Indigenous team for theNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl>
 All-Stars game. “That was another high in my career,” he says. “To play 
alongside [Johnathan] Thurston, that was pretty special. My mum’s Aboriginal 
and we try and get the most out of our history and culture through my 
grandfather. That’s something that’s close to me.”

The Warriors set alight the back half of the competition in 2011 and stunned 
many by reaching the grand final. But it was a bitter-sweet end to the year for 
Moon, whose season ended in the finals against his old club. “I broke my ankle 
in the semi-final against the Broncos and then we made the grand final, so I 
was pretty devastated I couldn’t play. That was a bit of a low point. But you 
move on. No regrets.”

That season would be the last down under for the centre. After three years in 
Auckland, and 82 games in the NRL, he was on the move again. “I guess my footy 
wasn’t going that well at the Warriors. I wasn’t playing to my potential and I 
thought I either needed to change something or move on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Faustralians-abroad-joel-moon-nrl-departed-to-super-league-champion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F258f00a47c2aecd4a058816f04e811460b7699df%2F0_0_3000_1725%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Joel%20Moon%2C%20NRL%20departed%20to%20Super%20League%20champion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Faustralians-abroad-joel-moon-nrl-departed-to-super-league-champion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Joel%20Moon%2C%20NRL%20departed%20to%20Super%20League%20champion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Faustralians-abroad-joel-moon-nrl-departed-to-super-league-champion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F258f00a47c2aecd4a058816f04e811460b7699df%2F0_0_3000_1725%2F3000.jpg>
 Moon during his time with the Brisbane Broncos. Photograph: Bradley 
Kanaris/Getty Images 
Salford City Reds, 18,000 kilometres away, would be his new home. On the field 
Moon thrived, crossing for 11 tries in just 19 games. The open style of footy, 
with less wrestling, more ball movement and the often inconsistent defending of
Super League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague>, proved to be to 
his liking. But off the field wasn’t as smooth. “I went to Salford, Matt Parish 
was there and he had a big thing for me. But I got there and he left. I liked 
Salford, I went well and I was playing really good footy on the field. If 
you’re happy on the field then you’re happy anywhere. The club was a bit… the 
club wasn’t in good nick.”

At the end of 2012 Salford were struggling financially and Leeds Rhinos, 
arguably the closest UK version of the Brisbane Broncos came calling. It was a 
no-brainer for Moon. “The whole team’s got some great players and everyone 
wants to be a part of the team. They wanted me and just to get in was awesome. 
We haven’t looked back.”

His exit didn’t go down well with some Salford fans and coach Phil Veviers who 
accused him of disloyalty. However, Moon had tunnel vision. In 2012 Leeds had 
won their fifth grand final in the past six years. The club ruled Super League 
with their quartet of Kevin Sinfield, Jamie Peacock, Kylie Leuluai and Danny 
Macguire. The Rhinos culture of success, of high-performance, was well 
enshrined.

Moon made a seamless transition into his new team, combing well with wing 
partner Ryan Hall, bagging a try and the man of the match award in his Leeds 
debut. Seventeen tries would come from 27 appearances in his first season. The 
following year the Challenge Cup, the trophy that had eluded the club since 
1999, was won against Castleford. This would set Leeds up for a history-making 
2015.

Last year everything clicked for the Yorkshire club. Hull KR were dispatched 
in the Challenge Cup final as they dished out a 50-0 history-making hiding at 
Wembley. Things would be tougher in the league, with Wigan, Saints and 
Huddersfield all nipping at the Rhinos’ heels. But the League Leader’s Shield 
was secured in dramatic fashion in the final seconds against the Giants, Hall’s 
miracle last-minute winner destined to be repeated in highlight reels over and 
over again.

Then it was Wigan in the grand final, a team desperate to avoid two decider 
defeats at Old Trafford in a row. The Warriors gave their all but the Leeds’ 
train, surged on by the anticipated departures of three club legends in 
Sinfield, Peacock and Lealuai, would not be derailed. The Rhinos were Super 
League champions once again and the first treble winners since St Helens a 
decade before. Moon was a vital cog in that historic season. Scoring tries, 
setting them up, making breaks and terrorising defences; the Australian’s 
status as one of the best centres in Super League was confirmed.

“It was a massive year,” Moon says. “It will go down in history as one of the 
best teams ever in Super League. Just to be a part of that was pretty special. 
I look back at and it still hasn’t sunk in.

Australians Abroad: Sam Robson, the boy from Sydney turned England Test player 
| Gavin Willacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/13/australians-abroad-sam-robson-the-boy-from-sydney-turned-england-test-player>
Moon has found a home at Leeds, an oasis away from the NRL goldfish bowl that 
dominates Queensland and New South Wales. In June 2014 he signed a new deal 
tieing him to the club until the end of 2018, signaling his happiness at his 
current abode. Moon struggles to fully explain the Rhinos appeal: “Just 
everything, the club’s great, [down] from Gary [Hetherington, CEO]. Brian 
[McDermott] is awesome. He’s the best coach I’ve ever had. Some of the players, 
you just learn every day at training. It’s just a great club and I think 
everyone who goes there stays there, they know how good it is and they don’t 
want to leave. It shows on the field doesn’t it.”

Most NRL players arrive in Super League at the start or the end of their 
careers – either chasing opportunity or a final pay cheque. Moon landed in the 
UK at the age of 23, heading into his prime and looking for acceptance, support 
and contentment. And he has found it in spades. “I’m set now and we’re all 
happy. I love Leeds, it’s a great club and I don’t see why you’d move and do 
something different when everything’s well. We’ll be here for a long time. My 
wife loves it, she wants to stay here for life. It makes it easier for me.”

Many Australians also see Super League as a short-term stay, a competition 
good for a season or two before the “big-time” beckons them back. Their 
ultimate goal is to return to the NRL. According to Moon, it is this attitude 
that leads to many talented players failing to adapt and live up to their 
reputations in the UK. “If you start like that it’s just going to be a tough 
time. We embrace it, we like it there and we don’t see why we should come back.”

With four trophies in the bag in just two years and another one up for grabs 
this weekend, against North Queensland in the World Club Challenge, not to 
mention a content family, it’s hard to argue with Moon’s logic. The 27-year old 
has no regrets about how his career down under finished. He might not have 
become the new Darren Lockyer, the new hero of the Broncos faithful or Origin 
savior as some had predicted, but things have turned out pretty well for the 
Caloundra product. The Cowboys and TV viewers back in Australia will get to see 
the new and improved Joel Moon – matured, settled, confident and talented – in 
action on Monday morning. Enjoy the show.

“I don’t look back and think there’s something missing. I’ve had a good time 
in the NRL, I’ve played in some games and in some good teams and there’s 
nothing I need to do to prove to myself why I should go back. The Super League 
is just as tough now. I’m challenging myself in England and that’s all that 
matters to me.”
 