
Australian politicians have given permission for people to act in xenophobic 
ways and have allowed for the rise of nationalist groups, theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> special rapporteur has said 
at the end of his first official visit.

He also voiced support for maintaining section 18C of the Racial 
Discrimination Act.


François Crépeau, who has just ended an 18-day visit to Australia as special 
rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, said hate speech and xenophobia had 
increased in Australia despite the nation’s rich migration history.

The human rights expert said Australia’s recent immigration policies had 
eroded human rights and tarnished the country’s reputation.

UN's François Crépeau on the refugee crisis: 'Instead of resisting migration, 
let's organise it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/22/uns-francois-crepeau-on-the-refugee-crisis-instead-of-resisting-migration-lets-organise-it>
“Politicians who have engaged in this negative discourse seem to have given 
permission to people on the street to act in xenophobic ways and to allow for 
the rise of nationalist populist groups,” he said.


“Australia must work to fight xenophobia, discrimination and violence against 
migrants, in acts and speech.”

Since the federal election returned Pauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson> to parliament, with 
three One Nation senators, several politicians have furthered their push to cut 
or end immigration to Australia.

Hanson has called for a ban on Muslim immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/pauline-hanson-first-speech-senate-calls-for-immigration-ban>
 and the Liberal senator Cory Bernardi has demanded that the migration intake 
be halved. The Victorian Liberal backbencher Russell Broadbent has criticised 
some colleagues – including the Queensland MP George Christensen – for“cuddling 
up to Hansonite rhetoric” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/03/cory-bernardi-warns-one-nation-will-rise-if-migration-not-halved>
.

Crépeau also called for the government to maintain section 18C of the Racial 
Discrimination Act, which he said “sets the tone of an inclusive Australia, 
committed to implementing its multicultural policies and programs and 
respecting, protecting and promoting the human rights of all”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fpeter-young-asylum-mental-health-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F4%2F1407146722459%2FAsylum-seekers-at-Manus-I-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia's%20asylum%20detention%20regime%20akin%20to%20torture%2C%20says%20immigration%20mental%20health%20chief%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fpeter-young-asylum-mental-health-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%27s%20asylum%20detention%20regime%20akin%20to%20torture%2C%20says%20immigration%20mental%20health%20chief%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fpeter-young-asylum-mental-health-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F4%2F1407146722459%2FAsylum-seekers-at-Manus-I-001.jpg>
Australia’s asylum detention regime akin to torture, says immigration mental 
health chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/aug/04/peter-young-asylum-mental-health-video>
Australian politicians, public servants, and media groups are in the midst of 
a debate about repealing 18C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/18c-must-be-fine-tuned-to-allow-for-cultural-differences-says-inquiry-chair>
, which makes it unlawful to engage in speech that is “reasonably likely to 
offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate on the basis of race, colour or 
national or ethnic origin”.

Detractors have variously called for the section to be scrapped or for 
“insult” and “offend” to be removed. There are already protections set out by 
18D for those who make such statements in the course of satire, commentary, and 
in the public interest.

In his address, Crépeau also praised several policies, including increases in 
Australia’s humanitarian intake and its one-off offer to take 12,000 Syrian 
refugees, but said other “punitive” measures were “regressive and fall way 
behind international standards”.

“The punitive approach adopted by Australia towards migrants who arrived by 
boat has served to erode their human rights,” he said.

“It is a fundamental principle of human rights law that one person cannot be 
punished only for the reason of deterring another.”

Crépeau highlighted the principles of non-refoulement – which Australia has 
been been accused ofpotentially breaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/asylum-seeker-forcibly-returned-by-australia-says-his-refugee-claim-was-ignored>
 with its enhanced screening processes – and the “immense suffering” caused by 
mandatory and prolonged detention and difficulties in accessing justice and 
health care.

The offshore detention system has been plagued by complaints of inadequate 
health care for asylum seekers, and in 2014 the governmentended the provision 
of legal aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/31/legal-aid-denied-asylum-seekers-arrive-boat>
 to “unauthorised” maritime arrivals.

UN expert: rich countries must take in 1 million refugees to stop boat deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/22/un-urges-wealthy-countries-to-take-one-million-syrian-refugees-in-next-five-years>
A recently announced but as yet undetailed deal with the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/14/us-refugee-deal-turnbull-says-america-will-decide-final-numbers-to-be-resettled>
 will also result in several UNHCR endorsed refugees from Nauru and Manus 
Island being resettled in the US. The deal has been largely welcomed by 
advocates and asylum seekers, aside from those with family in Australia who 
fear they will never be able to reunite.


The Australian government is also pushing for a ban on any asylum seekers who 
have sought refuge in Australia by boat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/lifetime-ban-on-asylum-seekers-not-connected-to-us-deal-says-immigration-head>
 – and who arrived after July 2013 – from ever returning to Australia. It’s 
expected to affect more than 3,000 people.

“I am deeply concerned about the grave impact of the punitive approach – which 
creates so much uncertainty about the future – on the mental health of many 
migrants, some of whom are in prolonged and indefinite mandatory immigration 
detention onshore or in offshore regional processing centres, or living in 
community detention, or living under temporary protection visas,” Crépeau said.

“Yet the cure lies ultimately with Australia, which has the responsibility to 
settle those from the regional processing centres who are found to be refugees. 
Any agreement regarding third country resettlement must be meaningful – in 
terms of numbers, timeliness and opportunities to rebuild – and adhere to 
Australia’s international humanitarian and human rights obligations.”

Race discrimination commissioner says 'no case' for changing 18C
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/09/race-discrimination-commissioner-says-no-case-for-changing-18c>
Crépeau said Australia offered regular and safe migration pathways but warned 
that without better oversight mechanisms, their temporary nature could leave 
migrants vulnerable to exploitation, and that fear of visa cancellation would 
discourage migrants from reporting or protesting.

Appointed by the Human Rights Council, Crépeau and other special rapporteurs 
are part of an independent fact-finding and monitoring body within the UN. It 
is the largest body of independent experts in the UN human rights system, but 
rapporteurs are not UN staff, are unpaid and independent from governments and 
organisations.

During his visit to Australia, Crépeau spoke with immigration and government 
officials, civil society groups, trade unions, the Australian Human Rights 
Commission, international organisations and migrants. He also gathered 
information from theNauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> processing 
centres.
 