
For a few hours last week an Australian was the highest goalscorer in 2018 
World Cup qualifying. No, not Tim Cahill, or any of his fellow Socceroo 
team-mates, but a self-employed concreter from Sydney.

The player in question was Taylor Saghabi, a name that not even the most niche 
of football intelligentsia could claim to have been familiar with ahead of last 
week’s Oceania Stage 1 qualifying for Russia 2018.

Saghabi netted four times in three matches for Cook Islands to finish the top 
goalscorer in the four-nation tournament. He bagged a hat-trick against hosts 
Tonga in Monday’s opening round and his winner against Samoa two days later 
left him alongside India pin-up Sunil Chhetri on four goals, six months after 
qualifiers commenced across different parts of Asia and the Concacaf region 
(covering the northern half of the Americas).

That record lasted just ten hours or so when Saudi Arabia’s Mohammad 
Al-Sahlawi scored three times against Timor-Leste in Dammam.

All this for a player who hasn’t played more than the odd game of park 
football during the past year and who, by his admission, was carrying a few 
extra kilograms. This too, was a player who had given the game away for a 
couple of years, disillusioned with petty club politics. A promising youth 
career included spells at Parramatta Eagles and Blacktown City - two clubs with 
a strong track-record in junior development - as well as stints at various 
lower-level State League and Association clubs.

Aussies Abroad: Iain Ramsey, set on a collision course with the Socceroos | 
John Duerden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/07/australians-abroad-iain-ramsey-set-on-a-collision-course-with-the-socceroos>
Born and raised in Sydney, Saghabi represents world football’s smallest nation 
outside the Caribbean thanks to a Cook Islander mother. A Lebanese father makes 
for a distinctive mix, with the pair meeting each other while mother Ngatamaine 
was visiting Sydney for a week during the 1980s, in what Saghabi describes as 
“one in a billion possibility”.

In 2011, Saghabi’s mother heard that the Cook Islands’ national team were 
conducting trials in Rarotonga, saying he should try his luck. There was, 
however, a catch. He would have to pay his own way there, and would only be 
reimbursed if successful. Saghabi made the cut and played in two qualifiers for 
Brazil 2014, but Cook Islands were ill-prepared and finished bottom of the 
world’s smallest confederation. They even finished belowone-time laughing stock 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1wg9ox9F7Vw> American Samoa 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZjoIZLGMgS0>.

This year was completely different. With just 15,000 inhabitants – and an area 
the size of western Europe – assembling a competitive football team is a 
massive challenge. Cook Islands suffers with a depopulation problem due to a 
lack of employment and the cost of living in the remote Polynesian nation. But 
for every negative there is an upside. Under astute young Welsh coach Drew 
Sherman, Cook Islands uncovered a host of the nation’s football diaspora based 
in New Zealand and Australia. Ultimately three players from Sydney were 
included in the 19-man squad which competed last week. Among them were West 
Ryde Rovers pair Saghabi and newly-named Cook Islands captain Jake Stuart, both 
of whom purely coincidentally attended the same school - Marist Brothers 
Eastwood.

Saghabi managed just a couple of games for the amateur club this year, 
focussing instead on his business and fitness. He would rise for work at 
5.30am, and after dispensing with the bright fluro shirt at day’s end, would 
“go to the gym, run for an hour or kick a ball for an hour at the local park”.


“Maybe I didn’t take things as seriously as I should have after four years ago 
in Samoa,” Saghabi said of his first taste of international football.


Cook Islands defied pre-tournament expectations with two wins in two games, 
the second of which was against favourites Samoa. Featuring in their sixth 
campaign, Cook Islands had suddenly recorded their first and second World Cup 
wins, and Saghabi had netted all four of the team’s goals.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Faustralians-abroad-taylor-saghabi-cook-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9afd795779e676cbc7fecdc11965986aef68aad%2F0_0_1552_2311%2F1552.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20the%20Sydney%20concreter's%20brief%20moment%20on%20top%20of%20the%20world%20%7C%20Pete%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Faustralians-abroad-taylor-saghabi-cook-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20the%20Sydney%20concreter%27s%20brief%20moment%20on%20top%20of%20the%20world%20%7C%20Pete%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Faustralians-abroad-taylor-saghabi-cook-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9afd795779e676cbc7fecdc11965986aef68aad%2F0_0_1552_2311%2F1552.jpg>
 OFC’s 2018 FIFA World Cup Russia Qualifier Stage 1, Match Day Two, Cook 
Islands v Samoa, Loto-Tonga Soka Centre, Tonga, Wednesday 2nd September 2015. 
Photo: Shane Wenzlick / www.phototek.nz Photograph: Shane 
Wenzlick/www.phototek.nz 
“That first game blew me out of the water: three goals, three points. Every 
aspect of the tournament was fantastic,” Saghabi said this week in Sydney, his 
voice still resonating with a touch of incredulity at the events of the past 
week. “If I had know this would have happened I would have taken time off.”


The Cook Islands, however, faltered at the last hurdle losing 2-0 to American 
Samoa, leaving three teams tied on six points. Samoa were the ones to progress, 
advancing to next year’s OFC Nations Cup, which doubles as World Cup Stage 2 
qualifying, having topped the standings by just a single goal.


“That lose broke me,” said Saghabi. “I was devastated. It was the fact that we 
went into the game knowing we just needed a draw. I haven’t even watched the 
highlights I am so disappointed. It was that heartbreaking. There were so many 
what-ifs. I felt if we had more than 14 days together we would have won easily.”

Saghabi, who likened the standard in Tonga to first or second tier state 
competition, says Oceania football standards are on the rise. “There was 
massive improvement from all of the teams, especially American Samoa who were 
technically good, but Samoa were our toughest opponent. The pace of the game 
was pretty intense, and extremely physical at times.”

On a personal level, Saghabi’s week was a triumph. His hat-trick against Tonga 
included goals with the left foot, right foot and head, while a long-range 
winner against Samoa showcased some impressive left-foot ability with a 
dead-ball. Playing attacking midfield, Saghabi boasts sharp feet, a 
power-packed shot and a natural game sense.

Not one for statistics, Saghabi became aware of his status as the World’s Cup 
top scorer after the second match. “My coach said if I scored in the last game 
I would be top scorer in the world,” laughed Saghabi. “It would have been great 
to score, and if I had we probably would have gone through.” Instead Saghabi 
was denied unique personal and team glory in the final match by the width of 
the woodwork as his free-kick pinged off the crossbar.

And the experience of the past week has left Saghabi, still just twenty-four, 
with renewed hunger for the game. “I would like to start training and see where 
it can take me. I haven’t really thought about how high I could go, but maybe 
when the new season starts I will really focus more on the game, and less on 
work. Of course it would be a massive dream to play in the A-League. But 
everything is really new at the moment.”

The international future for Saghabi and the Cook Islands remain unclear, 
given they went four years without a match and no fixtures are currently 
scheduled. There is talk of a regular Polynesian Cup, but for now Saghabi is 
looking at a stint with Cook Islands club Tupapa Maraerenga, who will 
participate at the preliminary stage of theOFC Champions League 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OFC_Champions_League> in the new year. Such 
guest stints in Oceania’s continental club competition have become increasingly 
popular for Australian players in recent years.

Tim Cahill, with inimitable style, stole all the local World Cup headlines for 
the Socceroos. Last week, ten years after Australia left the Oceania region, it 
was another Aussie with a Polynesian background topping the pile.

 * Australians Abroad is a new Guardian series that tells the seldom-told 
stories of players, coaches and others involved in sport who now ply their 
trades overseas  