
“Vorne, Vorne, Vorne,” growls Turbine Potsdam coach Bernd Schröder through 
fractured English at Australian midfielder Elise Kellond-Knight. “KK, 
Deutschland is vorne, Australia is hinten.” “Play forward, not backwards” is 
the intent of Schröder’s slightly sarcastic urgings, and it has become a 
familiar refrain heard by the new Australian arrival at the top Frauen 
Bundesliga club, based on the outskirts of Berlin.

 Kellond-Knight’s natural inclination is that ball-possession should be prized 
above all else, which is at odds with the modern German method, where the 
mindset is to press forward with pace and power at every opportunity.

For the Matildas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/matildas> midfielder, 
it is just another example of her drastic change in environment on and off the 
field since her move to Germany in August, following a stellar showing at the 
Women’s World Cup. Aside from two brief stints in Japan and Denmark, 
Kellond-Knight has spent her entire career at W-League club Brisbane Roar. Born 
and bred on the Gold Coast, a typical week included studying for a pharmacy 
degree, making several trips to Brisbane for training, surfing on the local 
beaches and squeezing in the odd round of golf.

Australians Abroad: Phil Bailey, the former NRL player turned union coach | 
Gavin Willacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/01/australians-abroad-phil-bailey-the-former-nrl-player-turned-union-coach>
 Training sessions under easy-going Byron Bay-raised Roar coach Belinda Wilson 
no doubt had a level of intensity, but also a spirit of underlying amiability – 
such is the culture of Australian women’s football. In Germany, 
Kellond-Knight’s team are all full-time professionals – despite a relatively 
modest wage – and often train twice a day. Schröder, a grizzled septuagenarian 
who learnt his methods under the harsh East German regime, has high 
expectations of his players especially the bigger-name imports, of which 
Kellond-Knight is one. The collegiality that can be found among Australia’s 
“soccer chicks” is barely seen in Germany’s Frauen Bundesliga. The contrast 
between Kellond-Knight’s life in Germany and that in Australia could hardly be 
starker.

 “It has been full-on, but I’m enjoying it so far,” she tells Guardian 
Australia. “Football is my only focus. It [the lifestyle change] is massive. I 
think you need a certain personality to cope, and it really tests how dedicated 
you are. It has been an adjustment and I’m learning from it. It can be mentally 
draining that is for sure.

 “Hopefully I don’t turn into German mentality,” laughs Kellond-Knight. “I 
still like to have fun at training. We like to have a joke when we play 
football in Australia, that doesn’t really happen here. I’m not sure if that is 
because they train too much and everyone is mentally drained, or just their 
style.

“Sometimes it can seem like the girls aren’t having fun at training. And 
sometimes I think you play better football if you are having fun. At training 
I’m a little more light-hearted than my team-mates. I’m the funny one at 
training, whereas in Australia I’m the serious one in comparison.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Faustralians-abroad-elise-kellond-knight-the-matilda-making-her-way-in-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0ddb793fae98de4003e609a1a5c8ef7b55439d3%2F0_0_4000_2407%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Elise%20Kellond-Knight%2C%20the%20Matilda%20making%20her%20way%20in%20Germany%20%7C%20Pete%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Faustralians-abroad-elise-kellond-knight-the-matilda-making-her-way-in-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Elise%20Kellond-Knight%2C%20the%20Matilda%20making%20her%20way%20in%20Germany%20%7C%20Pete%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Faustralians-abroad-elise-kellond-knight-the-matilda-making-her-way-in-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0ddb793fae98de4003e609a1a5c8ef7b55439d3%2F0_0_4000_2407%2F4000.jpg>
 Kellond-Knight has been voted onto the all-star team at the last two Women’s 
World Cups. Photograph: Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images 
 Kellond-Knight linked with one of Germany’s two traditional big clubs – the 
other being 1.FFC Frankfurt – for the start of the current season. And 
Kellond-Knight, unlike most Australian female players who go overseas on 
relatively short-term contracts, signed a two-year deal.

 At 25, Kellond-Knight decided it was time to get serious in order for her 
career to reach the next level. “I just went for it [the two-year deal]. I 
decided you need that long to adjust to the style of play, language and 
culture.”

A modern defensive midfielder, her game is equally focussed on starting play, 
as it is disrupting the opposition. Kellond-Knight is undoubtedly one of the 
first names pencilled on the teamsheet of Matildas coach Alen Stajcic. She has 
been named in the all-star squad at the past two Women’s World Cup, while her 
understated but crucial contribution was recognised by being one of three 
players shortlisted for Asian Player of the Year. That award is likely to be 
announced during the Olympic Games qualifiers in February.

 For now though, the focus is on building a new stage of her career in 
Europe’s football heartland. In some ways the club Kellond-Knight has signed 
for adds to the pressure. With major Bundesliga clubs such as Bayern Munich and 
Wolfsburg now putting significant resources into their female counterparts, the 
traditional powerbase of the women’s game has shifted. It means the only way is 
down for the grand old former East German club which boasts 45 years of history 
– one of the oldest major women’s football clubs in Europe.

 Scoring a rare goal on debut helped smooth her introduction to what is 
considered one of Europe’s best supported women’s teams. The team will head 
into the upcoming mid-winter break in mid-table on the 12-team ladder. It is an 
almost unthinkable position for a team that has not finished outside the top 
four since the 1990s.

 Snow hit as early as November setting up a long winter, and adding to the 
Australian’s culture shock. And Kellond-Knight, who boasts a thoughtful and 
unruffled personality, is not prone to anxiety but she does admit that being 
unfamiliar with the language has had its benefits. “We had a bad start, and 
there was a lot of media attention saying the club isn’t good enough,” 
Kellond-Knight says.

 “I would [feel under pressure] if I understood what was said, both with the 
coach and the media,” she adds wryly. “I don’t get a lot of feedback and 
guidance. Not knowing what is said is kind of cool in a way. But in a way I 
feel like I should be doing more for the team. Being my first season I am still 
trying to find the role I should be playing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Faustralians-abroad-elise-kellond-knight-the-matilda-making-her-way-in-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd279b3494f1d340741206168451a99a4681f3cbd%2F0_0_3148_2083%2F3148.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Elise%20Kellond-Knight%2C%20the%20Matilda%20making%20her%20way%20in%20Germany%20%7C%20Pete%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Faustralians-abroad-elise-kellond-knight-the-matilda-making-her-way-in-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20Elise%20Kellond-Knight%2C%20the%20Matilda%20making%20her%20way%20in%20Germany%20%7C%20Pete%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Faustralians-abroad-elise-kellond-knight-the-matilda-making-her-way-in-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd279b3494f1d340741206168451a99a4681f3cbd%2F0_0_3148_2083%2F3148.jpg>
 Kellond-Knight sits on the bench after the Matildas’ quarter-final defeat to 
Japan at the Women’s World Cup earlier this year. Photograph: Maddie Meyer - 
FIFA/FIFA via Getty Images 
 Off the field, Turbine is still trying to weave together a cohesive unit amid 
myriad cultural backgrounds. The club formed its own German language class 
which, aside from a lone Australian, features players of Japanese, Swiss, 
French, Bosnian, Polish and Italian extraction, conjuring images of a 1970s 
sitcom.

 Far removed from being a one-dimensional modern sportsperson, Kellond-Knight 
is keen to engage with the local culture, starting with regular visits to 
nearby Berlin which is 25 kilometres away, though part of the same metropolitan 
area. “Exploring Berlin is a great thing to do and I still have so much more to 
find. There is so much history and arts and music culture, everything.

 “Going for a bike ride through the parks in Potsdam and taking photos is my 
favourite thing to do. I like to ride my back up to the Glienicke Bridge which 
is a few minutes away and is a nice spot,” says Kellond-Knight in reference to 
one of the landmarks during Germany’s time as a divided nation, a local icon 
that has gained recent attention after featuring in the film Bridge of Spies.

 There is even a planned trip at some point in the future to go to Rostock on 
the Baltic Sea – a surfing outpost suggested by German team-mate Tabea Kemme 
who, Kellond-Knight says “loves to surf and is totally caught up in surfing 
culture”.

 Olympic qualifying looms in February which remains somewhat of a final 
unconquered frontier for the current Matildas squad. The team has not qualified 
since Athens 2004, and with only two spots available among five strong main 
competitors, Asia’s qualifying is arguably the globe’s most competitive. That 
challenge has been compounded by a ludicrous decision to compact the five 
matchdays into a 10-day period. That, however, is a challenge for another day.

 Several of the current Australian squad have carved out impressive niches in 
USA’s NWSL, but Kellond-Knight is not necessarily one to follow the pack. Hers 
is a greater challenge, but she is optimistic that the dividends on and off the 
field will be greater.
 