
The landmark Paris climate change deal will likely have little effect on the 
Australian share market, which will take its cues from a sliding iron ore price 
and an impending US interest rate decision.

CommSec economist Savanth Sebastian expects the local market will remain under 
pressure on Monday due to falls among mining and energy stocks.

The rate rise heard around the world: Janet Yellen prepares for her big 
decision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/12/us-interest-rate-rise-heard-round-world-janet-yellen>
“It’s going to be a volatile week,” he said on Sunday. “The ongoing slide in 
the ore price is concerning for not just the energy sector but even financial 
institutions.”

While the overall market struggles with cheaper ore, transport logistics 
companies and airlines will continue to benefit fromplunging crude oil prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/11/stock-markets-oil-prices-brent-crude>
.

And with the focus on overseas data, the historic climate change deal to curb 
emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-talks-julie-bishop-australia-environment>
 and limit global warming reached in Paris after two weeks of negotiations will 
have little impact on the local market, Sebastian said.

“I think the more long-term themes are around the slowdown in China and also 
the volatility in US markets,” he said.

US stocks closed sharply lower on Friday, with the S&P 500 ending its worst 
week since August, as falling oil prices compounded investor nervousness on 
expectations for the first US rate hike in nearly a decade.

The US Federal Reserve’s rates decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/12/us-interest-rate-rise-heard-round-world-janet-yellen>
 in the middle of this week will be watched closely around the world.

Given Australian shares have already experienced a fallback in the lead-up to 
Christmas, it could be a bumpy week ahead.

“While the volumes may be light there’s certainly going to be a lot of 
volatility this week,” Sebastian said.

But that could also lead to benefits for some.

“Given the slide that we will see on Monday, we might see some bargain hunting 
towards the latter part of the week,” he said.

After a day of consolidation on Friday, the benchmark S&P/ASX 200 index 
finished 8.2 points, or 0.16%, lower at 5,029.5 while the broader All 
Ordinaries index was down 8.9 points, or 0.17%, at 5,078.6.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison, will release the mid-year budget review on 
Tuesday, with economists predicting a further deterioration in the budget 
deficit.

 