
Australia has finally won the “fossil of the day” award – bestowed each day by 
young climate activists at big international climate summits.


Australia traditionally wins the award early and often, but the Paris talks 
had reached their 10th day before Australia got the gong – accepted, in sorrow 
and to loud boos, by Greens leader Richard Di Natale.

The award, shared with Argentina, recognised a speech by foreign affairs 
ministerJulie Bishop <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop> 
to an Indonesian side event on Tuesday in which she said “coal will remain 
critical to promoting prosperity, growing economies and alleviating hunger for 
years to come.”

Bishop also said the world was undergoing a “profound upheaval” as it 
transitioned to a low carbon economy and that a strong Paris agreement was an 
important signal for “efficient long term investment”, but the award focused 
just on the coal remarks.

Australia warns against stripping Paris climate agreement of ambition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/10/australia-warns-against-stripping-paris-climate-agreement-of-ambition>
“In France you say ‘let them eat cake’, but in Australia we say ‘let them eat 
coal’,” said comedian Dan Ilic, who presented the award on behalf of the 
Climate Action Network.

He said Australia had backed a target to keep global warming to 1.5 degrees at 
the Paris summit, but “still supports the construction of the largest coal mine 
in the southern hemisphere, right on the edge of the Great Barrier Reef.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjulie-bishop-discusses-australias-emissions-reduction-plan-at-paris-climate-talks-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449723261987%2FKP_717805_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julie%20Bishop%20discusses%20Australia%E2%80%99s%20emissions%20reduction%20plan%20at%20Paris%20climate%20talks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjulie-bishop-discusses-australias-emissions-reduction-plan-at-paris-climate-talks-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julie%20Bishop%20discusses%20Australia%E2%80%99s%20emissions%20reduction%20plan%20at%20Paris%20climate%20talks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjulie-bishop-discusses-australias-emissions-reduction-plan-at-paris-climate-talks-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449723261987%2FKP_717805_crop_640x480.jpg>
Julie Bishop discusses Australia’s emissions reduction plan at Paris climate 
talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2015/dec/10/julie-bishop-discusses-australias-emissions-reduction-plan-at-paris-climate-talks-video>
Jaden Harris of the Australian Youth Climate Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> said: “the Australian 
government is all talk, no action. Australia is dragging its feet here in 
Paris, desperately spruiking the fossil fuels of the past, whilst we miss out 
on the opportunities from clean energy.”

“It just no longer makes sense to construct new coal projects, this train 
won’t be turning around. Turnbull needs to match his innovation rhetoric with 
reality and embrace the clean energy jobs of the future,” he said.

Saudi Arabia, widely seen as playing a blocking role in the talks, has won the 
award most days so far.
 