
The Australian government approved Adani’s controversial $16bn Carmichael 
coalmine inQueensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
because it was not a “neo-colonialist”power that tried to tell poor countries 
what to do, environment minister Greg Hunt has told a side event at the Paris 
climate summit.


Hunt was speaking about the coalition’s Direct Action policy at an OECD event 
on different climate policies when he was challenged by a questioner about why 
the government had approved the Adani mine given the huge quantity of emissions 
its coal would create.

“This is not an Australian government project, it is a private sector firm 
from India and ... I thought we were over neocolonial moment where the wealthy 
decide what happens to the poor,” Hunt countered.

Coal from Carmichael mine 'will create more annual emissions than New York'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/12/coal-from-carmichael-mine-will-create-more-annual-emissions-than-new-york>
“I hope you would agree the poorest countries should be able to decide their 
own energy future. I am not a neo-colonialist. I think the poorest should be 
able to make their own decisions,” he said.

And he said the federal environment law allowed him to judge projects 
according to strict criteria, but greenhouse emissions weren’t one of them.

“It is not our project, there is no federal money, the federal government of 
Australia acts as a judge not as an advocate and I think it is very important 
that individual countries set their targets and make their own decisions,” he 
said.

Conservation groups have asked the federal court  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/14/federal-court-asked-to-overturn-adani-mine-approval-impact-great-barrier-reef>
to overturn the Hunt’s approval Carmichael because he did not take into account 
the impact on theGreat Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/great-barrier-reef> of the greenhouse 
gases emitted when the coal is burned.

A recent report designed to highlight the quantity of emissions that would be 
created by the coal from the mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/12/coal-from-carmichael-mine-will-create-more-annual-emissions-than-new-york>
 found that it would create annual emissions similar to those from countries 
like Malaysia and Austria and more emissions than New York City.

Others on the panel, including the head of the renewable energy division of 
the InternationalEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> 
Agency, Paolo Frankl, said “reverse auctions” like Australia’s Direct Action 
scheme were proving very efficient around the world, especially in financing 
renewable energy projects. (Australia’s scheme has not been used for this 
purpose, but has mainly financed land use, waste and energy efficiency 
projects.) But he said a carbon price was usually also needed to drive a long 
term price signal.

Shorten: Coalition rightwingers forcing Australians to 'pledge loyalty' to coal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/27/shorten-coalition-rightwingers-forcing-australians-to-pledge-loyalty-to-coal>
Asked if reverse auctions could be used on their own to give business the long 
term price signals, Frankl said “it can but it would not be very useful. If you 
look at Brazil and Australia that is exactly what they are doing now, but in 
addition to that there should be a carbon price which could give an additional 
signal ... we need some long term price signal but also some short term 
signals.”

Hunt is leading Australia’s delegation in the first week of the two-week Paris 
climate summit which aims to reach an agreement to progressively increase the 
ambition of global efforts to reduce greenhouse gases out to 2030.

The foreign minister, Julie Bishop, will take over the negotiating lead next 
weekend. The talks began in earnest on Tuesday after a day of speeches by 150 
world leaders designed to give them purpose and momentum.

Prominent Australians ask world leaders to consider ban on new coalmines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/27/prominent-australians-ask-world-leaders-to-consider-ban-on-new-coalmines>
Over the two weeks delegates will seek to overcome deep divisions over issues 
including whether rich and poor countries must face the same rules for 
reporting and checking their emission reductions and the amount of financing 
developed countries will provide to help poor nations reduce their emissions 
and deal with the impact of climate change.
 