
Austria’s cabinet has approved legislation that will allow the state to seize 
ownership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/09/adolf-hitlers-first-home-could-be-seized-by-austrian-government>
 of the house where Adolf Hitler was born, although the government appeared 
divided on what to do with the building.

The interior minister, Wolfgang Sobotka, reiterated his call for the property 
in Braunau am Inn to be torn down.

But the vice-chancellor, Reinhold Mitterlehner, said the building near the 
German border had heritage protection and so could not be demolished. He added 
that it could be used for educational purposes and turned into a museum.

Sobotka said the building was not worthy of heritage protection since that 
status was bestowed by the Nazis after Germany annexedAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> in 1938.

Letter to editor describes Germany under Nazis – archive, 24 June 1933
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/24/letter-editor-germany-nazis-archive>
The legislation, still to be approved by parliament, would lead to the owner, 
whose family has been in possession of the house for more than century, being 
forcibly dispossessed after years of fruitless talks.

The aim of the government, which announced its intentions in April, is to stop 
the building become a shrine for neo-Nazis. A 12-person commission is currently 
examining the different options.

Gerhard Baumgartner, head of the Documentation Centre of Austrian Resistance 
(DÖW), said the building should be “completely depoliticised” to stop what he 
said was its growing attraction among neo-Nazis.

“We are seeing a kind of European tourism. Last year there was a bus trip from 
Hungary visiting, this year different prominent far-right figures stopped on 
their way through,” he told Oe1 public radio.

'A born natural orator': Irish student's account of Hitler in 1921 emerges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/irish-student-hitler-1921-daniel-binchy>
“It should be turned into something that nobody wants to be photographed in 
front of ... a supermarket, a Humana [second-hand clothes shop] or a fire 
station – a sensible usage.”

The house is an unremarkable three-storey yellow-painted building in the 
centre of a quiet town.

But local historians say Hitler was not born in the house but in a building 
behind it that has long since been demolished. His family moved from Braunau in 
1892 when he was three.

Outside there is a stone memorial that reads: “For peace, freedom and 
democracy. Never again fascism, millions of dead warn.”
 