
Austria’s parliament has passed a law allowing authorities to expropriate the 
house in whichAdolf Hitler <https://www.theguardian.com/world/adolf-hitler> was 
born in 1889.


The law, passed on Wednesday night, ends years of dispute between the 
building’s owner, Gerlinde Pommer, and the authorities in Braunau am Inn. For 
years, Pommer refused to sell the building or allow it to be renovated.

Pommer, who once ran it as a guesthouse and was compensated by the government 
with a generous level of rent to prevent it from becoming a lure for neo-Nazi 
tourists, is due to be compensated for the loss of the three-storey house with 
an undisclosed sum.

But quite what the government plans to do with it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2016/oct/18/reclaiming-nazi-buildings-what-should-austria-do-with-hitler-old-house>
 remains unclear.

Reclaiming Nazi buildings: what should Austria do with Hitler’s old house?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2016/oct/18/reclaiming-nazi-buildings-what-should-austria-do-with-hitler-old-house>
While their main aim is to prevent the building becoming a shrine for the 
steady stream of neo-Nazi supporters who still make their way to Braunau, there 
has been an ongoing discussion over what more positive purpose it might serve.

Ideas have ranged from turning it into a labour office or a cultural centre to 
tearing it down altogether, though detractors say that would amount to an 
attempt to erase Austria’s Nazi past. Heritage experts are against pulling it 
down, arguing the house has an important place in Braunau’s architectural 
history.

Marcus Franz, an independent politician, has suggested the Bulgarian wrapping 
artist Christo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jun/18/the-floating-piers>
 should be invited to cover it up as an art installation.

Previous uses have included a workshop for people with learning difficulties 
and a day centre operated by a local charity, which rented the building from 
Pommer but was forced to give up the lease after she refused to carry out any 
repairs.

Hitler was born on the top floor of the house on 20 April 1889. Close to the 
border with Germany, Braunau has never been able to shake its association with 
the Nazi leader.

“It is not so seldom that neo-Nazis stop in front of the house to be 
photographed making the Hitler greeting,” Harry Buchmayr, a Social Democrat who 
lives in Braunau, told parliament.

Walter Rosenkranz, of the rightwing Freedom party, defended parliament’s 
decision to buy the building. “Expropriation is not a nice thing, rather the 
last resort,” he said. “But we’ve had five years of negotiations that were 
carried out in a very considerate way, but which didn’t lead to any result.”
 