
There were few sights that better personified Australian rugby league – and, 
sometimes, even culture – in the 1980s than that of legendary prop Steve 
“Blocker” Roach in full flight.


Never one to shy away from the physical side of the game, the Balmain front 
rower could turn human wrecking ball on the footy field. Blocker’s eagerness to 
dish out big tackles and hit-ups, along with the odd niggley punch, gained him 
a cult following, as well as 186 games for his club, and multiple appearances 
for New South Wales and Australia.

Ask around on the streets of Hungarian capital of Budapest, and you’re 
unlikely to find anyone with knowledge of Roach’s Winfield Cup exploits. Soon 
enough though, you’ll find someone keen to talk up the physicality of Blocker’s 
son Aidan. Not on the footy field, but in Hungary’s water polo pools.

Australians Abroad: James Galanis, mentor to the world's best women's 
footballer | Pete Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/13/australians-abroad-james-galanis-mentor-to-the-best-womens-footballer-on-the-planet>
Water polo in Hungary is like what football is to Brazil or rugby union is to 
New Zealand. It is a sport that exists in the nation’s DNA; a way that an 
entire culture measures itself on the world stage. A record nine Olympic gold 
medals, and a slew of world and European championship titles, attest to that.

Effectively a pool-bound version of football, using your hands, water polo is 
one of the world’s most brutal sports. Defenders are allowed to hold opponents 
underwater; punches, kicks and painful swimsuit twists are the norm under the 
surface.

The sport’s physical nature, and Hungary’s prominence in it, is no better 
personified than inthe notorious “Blood in the Water” match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/dec/28/olympic-hungary-soviet-union-blood-water>
 at the 1956 Melbourne Olympics.

While the Hungarian Revolution, and resulting Soviet invasion, raged on, the 
two nations met in a brutal semi-final that was eventually called off due to 
the extent of the violence between players. Hungary went on to claim Olympic 
gold, but their nation would fall under the iron curtain.

The match is remembered today as one of the most infamous moments in Olympic 
history, but still draws great pride from Hungarians.

“Budapest is like the home of water polo – people really love it here,” Roach 
tells Guardian Australia. “It is really embedded in Hungarian history. There 
was obviously the famous Olympics game in 1956, and that was around the time 
that Hungary was fighting for its freedom. So, you can see why people love it, 
and, yeah, most of the places we go people know we are water polo players.”

Roach is one of three Australians who play professionally in Hungary’s top 
league; considered the world’s best. Perth’s Joel Swift lines up alongside him 
at Ferencvarosi, while Aaron Younger, who also hails from the West Australian 
capital, plays for defending club champions Szolnok.

With 21 national titles, Ferencvarosi are Hungary’s second most decorated 
water polo club, and sit fourth in the league’s overall standings so far this 
season. Roach plays as a driver for the side; a perimeter player whose job is 
to draw defenders by surging towards the goal.

The Sydneysider is no stranger to water polo’s top levels. Before heading to 
Hungary in 2013, he had played two seasons in Serbia, and another in 
Montenegro, adding up to more than six years in Europe. Each nation has a 
distinct cultural approach to the game, the 25-year-old says.

“I’d say the Hungarians are more flamboyant,” he says. “If I had to compare it 
to soccer, the Hungarians are like the Brazilians. They do everything really 
fancy. They do big shots and everything like that.

“The Serbians and Montenegrins are more like the Germans, where they really 
set structures and everyone sticks to their job for the greater good. There’s a 
bit of difference in the leagues, because there’s more money in Hungary, so 
there’s better players.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Faustralians-abroad-water-polo-star-aidan-roach-a-chip-off-the-old-blocker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7dc49d27c0960dae637f2a5ef5e3aa0cd86d47f%2F0_111_3210_1926%2F3210.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20water%20polo%20star%20Aidan%20Roach%2C%20a%20chip%20off%20the%20old%20%E2%80%98Blocker%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Faustralians-abroad-water-polo-star-aidan-roach-a-chip-off-the-old-blocker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20Abroad%3A%20water%20polo%20star%20Aidan%20Roach%2C%20a%20chip%20off%20the%20old%20%E2%80%98Blocker%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Faustralians-abroad-water-polo-star-aidan-roach-a-chip-off-the-old-blocker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7dc49d27c0960dae637f2a5ef5e3aa0cd86d47f%2F0_111_3210_1926%2F3210.jpg>
 Aidan Roach believes Australia are a dark horse for a medal at the 2016 
Olympic Games in Rio. Photograph: Bryn Lennon/Getty Images 
Roach, who grew up in the Western Sydney suburb of Drummoyne, first played 
water polo aged nine. His old brother Dan had injured his hip playing rugby, 
and was told by doctor that he couldn’t play contact sport.

“We had family friends who played water polo, and they said ‘give this a go’,” 
Roach says. “I started playing with my two older brothers and just loved it 
straight away. There’s a lot of wrestling and a lot of contact, but you have to 
be very skilful with the ball and very fit, swimming. It’s a really 
complicated, but good sport.”

Roach’s burgeoning abilities saw him earn his first overseas contract, before 
being selected to represent Australia at the 2012 Olympics, where they finished 
seventh.

Though the “Blood in the Water” match took place in a Melbourne pool, water 
polo struggled, for decades, to gain traction in Australia. The sport’s big 
step forward came in 2000, when the national women’s team won gold at the 
Sydney Olympics. The Stingers have since transformed into an international 
force, winning two Olympic bronzes, and appearing in two World Championship 
finals.

The Australian men’s team hasn’t enjoyed the same success, though the tide 
seems to be turning under current coach Elvis Fatovic. The Croatian guided the 
Sharks to eighth at last year’s World Championships in Russia, where they 
pushed eventual winners Serbia 10-9 in pool play.

The side has since been strengthened by the addition of former New Zealand 
representative and Hungarian club pro, Joe Kayes, and secured qualification to 
this year’s Olympics through an automatic Oceania spot.

Roach believes that, under Fatovic, Australia could be the dark horse for a 
medal in Rio de Janeiro. “He’s a genius – he’s really helped the team come 
along,” he says, adding the squad’s London Olympic experience will also help.

“We still haven’t had the best results, but every game now, we are in the game 
and have a chance to win it. We’ve come a long way. Under Elvis’ guidance, I 
believe we really do have a chance to make the semi-finals, and from there, who 
knows what could happen. If we train hard, and give it ourselves the best 
chance to play well, then, why not? Why can’t we do something special?”

Roach’s cult hero father will be there in Rio, watching his son battle it out. 
Both his parents traveled to Budapest last October to watch him play, with 
Blocker an encouraging supporter. “He loves the sport, and loves the physical 
side of it,” Roach says. “If he sees I really need some help, he’ll come and 
help me, but he lets me do my own thing. “

If Roach is anything like his old man, his own thing will be more than enough 
for Australia in the pool in Rio this year.
 