
The British author Alan Shadrake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alan-shadrake> has lost an appeal against 
his contempt of court conviction and will begin a jail sentence in Singapore 
next week.

Shadrake, 76, refused to apologise for his book, Once a Jolly Hangman: 
Singapore <https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore> Justice in the Dock, 
which is critical of the country's use of the death penalty for crimes such as 
drug trafficking.

The high court judge Andrew Phang upheld a six-week jail term that begins next 
Wednesday. Shadrake will also serve an extra two weeks in jail after declining 
to pay a fine of 20,000 Singapore dollars (Â£10,000).

M Ravi, Shadrake's lawyer, said his client's jail term would most likely be 
reduced by a third for good behaviour.

"They tried to scare me into apologising," Shadrake told reporters after the 
ruling. "They're bullies who don't like freedom of speech."

The attorney-general's office alleged that statements in the book impugn the 
impartiality, integrity and independence of the Singapore judiciary. The 
government says any statement that damages the reputations of its leaders 
hinders their ability to rule effectively.

A criminal defamation investigation against Shadrake is still pending.

Rights groups say Singapore uses criminal defamation laws to silence critics. 
Singapore's leaders have sued journalists and political opponents for 
defamation several times in recent years.

"The prosecution of Alan Shadrake for doing nothing more than calling for 
legal reform is a devastating blow to free speech in Singapore," said Phil 
Robertson, deputy Asia director at New York-based Human Rights Watch. "More 
broadly, until the government releases its iron grip on basic freedoms, the 
Singaporean people will remain all the poorer."

The government says restrictions on speech and assembly are necessary to 
preserve economic prosperity and racial and religious harmony among Singapore's 
5.1 million population.

Shadrake was arrested on 18 July and freed on bail two days later. The author, 
who was born in Essex, and has four children, said he did not expect to be 
arrested after hosting a book launch party on 17 July because the government 
has not banned the sale of the book in Singapore.

The book features an interview with Darshan Singh, who was Singapore's hangman 
from 1959 to 2005.

Singapore applies capital punishment by hanging for offences such as murder, 
drug trafficking and unlawful use of a firearm. The country is one of the 
world's richest and has a relatively low rate of violent crime.
 