
Ah September 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/sep/16/nigel-slater-kitchen-diaries-2>
 - the month that straddles summer and autumn; a time of big changes for food. 
Keats was justifiably effusive in hisOde to Autumn 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/jan/23/to-autumn-john-keats> depicting a 
season overflowing with a glut of produce: ripe apples, juicy plums, damsons 
and pears, gnarled orange-green gourds swelling with culinary promise, and 
fresh milky-sweet nuts such as thecobnuts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/sep/09/hazelnut-cobnut-filbert-recipes-whittingstall>
 that have seen such revival in popularity over the last few years.

I have a confession: I don't like summer food all that much. The odd heirloom 
tomato salad 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/18/nigel-slater-classic-insalata-caprese>
 is fine,borlotti beans 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/allotment/2009/aug/04/gardens-gardeningadvice>
 woven into a minestrone with summer squashes, laced with basil and a heavy 
hand with the olive oil is all very well, but unless it's as hot as the Med it 
just doesn't taste quite right.Autumn 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/gallery/2011/oct/17/autumn> on the other 
hand, Britain does superlatively well. By this time of year I am thankful that 
soon I won't have to deal with the endless glut of courgettes arriving in
organic box schemes <http://www.riverford.co.uk/> or from the gardens of kindly 
friends <http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2008/apr/05/gardens28> and that 
I will be able to find some greens at thefarmers' market 
<http://www.lfm.org.uk/> that actually benefit from being cooked.

Talking of greens, it is the coming of the kale season that excites me most. 
It's one of the few things I manage toreliably grow in my garden 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2008/apr/05/vegetables.growingyourown8> 
and there is something about those crinkly dark green leaves that just spells 
goodness (the wholekale family <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kale> is full of 
vitamins C and K, calcium andsulforaphane 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sulforaphane>. If it wasn't so delicious it would 
rather put one off eating the Tuscan peasant dish,ribollita 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/apr/03/nigel-slater-classic-ribollita>
, rich in both beans and Tuscan kale.

Tuscan kale, also called cavolo nero or sometimes dinosaur kale in the States, 
is just one variety that grows well in this country. Red Russian kale with its 
beautiful crinkly purple tinged leaves, and dwarf kale are both easy to grow 
and excellent to eat. Many find the leaves bitter and chewy but it's all in the 
preparation, and while the current fashion is to put baby kale leaves in a 
salad I would rather do as the Italians have always done and slow cook hardy 
greens in plenty of olive oil, salt and garlic until they melt into a 
homogeneous mass, to be served alongside roasted meats or sausages (they have an
affinity for cured meats 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/24/kale-beans-salami-recipe>) 
or roasted pumpkin with shavings of pecorino or parmesan. Actually, even 
plonked on top of a slice of toasted sourdough and glossed with some good olive 
oil a bunch of cooked kale makes a fine lunch.

Gourds of all shapes and sizes begin to appear around now, and with them 
resurface the debate about which is the tastiest. Personally I go forkabocha 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabocha>, a green, knobbly-skinned beast that is 
almost impossible to cut or Crown Prince, a paler bluey-green in colour but 
similarly dense and deep-orange fleshed; Iron Bark is another good one to look 
out for. All these varieties make excellent soups and stand up to roasting 
without collapsing. For those who can't quite face the amount of flesh a large 
squash yields, small gem squashes are delicious stuffed with mushrooms (also 
justalso starting their season 
<http://www.rivercottage.net/users/Mushroom%20Man/blog/1283949048-september-is-mushroom-season/>
), cream and garlic, and baked and served individually. For lovers of starchy 
vegetables other roots are also being pulled –beetroot 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/jan/15/nigel-slater-beetroot-indian-lentil>
 and long, slim carrots with tops still attached, and soon we'll have baby 
turnips too, perfect for roasting whole or braising in stock.

And it is not just vegetables that we can get excited about this time of year 
– nuts might not seem an obvious British food butcobnuts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2005/sep/17/foodanddrink.shopping4> and 
evenwet walnuts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2007/oct/27/recipes.foodanddrink> are 
the perfect accompaniment to the hard, grainy cheeses that feel so right after 
a summer of oozy bries and mozzarellas. And fruit – apples are just appearing, 
the firstDiscoveries <http://www.orangepippin.com/apples/discovery> will soon 
make way forCoxes <http://www.orangepippin.com/apples/coxs-orange-pippin> and 
Russets <http://www.orangepippin.com/apples/egremont-russet>, raspberries are 
enjoying their second crop of the year, blackberries are abundant and if you 
are lucky you might even spot local figs or grapes at markets or farm shops. 
Soon plums,damsons 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/sep/07/damson-recipes-hugh-fearnley-whittingstall>
 and stone fruits will be ready for crumbles, cakes and evensweetly-sharp sauces
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/sep/14/summer-autumn-crossover-recipes>
 to accompany the game that is just appearing: grouse, wood pigeon and guinea 
fowl (if you want a tamer flavour) being among the best. What do you foods do 
you look forward to when the weather cools?
 