
When the annual hop harvest comes, it brings with it a four week window of 
opportunity for brewers to make the ultimate seasonal beer.

As perennial plants, hops return every spring and are harvested at the end of 
summer in both hemispheres – they give beer the quenching bitterness and 
appealing aroma which makes us go back for another gulp. Freshly picked hops 
start to deteriorate in quality and flavour as soon as they are stripped from 
the bine, so they're usually taken directly from field to kiln to be dried and 
then packed. The drying process is essential to ensure the hops last a full 
year, but in the process volatile oils which otherwise contribute towards the 
beer's taste and aroma are lost. This is where there's a chance to make a 
unique seasonal drink: green-hopped beers, also known as wet- or fresh-hopped, 
take hops fresh from the bine and straight into the brewhouse, bypassing the 
kiln.
The flavours in freshly picked hops are very different from those in dried 
hops: the grassy, delicate citrus notes in fresh hops turn pungent and intense 
when they're dried. It's like the difference between a freshly-picked apple or 
tomato and one that's been roasted or dried. Speed is crucial when brewing a 
green-hopped beer and the hops need to get from field to brewery in the 
shortest time possible to capture all of those delicate volatile oils before 
they begin to oxidise. The joy of a green-hopped beer is in the aroma and 
flavour which captures an elemental essence of late summer, an evocative grassy 
kind of spiciness that hangs in the air.

The brewing process <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brewing#Brewing_process> for 
a green-hopped beer is made more exciting by a ticking clock. One brewer will 
make a start on the beer while another goes to pick the hops (meaning they also 
know their provenance down to the exact row in the garden and get to shake the 
hop grower's hand on the day), returning in time to add them to the kettle and 
capture all of those unique flavours. The pressure of speed, plus the 
pre-planning needed to co-ordinate (it means knowing what hops are being picked 
on which day and at what time) also means brewers are more invested in the brew 
and put extra effort into its success.
 A Kentish hop garden ready for the harvest. Photograph: Mark Dredge 
This year, breweries around Britain have made green-hopped beers from a 
variety of English hops, and it's a growing trend. The base beers are typically 
pale ales; light in colour and without too much malty backbone so the hops take 
centre stage and really show off their fresh aromas. Look around and you'll see 
more than just pale ales: there'll be bigger and more boldly hopped IPAs, 
milds, golden ales and best bitters.

I've had the pleasure of tasting a few. Gadds Brewery's Green Hop Ale 
<http://gaddsbeershop.blogspot.co.uk/2012/09/more-hops.html> is full of grassy, 
spicy fresh hops, lightly laced with the lemon balm of East Kent Goldings. Kent 
Brewery used more hops than most in their 6% ABVGreen Giant IPA 
<http://www.kentbrewery.com/1/category/harvest/1.html>, a bold, bitter and 
beautifully aromatic brew reminiscent of forests, stone fruit and fresh 
blossom. Dark Star Brewery, near Brighton, have alsomade an IPA 
<http://www.ratebeer.com/beer/dark-star-green-hopped-ipa/133288/> while 
Lovibonds Brewery <http://lovibonds.com/ourbeers.php> in Henley-on-Thames make 
a beer each year with green hops growing outside their brewhouse – this year 
they went for a black IPA.

The Foundry brewpub <http://www.thefoundrycanterbury.co.uk/canterbury-brewers/>
 in Canterbury have brewed four green-hopped beers: a pale ale, a lager, a 
Belgian-inspired saison and an all-Kent version ofPresident Obama's White House 
Honey Ale 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/us-news-blog/2012/sep/01/white-house-beer-recipe-released>
, this one made with local honey and hops. Gadds, Kent and The Foundry are 
three of 20 Kent breweries who have joined together to make at least one beer 
for theKent Green Hop Fortnight <http://kentgreenhopbeer.com/>, calling it 
"beerjolais" in a playful send-up of wine's beaujolais nouveau and highlighting 
the county's hop growing heritage.

That idea of heritage and future is important. This isn't just about grabbing 
a seasonal product while you can: English hops also need a boost. Hop acreage 
has dropped from a high of71,189 acres in 1878 
<http://zythophile.wordpress.com/2009/11/20/a-short-history-of-hops/> to around 
2,500 now, and the bright citrus and tropical flavours of American and New 
Zealand hops are growing in popularity compared with of the earthy, floral, 
hedgerow fruitiness of English varieties.

It's only once a year, in a short timeframe, that green-hopped beers can be 
brewed, making this the ultimate seasonal beer and celebration of the English 
hop harvest. They have started hitting taps and you can expect to see them 
throughout October; drink them fresh, drink them local and get them while you 
can.
 