
Selma director Ava DuVernay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ava-duvernay> 
has decided not to direct Marvel’s upcoming Black Panther movie.

Ava DuVernay joins 'most diverse' Oscars board election race
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/26/ava-duvernay-joins-most-diverse-oscars-board-election-race>
In an interview with Essence magazine 
<http://www.essence.com/2015/07/03/exclusive-ava-duvernay-not-directing-black-panther-movie>
, DuVernay made a definitive statement on her choice not to work with Marvel.

“I’m not signing on to direct Black Panther,” she said. “I think I’ll just say 
we had different ideas about what the story would be.Marvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> has a certain way of doing things, 
and I think they’re fantastic and a lot of people love what they do. I loved 
that they reached out to me.”

The film is part of Marvel’s ambitious cinematic universe slate that also 
includes sequels toGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/guardians-of-the-galaxy-review-marvel-superheroes>
 and Captain America. Black Panther has already castGet on Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/20/get-on-up-review-james-brown-chadwick-boseman>
 star Chadwick Boseman in the lead role. The character was the first 
African-American superhero in mainstream comics after debuting in 1966.

“I loved meeting Chadwick and writers and all the Marvel execs,” DuVernay 
said. “In the end, it comes down to story and perspective. And we just didn’t 
see eye to eye. Better for me to realise that now than cite creative 
differences later.”

She also added that she fully supports the project and is excited to see what 
another director does with it. “I love the character of Black Panther, the 
nation of Wakanda and all that could be visually,” she said. “I wish them well 
and will be first in line to see it.”

DuVernay had also directed a pilot for a CBS show called For Justice, but the 
network decided not to pick it up. “We turned it in the week of the Baltimore 
uprising, and we had an uprising in our piece when we filmed it,” she said. “I 
think they thought it was a little close to real life. But I had an absolute 
ball making it.”

She will now be focusing on a hurricane Katrina-set love story, starring David 
Oyelowo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/26/selma-director-ava-duvernay-hurricane-katrina-film>
.
 