
Reports were circulating 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2015/06/ava-duvernay-direct-black-panther-marvel>
 on Monday that Ava DuVernay would direct Marvel’s new Black Panther film.

The Selma director has long been rumoured to be a strong candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/13/ava-duvernay-marvel-direct-black-panther-selma>
, and would follow in the footsteps of Kenneth Branagh, Jon Favreau and Joss 
Whedon as a high-profile, but counter-intuitive, director of a big-budget 
superhero film.

Black Panther, which stars Chadwick Boseman – who played James Brown in the 
biopic Get On Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/01/get-on-up-review-james-brown-biopic>
 – in the lead role, is set for release in 2018. DuVernay would be the first 
black female director to helm a Marvel film.

The move sees Marvel continue to increase diversity in its projects, after it 
castIdris Elba as Heimdall in Thor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/apr/27/idris-elba-thor-race-debate> 
andMichael B Jordan as Johnny Storm/The Human Torch in the Fantastic Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/04/fantastic-four-film-makers-respond-to-criticism-of-decision-to-cast-black-actor>
, both of which caused outrage online with far-right groupsboycotting Thor 
because Marvel chose non-white actors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/17/white-supremacists-boycott-thor>.

Marvel’s first big-screen adaptation that starred a black lead was the 90s hit 
Blade, which saw Wesley Snipes star in the lead role ofthe day-walking vampire 
across a trio of films <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/mar/26/news3>.

Black Panther was the first ever black superhero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/29/marvel-black-panther-black-superhero-chadwick-boseman>
, appearing in the 60s as a supporting character in the Avengers comics before 
his back story in the fictional African nation of Wakanda was expanded in the 
200-page Panther’s Rage.

DuVernay recently held an event dubbed the Rebel-A-Thon on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/28/ava-duvernay-rebel-a-thon-black-film-makers-symposium>
 where she along with more than 40 black directors gave advice to aspiring 
young creatives, and while at SXSW in March she lamentedthe lack of Hollywood 
films with black protagonists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/14/ava-duvernay-selma-director-sxsw-festival>
.
 