
A record number of women and people from ethnic minorities are running for 
seats on the board of governors at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and 
Sciences, the organisation responsible for the Oscars,according to the 
Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/race/selmas-ava-duvernay-diverse-academy-805009>
.

Among the 27 female candidates is director Ava DuVernay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/14/ava-duvernay-selma-director-sxsw-festival>
, who many felt was snubbed by the academy when her Martin Luther King Jnr 
biopic,Selma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/oscar-nominations-2015-mr-turner-selma-grand-budapest-hotel-birdman>
, failed to win her a best director nomination earlier this year.

Ava Duvernay: 'Studios not lining up to make films about black protagonists'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/14/ava-duvernay-selma-director-sxsw-festival>
Academy membership is split into 17 branches, according to cinematic job 
description, and each branch is represented by three governors, who serve 
three-year terms. An election is held each year for one of the three 
governorships for each branch.

This year, DuVernay is challenging board governor Michael Mann to represent 
the directors’ branch. Her fellow candidates are both women: The Kids Are All 
Right director Lisa Cholodenko and Kimberly Peirce, director of Boys Don’t Cry. 
Seven of the 67 governor candidates are from ethnic minorities.

The academy has been regularly criticised for its lack of diversity. The 
organisation does not publish a list of its members, butin 2012 the Los Angeles 
Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/envelope/oscars/la-et-unmasking-oscar-academy-project-20120219-story.html#page=1>
 claimed that more than 90% were white and more than 70% were male after the 
paper confirmed the identities of almost 90% of members.

It is widely assumed that lack of diversity among academy members is reflected 
in the individuals and films nominated for Oscars. All of this year’s acting 
nominees were white, leading to the hashtag#OscarsSoWhite 
<https://twitter.com/OscarsSoWhite> trending on Twitter. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fava-duvernay-joins-most-diverse-oscars-board-election-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435315723536%2F0d2ff56b-f307-4269-b484-e0344f819755-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ava%20DuVernay%20joins%20'most%20diverse'%20Oscars%20board%20election%20race&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fava-duvernay-joins-most-diverse-oscars-board-election-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ava%20DuVernay%20joins%20%27most%20diverse%27%20Oscars%20board%20election%20race&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fava-duvernay-joins-most-diverse-oscars-board-election-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435315723536%2F0d2ff56b-f307-4269-b484-e0344f819755-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The academy’s first black president, Cheryl Boone Isaacs. Photograph: Chris 
Pizzello/Invision/AP 
The academy is led by two-term president Cheryl Boone Isaacs, who, in 2013, 
became the first black person to take the top job. She has said that she hopes 
to see the academy’s membership become more diverse.

“I would love to see and look forward to see a greater cultural diversity 
among all our nominees in all of our categories,”she said earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/17/oscar-nominations-academy-president-more-diversity>
.
 