
Ava DuVernay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ava-duvernay> has made history 
as the first woman of color to direct a live-action film that boasts a budget 
over $100m, with Disney’s upcoming A Wrinkle in Time.

The Selma director has been attached 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/23/ava-duvernay-to-direct-disney-fantasy-a-wrinkle-in-time-from-frozen-writers-script>
 to the project since February, after passing up the opportunity to direct 
Black Panther for Marvel, butthe milestone wasn’t made official 
<https://blog.womenandhollywood.com/ava-duvernay-will-be-first-african-american-woman-to-helm-100-million-film-4001572bacb4#.cfu7g3cfk>
 until Tuesday, when the adaptation of Madeleine L’Engle’s novel was included 
on a list of big-budget films receiving California tax incentives.

Ava DuVernay: 'This patriarchy is often shocked when a black film does well'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/06/ava-duvernay-los-angeles-film-festival>
Reacting to the news on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/AVAETC/status/760974148625502208>, DuVernay said she’s 
“not the first [woman of color] capable of doing so. Not by a long shot”.

“Thanks to @DisneyStudios for breaking this glass with me,” she added.

DuVernay is only the third woman to direct a $100m film, joining Kathryn 
Bigelow for 2009’s K-19: The Widowmaker, and Patty Jenkins for the upcoming 
Wonder Woman.

A Wrinkle in Time was mentioned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/31/chelsea-clinton-a-wrinkle-in-time-is-amazing>
 at the Democratic national convention by Chelsea Clinton, who shared that the 
book had captured her imagination as a child. The novel centers on the 
bespectacled Meg Murry and her courageous quest to save her scientist father. 
DuVernay has teased her adaptation as a film “about a time-traveling black girl 
traveling through the universe”.

DuVernay is meanwhile enjoying a very good year: her first documentary, The 
13th, about racial inequality in America, has beenselected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/19/ava-duvernay-the-13th-documentary-new-york-film-festival>
 as the first non-fiction film to open the New York film festival in September; 
while her new TV series for Oprah Winfrey’s OWN channel, Queen Sugar, has 
already been renewed for a second season before the first season’s launch in 
the fall.
 