
A new test designed to challenge Hollywood’s record on racial diversity has 
received backing from its inspiration, the award-winning African American 
director Ava DuVernay. Dubbed the “DuVernay test”, the initiative was first 
posited by New York Times film critic Manohla Dargisin a review of this year’s 
Sundance film festival 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/30/movies/sundance-fights-tide-with-films-like-the-birth-of-a-nation.html?smprod=nytcore-ipad&smid=nytcore-ipad-share&_r=2&referer=https:/t.co/P9T6RDkL3w>
.


SAG awards: diversity is the night's winner in pointed counter to Oscars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/30/sag-awards-2016-diversity-idris-elba-viola-davis-uzo-aduba-queen-latifah-spotlight-leonardo-dicaprio>
Ava DuVernay (@AVAETC) 
Wow. Floored. What a lovely cinematic idea to embrace. What a thrill to be 
associated with it. Absolutely wonderful.https://t.co/zjoWBBIKVy 
<https://t.co/zjoWBBIKVy>
 <https://twitter.com/AVAETC/status/693823065571119104> January 31, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/AVAETC/status/693823065571119104> 
The long-established Bechdel test, first proposed by the US cartoonist Alison 
Bechdelin a 1985 comic strip 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bechdel_test#/media/File:Dykes_to_Watch_Out_For_(Bechdel_test_origin).jpg>
, requires two women to talk to each other about something other than a man to 
prove its egalitarian values. Dargis said her “DuVernay test” would merely 
require “African Americans and other minorities [to] have fully realised lives 
rather than serve as scenery in white stories”.

While the critic appears to have used the term as a light-hearted framing 
device for a piece on diversity in Sundance movies, the concept may have legs. 
DuVernay’s name symbolises the ongoing battle by African American film-makers 
to get movies made in Hollywood, given the furore over the Oscars’ decision to 
limit her acclaimed civil-rights drama Selma to just two nominations (for best 
picture and best song) in 2015.

After the feminist film blog Women in Hollywood tweeted about Dargis’s 
coinage, DuVernay posted: “Wow. Floored. What a lovely cinematic idea to 
embrace. What a thrill to be associated with it. Absolutely wonderful.”

How the SAG awards will affect the Oscars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/30/sag-awards-2016-impact-oscars-academy-awards-spotlight-leonardo-dicaprio-brie-larson-alicia-vikander>
In a blogpost, Slate magazine’s Megan Logan suggested the concept could be 
developed 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2016/01/31/manohla_dargis_coins_the_duvernay_test_a_racial_bechdel_test_to_begin_discussion.html>
. “Though the Bechdel test is, of course, an over-simplified yardstick for 
feminism in film, it remains a simple, straightforward way to begin the 
conversation about how any given movie humanises its female characters,” she 
wrote. “Perhaps it’s just as well that Dargis doesn’t propose any specific 
measure for the DuVernay test; rather than producing a simply binary yes/no, it 
can serve similarly as a way to begin discussing the diversity, representation, 
and depth of the stories of minority characters in the films we make and watch.”

The idea of a Bechdel test focused on racial as opposed to gender diversity 
has been proposed before.In 2013, the author Nikesh Shukla suggested the 
“Shukla test” 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/2013/10/after-bechdel-test-i-propose-shukla-test-race-film>
, requiring two ethnic minorities to talk to each other for more than five 
minutes about something other than race.

In the wake of the ongoing row over the all-white lists of Oscar nominees, 
bloggers Nadia and Leila Latif proposed a more complex test for racial 
diversity in film.In a piece for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/18/hollywoods-race-problem-film-industry-actors-of-colour>
, they suggest films should feature two named characters of colour with lines 
of dialogue, who were not romantically involved with each other and did not 
talk about comforting or supporting a white character. The bloggers also said 
neither of the two main black characters should conform to the hated “magical 
negro” stereotype.
 