
Ava DuVernay’s racial inequality documentary The 13th will open the 54th New 
York film festival, marking the first time a non-fiction film has been chosen 
to kick off the event.

The Netflix project, which debuts globally on the streaming platform and in 
select theaters on 7 October, examines why the US has produced the highest rate 
of incarceration in the world, with the majority of those imprisoned being 
African American. The title of the film refers to the 13th amendment to the 
constitution: “Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a 
punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall 
exist within the United States.”

A statement reported that “the progression from that second qualifying clause 
to the horrors of mass incarceration and the prison industry in the US is laid 
out by DuVernay” in the documentary.

Ava DuVernay: 'This patriarchy is often shocked when a black film does well'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/06/ava-duvernay-los-angeles-film-festival>
The film is said to be a mix of archival footage and testimonies from 
activists, politicians and historians, including Michelle Alexander, Bryan 
Stevenson, Van Jones, Newt Gingrich, Angela Davis, Senator Cory Booker, Grover 
Norquist, Khalil Muhammad, Craig DeRoche, Shaka Senghor, Malkia Cyril and Henry 
Louis Gates Jr.

The festival director and selection committee chair, Kent Jones, said in a 
statement that The 13th is a “great film”, and also “an act of true patriotism”.


DuVernay, best known for directing 2014’s Oscar-nominated Selma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/08/selma-observer-film-review>, had 
kept The 13th a secret from the public, until Tuesday’s announcement; it’s 
still not listed on herIMDb page <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1148550/reference>.

She’s currently prepping her first big-budget film for Disney, an adaptation 
of Madeleine L’Engle’s sci-fi classic A Wrinkle in Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/06/ava-duvernay-los-angeles-film-festival>
, “about a time-traveling black girl traveling through the universe”. Marvel 
Studios had courted her to take on Black Panther, but she turned it down in 
favor of making the family film, which resulted in the blockbuster going to 
Creed director Ryan Coogler.

The festival runs from 30 September to 16 October. 
 