
Raised in Compton, and educated in African American studies at UCLA, film-maker
Ava DuVernay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ava-duvernay> said that her life 
experiences have left the ravages of the US criminal justice system a subject 
very close to her heart.

“Having had the experience of being around folks who have been touched by mass 
incarceration” along with an education that offered a “framework for why and 
how things are happening” has had a major impact on the acclaimed director of 
Selma.

This proximity was largely behind her decision to embark on 13th, a 
full-length feature documentary on the racialized history of the criminal 
justice system and mass incarceration thatopens this year’s New York film 
festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/19/ava-duvernay-the-13th-documentary-new-york-film-festival>
. The film is the first non-fiction offering to own that prestigious 
distinction.

“My hope for the film is simply that people come out more aware that prison 
isn’t just a place where bad people go,” DuVernay told the Guardian. “The hope 
is that we re-examine why we think what we think and question ‘have we been 
taught to think that?’ and ‘have we been manipulated to think that?’”

13th review: Ava DuVernay doc shows prisons are the new plantations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/the-13th-review-ava-duvernay-new-york-film-festival-prisons-plantations-race-law-us>
The film begins offering a number of the troubling statistics about race and 
incarceration in the US that have virtually become common knowledge in the past 
five years or so. The US is home to 5% of the world’s population, but 25% of 
the world’s prisoners. One in three young black men in the US today can expect 
to serve time in prison during their life. The prison population has grown 
exponentially since the 1980s-era war on drugs began in earnest, ballooning 
from a few hundred thousand to over two million today, with black people 
heinously overrepresented among them.

But DuVernay’s 100-minute voyage through the legacy of the criminalization of 
black Americans does more than rattle off statistics. Weaving a historical 
narrative from slavery through the present, the film and its contributors trace 
in stark relief, the various transmutations that the oppression of the black 
body in America has taken, and the ways that criminal justice has been 
recruited to that end.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk&media=>
Michelle Alexander, author of the bestselling book The New Jim Crow, explains 
in the film how in the post-civil war south, petty offenses were used to 
recapture newly freed blacks and force them into free labor under convict 
lend-lease programs that functionally reconstituted chattel enslavement. Indeed 
the film’s title is drawn from the caveat in the 13th amendment, presumed to 
guarantee freedom for enslaved blacks, but also legalizes the slavery and 
involuntary servitude of convicted criminals.

The film winds from this early postbellum era through the extrajudicial 
lynchings of blacks in the early 20th century, through resistance to the civil 
rights movement and finally the war on drugs. All these mutating forms of 
racial control were premised at least in part, the film suggests, on white 
notions of black criminality. Every time the word is uttered in the film, no 
matter the historical context, it appears on the screen in bold white on black 
text to highlight this connection.

DuVernay said the film was conceived around the idea of telling the story of 
how privatization and profit drove much of the expansion and development of 
mass incarceration. “There is a really clean clear line of the black body being 
used for profit and for politics.

Ava DuVernay: 'This patriarchy is often shocked when a black film does well'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/06/ava-duvernay-los-angeles-film-festival>
 “But as we started working on the film we quickly realized in order for that 
to really pack a punch you had to understand the historical and cultural 
context,” DuVernay said.

A number of high-profile criminal justice reform advocates, like New Yorker 
columnist and UConn professor Jelani Cobb, former Obama adviser Van Jones and 
civil rights icon Angela Davis lend their voices to the film, along with some 
seemingly less likely figures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fava-duvernay-selma-13th-interview-criminal-justice-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd53ff8475ceb4689a884ecb6acdee8c02c252376%2F11_0_638_383%2F638.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ava%20DuVernay%3A%20'The%20black%20body%20is%20being%20used%20for%20profit%20and%20politics'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fava-duvernay-selma-13th-interview-criminal-justice-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ava%20DuVernay%3A%20%27The%20black%20body%20is%20being%20used%20for%20profit%20and%20politics%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fava-duvernay-selma-13th-interview-criminal-justice-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd53ff8475ceb4689a884ecb6acdee8c02c252376%2F11_0_638_383%2F638.png>
 A still from 13th. Photograph: Netflix 
Republican Newt Gingrich and conservative anti-tax crusader Grover Norquist 
also make appearances, in part highlighting thebipartisan consensus that has 
begun to built around issues of criminal justice reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/01/sentencing-reform-bill-criminal-justice-congress-critics>
– but also, according to DuVernay, some of the points of disagreement which 
still exist, and some of the potential land mines.

“I wanted to explore the question of why all this bipartisanship now … and we 
found a surprising answer that may not necessarily be positive,” DuVernay said.

Lingering on the American Legislative Exchange Council (Alec), 13th looks hard 
at how corporate interests have shaped public policy on criminal justice, and 
adapted to developments in the national consensus on crime and punishment. The 
film warns that as liberal and conservative opinion coalesces around the need 
to have less people in jail and prison, what’s likely to follow is a new wave 
of technology-aided supervision, like GPS-based monitoring of criminals.

“How much progress is it really if communities of color are still under 
perpetual surveillance and control, but now there’s a private company making 
money off the GPS monitor, rather than the person being locked in a literal 
cage?” Alexander asks in the film.

Queen Sugar: why it's a time travel show for black audiences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/28/queen-sugar-ava-duvernay-black-audiences-own>
The film is not DuVernay’s first time engaging with this topic The first 
script she ever wrote, for acclaimed drama Middle of Nowhere also addressed the 
criminal justice system, as doesQueen Sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/06/queen-sugar-oprah-winfrey-own-review>
, a television series created by DuVernay that debuted earlier this month.

But by taking the subject on in a documentary format, DuVernay hopes the film 
can help provide a systematic, easy-to-follow “primer” on the past, present and 
possible future of mass incarceration.

“It’s about a slow unfolding of this tapestry that we’ve woven. This American 
quilt of injustice, oppression, systemic racism and anti-blackness. It’s about 
the construction of criminality that has been an ongoing, decades-long blight 
on our society and it’s a chapter by chapter and layer by layer peeling back of 
each and every piece.”

The film will be released on Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> and in select theatres on 7 October.
 