
Comic book movie fans have launched an international flashmob campaign 
<http://riellygeek.com/WIDOW/> and Twitter hashtag aimed at convincing studio 
Marvel to put a Black Widow movie into production.

Scarlett Johansson’s ex-KGB superhero has proven one of the most popular 
figures in the Disney-owned studio’s “cinematic universe” thanks to appearances 
in the Iron Man, Captain America and Avengers films. But a solo Black Widow 
movie was conspicuous by its absence from Marvel’s announcement in October of 
10 new interlinked comic book films, the company choosing to built its first 
female-led movie around the lesser-known CaptainMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> character instead.

Black Widow deserved a better romance in Avengers: Age of Ultron
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/08/black-widow-romance-hulk-avengers-age-of-ultron>
US blogger and Black Widow fan Kristin Rielly said she launched the campaign 
due to frustration at what she felt was Johansson’s lack of meaningful screen 
time in recent superhero epicAvengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>. Marvel acolytes 
have also been disappointed at Black Widow’s low profile in official 
merchandise.
Amara LFC. (@Amara_secrets) 
#Mattel <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Mattel?src=hash> replaced #BlackWidow 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BlackWidow?src=hash> with #CaptainAmerica 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/CaptainAmerica?src=hash> while #Hasbro 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Hasbro?src=hash> replaced her with #Hawkeye 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Hawkeye?src=hash>. #Marvel 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Marvel?src=hash> please do something. We love 
#BlackWidow <https://twitter.com/hashtag/BlackWidow?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Amara_secrets/status/601402917996879872> May 21, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Amara_secrets/status/601402917996879872> 
“Black Widow is an important female superheroine in the Marvel universe, and 
she deserves to be more than just a love interest at this point,”wrote Rielly 
on her blog <http://riellygeek.com/>. “She is a trained assassin with an 
incredible background story, turning from Russian espionage to joining the 
Avengers and saving the world. She should have her own movie and merchandise 
and Marvel should be proud at the opportunity to develop a character that girls 
can look up to. Unfortunately, even with all the Hulk-smashing internet 
outrage, it seems that Marvel and Disney are still not listening. So I’ve taken 
it upon myself to do something about it.”

The Black Widow flash mob took place in 16 US, Canadian and Australian cities, 
with fans decked out as the superhero in red wigs and skintight leather. Rielly 
also launched the hashtag #WeWantWidow.
Aitch is Trubble !! (@DreddedDeuce) 
@Marvel <https://twitter.com/Marvel> @MarkRuffalo 
<https://twitter.com/MarkRuffalo> @HasbroNews <https://twitter.com/HasbroNews> 
#WeWantWidow <https://twitter.com/hashtag/WeWantWidow?src=hash> spread the word 
pic.twitter.com/tg4qcueetr <http://t.co/tg4qcueetr>
 <https://twitter.com/DreddedDeuce/status/607225565188386817> June 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/DreddedDeuce/status/607225565188386817> Black Widow 
(@rikkuriffic) 
#WeWantWidow <https://twitter.com/hashtag/WeWantWidow?src=hash> so here we 
are...!@Marvel <https://twitter.com/Marvel> pic.twitter.com/e3rrngV5fz 
<http://t.co/e3rrngV5fz>
 <https://twitter.com/rikkuriffic/status/607218693106368513> June 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/rikkuriffic/status/607218693106368513> All Geek to Me 
(@AllGeektoMeNet) 
#BlackWidow <https://twitter.com/hashtag/BlackWidow?src=hash> cosplayers come 
out to support#wewantwidow <https://twitter.com/hashtag/wewantwidow?src=hash> at
#SpecialEditionNYC <https://twitter.com/hashtag/SpecialEditionNYC?src=hash>! 
Photo:@amandarprescott <https://twitter.com/amandarprescott> 
pic.twitter.com/mRR5kUnkqc <http://t.co/mRR5kUnkqc>
 <https://twitter.com/AllGeektoMeNet/status/607240622043504640> June 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/AllGeektoMeNet/status/607240622043504640> 
In Seattle, flashmob organiser and pop culture historian Jennifer K Stuller 
told female-led geek culture blog the Mary Sue 
<http://www.themarysue.com/black-widow-flash-mob/>: “Executives empowered with 
making decisions probably don’t care about our desires – as fans or as females. 
But it’s shocking that they don’t seem to care about our dollars.

The Black Widow can take a bit of sexism: she doesn’t exist | Catherine Shoard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/29/black-widow-scarlett-johansson-sexism-avengers-jeremy-renner-chris-evans>
“Our dollars should be their incentive, and perhaps some visualisation of that 
potential for them – through images and text that goes viral and gains news 
coverage – should speak to them in a way that accomplishes something beneficial 
to everyone with a stake in these stories.”

Captain Marvel, due in July 2018, centres on a sometime US Air Force pilot 
named Carol Danvers who develops cosmic superpowers including flight, 
super-strength and “energy projection” after absorbing extraterrestrial DNA 
during an accident on a restricted military base. Angelina Jolie has been 
rumoured as a potential director.

Rival studio Warner Bros looks likely to get the first female-led superhero 
movie of the modern era, Wonder Woman, into cinemas a year earlier in 2017.
Monster’s Patty Jenkins will direct Israeli actor Gal Gadot in the role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/16/monster-director-patty-jenkins-wonder-woman-movie>
, with the character due to debut first in next year’s Batman v Superman: Dawn 
of Justice.
 