
When patients attend GP surgeries after just one day of ill-health or an 
ill-informed session with Dr Google, it’s easy to assume that the blame for the 
seemingly ceaseless demand for appointments lies with them. But for every
patient who comes requesting energy-boosting pills, or even glasses and shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2015/jul/13/wasting-gps-time-no-i-cant-prescribe-you-new-shoes>
, there are dozens whose decision to visit their GP is both appropriate and 
necessary. While undoubtedly there are many patients who seek help without 
trying self-care, there is a better explanation for the rise in demand for 
appointments – that people are getting sicker.

Wasting GPs' time: 'No, I can't prescribe you new shoes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2015/jul/13/wasting-gps-time-no-i-cant-prescribe-you-new-shoes>
The number of GP appointments has risen significantly during the past few 
decades, from 217m consultations in 1995 to 340m in 2009. But should we simply 
assume that the extra caseload comes down to a combination of time wasters and 
an ageing population? Or is it possible that the increase in demand for the 
attention of a doctor may also come from a genuine increase in need across all 
age groups?

We like to think we live in an age of great health. After all, we live longer, 
we are rarely affected by the life-threatening infectious diseases that plagued 
society a century ago, and medical science is more effective than ever before. 
But, over the past 60 years, societies in the developed world have seen 
increases in a range of conditions that barely affected our grandparents and 
now make up a large proportion of visits to GPs.

For example, allergies, acne, depression, and digestive difficulties are some 
of the most common complaints GPs face, and while they may seem like an 
inevitable and unavoidable feature of life, they have become far more common 
than they used to be.Allergies <https://www.theguardian.com/society/allergies> 
affect over 40% of children and 30% of adults, having trebled in the last two 
decades of the 20th century. Asthma was estimated to affect 0.4% of children in 
the 1940s, but troubles 25% now. Acne was once rare, but now bothers 90% of 
people at some stage in their lives, and increasingly crops up on the faces of 
adults, particularly women in their 20s and 30s.

Irritable bowel syndrome, too, has become extremely common, making life 
difficult for 15-20% of people. Autoimmune diseases are also on the rise. Type 
1 diabetes, for example, in which the pancreas stops producing insulin, was 
thought to affect as few asone in 25,000 people 
<http://diabetes.diabetesjournals.org/content/51/12/3353.short> as the 20th 
century dawned, but at its close, the rate had reached one in 250.

Although a proportion of these extra cases can be put down to improved 
diagnosis, the experts agree that the astonishing rise in these conditions is a 
genuine one. Though some are life-threatening – such as severe asthma attacks 
andanaphylaxis 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Anaphylaxis/Pages/Introduction.aspx> from a nut 
allergy – for most the burden comes from their chronic nature. These illnesses 
are often lifelong, requiring repeat visits to the GP several times a year over 
many decades. And while a substantial increase in the average consultation rate 
per person is seen in those aged over 60, younger adults are also booking 
appointments far more often. On average, Women in their late 40s, for example, 
visited the GP 4.2 times in 1995, but six times in 2009 – a greater than 
average increase when compared to other age categories.

These modern disorders all have something in common. Over the past decade, 
evidence has been growing for an important role for the microbes that share our 
bodies in many of the chronic illnesses people in the developed world suffer 
today. The interaction between our immune systems and the 100tn bacteria living 
in our guts appears to be behind the dysfunctional immune responses of 
allergies and autoimmune diseases. For the others - depression and anxiety, 
digestive disorders, and especially obesity - inflammation induced by a damaged 
microbial community seems to play a significant part.

That the cause of this damage is down to factors within our control, including 
the overuse of antibiotics, a lack of fibre in the diet, and a shift towards 
caesarean sections and formula feeding, puts the onus to reduce the need for GP 
consultations on both patients and health services, as well as society as a 
whole. Perhaps, instead of blaming a minority of worried patients for 
over-burdening GPs, we should recognise that we suffer from a new epidemic of 
chronic ill-health, and begin seeking ways to minimise the causes of these 
modern conditions.

Alanna Collen has a PhD in evolutionary biology and is author of 10% Human: 
How Your Body’s Microbes Hold the Key to Health and Happiness 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/10-Human-Microbes-Health-Happiness/dp/0007584032/ref=tmm_hrd_title_0?ie=UTF8&qid=1429873605&sr=1-1>

Join our network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> 
to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 