
German publisher Axel Springer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer> is buying control of 
ProSiebenSat.1, Germany's biggest commercial broadcaster, for 2.5bn euros 
(£1.7bn).

The deal will create Germany's second biggest media group behind Bertelsmann 
and moves Springer, the owner of newspapers Bild and Die Welt, into TV for the 
first time.

The deal provides a tidy profit for Israeli billionaire, Haim Saban, whose 
consortium is selling its stake in ProSieben for three times what it spent two 
years ago when it bought the broadcaster from the collapsed media group Kirch.

ProSieben, which counts the former BBC director general, Greg Dyke, as a board 
director, runs four commercial TV channels in Germany.

It offers general entertainment on Sat.1, youth shows on ProSieben, classic TV 
on Kabel Eins and round the clock news on N24.

Springer already has an 11.8% stake in ProSieben, and will now own 100% of the 
company's voting shares and 25% of the preferred shares.

"ProSiebenSat.1 is an investment that will pay off," the Springer chief 
executive Mathias Döpfner said in a statement today.

"We are investing in a business that is profitable even in difficult times. We 
are creating a structure to open up the digital business of the future."

As part of today's agreement, Mr Saban's group, P7S1 Holding, will receive a 
2.4% stake in Springer.

One of the consortium partners is San Francisco-based private equity firm 
Hellman & Friedman, which already has a 19% stake in Springer.

Founded in 1946, Springer has grown into a publishing group with over 150 
newspapers and magazines in 27 countries.

Last year it was one of the disappointed bidders in the battle to take over 
the Telegraph group, its first attempted foray into the UK market.

Mr Saban was linked to the bid, though his interest was confined to the 
Jerusalem Post, another title owned by the Telegraph's then parent company, 
Hollinger International.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 