
German publisher Axel Springer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer> has acquired Business Insider 
in a deal valuing the company at $442m, making it one of the largest digital 
publishing acquisitions to date.

Springer is paying $343m to acquire a further 88% of the company, having 
alreadytaken a 9% stake 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-01-29/axel-springer-buys-business-insider-stake-in-digital-expansion>
 during a funding round in January. The remaining 3% of shares are owned by the 
investment firm of Amazon founder Jeff Bezos.

Springer publishes newspapers including Germany’s largest tabloid Bild. The 
deal is part of Springer’s attempts to grow its digital and global footprint, 
particularly in the English language.

The company said the addition of Business Insider’s 76 million unique users 
would increase Springer’s total reach worldwide to more than 200 million, 
making it the sixth largest online publisher worldwide.

Springer chief executive Mathias Döpfner said: “With the acquisition of 
Business Insider, we continue with our strategy to expand Axel Springer’s 
digital reach and, as previously announced, invest in digital journalism 
companies in English-speaking regions of the world.”

“Combining our forces will allow us to unlock growth potential and expand 
Business Insider’s portfolio to new verticals, new locations and new digital 
content. We look forward to working together with Henry Blodget, Julie Hansen 
and the exceptional Business Insider team to continue shaping the future. At 
the same time, I am thrilled to have our close partner Ken Lerer joining us.”

Business Insider founder and chief executive Henry Blodget will stay on at the 
company, along with president and chief operating officer Julie Hansen.

Blodget said: “We have tremendous respect for Axel Springer’s commitment to 
independent journalism and its global vision for the future. We look forward to 
working together to build a major global news organisation for the digital 
century.”

Hansen said the deal would provide access to the resources of a “media 
superstar” and Business Insider was already exploring partnerships with other 
parts of Axel Springer in Europe.

She said: “It aligns with our interests, with someone who has the same view of 
the market. They’ve built a media empire over decades and we take a long term 
view – it takes years, decades to create lasting media habits.”

“It gives us some knowhow, potentially some partnerships, they have some 
assets particularly in Europe and we are already exploring some of those.”

Politico to launch in Europe in April with more than 40 journalists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/17/poltico-europe-axel-springer-brussels-paris-london-berlin>
Axel has a broad range of investments beyond its core newspaper business, 
which includes a joint venture in Europe with US site Poltico and a large 
digital classifieds business.

The deal gives Business Insider a valuation much lower than the $1.5bn of 
BuzzFeed’s most recent funding round or the $2.5bn Vice is worth. However, it 
is larger than the previous record holder for an outright acquisition of a 
digital publisher,AOL’s $315m deal to buy the Huffington Post in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/richard-adams-blog/2011/feb/07/huffington-post-sale-aol-ariana>
.

Springer was in the running to acquire the Financial Times from Pearson this 
summer, but wasbeaten at the last minute by Japanese business publisher Nikkei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/23/financial-times-sale-pearson>. 
 