
Axel Springer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer> has snapped up 
market research firm eMarketer in a $250m (£173m) deal as the German publisher 
continues to focus on building its digital subscription business and reducing 
dependence on advertising.

The media group, which took control of Business Insider in a $442m deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/29/axel-springer-buys-business-insider-henry-blodget>
 in September, has taken a 93% stake in the business.


Axel Springer, which owns Europe’s biggest tabloid Bild, said that the deal 
marked its latest step in growing its digital and global footprint in 
English-speaking markets.

Axel Springer bans adblock users from Bild online
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/13/axel-springer-bans-adblock-users-from-bild-online>
“As more and more industries are facing the challenge of digitisation, the 
smart creation, processing, and presentation of relevant market information is 
becoming increasingly important,” said Mathias Döpfner, chief executive of Axel 
Springer. “The acquisition of eMarketer follows our strategy of expanding our 
US activities and strengthening our paid models”.


Axel Springer, which has a joint venture in Europe with US site Politico, 
narrowly missed out on buying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/23/financial-times-sale-pearson> 
the subscription-led Financial Times business last year.


“eMarketer perfectly complements our business services BI Intelligence and 
Politico Pro in Europe, from which we know the attractiveness of strong 
subscription-based businesses,” added Döpfner. “This transaction [is] another 
element in Axel Springer’s successful digital transformation.”


Taking into account eMarketer’s cash and debt, Axel Springer has paid $242m 
for the 93% stake.


EMarketer co-founders Terry Chabrowe, who is chief executive, and Geoff 
Ramsey, chief innovation officer, hold the remaining 7% and have committed to 
stay with the company “long-term”.


“Axel Springer’s commitment to digital and strategic vision makes them the 
ideal partners for the next stage of eMarketer’s growth,” said Chabrowe. “Just 
as important, the cultural fit between our two organisations is the kind we 
dreamed of when we began looking for the right home for our business.”


Investment bank Jefferies advised eMarketer on the sale.

 