
It is appropriate on the 15th anniversary of the death of Ayrton Senna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ayrton-senna> that Formula One should 
restore a form of racing at which the Brazilian would have excelled. Changes 
for 2010 include a ban on refuelling, a tactic reintroduced in 1994, the year 
Senna was killed during the San Marino Grand Prix. The Brazilian never had the 
chance to come to terms with fuel stops which effectively split each grand prix 
into two or three separate races and coined phrases such as: "Well, I just sat 
behind him until the first pit stop because I knew I was running two laps 
longer and could overtake him then." Being a consummate professional, Senna 
would have adapted to the revised thinking but the chances are he would have 
missed the more exhilarating challenge of having to overtake a rival on the 
race track rather than when he was stationary in the pit lane.

Refuelling was par for the course in the 1950s when races lasted between two 
and three hours and petrol was sloshed manually into a tank in the tail of the 
car, just behind the driver's seat. The advent of smaller cars and less 
powerful engines in the 1960s made non-stop races de rigueur, the 1961 Dutch 
Grand Prix setting an unbeaten record as all 15 drivers completed the race 
without either stopping or retiring.

In 1982, design genius Gordon Murray figured he could get away with starting 
the thirsty Brabham-BMW turbo on soft tyres and a light load of fuel, make a 
refuelling stop halfway through and, having built up a huge advantage, continue 
in the lead. That trend was banned at the end of the year and not thought of 
again until 1994 as a means of spicing the show.

Refuelling has been nectar to strategists at the expense of fans who enjoy the 
less complicated pleasure of wheel-to-wheel racing. From next year, drivers 
will have to cope with cars carrying about 220 litres at the start and then 
deal with the dramatic change in handling and performance as fuel is burned 
off. It is fitting that Alain Prost should have won the last championship 
before the return of refuelling, the Frenchman being a master at taking care of 
his tyres, sometimes without stopping. It was easy to discount Prost as he lay 
in seventh or eighth place in the opening laps, only to gradually overhaul 
those ahead who had been too aggressive and abused their tyres in the early 
stages.

Much will depend on the 2010 tyre regulations that have yet to be announced. 
If the current practice of every driver having to use each of the two types of 
tyre available is continued, then pit stops will be necessary, a likely 
scenario since it will add interest as well as allowing the mechanics to 
contribute to the team-work during each race. The ban on refuelling will rid 
each team of the expense of having to transport two hefty fuel rigs around the 
world and reduce the pit stop from around seven or eight seconds to less than 
five.

If the different tyre specifications remain, the softer of the two is only 
likely to be suitable for the final phase of the race when the car is 
comparatively light and there is more rubber on the track. An additional 
complication will be a ban on the heated blankets which currently bring tyres 
close to working temperature before use. Next year, drivers will have to cope 
with less grip and a shortfall in performance for the first few laps as the 
tyres warm up.

It also remains to be seen how qualifying will be structured. In Barcelona 
next Saturday, the topâ€‘10 shoot-out will, as usual, require drivers to carry 
the fuel necessary for the first phase of the race. Next year, asking the 
fastest 10 drivers to qualify cars lumbered with an extra 150 kilogrammes would 
be the same as making Usian Bolt run in hobnailed boots. It is to be hoped that 
the cars will be at their lightest and fastest all weekend. If that means 
getting rid of the current caveat "I'm not fastest because the guy on pole is 
carrying less fuel" and switches the emphasis to the fastest shall be first, it 
will mark the return to a plan of which Senna, winner of 65 pole positions, 
would approve.
 