
The first thing you notice about Azealia Banks – apart from her striking 
outfit: black biker jacket, micro-skirt, tights with holes at the top of her 
thighs and vertiginous heels – is that she is glowing. She looks happy.The last 
time we met 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/05/azealia-banks-unique-lady-leshurr>
, in late 2011, just asher extraordinary single 212 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3Jv9fNPjgk> was establishing her brand of 
verbally dextrous (and expletive-rich) future rap/house/pop, she seemed glum. 
Then, when she talked about her tough upbringing – her father died when she was 
two and her mother was abusive – she started to cry.

This time, at a hotel in central London, where she has come to promote her 
debut album, there are no tears. Only once does she waver, when she mentions 
her improved relationship with her mother (“We’re so close right now,” she 
beams). Throughout the rest of the two-hour interview she is fit to burst, with 
a torrent of ideas to match her flow. Reckless and rude, she is hilarious 
company.

What has made the difference? One, that debut album, Broke With Expensive Taste
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/11/azealia-banks-broke-with-expensive-taste-review-the-album-she-wanted-to-make>
, is finally out after three years of false-release dates; and two, she is no 
longer in a destructive relationship with a much older man. Not that the 
experience has put her off.

“I love Drake. Drake’s cool,” she says on the subject of her choice of men. 
“But I like really older white guys. Not, like, really old, like 50s and 60s, 
but late 30s, 40s. Maybe early 50s. I did date a guy in his 50s. That’s, like, 
my thing. You just like what you like. I was telling my sister Lakimba [who is 
gay]: ‘It’s just like being gay. When you’re gay, you’re gay.’ Why am I black? 
I don’t know. I’m black!”

As for her unhappiness when 212 was breaking through and she was being tipped 
everywhere – No 1 on the NME’s Cool List, third in the BBC Sound of 2012 poll, 
the cover of Spin – well, she says, “I had a lot of things in my head. I was 
trying to be an adult, which I wasn’t – I was 19. And he [her ex-boyfriend] was 
45. Once we broke up, I got the licence to be a little girl again. Now I’m 
happy. My first two years doing music was hard, because I was dealing with so 
much in my love life. I didn’t enjoy it, and you could see it. I was always on 
Twitter, arguing. I wasn’t happy.”

But she can’t deny it made her interesting. “That’s right,” she says, with 
eyebrow furrowed. “The InterestingAzealia Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/azealia-banks>.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnQOD8M6Okoc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnQOD8M6Okoc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnQOD8M6Okoc&media=>
As the world waited – and waited – for her to deliver Broke …, there came 
a point when her Twitter quarrels threatened to overshadow her music. Now that 
she has extricated herself from her deal with Universal – which she feels was 
insufficiently encouraging of her art – and the album is out and being largely 
acclaimed for its eclectic mix of rave and trap, electronica and R&B, a 
palpable sense of relief has given her the confidence to discussthose beefs 
<http://www.stereogum.com/1610061/the-10-dumbest-azealia-banks-beefs-of-2013/franchises/wheres-the-beef/>
.

Like the one with Disclosure 
<http://www.stereogum.com/1499161/azealia-banks-scraps-collab-with-really-rude-disclosure/franchises/wheres-the-beef/>
, with whom she had a preliminary recording session last September and which 
she then tweeted about, much to the Lawrence brothers’ chagrin. They felt she 
was being a little previous.

“I tweeted that I just had the best session with Disclosure, because I was 
such a fan-girl and I was so excited to have met them. But I guess their thing 
was: ‘What if the song isn’t that good and you hyped it up?’ But I was like: 
‘So fucking what?’ So they tried to be, like, assholes. And the next day they 
went to the media and they were like,” – she assumes the identity of an uptight 
Brit – “‘Oh well, I don’t know why she’s so excited, because we haven’t even 
finished this song or written a hook for it.’ I mean, come on!”

She reflects for a second. “I want to punch one of them in the face – the 
little one [possibly Guy Lawrence]. The ugly one. I want to hit him so bad. I 
saw him at the airport in Australia and I came over to him and I was like: 
‘Hello? Like, what are we going to do with this song?’ And he was just being a 
dickhead. I started crying, I was so angry. I  wanted to hit him. I cannot 
stand that little boy with all those pimples around his mouth. I love 
their music, though.”

Another dispute that almost came to blows was with Ian Brown of the Stone 
Roses. Following a performance at Melbourne’s Future Music festival, Banks 
claimed on Twitter that her former tour manager “made a pact with the Stone 
Roses [to] sabotage my set because I fired him”. She followed that up by 
wishing “nothing but excrement and death” on the group, calling them “old saggy 
white niggas”.

What really happened?

“I was dating this tour manager, and we stopped dating,” she explains. 
“I didn’t want to fire him, but I wanted to bring my new boyfriend on tour. So 
he did something really stupid where he had dinner with the Stone Roses and he 
made a pact with them to have one of their roadies come on my stage and 
soundcheck during my set. Whatever. I broke his heart and it was unfair. I kind 
of deserved it. But don’t fuck with my stage or I’ll kill you. Anyway, I’d been 
looking for [the Roses] all day, and this van comes up and Ian Brown gets out 
the car, and he’s like: ‘Why you talkin’ about me on Twitter?’ And literally I 
got this close to him.” She stands up and bends towards me, her face 
millimetres from mine, and roars: “I’m like: ‘Rarrrrrr!’”

There was, inevitably, also a social media face-off with Iggy Azalea, whom she 
dismisses today with a food metaphor: “Nobody’s going to go to Nobu and have a 
McDonald’s.”

Did she ever worry that all of this extracurricular aggro devalued her work? 
“No,” she replies. “I’m just worried that it’s going to get in the way of my 
love life. I don’t want men to think I’m crazy. Even though I am crazy.” (She 
takes antidepressants, and Soda, on the album, is about that subject.)

Does she regret any of her rows? The one with showbiz blogger Perez Hilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/07/azealia-banks-perez-hilton>, 
say? “I don’t regret doing it, but I’ll never do it again, because I don’t care 
enough about the person to have the battle again and defend my use of the word 
‘faggot’,” she says. I thought her defence might be that she was using the word 
much as American comedian Louis CK employs it, asa general insult for a weak 
person or ineffectual behaviour <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fcja4WFFzDw>. 
In fact, to Banks, “faggot” is a term of abuse levelled specifically at 
misogynists, some of whom, in her experience, have been gay.

“A lot of gay men are way more misogynistic than straight men,” she says. “The 
shit they say about women behind their backs, it’s like: ‘Wow, oh my God!’ You 
can be a straight faggot, you can be a gay faggot. A faggot is anybody that 
hates women. It’s like, y’all sing along to my words when I’m saying ‘nigga’ 
and ‘cunt’, but as soon as I call this one white man a faggot the whole world 
exploded. Listen, I didn’t say all gay men are faggots; I said Perez Hilton is 
a faggot, so don’t try and bring the rest of the gays down with your faggotry.”
 Broke With Expensive Taste on Spotify 
Beyoncé, Kanye, Pharrell – all the other stars who have been involved, to a 
lesser or greater extent, in Banks’s online spat-fests, get a “who cares?” when 
I mention them. The only musicians whose approbation she takes seriously are, 
she insists, her friends Lana Del Rey, Ezra Koenig of Vampire Weekend, andAriel 
Pink <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink>, whose surf-pop 
collaboration, Nude Beach A Go-Go, is an unexpected highlight of Broke With 
Expensive Taste.

She and Pink hang out a lot in Los Angeles, where she has an apartment - she 
also has one in New York; not for nothing does she feature on Forbes’ current 
Hip-Hop Cash Princes list 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/natalierobehmed/2014/02/19/azealia-banks-hip-hop-cash-princess-2/>
. “Stink Pink loves my album,” she says (she calls him Stink Pink because of 
his questionable hygiene). “Once Stink Pink says it’s a go, it’s a go! He’s a 
fucking creep. But I looove him.”

Is she concerned that an album with collaborators as varied as AraabMuzik and 
Ariel might confuse people?

“Not if it confuses you in a way that you want to figure it out,” she parries.

Who does she see as her audience?

“English people,” she says. “Thinking people. People that listen to Stereolab 
and Ariel Pink. Weird, eclectic people. Smart people.”

There is a blast of angular electronica on Broke … called Heavy Metal and 
Reflective. Is that “heavy metal” as in “triumphant”?

“No, as in ‘I’m solid as a fucking rock’. Indestructible,” she asserts. “Did 
you see how many times they tried to shut my mic off? How many times Universal 
tried to turn my mic off? How many times the hip-hop world tried to turn my mic 
off? All the time. And I’m very heavy metal and reflective. You can’t break me.”

• Broke With Expensive Taste is out now on Prospect Park
 