
Rapper Azealia Banks  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/azealia-banks>has 
responded to an allegation that she threatened guests at a party thrown by
Russell Crowe <https://www.theguardian.com/film/russellcrowe> at his Beverly 
Hills hotel room on Saturday.

Banks attended the intimate bash as the guest of fellow rapper RZA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/10/man-arrested-after-double-stabbing-rza-wu-tang-clan>
,TMZ <http://www.tmz.com/2016/10/16/azelia-banks-russell-crowe-hotel-fight/> 
reports. RZA has signed her to his label, while Crowe starred with the Wu-Tang 
Clan rapper in American Gangster.

However, the evening rapidly went sour. According to “eyewitness accounts”, 
Banks scoffed at Crowe’s music selection, calling him and another attendee 
“boring white men”. A female guest reportedly criticized her behavior, causing 
Banks to go on a tirade, telling Crowe and the woman: “You would love it if I 
broke my glass, stabbed you guys in the throat, and blood would squirt 
everywhere like some real Tarantino shit.”


'I never said you should be raped': Azealia Banks apologises to Sarah Palin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/06/azealia-banks-apologises-to-sarah-palin-twitter>
Banks is said to have then raised a glass, threatening to throw it, leading 
Crowe to grab her in a “bear hug” and remove her from the suite. Security 
guards then allegedly came to remove her from the hotel grounds.

While Crowe has yet to issue a statement on the supposed incident, he did 
retweet 
<https://twitter.com/russellcrowe?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 TMZ’s story.

Banks, who has been suspended from Twitter following a series of racially 
abusive tweets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/11/azealia-banks-axed-uk-music-festival-zayn-malik-twitter>
 attacking singer and former One Direction star Zayn Malik in May, usedFacebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/azealiabanksmusic/> to share a screenshot of a 
statement issued on Twitter by her representative Raýmani International:

The 212 rapper apparently detailed the experience in a Facebook post that 
since been deleted. Ascreenshot 
<https://twitter.com/TheFactsOfShade/status/787981868704473089/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 shows that Banks claims Crowe called her the N-word, choked her, and spat at 
her. However, others at the party claim that the N-word was uttered by her.

This is far from the first time Banks has been embroiled in controversy. In 
the summer, she described British rap as “a disgrace to rap culture”, prompting 
her removal from the headline slot at London’s Rinse festival.

In September 2015, she reportedly attacked a man who blocked her path when she 
was trying to disembark a flight in Los Angeles, and used a homophobic slur 
against a flight attendant who tried to step in – an incidentwhich was captured 
on camera 
<http://www.mediaite.com/online/azealia-banks-calls-delta-flight-attendant-a-faggot/>
. Banks responded that she did not “tolerate bitchassness” and “men putting 
their hands on me”.

Banks claimed she was voting for Donald Trump, but told the London Evening 
Standard on Monday 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/showbiz/celebrity-news/azealia-banks-i-ve-realised-you-re-not-keeping-it-real-by-being-the-crazy-girl-a3371046.html>
 that she had revoked her endorsement and that she will vote for Jill Stein.

Banks said: ““Everything [Trump] says out loud is all the things she says 
behind her back. You don’t think Hillary Clinton is racist? She just wants to 
be in that white feminist book with Eleanor Roosevelt and, like … Sylvia Plath. 
That’s what corporate white feminism does.”
 