
Azealia Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/music/azealia-banks> has been 
dropped from her headlining slot at a British musical festival after posting 
racist and homophobic tweets towards former One Direction member Zayn Malik.

The American musician began trending worldwide after she posted the string of 
comments which referred to Malik in highly derogatory terms.

Rinse FM, which had recently booked Banks to headline their Born & Bred 
festival in July, said: “We have decided to cancel Azealia Banks’ headline 
appearance at Rinse Born & Bred.

“Rinse Born & Bred is a celebration of rave culture and has been created for 
everyone. We celebrate inclusivity and equality.”
Rinse I Born & Bred (@bornandbredLDN) 
ANNOUNCEMENT: @RinseFM <https://twitter.com/RinseFM> I @bornandbredLDN 
<https://twitter.com/bornandbredLDN> pic.twitter.com/AB3wnTaSru 
<https://t.co/AB3wnTaSru>
 <https://twitter.com/bornandbredLDN/status/730359513979719680> May 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bornandbredLDN/status/730359513979719680> 
The row started when Banks, 24, claimed Malik had copied her work for his new 
video, Like I Would, though she added that she liked the singer and thought he 
was a “cutie pie”.

But when Malik, a Yorkshire-born singer to a Pakistani father and an 
English-Irish mother, tweeted: “I see you reaching but I don’t care … My @’s 
too good for you,” Banks assumed it was about her and began sending abuse his 
way, including saying he was a member of One Direction only “to draw brown 
attention”.

Azealia Banks uses homophobic slur during fracas with flight attendant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/22/azealia-banks-calls-flight-attendant-homophobic-slur>
Banks also posted a string of derogatory comments about the UK rap scene, 
saying that British rappers “never have swag” and British rap music was a 
“disgrace” to the genre.

The rapper and singer has been the centre of controversy in the past, having 
aimed tirades at a range of artists including Iggy Azalea, Rita Ora and Lily 
Allen.


In March she was forced to apologise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/06/azealia-banks-apologises-to-sarah-palin-twitter>
 after former US politician Sarah Palin threatened to sue the rapper for a 
series of derogatory tweets.

On Wednesday social media users, including Lily Allen, called on Twitter to 
suspend Banks. “Why do the Police shut down@Giggs <https://twitter.com/giggs> or
@nines1ace <https://twitter.com/nines1ace> raves but @AZEALIABANKS 
<https://twitter.com/AZEALIABANKS> is cool to just come here threatening to 
bring arms?” Allen wrote. “Don’t get it.”

The Guardian has contacted Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> for a comment.
 