
Deadly clashes between Azerbaijani and Armenian forces in the Nagorno-Karabakh 
region have continued for a third day, despite international pressure to halt 
the worst fighting in decades over the disputed territory.

Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> said three of its 
troops were killed overnight when Armenian forces shelled its positions using 
mortars and grenade launchers, taking the overall death toll in the latest 
surge of violence to at least 36.

The fresh outbreak of fighting over the region – held by Armenian-backed 
separatists since a war ended with an inconclusive truce in 1994 – erupted on 
Friday night with both sides accusing the other of attacking with heavy 
weaponry.

Although Nagorno-Karabakh is a small territory – it is home to about 150,000 
people – it has long been a flashpoint for power rivalry and ethnic and 
religious tensions.

Following the Bolshevik revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/jan/25/russia.books> in Russia towards 
the end of the first world war, Moscow’s new rulers established the 
Nagorno-Karabakh autonomous region, with anethnic Armenian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/09/-sp-post-soviet-world-need-to-know-armenia>
 majority, within the Soviet Socialist Republic of Azerbaijan.


When the Soviet empire began to implode in the late 1980s, the mostly 
Christian Armenians fought to break the grip of the mostly Muslim Turkic 
Azeris. Up to 30,000 people are thought to have died before the 1994 truce.
Nagorno-Karabakh map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/nagorno-karabakh/giv-2716753YYblNQThM4/>
“In the event of continued Armenian provocations, we will launch a full-scale 
operation along the entire frontline, using all kinds of weapons,” Azerbaijan’s 
defence ministry spokesman Vagif Dargahly told journalists on Monday. He said 
the separatists had fired on Azeri positions and frontline villages with 
large-calibre mortar and grenade launchers.


The Armenian-backed separatist authorities in Karabakh – internationally 
recognised as part of Azerbaijan – also said fighting was continuing and that 
Azeri troops had “intensified shelling of the Karabakh army positions on Monday 
morning, using 152mm mortars, rocket-propelled artillery and tanks”.

Russia and the west have called for a ceasefire, with Vladimir Putin, a key 
power broker, pushing for an immediate end to the fighting, and Moscow’s 
diplomats and military pressuring both sides. “We are continuing contacts with 
Baku and Yerevan so that they hear the signals from Moscow, Washington and 
Paris,” the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said.

France, a co-president of the Minsk Group of negotiators in the conflict, said 
the group would meet on Tuesday in Vienna to discuss the violence.

Azerbaijan-Armenia conflict is a reminder of Europe's instability
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/03/azerbaijan-armenia-conflict-europe-instability-nagorno-karabakh>
Sporadic clashes happen regularly along the frontline but the latest outbreak 
represents a serious escalation and analysts warned it could quickly spiral.


“The Karabakh conflict has serious geopolitical implications,” Sergi 
Kapanadze, the professor of international relations at the Tbilisi State 
University in Georgia, told AFP, and “threatens the stability of the strategic 
Caucasus region which is a transit route of Caspian oil and gas to European 
markets that bypasses Russia.”

Russia and Turkey – the major regional powers which are at loggerheads 
following Ankara’s downing of a Russian war plane over the Syrian border in 
November – have found themselves on opposing sides of the conflict.

The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has vowed to back traditional 
ally Azerbaijan – a secular Muslim Turkic nation – “to the end”. “We pray our 
Azerbaijani brothers will prevail in these clashes with the least casualties,” 
he said on Sunday. Russia maintains a military base and ties withArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>.

Iran on Monday urged Armenia and Azerbaijan to show restraint and offered its 
help to halt the fighting.


Both sides claimed to have made territorial gains since the fighting flared. 
Artsrun Hovhannisyan, the spokesman for the Armenian defence ministry, said 
Karabakh forces had advanced overnight, “liberating new positions”. Azerbaijan 
claimed to have snatched several strategic positions inside the territory.


Agence France-Presse, the Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this 
report

 