
Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> and Armenian 
separatist authorities in the disputed Nagorny-Karabakh region have reached an 
agreement to end four days of fierce fighting over the disputed territory, Baku 
and Karabakh rebels said.


“Military actions were halted as of 12pm local time (8am GMT) on Tuesday,” 
Azerbaijan’s defence ministry said in a statement.

“An agreement to cease fire has been reached with Azerbaijan,” a Karabakh 
defence ministry spokesman told AFP. “An order was given to stop shooting.”

An AFP photographer in the frontline Azeri town of Terter said both sides 
stopped shelling on Tuesday afternoon after a night of sporadic artillery fire.
Nagorno-Karabakh 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/nagorno-karabakh/giv-2716753YYblNQThM4/>
The death toll from both sides since the clashes in the Caucasus erupted on 
Friday has reached at least 64, according to an AFP estimate based on official 
reports, the worst violence in decades over the disputed territory.

Both sides accused each other of starting the latest outbreak of violence. 
Azerbaijan claims to have captured several strategic locations in 
Armenian-controlled territory, in what would be the first change to the 
frontline since an inconclusive truce ended a war in 1994.


Azerbaijan-Armenia conflict is a reminder of Europe's instability
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/03/azerbaijan-armenia-conflict-europe-instability-nagorno-karabakh>
Meanwhile, the so-called Minsk Group of the US, French and Russian ambassadors 
to the Organisation of the Security and Cooperation inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> (OSCE) that has long mediated 
in Karabakh peace talks, was to meet in Vienna on Tuesday for talks seeking a 
diplomatic solution to the crisis.

Armenian-backed separatists seized control of the mountainous Nagorno-Karabakh 
region, a majority ethnic Armenian area in Azerbaijan, in an early 1990s war 
that claimed about 30,000 lives.


The protagonists have never signed a peace deal despite a 1994 ceasefire, and 
sporadic violence regularly leads to the deaths of soldiers on both sides, 
though the latest outbreak represents a serious escalation in hostilities.

Energy-rich Azerbaijan, whose military spending exceeds Armenia’s entire state 
budget, has repeatedly threatened to take back the breakaway region by force.
 