
Authorities in Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> 
say that one of the country’s leading players is among six people arrested in 
connection with the death of a journalist who criticised him.

Azerbaijani journalist dies after criticising footballer on Facebook
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/10/azerbaijani-journalist-rasim-aliyev-javid-huseynov>
Rasim Aliyev died in hospital on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/10/azerbaijani-journalist-rasim-aliyev-javid-huseynov>
, a day after receiving a severe beating. According to Azerbaijani media, 
Aliyev said he had been attacked after going to meet a man who had introduced 
himself by telephone as the footballer Javid Huseynov’s cousin and offered to 
discuss Aliyev’s criticism of the player.

Aliyev had criticised Huseynov in a Facebook post as “ignorant and unable to 
behave himself”, and unsuitable to representAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> in Europe. Aliyev accused him of 
insulting behaviour after a Europa League game on Thursday, in which Huseynov 
scored the winning goal for Azerbaijan’s FC Gabala at home to Apollon Limassol 
of Cyprus.

Aliyev said Huseynov had displayed an insulting gesture to journalists when 
asked why he had celebrated with a Turkish flag after the match. Turkey has 
occupied the northern part ofCyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> 
since 1974.

In a joint statement Tuesday, Azerbaijani police and prosecutors said 
Huseynov, an Azerbaijan international, was among six people arrested in 
connection with the death. He is accused of covering up a serious crime and 
failing to inform authorities.

The death of Aliyev is being investigated under a law against “the deliberate 
inflicting of serious damage to health, leading to the death of the injured 
party”. Authorities say the country’s president is being personally informed of 
developments in the case.

The 27-year-old Huseynov is captain of Gabala and a regular for the national 
team. He last played for Azerbaijan in June in a European Championship 
qualifier against Norway. “No one has the right to threaten anyone or to use 
violence. The club always keeps to these principles,” Gabala said in a 
statement on Sunday, adding that Huseynov was “suspended from the first team 
until this case is resolved”.
 