
British human rights lawyer Amal Clooney has sparked outrage in Azerbaijan by 
taking on the case of jailed investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova 
<https://www.facebook.com/voa.azerbaijani/videos/vb.286379721387253/1162021673823049/?type=2&theater>
.

Ismayilova, an outspoken critic of the government, has been in prison for more 
than a year on charges she claims are politically motivated.

Clooney and the Media Legal Defence Initiative <http://www.mediadefence.org/> 
will challenge Ismayilova’s detention in the European court of human rights, 
saying her extended pre-trial imprisonment violates the European convention.


The Azerbaijani media, which often acts as a mouth piece for the government, 
responded to the news by accusing Clooney of harbouring a vendetta against the 
Turkic countries of central Asia.

“Clooney targets Turkic states in her path to fame,” claimed AzerNews 
<http://www.azernews.az/analysis/91874.html> on Wednesday – an outlet known to 
defend the government against criticisms of human rights abuses.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Famal-clooney-azerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59ae3e302ca7bfa0cb1d9eba05bd752fc5b98497%2F0_9_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azerbaijan%20attacks%20Amal%20Clooney%20over%20support%20for%20jailed%20journalist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Famal-clooney-azerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azerbaijan%20attacks%20Amal%20Clooney%20over%20support%20for%20jailed%20journalist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Famal-clooney-azerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59ae3e302ca7bfa0cb1d9eba05bd752fc5b98497%2F0_9_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Khadija Ismayilova, taken in Baku in 2014.
 Photograph: Aziz Karimov/AP 
“We would like to note that Amal Clooney is an ethnic Armenian and she 
represented Armenian interests in the European court for human rights,” echoed 
theHaqqin.az <http://haqqin.az/news/61660> news service.

Armenia and Azerbaijan have been at loggerheads over the disputed territory of 
Nagorno-Karabakh <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-32698480> since the 
1990s. Clooney is of Lebanese heritage.

Ismayilova, 39, was detained in December 2014 after allegedly prompting a 
co-worker to attempt suicide but remained in custody evenafter the the charges 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/azerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova-trial-court/27183347.html>
 were dropped, said Media Legal Defence Initiative attorney Nani Jansen.

The initiative is also representing Ismayilova in a case which accuses the 
government of failing to prosecute those involved ina sex-video blackmail 
attempt <http://www.eurasianet.org/node/65137> against her, which they say 
violated her right to privacy.

The journalist has also been sentenced to seven-and-a-half-years in prison on 
“economic charges” in a verdict delivered in September. Supporters say the 
conviction is in retribution for herexposés of corruption  
<https://www.occrp.org/freekhadijaismayilova/>at the hands of the president, 
Ilham Aliyev.

Under the European court rules, Ismayilova’s case must go through the national 
appeal process before being considered. After being rejected at theBaku court 
of appeals, Ismayilova’s lawyers filed a case with Azerbaijan’s supreme court 
and expect to hear back “in two to three months, ”Interfax-Azerbaijan  
<http://interfax.az/view/662678> reported. 

The attacks on Clooney focus on a 2015 Armenian genocide-denial case 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/armenia/11933115/Right-to-deny-Armenian-genocide-upheld-by-European-court-in-blow-to-Amal-Clooney.html>
 she led and lost against a Turkish politician, also at the European court. 
This has fed accusations that the 37-year-old attorney is on an anti-Turkic 
tirade.

As close allies, Turkey and Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> both oppose Armenia on the 
Nagorno-Karabakh issue.

“Anti-Turkic activities indeed helped Amal, a Lebanese by origin with close 
roots to large Armenian community in her motherland, to get distinguished in 
her lawyer career,” wrote AzerNews. Adding that Clooney’s “anti-Turkic” spree 
was a “bid to catch up [with] with her husband’s [George Clooney] fame.”


 