
Heavy fighting between the armed forces of Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> and Armenia over the weekend has 
highlighted the unresolved disputes and chronic internal instability that still 
affect key strategic areas of Europe, even as the political and security focus 
has shifted to external threats.

With the attention of EU leaders firmly fixed on Syria’s civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/syria-civil-war-five-years-guardian-reporting>
, the refugee crisis and the menace posed by Islamist terrorism, the sudden 
eruption on Saturday of violence in theNagorno-Karabakh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/10/azerbaijan-shells-nagorno-karabakh>
 region, an internationally unrecognised Armenian-dominated enclave inside 
Azerbaijan, has come as a nasty shock.

Conflict erupts between Azerbaijani and Armenian forces
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/02/conflict-erupts-between-azerbaijani-and-armenian-forces>
Both sides reported intermittent clashes on Sunday after 30 soldiers and some 
civilians were reportedly killed on Saturday. Both accused the other of using 
heavy weapons, tanks and artillery, and of responsibility forstarting the 
trouble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/02/conflict-erupts-between-azerbaijani-and-armenian-forces>
.

“Armenian armed forces violated the ceasefire 130 times during the night. They 
were shooting from mortars, grenade launchers, and large-calibre machine guns. 
The shelling was carried out from both Armenian territory and from 
Armenian-occupied Karabakh,” theAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/15/azerbaijan-forced-to-cut-bread-taxes-after-widespread-protests>
 defence ministry said.

While Azerbaijan said it was calling a truce on Sunday, the Armenian defence 
ministry said fighting was continuing. “Azerbaijanis are attempting to attack 
but are being repelled,” it said. The Armenian-backed defence ministry in 
Karabakh said its troops along the contact line were being shelled. Yerevan 
distinguishes its own armed forces from those of Nagorno-Karabakh, while Baku 
considers them all to be Armenian.
Map of Nagorno-Karabakh region 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/nagorno-karabakh/giv-2716753YYblNQThM4/>
 Map of Nagorno-Karabakh region 
Serzh Sarkisian, Armenia’s president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/07/armenia-vote-disputed-referendum-president-powers>
, said the clashes were the “largest-scale hostilities” since a 1994 truce 
halted a war in which Armenian-backed fighters seized the territory from 
Azerbaijan.

The high degree of international alarm was reflected in the swift response of 
Federica Mogherini, the EU’s foreign policy chief, who called on all sides to 
respect the 1994 ceasefire. The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, also weighed 
in, as did John Kerry, the US secretary of state.

All three urged Armenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia> and 
Azerbaijan to show faith in the so-called Minsk process overseen by the 
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (Osce). But many years of 
meetings have yielded little in the way of results, with both sides as 
entrenched as ever despite occasional attempts to thaw relations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-armenia-conflict-europe-instability-nagorno-karabakh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f3ccccc7adbb22ff3e6060920b5997af427d26b%2F363_283_3778_2267%2F3778.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azerbaijan-Armenia%20conflict%20is%20a%20reminder%20of%20Europe's%20instability&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-armenia-conflict-europe-instability-nagorno-karabakh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azerbaijan-Armenia%20conflict%20is%20a%20reminder%20of%20Europe%27s%20instability&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-armenia-conflict-europe-instability-nagorno-karabakh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f3ccccc7adbb22ff3e6060920b5997af427d26b%2F363_283_3778_2267%2F3778.jpg>
 Federica Mogherini, the EU’s foreign policy chief. Photograph: Denis 
Balibouse/Reuters 
Although Nagorno-Karabakh is not a very large territory – it is home to about 
150,000 people – it has long been a flashpoint for great power rivalry and 
ethnic and religious tensions.

Following the Bolshevik revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/jan/25/russia.books> in Russia towards 
the end of the first world war, Moscow’s new rulers established the 
Nagorno-Karabakh autonomous region, with anethnic Armenian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/09/-sp-post-soviet-world-need-to-know-armenia>
 majority, within the Soviet Socialist Republic of Azerbaijan.

When the Soviet empire began to implode in the late 1980s, fighting erupted, 
with the mostly Christian Armenians striving to break the grip of the mostly 
Muslim Turkic Azeris. Up to 30,000 people are thought to have died before the 
1994 truce. Since then, Russia has mainly backed Armenia, while Turkey and Iran 
tend to take Baku’s side. The west’s interests are primarily centred on 
Azerbaijan’sCaspian offshore oil and gas fields 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/19/bp-azerbaijan-100bn-dollars-gas-deal>
.

Moscow, which currently co-chairs the Minsk group, demanded an immediate 
ceasefire. Sergei Shoigu, Russia’s defence minister, held emergency phone talks 
with his Armenian and Azeri counterparts, the ministry said.

Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Turkey’s president, publicly vowed on Sunday to support 
Azerbaijan “to the end”. Turkey has no diplomatic relations with Armenia, a 
rift dating back to themass killings of Armenians by Turks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/28/the-fall-of-the-ottomans-the-great-war-in-the-middle-east-1914-1920-eugene-rogan-review>
 towards the close of the Ottoman period. Erdoğan is also at daggers drawn with 
Russia over its support for the Syrian regime and Turkey’s shooting down last 
autumn of a Russian combat plane but he is unlikely to intervene militarily.

Nagorno-Karabakh is one of several so-called frozen conflicts, mostly on 
Europe’s borders, that have the potential to erupt at any time. Because they 
are so difficult to resolve, the big powers tend to leave them on ice until 
circumstances force them to act.

Azerbaijan forced to cut bread taxes after widespread protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/15/azerbaijan-forced-to-cut-bread-taxes-after-widespread-protests>
The breakaway region of Transdniestria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/26/moldova-russia-europe-transnistria-dobrinski>
 – historically known as Bessarabia – in Moldova is one case in point. Another 
example isAbkhazia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/25/georgia-russia-abkhazia-military-agreement-putin>
, which Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, encouraged to split with Georgia 
after a brief border war in 2008. There is no end in sight to the disputes. In 
contrast, the conflict over Cyprus, divided between its ethnic Greek and 
Turkish populations since Turkey’s 1974 invasion, may finally be nearing some 
sort of resolution.

Freezing a conflict can be a deliberate act of state policy, producing a new 
status quo by creating facts on the ground. This is what seems to be happening 
following Putin’s invasion andannexation of Crimea in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/putin-confirms-annexation-crimea-ukrainian-soldier-casualty>
, and the truce subsequently imposed in eastern Ukraine.

Western countries vowed at the time that the Crimea land-grab was a blatant 
breach of international law and would never be allowed to stand. But attention 
has shifted elsewhere, and with every month that passes, the annexation looks 
ever more frozen and thus ever harder to reverse. Yet adding to the number of 
frozen conflicts or doing little to resolve those that already exist is, 
potentially, a recipe for disaster.

As they struggle with mass unchecked immigration, terrorism, and other foreign 
and security policy challenges, European leaders will not want a violent 
flare-up on their own doorstep. The likelihood is that the Armenia-Azerbaijan 
clashes can be defused, for now at least. But given that so many powerful 
countries have a stake in the outcome, the danger of an unplanned escalation is 
clear. The risk of letting matters slide again just got measurably higher.
 