
Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> has been ranked the 
worst place in Europe to live as an LGBTI citizen, after meeting only 5% of a 
leading rights organisation’s criteria for legal equality.

The ILGA-Europe Rainbow Index, released today <https://rainbow-europe.org/>, 
ranks 49 European countries according to the laws, policies and practices that 
affect LGBTI communities.

The countries with the three lowest scores are all post-Soviet: Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>, Russia and Azerbaijan. The 
countries leading the index – Malta, Belgium and the UK – all scored above 80%.

Although homosexuality is legal in Azerbaijan, the 2016 index draws attention 
to the country’s failure to protect its LGBTI community from hate crime and 
discrimination. The review links the low score to the high number of homophobic 
and transphobic violent attacks, as well as discriminatory remarks made by 
political figures.

“Of all the social groups that are victims of violence and hatred, we are the 
ones that struggle most,” says gay Azerbaijani activist, Javid Nabiyev.

“Each year, hundreds of LGBTI people are exposed to physical, psychological 
and economic violence by their family members and the people around them. They 
are killed, forced to live a double life, commit suicide or leave the country.”

East v west
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fazerbaijan-worst-place-in-europe-to-be-gay-lgbt-rainbow-index%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f36190042bbb04ef303cbed41e58847f5041abd%2F0_15_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azerbaijan%20worst%20place%20to%20be%20gay%20in%20Europe%2C%20finds%20LGBTI%20index&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fazerbaijan-worst-place-in-europe-to-be-gay-lgbt-rainbow-index%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azerbaijan%20worst%20place%20to%20be%20gay%20in%20Europe%2C%20finds%20LGBTI%20index&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fazerbaijan-worst-place-in-europe-to-be-gay-lgbt-rainbow-index%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f36190042bbb04ef303cbed41e58847f5041abd%2F0_15_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Azeri LGBTI activist Javid Nabiyev in 2012. Photograph: Nefes LGBT Azerbaijan 
Alliance 
Today, Nabiyev sits in a small box-room in a German refugee shelter, the bare 
white walls are decorated only with the rainbow LGBTI flag and the national 
flag of Azerbaijan. Despite everything that happened to him there, he says: 
“It’s my homeland and I miss it.”

Gay couple in Azerbaijan forced to flee after engagement vow makes local news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/26/gay-azerbaijan-engagement-threats>
Nabiyev’s life in Azerbaijan became unbearable after he proposed to his 
boyfriend in 2014,and the pair became targets of a national hate campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/26/gay-azerbaijan-engagement-threats>
. Pictures of their engagement ceremony posted to Facebook found their way onto 
mainstream news. The couple’s personal details were published online and 
Nabiyev’s neighbours became threatening, he says.

The couple fled to Turkey before the pressure of persecution finally tore them 
apart. They returned to Azerbaijan separately, and Nabiyev continued with his 
activism.

But his work for Nefes LGBT Azerbaijan Alliance 
<https://www.facebook.com/nefeslgbt> – the organisation he founded – made him a 
fresh target for the authorities. He can no longer count the number of times 
he’s been beaten by police and in the media, he was accused of being a western 
spy. Worried he could be detained more permanently, he fled to Germany.

Bjorn van Roozendaal, programme director of ILGA-Europe, sees the tension 
between east and west as key in the struggle for LGBTI rights. “We’ve seen a 
lot of backlash in the region. One common denominator is that Armenia, 
Azerbaijan,Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> all want to 
distance themselves from the west and the LGBTI struggle has been at the centre 
of that,” he explains.

“LGBTI rights are seen as a modern western value that the west is trying to 
impose and this mindset really comes at the cost of the LGBTI community.”

Azerbaijan is a member of the Council of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, which describes itself as “the 
continent’s leading human rights organisation.” All CoE members have signed the 
European Convention of Human Rights, in which article 14 prohibits 
discrimination “on any ground such as sex, gender”.

LGBTI rights are seen as a western value that the west is trying to impose
Bjorn van Roozendaal 
In September 2015, the EU Parliament passed a resolution on Azerbaijan, 
condemning its treatment of human rights defenders and said it was “extremely 
concerned 
<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//NONSGML+TA+P8-TA-2015-0316+0+DOC+PDF+V0//EN>
 over the situation of LGBTI people”.

But van Roozendaal is not optimistic about the resolution’s power. “I don’t 
think that a country like Azerbaijan really cares what the EU think. I don’t 
think they want to be seen to be promoting LGBTI rights,” he says. “Change is 
not going to happen in top down way, it’s going to come from bottom up – from 
activists on the ground.”

He can’t speak openly about the work ILGA-Europe is doing in Azerbaijan 
because “any kind of visibility that we give to the work we do, puts people at 
risk. This work is made extremely difficult by the government, which is very 
sad.”

He can say that they are working to support the LGBTI communities to educate 
them on how to avoid risk and document hate crime. But it’s not easy to support 
grassroots groups. “There are strict controls on any kind of money that goes 
into the country, so it’s difficult to fund even awareness campaigns,” he says.

‘Love is love’
 Isa Shakhmarli before his death in 2014. Photograph: Nefes LGBT Azerbaijan 
Alliance 
Nabiyev’s is just one of many tales to have leaked out of the country in the 
past few years.

One of the most high-profile was the death of Isa Shakhmarli in 2014, a leading
LGBTI activist who killed himself draped in the rainbow flag 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2014/01/23/leading-lgbt-activist-commits-suicide-i-cant-live-in-this-world-any-more/>
. He left behind a video in which he said: “I tried to explain that love is 
love as much as I could but my family and friends never understood.”

After his death, his friend Lala Mahmudova took over his role at the LGBTI 
organisation,AZAD <http://www.azadaz.org/>. Mahmudova, who is straight and 
currently studying in Chicago, says she is often criticised for supporting 
LGBTI equality.

“On Facebook, a lot of my relatives and friends have blocked me because I 
support LGBTI people. They say, ‘You are going against our society’s values’.”

'We'll cut off your head': open season for LGBT attacks in Kyrgyzstan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/kyrgyzstan-lgbt-community-fear-attacks-russia>
Mahmudova sees violence and abuse at the hands of family members as a serious 
problem. “I know a lot of transgender people who are beaten by their fathers, 
sisters and mothers. It starts with their family,” she says. But with no LGBTI 
shelters in Azerbaijan and a largely unsympathetic police force, there is 
little Mahmudova or AZAD can do to help people in this situation.

Given the risks, for many people coming out to family and friends is too 
dangerous. Ahmad – not his real name – a 21-year-old student living in the 
capital, Baku, explains: “If my brother and my uncle find out [I’m gay], they 
will get very angry and I don’t know what could happen.”

Ahmad doesn’t feel like he has a family, and says he could never approach the 
authorities for help. “As a nation, we have no trust for our police or our 
government,” he says. “I have always felt I have no one but myself to lean on.”
 