
When Bérénice Bejo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/berenice-bejo> was young, 
her sister sat her down and told her: "Bérénice, I love you. But you take up 
too much room." This was not a hint about bodyweight. The sisterly advice was 
more to do with Bejo's roving arms, a tendency to flail when she spoke. She 
was, and still is, a great gesticulator.

"It's the Argentinian in me, I get enthusiastic, I use my body," the 
36-year-old tells me, the day after her new film,The Past, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/17/cannes-2013-the-past-review> has 
premiered at the Cannes film festival.

Born in Argentina, Bejo grew up in Paris and is best known for charming 
audiences around the world as Peppy Miller in the Oscar-winning black-and-white 
movieThe Artist <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142801/artist>. We're 
having tea on the roof of a seafront hotel, where the view of Cannes's 
yacht-filled harbour has been temporarily obscured by black drapes and fairy 
lights. It is the afternoon, but later the terrace will become a small 
nightclub – a small, cold nightclub. Cannes is wind-struck today, the yachts 
are roiling and Bejo, wearing a pretty but insubstantial dress, has a blanket 
around her shoulders. It falls free, of course, whenever she needs to emphasise 
a point and the gesticulating takes up.

It's not strange to see her emote like this, physically. At the end of 2011, 
when for a few monthsThe Artist dominated the cultural agenda, the world fell 
for Bejo without her saying anything. As Peppy, she played a young star in 
1930s Hollywood who embarked on a love affair with Jean Dujardin's older 
matinee idol, George. Dujardin got a famous line of dialogue at the end but 
Bejo didn't utter a word. Her skill was in conjuring up the character through 
movement – the twitches and shivers, a wild tap dance, those unforgettable, 
face-crunching winks. The film was a hit, winner of enough Oscars and Baftas 
and Globes to ballast every one of the upset yachts in Cannes.

The very first scene in Bejo's new work, The Past, directed by Iranian director
Asghar Farhadi <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/asghar-farhadi>, involves more 
mime. As with his previous drama,A Separation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142608/separation>, The Past explores the 
dismal end stages of a marriage. Bejo's character, Marie, meets her estranged 
husband, Ahmad (Ali Mosaffa), at the airport, where they are temporarily 
divided by thick security glass. They greet each other with sad eyes, a few 
mouthed words. It's a powerful sequence, though one Bejo might have watched a 
few too many times. At the film's premiere the night before, she tells me, she 
fell to daydreaming. "I was sitting there thinking, 'OK, so that's me silent 
but in colour. Next scene it'll be me in colour – and speaking. It's like I'm 
slowly working my way towards the cinema of the present. What next? 3D?'"

The Cannes premiere made front-page news in Le Monde and most of the early 
reviews have been positive ("Unimpeachably authentic"; "Real intellectual 
sinew"). Bejo is hotly tipped for the best actress award. The walls of the 
hotel terrace we're on have been mounted with big photographs of French 
actresses,Marion Cotillard <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/marion-cotillard>, 
Audrey Tautou 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/apr/14/audrey-tautou-french-love-amelie>, 
Mélanie Laurent, the domestic A-list, and it's this sort of companyThe Past 
ought to push Bejo into. She says she never thinks ahead. "I have no idea of my 
career [plan], no vision. I go wherever life takes me."

It is the familiar dodge of an actor. "I don't like to think about handling a 
career. I like to think of meeting a new role, a new director…" It's only when 
she relaxes into our conversation that some mischief creeps in. She makes a 
joke about sleeping with directors for work, which is bold, given she's married 
to the man behindThe Artist, Michel Hazanavicius 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/michel-hazanavicius>. And for all the easy talk 
about letting acting roles come to her, she says she'd zip Hazanavicius and 
their two young children into a suitcase to go wherever, immediately, if it 
meant getting to make a film withAng Lee <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/anglee>
.

When she and Hazanavicius got married, she says, the 46-year-old already had 
two daughters from a previous relationship, but she wasn't unburdened herself. 
"I had a dog," she deadpans, "a very big dog." She then casually brings up 
smoking marijuana with her dad as a teen. She is both charming and slightly 
baffling.

The Farhadi film is unusual in that the director made it in France, with 
French dialogue, without being able to speak the language himself. Bejo and her 
co-stars learned to take instruction through a translator. After the success of
A Separation, Farhadi had become too prominent to be comfortable in Iran and 
arranged to make his new film abroad. Something similar brought Bejo's family 
from Argentina to France in the late 1970s. "My parents are very intellectual 
people. They were running away from a dictator [Jorge Rafaél Videla 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/may/17/jorge-rafael-videla>]. And they 
wanted to go somewhere where the culture would be stronger than, you know, the 
military. It was going to be either Paris, Berlin or New York, and they chose 
Paris for the same reason that Asghar chose Paris – because of the past of the 
city. The energy of its culture. When you are in Paris youfeel Louis XIV."

Her parents, she says, were intellectuals. Cinephiles. She watched musicals, 
westerns and Wilder with her father and by the time she was a teenager Bejo had 
decided she wanted to act. The big wound, in this period, was a part she almost 
got in aGérard Depardieu <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/gerard-depardieu> 
film. "I bought a red dress to go to the audition. I was pretty close, maybe 
the last three. I remember hanging up the phone and crying. Why? Why? Why? But 
you grow up. You learn it's part of the job."

By the time she was 28, there had been a few too many of these learning 
opportunities. She'd had a small role in a Hollywood film,A Knight's Tale 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/88937/knight.s.tale>, and erratic 
castings in France, but Bejo was broke, sleeping on her sister's couch. A 
script came through for a film calledOSS 117 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/118317/oss.117>, an adaptation of a 
popular French novel about a goofy spy. The spy was to be played by Jean 
Dujardin. Michel Hazanavicius was directing. "I didn't want to go to the 
audition," Bejo remembers, "French comedies weren't my thing." She flicked 
through the script, though, and found it tickled her. "You know," says Bejo, 
"if I didn't get that part, I wouldn't have my kids?" She laughs nervously.

The filming of OSS 117 must have been a blast. Bloopers, posted online, shows 
Dujardin and Bejo collapsing in laughter, scene after scene, while Hazanavicius 
issues gruff-voiced cries of "Action!" from behind the camera. Bejo became 
great friends with Dujardin. She has said her relationship with Hazanavicius 
stayed professional until shooting was finished, at least until the edit. Then 
they fell in love. It prompts another wonderful offbeat disclosure. Bejo 
offers, unbidden, a list of the similarities between Hazanavicius and her 
father, pondering how this might have factored in the attraction. "It's very 
interesting. They like the same kind of movies. And Michel's got a beard and my 
dad's got a beard. And my dad's name is Miguel, which sounds like Michel. I 
maybe have to go and lie down on a psychologist's couch about this."

When OSS 117 came out in France it was a commercial hit, but it didn't do a 
lot for Bejo. Employment quickly dried up again. "AfterOSS 117 I made one 
movie, calledModern Love <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0996962/?ref_=fn_al_tt_2>
. Then I got pregnant and didn't work for a long time, maybe a year and a half, 
two years. That was hard. Because you're just a… " She searches for the English 
word. "In French we sayune femme au foyer, a woman at home, you're not working. 
I'm an actress, I don't want to be at home. Yeah, for a few months, maybe, but 
not for two years." She says she tried to remain upbeat.OSS 117 and a sequel 
had made good money in France, giving Hazanavicius some clout. He was now 
pursuing a long cherished project, a silent movie.

Hazanavicius wrote the character of Peppy – full of pep – with his wife in 
mind. "Michel changed my life. And I think I changed his life too. Writing the 
part inThe Artist for me, it was a gift. But I think I was really good in the 
movie, I tried my best. I gave back what he gave me." Harvey Weinstein, who 
bought the film at Cannes in 2011, contributed too. With his usual blend of 
contentiousness and cash outlay, he steamrolleredThe Artist to awards-season 
glory. Hazanavicius won an Oscar. So did Dujardin.

Bejo points out that her own nominations, for an Oscar and a Golden Globe 
among others, didn't result in any wins. "I was the loser," she says bluntly. 
"So after a while I said [to myself]: Right, I'm going to watch Michel win. He 
had so much fun. He met so many people, so many famous actors and producers and 
directors. It was fun to watch him living that."

They seem to be a couple who pick up each other's slack like this. Directly 
afterThe Artist, Bejo was approached about a supporting role in Populaire 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2070776/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1>, a comedy about 
secretaries in 1950s France. In the wake of Peppy, a lead, she felt too grand 
to take the smaller job, a feeling that lasted 24 hours, she says, until 
Hazanavicius called her "dumb". He also passed along Asghar Farhadi's mobile 
number, picked up over a chat at the Oscars, so that she could text the Iranian 
and say nice things about his script while she was still hoping to be cast. 
Bejo, for her part, helped keep Hazanavicius's head out of the clouds whenThe 
Artist got big.

 "I was the one who was more grounded during the Oscar season. I had just 
given birth. I knew I was going to lose every award. And that, I think, helped 
us to stay normal. It's important not to feel too cute. Do you know what I 
mean? Not to like the image of yourself too much. It's a joke. It's play."

Fifteen months on, a sense of normality has returned. Before flying out to 
Cannes, Bejo and Hazanavicius were moving house, switching arrondissements in 
Paris for somewhere bigger. "Thanks toThe Artist," she says, "the banks have 
been very nice." Has there been any bad stuff? Bejo considers it for a while 
and arrives, unexpectedly, at autographs.

"When The Artist came out, Michel would sign autographs, always smiling, 
always nice. I had to work on it. Now I'm pretty cool. Because I've realised 
that if you say yes, your life goes on. But if you say no, you keep the no the 
whole day. You feel like an asshole."

She says she's taking a break to be with her family after Cannes. Three months 
off, no acting, an untroubledfemme au foyer for a while. Then in August she'll 
start shooting a new film. It's written and directed byMichel Hazanavicius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michel-hazanavicius>, which worked out well 
the last time.

Populaire is in cinemas from 31 May. The Past will be released in early 2014
 