
A Conservative backbencher whose allies have been running a campaign against 
David Cameron is calling on Tory MPs to vote in favour of a referendum on 
Britain's EU membership within the next year or risk "sleepwalking to election 
defeat" as voters flock to Ukip.

As a new poll found that just over a third of Conservative party members 
support an early referendum on the EU, the former frontbencherAdam Afriyie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-afriyie> wrote to Conservative MPs 
to say they have a "last chance" on Friday to ensure a referendum is held by 
October 2014.

Afriyie will table an amendment to a private members' bill, introduced by the 
backbencher James Wharton, which will be considered by MPs at report stage. 
Wharton's bill would ensure that a referendum on Britain's EU membership by the 
end of 2017, in line with the prime minister's plans.

But Afriyie called on Tory MPs to support an earlier referendum to ensure the 
party aligns itself with voters who would like the vote to be held before the 
general election. He said that a referendum next October would allow the Tories 
to draw a line under Europe, allowing them to hold a "straight fight" with 
Labour on the economy at the 2015 general election.

"This Friday you will have the opportunity to vote for a 2014 EU referendum," 
Afriyie wrote in his letter published on the Guido Fawkes website. "This will 
be the last moment to try to hold an EU vote within this parliament."

Afriyie's letter continued: "This is Conservative MPs' last chance to try to 
secure a referendum. If we do not take this opportunity, we risk sleepwalking 
to election defeat by driving votes to Ukip."

But the letter makes clear that Afriyie, who has failed to secure more than a 
handful of supporters for his amendment, is struggling. He wrote: "I urge you 
to vote for this amendment. At minimum, I would ask you not to vote against it."

He also addressed concerns that his amendment could upset the Wharton bill by 
taking up precious time for the measure, which cannot be considered in 
government parliamentary time. He wrote: "PS â€“ I'm sensitive to concerns that 
this amendment may take up valuable debate time and I will do my best to ensure 
that is not the case."

Up to 20 Conservative MPs would like to support Afriyie's amendment. But it is 
expected that it will fail because many hardline Eurosceptic Tory MPs fear 
supporting his amendment could wreck the Wharton bill.

The intervention by Afriyie came as the ConservativeHome website found that 
35% of Conservative members would support a referendum next year. This was 
matched by the number of people who would like a referedum to be held on 
Cameron's timetable by the end of 2017.

But the poll of 700 Tory members found that 22% would like a referendum to be 
held after October 2014 but before Cameron's target date of 2017. Paul Goodman, 
the editor of ConservativeHome, wrote: "Just over a third of respondents for 
Adam Afriyie and David Cameron's positions respectively, with under a quarter 
in between. Perhaps more importantly, over half of them want a vote before the 
date set by the party leader."
 