
The record-breaker

Three weekends along on Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-review-a-spectacular-homecoming>
, we’re in a much better position to place bets on its final box-office tally. 
Unpredecented US grosses for weekends one, two and three mean that Avatar’s
all-time US record of $760.8m 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/domestic.htm> (unadjusted for inflation) 
is as good as toast, probably by tomorrow or Wednesday. And this will have 
happened in about a quarter of the time James Cameron’s blockbuster took to 
reach that point. The pace is astonishing, particularly for the normally sedate 
December period, but the reason is searingly obvious: being the latest in the 
world’s most-vaunted film franchise would always be in its favour. Just more so 
than we expected.

What’s worth digging deeper into is its overseas performance, slightly fogged 
by the fact that Disney for some reason won’t confirm exactly how many 
territories it’s playing in. Is this defensiveness due to it looking 
increasingly likely that The Force Awakens won’t pass Avatar ($2.8bn) for the
all-time worldwide crown <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/>? Taking 
$900m-1bn in the US and a national-record-high $400m-plus haul in China, where 
it opens on 9 January, would put it in with a shot. But the fact remains that 
its American stronghold is not displaying the indefatigable stamina shown by 
Avatar; overseas, this weekend’s take is already under $100m, a figure the 
Cameron film exceeded for six consecutive frames.


We looked at possible reasons for Avatar’s unparalleled success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/22/star-wars-the-force-awakens-avatar-mojin-global-box-office>
 a fortnight ago when The Force Awakens opened. Now that the latter has shown 
its hand, one thing that stands out is that where it is rock-solid in the 
western heartlands (the UK, $145m running total; Germany, $81.4m; France, 
$67.4m; Australia, $50.7m – four territories that consistently placed second to 
fifth for George Lucas’s prequels), the one big change is Japan. Top territory 
for Episodes I-III, it has now slipped to fourth place ($52.9m). Is it possible 
the Japanese respond to Star Wars primarily as a forward-looking sci-fi 
franchise and that Episode VII’s swooning yet carefully calculated nostalgia, 
gathering around western actors, is less appealing there? That might also 
explain why box office in other developing territories (Mexico, $24.5m; South 
Korea, $23.1m; Russia, $22.9m; Brazil, $21.2m) is good but not the overwhelming 
victory you might expect from a Star Wars franchise. Barring a galactic take in 
China, that could decide things in Avatar’s favour.


The Tarantino film
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgnRbXn4-Yis&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgnRbXn4-Yis>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgnRbXn4-Yis&media=>
The Weinstein Company was cranking up its damage-limitation machine 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/hateful-eight-box-office-quentin-tarantino-1201670819/>
 this weekend, insisting to Variety that the omnipotent The Force Awakens was 
responsible for Quentin Tarantino’sThe Hateful Eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/15/the-hateful-eight-review-quentin-tarantino-takes-agatha-christie-adds-gags-more-guns-and-samuel-l-jackson>
 only making $16.2m on its US wide release. Adjusted for inflation, it’s his
worst wide opening ever 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/people/chart/?view=Director&id=tarantino.htm>. 
The Weinsteins are probably correct, but the responsibility is theirs for 
choosing to open against the Disney behemoth. Like everyone, they probably 
underestimated how much air the blockbuster was going to suck out of the 
market, believing the Tarantino western could function as effective 
counter-programming. But even coupled witha set of reviews with a 
weary-sounding undertone <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_hateful_eight/>, 
Tarantino doesn’t need to fret too much. He’s sure to pick up fanboy stragglers 
who’ve hitherto only had eyes for Star Wars, giving The Hateful Eight legs. The 
film is, at $62m, his cheapest for a while – less risky than the $100m Django 
Unchained, which, with a $30m debut, didn’t fly out of the gate either. In 
truth, Tarantino has never been the biggest opener, but that doesn’t stop him 
accumulating impressive box office. Such is his reputation, and his ability to 
finish pulp material with an auteurish gloss, that he now commands almost 
blockbuster-size grosses – these days because he almost always hits the mark 
internationally, too. Both Django and Inglourious Basterds did over $200m 
overseas, taking them to $425.4m and $321.5m respectively. The Hateful Eight 
starts the fightback in over 20 countries this weekend.


The kids’ films
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-XmV3zGifOE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-XmV3zGifOE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-XmV3zGifOE&media=>
All the talk is of how the game-changing The Force Awakens is going to change 
the game for future December releases. In many ways, though, the monumental 
scale of its box office apart, it continues the trend of recent years: the 
monopolisation of the Christmas period by blockbuster-grade material 
(previously the Hobbit films). That has made life tough for that other seasonal 
staple: children’s entertainment. The fourthAlvin and the Chipmunks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/alvin-chipmunks-road-chip-review-minions-uptown-funk>
 (The Road Chip), currently on $91.6m globally, looks to be continuing a 
pattern of franchise fall-off; Fox’s well-reviewedThe Peanuts Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/snoopy-and-charlie-brown-the-peanuts-movie-review-return-of-a-lovable-loser>
 is just about starting to pull its weight overseas ($77.1m of a $205.9m total 
take) without dazzling anyone. There hasn’t, though, been a December-dominating 
kids’-targeted release since The Chronicles of Narnia in 2005 and Night at the 
Museum in 2006. It feels as if the studios have started to neglect the 
Christmas children’s market, happy to fling endless sequels down the pipe 
rather than develop original material. Harry Potter – usually released in 
November – credibly filled the slot for a decade, but since then we’ve only had 
the third instalments of Alvin and the Chipmunks (Chipwrecked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/15/alvin-and-the-chipmunks-chipwrecked-review>
, 2011) and Night at the Museum (Secret of the Tomb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/18/night-at-the-museum-secret-of-the-tomb-review>
, 2014). And no major children’s releases in 2012 and 2013. Both aforementioned 
threequels made well over $300m, so the market is obviously still there. The 
quality, though, less so.


Beyond Hollywood
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WHNLD_sTpA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WHNLD_sTpA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WHNLD_sTpA&media=>
One person holding off The Force Awakens’ death march is toothy Italian comedy 
starChecco Zalone <https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Checco_Zalone>. His Quo Vado? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2WHNLD_sTpA>, about a southern dosser 
desperate to hold on to a cushy bureaucratic job, opened to $24.2m (higher than 
Rentrak’s initial estimate below) – a debut record for the country and better 
than The Force Awakens’ entire-three-week take. Zalone, working with director 
Gennaro Nunziante, has monstered Italian box office in recent years:Che Bella 
Giornata <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wMh1xbdaul0> and Sole a Catinelle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5OdkqSQGyzc>, the duo’s second and third 
films, were local champions in 2011 and 2013 respectively. Quo Vado? looks 
nailed down to beat the latter’s record for homegrown films ($69.9m) and 
possibly Avatar’s overall one ($71.5m), too.


Elsewhere, this week mostly saw a barrage of local Chinese hits making merry 
pre-Star Wars. Comedy megastar Wang Baoqiang (of 2012’s indie breakoutLost in 
Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/13/lost-in-thailand-lost-in-translation>
) obviously has a thing for Bangkok, returning to it for this week’s caper
Detective Chinatown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1LZabH1kO_M>. In second 
place globally with $45m, the film suggests that Thailand is becoming to China 
what Las Vegas is to America: anything goes. Already on release, drag-racing 
action-comedyMr Six <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=osD5iRMsN6E> and 
tomb-raiding thrillerMojin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CUB7XgUke04> 
continued to hold their own in the global top 10, the latter now the fifth most 
successful film in China with $230.8m so far. Lower down the worldwide chart, 
animationLittle Door Gods <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pAGMDOZhloY> – about 
out-of-favour deities canvassing the mortal world for new followers – entered 
at 16th place with $10m; rising actors Shen Teng and Ma Li managed 19th with 
$7m for comedyHeart for Heaven <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JBt-xU_qmRM>, 
following up Goodbye Mr Loser, their September hit; Donnie Yen, playing the 
much-chronicled Bruce Lee trainerIp Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jckXscMwIOI> for a third time, struck a $5m 
blow for 21st on the chart.


Not listed, as ever with Bollywood releases, were India’s two Christmas 
biggies. The execrable reviews for Shah Rukh Khan vehicleDilwale 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AHuOo1DLcRc> have begun to count against it: 
the film has dropped back to R138 crore ($20.7m) against lavish extramarital 
period dramaBajirao Mastani <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eHOc-4D7MjY>’s 
R150 crore. Star Wars, just to give you some idea of the cultural odds stacked 
against it, was hovering somewhere near the R15 crore mark.


The future

Disney must be feeling pretty smug, but The Force Awakens’ Chinese bow on 
Saturday – with Star Wars a little-known quantity in the country – will give 
the conglomerate a stronger idea of how aggressive its expansion strategy will 
have to be as the extended franchise develops over the next decade. It has, to 
be fair, been busting a gut in China over the last few weeks –roping in 
singer-actor Lu Han to act as “Star Wars” ambassador 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/meet-lu-han-official-ambassador-846283>. 
(Though, presumably, at 25 years old, he’s in need of just as much education as 
the rest of the country’s youth demographic.) Other than that, very little of 
worldwide import is happening – apart from The Hateful Eight starting out on 
the international trail, already mentioned above.


Top 10 global box office, 1-3 January

1. Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>, $184.6m from 
approximately 75 territories. $1.51bn cumulative – 51% international; 49% US
2. (New) Detective Chinatown, $45m from 1 territory. $58m cum – 100% int
3. Mr Six, $32.3m from 2 territories. $93.1m cum – 98.9% int; 1.1% US
4. Daddy’s Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/daddys-home-review-will-ferrell-mark-wahlberg>
, $38.2m from 16 territories. $115.6m cum – 18.9% int; 81.1% US
5. Mojin: The Lost Legend, $32m from 3 territories. $230.8m cum – 99.6% int; 
0.4% US
6. Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Road Chip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/alvin-chipmunks-road-chip-review-minions-uptown-funk>
, $22.1m from 17 territories. $91.6m cum – 26.5% int; 73.5% US
7. (New) Quo Vado?, $20m from 1 territory – 100% int
8. Joy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joy>, $19.7m from 29 territories. 
$51.8m cum – 25.3% int; 74.7% US
9. The Peanuts Movie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-peanuts-movie>, 
$17.4m from 45 territories. $205.9m cum – 37.4% int; 62.6% US
10. The Hateful Eight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hateful-eight>, $16.2m 
from 1 territory. $29.6m cum – 100% US


 * Thanks to Rentrak <http://www.rentrak.com/>. This week’s figures are based 
on estimates; all historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.
 