
The closing in of Dustin Johnson on the summit of golf’s world ranking may be 
the least of Jason Day’s worries. As theAustralian departed East Lake on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/25/scotts-fedex-cup-hopes-plummet>, 
a back injury having curtailed his Tour Championship appearance, the narrative 
was ominously familiar.

Fitness woes, and all manner of them, have been a constant companion to Day’s 
professional career. With this in mind, it seems partly remarkable he has 
scaled such heights; either Day has a penchant for over-dramatisation or he 
recovers especially well. Johnson, who is in the form of his life, has Day’s 
No1 status firmly in his sights to the point where it would be a surprise if 
the American does not assume that position in the near future.

Ryder Cup 2016: US face pressure test as Darren Clarke backs young team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/ryder-cup-us-europe-darren-clarke-davis-love>
Where issues of the back are concerned, Day must be especially careful. The 
troubles of his close friend Tiger Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/tiger-woods-return-golf-injury-layoff>
 provide all necessary evidence of that. Day and Woods have at least one thing 
in common: a powerful but borderline violent golf swing which will place 
inevitable pressure on their back.

“It’s not what you want to be happening in your career and it’s clear that 
there is something going on in Jason’s back and that’s why he’s treating it 
with caution,” said Day’s compatriotAdam Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott>.

“The thing is that a back issue can be serious and it’s not good for him or 
for any golfer if you have back problems. Hopefully, Jason gets on top of it 
quick. The good thing is that he’s got some time off now from the Tour so that 
should go a long way to helping cure whatever maybe wrong with his back. But it 
also just shows that if you play a punishing schedule and if you are carrying 
any sort of injury through the season, it’s very difficult.

“Jason’s had a great year. He’s now got a good rest period ahead of him with 
five or six weeks off so hopefully he will be OK for the tournaments later in 
the year. Though, in saying that, it’s his judgment.”

Scott is due to appear alongside Day representing Australia in the World Cup 
of Golf later this year. Day, whose previous ailments include a thumb issue and
vertigo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/08/golf-jason-day-us-open-vertigo-down-to-ear-infection>
, had a bulging disc in his back which appeared to remedy itself. The current 
injury has been diagnosed as a strained ligament in his lower back.

“It’s not the first time that it’s happened,” said Day. “I mean, if it was the 
first time, then I’d be like: ‘Oh, I’m really kind of worried about it.’ I put 
the tee in the ground at the BMW Championship and my back went out. Last time 
it went out, I [had] changed a diaper.

“So it’s nothing where I go and physically make a move at it during a swing 
and my back goes out. It literally is from the smallest things: picking up a 
pillow, picking up something off the ground, or just moving the wrong way.

“The bulged disc has actually come in, which is kind of a miracle because, 
actually, when you have those kind of symptoms, you’re thinking that it’s 
either going to stay the same or get worse. Fortunately for me, the disk has 
actually come back in.

“It’s like you’ve got to do the small exercises. It’s like brushing your teeth 
every morning; I just have to do them because it’s part of my daily routine 
now.”
 