
No one dies, except in old age. No violence occurs, aside from a sudden slap 
to the face. But something truly evil lurks in sleepy, leafy Barchester. It 
begins with a creeping sense of dread. Then comes a remorseless feeling that 
one’s livelihood, and everything on which it depends, could be entirely 
controlled by someone who has no interest in your welfare and cares only to 
better their own position. This may sound like very contemporary villainy, but 
there are few more dangerous baddies than the ambitious, ever-plotting, slimy 
Obadiah Slope, the calculating curate who sends shockwaves of unease through 
the diocese of Anthony Trollope’s Barchester Towers.


Slope has an instantly unsettling physical presence. “His hair is lank, and of 
a dull, reddish hue, lumpy masses, cemented with much grease.” He is 
“saucer-eyed”. “His face is not unlike beef of a bad quality. A cold, clammy 
perspiration always exudes from him, the small drops are ever to be seen 
standing on his brow, and his friendly grasp is unpleasant.” But such things 
are only skin deep. It is Slope’s methods that cause greatest recoil.


Yet what is wrong with ambition? Isn’t Slope just a man seeking a better job 
and, into the bargain, a wife with a comfortable income? What exactly does he 
do, and why is he so disturbing? Ruthlessly fawning, constantly trying to 
wriggle his way into favour with the rich and powerful, and in the process 
tread on the heads of others, Slope is a particularly poisonous example of the 
kind of creep that haunts almost any organisation or social group. But this is 
no comicalGareth from The Office <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XZMqOMtl5C0>. 
Slope may be shallow, but he is deeply clever, supremely articulate, and 
absolutely secure in his abilities.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvSXrKyscO3U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvSXrKyscO3U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvSXrKyscO3U&media=>
 Obadiah Slope faces off with Mrs Proudie. 
His instant ambition, even on his arrival as chaplain, is to “be in effect the 
bishop of Barchester” controlling his dithering boss, Dr Proudie (“an 
insignificant goose”), in a temporary alliance with the hen-pecking Mrs 
Proudie, but playing the two off against each other. Theparlour politics 
described provide some of the most deliciously comic scenes in literature 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vSXrKyscO3U>. Yet there is much darkness 
behind it. Slope is entirely self-promoting, but portrays all his actions with 
a veil of religious virtue embroidered with psychopathic confidence. Using a 
cruel moral high ground propelled by a waspish, bullying hypocrisy, “he can 
stoop to fawn and stoop low indeed”, but “as he stalks the streets, his very 
face denotes his horror of the world’s wickedness” and “from the poorer classes 
he exacted an unconditional obedience to set rules of conduct”. His sermon, 
telling clergymen how to behave, sends “all Barchester in a tumult”.


Slope has an extraordinary talent to tear families apart. Preaching against 
“Sabbath travelling” and other matters, he implies that the gentle Mr Harding 
is a man past his sell-by date who should be carried away on “the rubbish cart” 
of history, and blocks him from getting a job at Hiram’s hospital (pretending 
always to use the bishop’s decision as foil). Slope plays off the impoverished 
Mr Quiverful – with wife and 14 children – over the role, too. His power game 
switches back and forth when he realises that Harding’s daughter, Eleanor Bold, 
is rich, and could be a target for marriage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DehnSdG4HRPE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DehnSdG4HRPE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DehnSdG4HRPE&media=>
 Obadiah Slope begins his manipulation over the job at Hiram’s hospital. 
Slope is like a stone dropping in the lives of others, anguish and antipathy 
rippling out in all directions. One rival, Dr Grantly, decides “to fight 
because he found that he hated the man”. By contrast, Slope “had predetermined 
to hate the man, because he foresaw the necessity of fighting him”.


Appearing in the same decade as Dickens’s money-grubbing clerk Uriah Heep, 
Slope wields a sharper, more subtle knife that twists its way into others’ 
lives and emotions. He is somewhere between spider and mosquito, stealthily 
moving across a web of positions to sting and destroy. Slope is also master of 
tone and emphasis - a Victorian PR man. Even before the dean of Barchester is 
dead, he plots to take his job, writing three different letters to influential 
parties, with the barefaced lie that “the bishop is anxious my name is put 
forward”.

When the BBC adaptation – Barchester Chronicles – was aired in 1982, it was a 
breakthrough role for Alan Rickman, whose wondrously weaselly performance 
attracted a media frenzy even bigger than the likes of today’s Downton Abbey. 
JK Rowling talked of her Harry Potter character, Severus Snape, as being 
inspired by a teacher, but the part played by Rickman, also Snape in the Potter 
films, shares a similar name as well asa disregard for personal grooming 
<http://www.accio-quote.org/articles/2007/0730-bloomsbury-chat.html> and that 
cold, calculating air.

Slope’s eventual downfall, as least as far as Barchester is concerned, comes 
from a failure to understand the intelligence of women. He underestimates the 
power of Mrs Proudie, the honesty of Eleanor Bold, who rejects him with that 
slap, and the manipulative cruelty and beauty of Madeline Neroni, the object of 
his lust. But Slope is equally fascinating because he is, with that stinging 
blow of rejection and anger, aware of his own wickedness, and wonders whether 
“all his religion is hypocrisy”. Yet his character is not reformed by 
rejection, but hardened.




 