
No other Bafta best picture was possible. Steve McQueen's 12 Years a Slave was 
the worthiest of winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/baftas-2014-best-film-award-12-years-a-slave>
 – despite, incidentally, a smidgen of ill-informed punditry here and there in 
the last few weeks about its alleged "worthiness" as code for dullness. It is a 
magnificent, thrilling and uplifting movie, and this award, along withthe best 
actor prize for its male star Chiwetel Ejiofor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/baftas-2014-chiwetel-ejiofor-best-actor-12-years-a-slave>
, partly soothed my feeling that there were some exasperating misjudgments amid 
the good choices at this year's Baftas. 12 Years a Slave could – and should – 
have been better rewarded than this.

I also share the widespread feeling that Jennifer Lawrence's stock price has 
now peaked. Lovable though Lawrence is on- and off-screen, it isn't at all 
clear that shedeserved a best supporting actress prize for her role in David O 
Russell's American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/baftas-2014-jennifer-lawrence-supporting-actress-american-hustle>
, ahead of contenders including Lupita Nyong'o and Sally Hawkins.

These Bafta awards turned out to be the event where the sci-fi thriller 
Gravity, like Mo Farah, triumphantly asserted its British status,winning best 
British film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/baftas-2014-gravity-outstanding-british-film>
, in spite of some mutterings about its passport. Given that its remarkable 
technology and effects were magicked up in the UK, probably only a curmudgeon 
would object too vehemently. Along with the award for original music and sound, 
Gravity also picked up a supremely deserved Bafta for best visual effects. The 
cinematography prize for Emmanuel Lubezki, meanwhile, was fitting, because 
Gravity was such a thrillingly immersive visual spectacle – although I thought 
Sean Bobbitt, the director of photography for 12 Years a Slave, was by a 
whisker the better choice.

But for me, Alfonso Cuarón's best director Bafta for Gravity was, to put it 
delicately, a surprise. It is a really terrific film – almost sensually pure 
entertainment in the truest, most old-fashioned sense of Hollywood cinema. I 
don't retract a word ofmy five-star rave. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review> Yet I didn't 
think the direction was absolutely the best thing about it, and at the risk of 
churlishness, Steve McQueen was the better choice to win as director.

As for Paul Greengrass's Captain Phillips, newcomer Barkhad Abdi made a 
brilliant impression as the desperate Somali pirate who boards Tom Hanks's 
colossal container ship, a symbol of Western prosperity under attack. But even 
the film's fans, of whom I am one, might be bemused that this is what has 
earned it a Bafta, andAbdi's performance is considered better than Michael 
Fassbender's in 12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/baftas-captain-phillips-supporting-actor>
.

One thing was resoundingly right: Cate Blanchett's best actress Bafta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/baftas-2014-cate-blanchett-best-actress>
 for Woody Allen's Blue Jasmine – a brilliantly detailed and muscular 
performance, theatrically vehement when it needed to be and subtly shaded at 
the right times, too.

American Hustle is such an enjoyable film, and it's great to see a comedy do 
well in awards ceremonies that traditionally reward seriousness and solemnity. 
Itsaward for best original screenplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/baftas-2014-best-original-screenplay-american-hustle>
 is, in many ways, an exhilarating choice, as this was a film which seemed 
almost like free-form jazz – thumbing its nose at the verities of three-act 
screenplays and surmounting obstacles and having sympathetic characters. This 
was a film populated by chaotic, self-obsessed and entirely unsympathetic 
people. But the writing was great and the comedy was great. And the Bafta for 
best makeup and hair could have gone to no one else.

Elsewhere, Steve Coogan and Jeff Pope's Philomena came away with best adapted 
screenplay, which was a pleasing event: the film is a heartfelt and candid true 
story to which Coogan and Pope brought a sure touch, creating a great role for 
Judi Dench, and a thoroughly engaging odd-couple relationship with its 
producer-actor Coogan.

Best documentary and best foreign film went to The Act of Killing and The 
Great Beauty respectively, which look to me like impeccable choices. And it is 
great to see the outstanding debut Bafta go to Kieran Evans for the excellent 
movie Kelly + Victor.

So: some mixed feelings at this year's Baftas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/baftas>. Gravity is an outstanding film and 
12 Years a Slave partisans like me should be wary of sore-loser-ism, but there 
is always the possibility of a disconnect between the view of critics and those 
of awards voters. But I am still hoping for a big win, including best picture 
and best director, for Steve McQueen's masterly 12 Years a Slave at the Oscars.

• Xan Brooks's ceremony live blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/baftas-2014-winners-full-list>
• Full list of winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/baftas-2014-winners-full-list>
 