
At the end of the Bafta-nominated Zero Dark Thirty 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149492/zero-dark-thirty>, a bunch of 
intrepid Navy Seals blunder up the stairwell of a fortified compound, unsure 
what they're going to find there, not knowing if they've even got the right 
place. They're shooting at shadows, working on a hunch. In this respect they 
are slightly better briefed than the journalists currently preparing to climb 
the stairs to the Bafta press room, right at the top of London's Royal Opera 
House.

Tear up the script and toss out the form guide. This year's awards season is 
the most open affair that I can remember: a hazy huddle of frontrunners, all 
seemingly bobbing back and forth in front of the finish line.Ben Affleck 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/benaffleck>'s Argo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148728/argo> unseats Steven Spielberg's 
Lincoln <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149491/lincoln> at the Golden 
Globes <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jan/14/golden-globes-drama-2013> – 
and yet Affleck isn't even nominated at the Oscars.Lincoln leads the field 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jan/09/baftas-nominations-2013-lincoln> at 
the Bafta nominations – and yet Spielberg fails to make director shortlist. The 
favourites all have feet of clay.

Judged on the numbers, Lincoln remains the film to beat at Sunday's Baftas, if 
only because its 10nominations 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jan/09/baftas-2013-nominations-list> put 
it a whisker ahead of Tom Hooper's belabouring adaptation ofLes Misérables  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150107/miserables>(nine) and Ang Lee's 
winsomeLife of Pi <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149778/life-of-pi> 
(also nine). And yet for all that, the only prize Lincoln can feel truly 
confident of taking home is the best actor statue. Thank heavens forDaniel 
Day-Lewis <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/danieldaylewis>. He's the one sure 
thing in a sea of imponderables.

Best actress? I'm leaning towards Emmanuelle Riva 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/06/emmanuelle-riva-baftas-oscars>, the 
85-year-old mainstay of Michael Haneke'sAmour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147440/amour>, although both Jennifer 
Lawrence (Silver Linings Playbook 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148764/silver-linings-playbook>) and 
Jessica Chastain <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/jessica-chastain> (Zero Dark 
Thirty) must fancy their chances.Anne Hathaway  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/anne-hathaway>looks a decent bet to secure the 
best supporting actress prize for her brief, anguished eruption in Les 
Misérables, whileDjango Unchained 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144406/django-unchained>'s Christoph Waltz
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/christoph-waltz>has a slight advantage in a 
best supporting actor race, though one can bet thatPhilip Seymour Hoffman  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/philipseymourhoffman>(The Master 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146341/master>) and Tommy Lee Jones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/tommyleejones> (Lincoln) will be running him 
close.

The pattern continues with the murk and muddle of the best director nominees 
(pattern? It looks more like a splatter painting). The heart saysQuentin 
Tarantino <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/quentintarantino> but the head says 
Affleck - particularly in the absence of Spielberg and Hooper. Incidentally, 
can this be right? The directors of Bafta's two most nominated pictures, both 
shut out of the best director category. What is Bafta saying here? That the 
only bad thing about these brilliant, brilliant movies were the idiot directors 
asleep at the wheel?

Moving hastily on, we come to the films themselves, which Bafta divvies up 
(with a few canny duplications) between six different categories: "best 
picture", "outstanding British film", "best foreign film", "best animation", 
"best documentary" and "outstanding debut by a British writer, director or 
producer". In a rush, working blind, I'm picking Amour (for foreign),
Frankenweenie <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149787/frankenweenie> 
(animation),The Imposter  <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145816/imposter>
(debut) andSearching For Sugar Man  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147796/searching-for-sugar-man>
(documentary).

Les Misérables, significantly, crops up on both the best film shortlist and in 
the outstanding British film category that precedes it. Keep an eye on that 
British award. If it goes toSkyfall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144416/skyfall> (as I think it will), 
then I'm backing Les Misérables to take the night's crowning prize. And if it 
doesn't – in other words, if Les Mis is named best British film – then switch 
your allegiance to either Argo or Lincoln.

The EE British Academy film awards kick off at 7pm (GMT) on Sunday 10 
February. As in previous years, I shall be there,live-blogging the event 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/baftas-2013> throughout the evening and 
alternately blushing and wincing at all the predictions I've got so wrong. 
Please feel free to join me and gloat.
 