
Unseeded Marcos Baghdatis extended his remarkable run on Tuesday, beating 
Croatia's Ivan Ljubicic 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6, 6-3 to reach the semi-finals of the 
Australian Open.

Baghdatis is 54th in the world but the difference between him and his world 
No8 opponent was intangible as the Cypriot raced to a two-set lead, his 
powerful groundstrokes and athletic approach play in stark contrast to the lack 
of movement on the other side of the net. But the 20-year-old tired as he 
looked set to clinch the match and Ljubicic fought back to take the next two 
sets and establish his dominance.

Baghdatis found the energy to fend off two break points before breaking the 
Croatian in the fourth game and holding on to secure victory. "I started 
thinking a lot and putting some doubts in my head," said Baghdatis. He started 
serving well and got some confidence. It was going so fast I couldn't control 
the game. But in the fifth set I started hitting the ball again."

The win follows his shock defeat of Andy Roddick in the last round and 
Baghdatis will now face David Nalbandian in the semi-finals. The Argentinian is 
fast shaping up to be the biggest challenger to world No1 Roger Federer here.

Nalbandian, the highest remaining seed in the opposite half of the draw to 
Federer, booked the first spot in the semi-finals - his first in Melbourne - 
after overcoming Fabrice Santoro 7-5, 6-0, 6-0.

The match on Rod Laver Arena was a clash of two different styles as 
Nalbandian, the powerful baseliner, locked horns with Santoro, the mercurial 
ball-player. However, it eventually proved to be Nalbandian's day as he 
overcame an initial challenge from his opponent before racing away with the 
victory.

Nalbandia currently boasts a winning record against Federer and won their most 
recent encounter at the final of the Masters Cup in Shanghai at the end of 
2005. However, the fourth seed will have to get past an in-form Baghdatis first.
 