
Hundreds of young people shouting anti-government slogans took to the streets 
in Bahrain on Sunday despite a heavy police presence to mark the fifth 
anniversary of anuprising calling for political change in the tiny island 
kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/08/bahrain-protests-repression-getting-worse>
.

The 2011 protests in Bahrain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain>, 
which is home to the US navy’s 5th fleet, were the largest of the Arab spring 
wave of demonstrations to rock the Gulf Arab states. They were driven by the 
country’s Shia majority with protesters demanding greater political rights from 
the Sunni-led monarchy.

Bahrain’s authorities crushed the protests after its allies, Saudi Arabia and 
the United Arab Emirates, sent reinforcements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/14/saudi-arabian-troops-enter-bahra>
. Many opponents of the government and rights activists remain behind bars and 
the site that was the focus of the protests is still sealed off by security 
forces.

Bahrain's UK-funded police watchdog fails to investigate torture claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/09/bahrains-uk-funded-police-watchdog-fails-to-investigate-torture-claims-mohammed-ramadan>
The government committed itself to reforms but low-level unrest continues, 
particularly in Shia communities outside the capital, Manama. Small groups of 
activists frequently clash with riot police and bombs occasionally target 
security forces.

Last week, a spokesman for Amnesty International said that hopes for progress 
on human rights and holding Bahrain’s authorities to account for alleged abuses 
had faded over the past five years. It released a scathing report last year 
saying government reforms failed to end serious violations of human rights. In 
reply, the government said the report had significant shortcomings and glossed 
over recent institutional and legal measures.

On Sunday, demonstrators from the largely Shia community of Sitra, south of 
the capital, attempted to march but were turned back by police firing teargas, 
according to an Associated Press journalist who was there.

Bahrain torture report undermines UK's reform claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/23/human-rights-watch-report-says-bahrain-is-torturing-detainees>
Protesters carried posters of Manama’s Pearl Square, the centre of the 2011 
protests, while others held aloft portraits of jailed opposition figures. Some 
of the demonstrators hurled petrol bombs and paint bombs at police and blocked 
roads to their communities with iron rods and rubbish to keep security forces 
out. Witnesses reported clashes with police in other areas, too.

The interior ministry said in a statement on Sunday that several minors “who 
were manipulated into participating in riots and acts of vandalism” had been 
arrested the previous day.

Under questioning, those detained admitted they were involved in disrupting 
security, attacking police vehicles, committing arson and blocking roads, 
according to the statement. Their parents have been summoned and ordered to 
bring their children before juvenile prosecutors.

The anniversary protest coincided with celebrations marking the 2001 
referendum on the country’s “national action charter”, which promised earlier 
reforms.

The government said it remained “fully committed to delivering sustainable 
progress, through stable and meaningful democratic development” but it warned 
that progress could not be impeded by “groupings seeking to reject all attempts 
at political advance in favour of narrow, short-term interests”.
 