
Roger Taylor, the captain of Britain's Davis Cup team that in just over three 
weeks will play Australia in their world group first-round match in Sydney, cut 
a somewhat forlorn figure on the opening day of the Australian Open as he sat 
in the blazing sun and watched his country's sole representative fall in the 
first round.

Elena Baltacha <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/elena-baltacha>, a wild card 
and playing in her first grand slam event outside Wimbledon, lost 6-1, 6-4 to 
the unpredictable but patently superior Alexandra Stevenson of the United 
States, the No15 seed.

Taylor had no need to watch, given the parameters of his job, but for the 
first time since Roland Garros in 1994 Britain had no men in a grand slam 
tournament. Life without Tim Henman and Greg Rusedski, both injured, is no life 
at all.

Taylor will attend a routine Davis Cup captains' briefing today and then 
return home where he will take the lead role in the LawnTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association's latest production, 
Waiting for Henman. With Rusedski, before Christmas, having ruled himself out 
of the Davis Cup match, Taylor can only hope that Henman will put Queen and 
country ahead of any personal career objectives and decide to play.

Sven Groeneveld, the former coach of Rusedski and in Melbourne with his new 
charge, the young Croatian Mario Ancic, who won his first-round match 
yesterday, believes Henman would be making a big mistake to play in Sydney, 
where the Australians have chosen to play the tie on clay.

"Unless Tim's shoulder is 100%, he should stay well away," said Groeneveld, 
who denied any approach had been made to him by the LTA to take over from 
France's Patrice Hagelauer as performance director, a job that David Felgate, 
Henman's former coach who is now working for IMG in the United States, is 
supposedly pressing for.

"I was very surprised to hear that Patrice had left. He is one of the best 
coaches in the world but I think that maybe he should have got together a small 
elite group and worked with them rather than trying to change the whole 
structure," said the Dutchman.

The 19-year-old Baltacha, ranked at No157 in the world, is Britain's leading 
woman player though little more than a raw novice. Illness disrupted her season 
last year and she is still not fully recovered. But to express "shock" at the 
speed of Stevenson's serve and to admit that "there was nothing I could have 
done today" suggested a naivety of preparation all too prevalent in British 
tennis.

Baltacha remains a long way off the standard required at this level and 
admitted to being "really nervous". After a disastrous first set, she gained a 
3-2 lead in the second but could not raise her game further as her service 
disintegrated.
 