
Elena Baltacha produced another superb fightback today to become the first 
British woman to reach the third round in Melbourne for 14 years.

Baltacha committed 22 unforced errors as she lost the opening set of her 
second-round clash with France's Stephanie Cohen-Aloro on court six. But the 
British No1 produced a typically gritty display to claim the next two sets for 
the loss of just four games, booking her place in the last 32 with a 2-6, 6-3, 
6-1 victory.

Baltacha, who will face world No19 and 15th seed Silvia Farina Elia in the 
third round, said: "It still hasn't sunk in. I'm really delighted. I was so 
tired today, it was really hurting, but I thought if you just keep fighting 
anything is possible.

"Now I can really relax and have fun. The matches I've had I knew I had a 
chance but I know it's going to be much tougher now."

The 21-year-old is the first British woman through to the third round since 
Clare Wood in 1991, one win away from a glamour tie with Wimbledon champion 
Maria Sharapova.

Baltacha, ranked 185 in the world, won three matches in qualifying to earn her 
place in the main draw, and then fought back from a set down to beat world No66 
Katarina Srebotnik in the first round.

It had looked like Baltacha would finally be able to catch the flight home she 
had been forced to change three times last week, as Cohen-Aloro won five games 
in a row to claim the opening set.

But the second set was a vast improvement as her unforced errors were replaced 
with more of the winners which peppered her victory over Srebotnik on Monday. 
After receiving a warning from the umpire for taking too long between points, 
Baltacha broke her opponent's serve in the sixth game and then fired her second 
ace of the match as she served out to take the set and level the match.

Momentum was firmly on Baltacha's side now and she breezed through the final 
set, winning six games in succession.

She is now certain to climb to a new career-best world ranking inside the top 
130, and her guaranteed prize money of Â£19,000 is almost as much as she won 
throughout the whole of last season.

"I'll have to change my flight now for the fifth time but I think I'll stick 
with economy," she joked afterwards.

Serena Williams enjoyed an easy passage into the third round with a straight 
sets victory over Dally Randriantefy of Madagascar.

Williams, seeded seventh after an injury-hit 2004 which saw her win just two 
tournaments and fail to add to her tally of six grand slams, had no problem 
easing to a 6-3, 6-0 win.

France's Amelie Mauresmo recovered from a set down to charge into the third 
round.

As the temperature soared to 95 degrees, Mauresmo seemed to be wilting in the 
heat as she surrendered the first set to Russian Dinara Safina on the Vodafone 
Arena.

But the second seed hit back to claim the second set 6-1 and breezed through 
the decider without dropping a game to advance to the last 32.

Mauresmo, who is scheduled to meet Williams in the quarter-finals, said: "I 
had a pretty slow start I would say. My legs were not really moving very well 
and she played a good first set. She made me work a little bit more.

"But in that second and third set I felt really that I was taking control of 
the game and that she was going downhill a little bit physically also."

Fifth seed Svetlana Kuznetsova put the furore surrounding her reported failed 
drugs test behind her as she eased into the third round.

The US Open champion, who looks certain to escape sanction even if a positive 
test for the stimulant ephedrine is confirmed, thrashed France's Marion Bartoli 
for the loss of just two games.

Fellow Russian Vera Zvonareva was not so fortunate, however, the ninth seed 
losing to compatriot Vera Douchevina 6-3, 6-3.
 