
When it comes to box office figures, Scarlett Johansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/29/scarlett-johansson-10th-highest-grossing-female-film-star-ever>
 currently makes far more money than Will Smith.

It’s an astonishing statistic. Smith was once dubbed the “box office king” 
thanks to the barnstorming success of Independence Day and the Men in Black 
films. Collectively, his films have made more than $2.8bn in the US alone.


However, in a newly released ranking of the highest-grossing movie stars of 
all time 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/people/?view=Actor&sort=sumgross&order=DESC&p=.htm>
, Smith only makes 24th place. Johansson, meanwhile, is ranked 10th, her films 
having made over $3.3bn in the US. That makes her the only female actor in the 
top 10 – and the youngest by 20 years. Johansson is only 31. (No 1? Harrison 
Ford.)

Scarlett Johansson now highest-grossing female film star of all time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/29/scarlett-johansson-10th-highest-grossing-female-film-star-ever>
Back when Independence Day made Smith a worldwide superstar in 1996 (it’s 
still his biggest hit in the US, having made $306m), Johansson was just getting 
her start in Hollywood, first appearing in a small role in Home Alone 3, then, 
aged 13, playing a severely traumatized girl opposite Robert Redford in The 
Horse Whisperer.

She went on to impress audiences in Ghost World; charm the world’s socks off 
in Lost in Translation, her breakthrough film; and find depths of 
characterisation in Girl With a Pearl Earring. Each performance was distinct, 
unvarnished and unabashedly sensual thanks to Johansson’s striking pout and 
husky Lauren Bacall-like voice.

Nonetheless, Johansson didn’t work to exploit her sexuality until she teamed 
up with Woody Allen forMatch Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/match-point>, their first of three 
collaborations (they went on to make Vicky Cristina Barcelona and Scoop). 
Playing the femme fatale to Jonathan Rhys Meyers’ tennis pro, Johansson proved 
herself to be an intoxicating screen presence: both carnal and mischievous.

The role undoubtedly served as her calling card to Hollywood. Here was a young 
female actor in firm control of her talent, whose beauty was not passive but a 
source of strength. In other words, a future box-office powerhouse was born.

It’s no wonder that straight after Match Point, Johansson starred in her first 
big-budget action film,The Island 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0399201/reference>, from the blockbuster director 
Michael Bay. The film underperformed and was savaged by critics, something 
Johansson had not previously experienced.

The negative response probably led her to stick with smaller projects for a 
time, including The Nanny Diaries and Christopher Nolan’s film The Prestige. 
ThenIron Man 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/iron-man-2> came along, with a 
supporting role that would blossom to become the defining reason she can now 
boast of being one of the most successful actors ever.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fscarlett-johansson-highest-paid-female-actor-box-office-action-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e477b37711e327413871305007031057069e588%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bam%2C%20pow%2C%20ker-ching!%20How%20Scarlett%20Johansson%20became%20box%20office%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fscarlett-johansson-highest-paid-female-actor-box-office-action-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bam%2C%20pow%2C%20ker-ching%21%20How%20Scarlett%20Johansson%20became%20box%20office%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fscarlett-johansson-highest-paid-female-actor-box-office-action-movies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e477b37711e327413871305007031057069e588%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Scarlett Johansson as Black Widow/Natasha Romanoff, in Avengers: Age Of 
Ultron. Photograph: Jay Maidment/AP 
As the scarlet-haired spy Black Widow, Johansson appeared only fleetingly 
opposite Robert Downey Jr in the sequel to his box-office smash that launched 
the Marvel Cinematic Universe (and which has since spawned countless superhero 
films, including The Avengers series). But she made a hell of a first 
impression, effortlessly trading quips with Downey, the quickest-witted actor 
in Hollywood. Johansson also excelled in the action department, something her 
work up until then never indicated.

Suddenly Johansson was a female action star, an anomaly in Hollywood. Marvel, 
realizing what it had on its hands, called on the Black Widow to take on more 
robust roles in The Avengers, Captain America: The Winter Soldier, The 
Avengers: Age of Ultron, and most recently,Captain America: Civil War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-civil-war>. Collectively, 
they’ve propelled Johansson to the list she now finds herself on – despite the 
fact that Marvel has yet to give Black Widow her standalone feature.

Johansson proved she has both the talent and commercial viability to take the 
lead in such a film with Lucy, her 2014 action vehicle from The Fifth Element 
director Luc Besson. The film relied solely on Johansson’s prowess as an action 
star to succeed – and succeed it did, earning more than $126m domestically (a 
huge number, considering it was made for only $40m). Lucy proved that Johansson 
could open a film not tied to a pre-existing property with a built in fanbase. 
That’s something Jennifer Lawrence, who ranks 17th on the list, has yet to 
prove.

Since then, Johansson has continued to satiate her appetite for action by 
signing on to lead the 2017 blockbuster Ghost in the Shell, based on the 
Japanese manga of the same name. Her casting has beenplagued by controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/15/scarlett-johanssons-role-in-ghost-in-the-shell-ignites-twitter-storm>
 – but should the film be a hit with audiences when it comes out next spring, 
Johansson could find herself even higher on the list. If not, she has more 
Avengers movies to move her up a slot or two.
 