
The outgoing US president, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, has used his final trip to 
Europe to call for action to put Greece on a path to “durable” economic 
recovery, including the possibility of debt relief.

Making his first stop in Athens in a farewell tour aimed at safeguarding his 
legacy,Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/barack-obama-calls-for-meaningful-debt-relief-for-greece>
 made the strongest case yet for the debt-stricken country to be given some 
slack. He said: “To the rest of Europe I will continue to emphasise our view 
that austerity alone cannot deliver prosperity.”

Acknowledging the “painful and difficult time” Greeks had endured as a result 
of being bailed out to avoid economic collapse, the US president called for a 
growth strategy that included debt relief formulas. A prosperous Greece would 
not only be good for the Greeks but good forEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and ultimately the world, he 
said.

“I will continue to urge creditors to put Greece on a path of a durable 
economic recovery,” he told a press conference after talks with the Greek prime 
minister,Alexis Tsipras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbarack-obama-raises-possibility-of-debt-relief-on-final-greece-visit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe0ab5a497af553d9bd71e57ddea7729b7b7dcc2%2F0_103_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%20raises%20possibility%20of%20debt%20relief%20on%20final%20Greece%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbarack-obama-raises-possibility-of-debt-relief-on-final-greece-visit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%20raises%20possibility%20of%20debt%20relief%20on%20final%20Greece%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbarack-obama-raises-possibility-of-debt-relief-on-final-greece-visit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe0ab5a497af553d9bd71e57ddea7729b7b7dcc2%2F0_103_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Greek riot police clash with anti-Obama protesters in Athens. Photograph: 
Yannis Behrakis/Reuters 
“Our argument has always been that when the economy contracts this fast, when 
unemployment is this high, that there also has to be a growth agenda to go with 
it and it is very difficult to imagine the kind of growth strategy that’s 
needed without some debt relief mechanism.”

But Obama insisted that, like all countries, Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> also had to undergo structural 
changes and acknowledged that in an arena of multiple players, such as the EU, 
consensus was hard to come by.

“I know the politics of this are not easy,” he said, adding that EU member 
states had their own institutions and constituencies to take into account.

Meanwhile, thousands of hardline anti-capitalist leftwingers protested in the 
streets against Obama’s visit, clashing with riot police as they denounced him 
as “unwanted”.

Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/greece-edges-out-of-recession-with-two-quarters-of-growth>
 has suffered a depression-era downturn since its debt crisis began in late 
2009. Biting austerity, in the form of numerous rounds of budget cuts, has left 
a third of the population living in poverty and one in four out of work.

In talks with the Greek president, Prokopis Pavlopoulos, Obama emphasised the 
politics of inclusion, which he later said were vital to keeping fear and 
loathing at bay.

He said: “Part of my message as I travel not just to Greece but to meet with 
other European leaders is to encourage a process that ensures opportunity for 
all, particularly for the youth of Europe and youth here in Greece.”

With the US president heading next to Germany, the biggest champion of tough 
fiscal policies in the EU, the Greek government has set much store by the 
visit. Tsipras, who has called for a debt deal to be reached by the end of the 
year, described Obama’s support as crucial.

Greece’s staggering debt load – at close to 180% of GDP – is the highest in 
Europe and widely regarded as the greatest impediment to economic recovery.

Obama’s visit coincided with a new round of talks between Athens and the 
creditors who have poured more than €300bn into bailing out the country since 
2010 but also demanded severe austerity measures in return.

 