
This weekend sees the centenary celebration of Barbara Pym, a writer compared 
ina recent article by Salon's Laura Miller 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/03/14/barbara_pym_gets_rediscovered_%E2%80%94_again/>
 to Jane Austen, Anthony Trollope, EF Benson, Stella Gibbons and Agatha 
Christie's Jane Marple.

With the BBC for once seemingly letting a literary anniversary pass unnoticed, 
no national organisation is putting the bunting out for a novelist known for 
social comedies featuring village jumble sales, unrequited love and clergymen 
(averaging 5.76 vicars per novel, James Runcie – who made a Pym TV biopic 
starring Patricia Routledge – has calculated). And that's fitting too – being 
overlooked or turned down was a recurring experience for Pym, as for her 
heroines.

For 16 years amid the un-Pymian hullabaloo of the 60s and early 70s, she was 
out of fashion (as was Austen) and couldn't get published until Philip Larkin 
and others championed her; back in print in 1977, she made the Booker prize 
shortlist withQuartet in Autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780006547808/quartet-in-autumn>
, three years before her death.

These stories of rejection and rediscovery will doubtless be retold at St 
Hilda's College, Oxford (an alma mater Pym shares with several authors, Wendy 
Cope and Val McDermid among them), as the Barbara Pym Society gathers. The 
highlight, tea and biscuits apart, looks to be a walk from the railway station 
around locations connected with Pym and Larkin. Only a cynic would suggest it 
might be called off if there's a risk of sunshine.

At a livelier event in March at Harvard, her American fans enjoyed a church 
service, singing the society song, "Unsuitable Things" (to the tune of "My 
Favourite Things"), papers including one on food in Pym, and champagne and 
cupcakes at their AGM.

In the US – where a perfume called Paperback, billed as smelling like "a dusty 
old copy of a Barbara Pym novel", is available – the BPS's US arm seems keener 
on "doing a Jane Austen" on her, judging by the mugs, tea-towels and other 
merchandising on its website. Who wouldn't want a Barbara Pym "tea-bag rest", a 
snip at $5?
 