
Sir Frederick and Sir David Barclay, the owners of Telegraph Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup>, lent the company £40m 
last year.

The loan, reported in the annual accounts for the Barclay brothers' Press 
Acquisitions group, was repaid in April this year from a £45m cash reserve,
according to a report in today's Times 
<http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/industry_sectors/media/article6721198.ece>
.

According to the report it is the third time that the Daily Telegraph's owners 
have provided loans to Telegraph Media Group since they acquired the business 
in 2004 for £665m. The twins loaned the newspaper £25m in 2007 and have 
injected £25m in equity.

Telegraph Media Group, which earlier this month reported a £15.7m pre-tax loss 
for 2008, recorded the latest £40m loan as due to Press Holdings Ltd, "an 
intermediate parent company", with "no fixed terms of repayment and interest 
free".

TMG recorded costs attributable to exceptional items of £47.1m last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/13/telegraph-media-group-2008-results>
. The bulk of this, some £32.9m, related to restructuring costs surrounding the 
termination of TMG's printing joint ventures, including its West Ferry 
partnership with Richard Desmond's Northern & Shell. These costs included staff 
redundancies, lease obligations and pension costs. According to the Times 
report, the Barclay brothers' Press Acquisitions made a loss of £33m after tax 
in the year to 29 December 2008. Total losses run up by the company since the 
papers were bought from Conrad Black's Hollinger International are £79.3m.

A statement from Press Acquisitions said that it was "confident that it will 
generate sufficient operating profits to meet future interest payments and 
capital loan repayments as they fall due".

Group turnover was £343.4m, down from £354.9m the previous year, excluding the 
company's joint-venture printing arrangements.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 