
Entertainment Weekly has published an array of official on-set shots from Zack 
Snyder’s Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<http://www.ew.com/gallery/batman-v-superman-dawn-justice-first-look-photos>, 
featuring Ben Affleck as Batman, Henry Cavill as Superman and Israeli actor Gal 
Gadot as Wonder Woman. So what do they tell us? Here’s a handful of superhero 
sleights of hand we did not quite see coming.

Will Batman breathe life into Suicide Squad or just kill our buzz?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/may/28/batman-suicide-squad-warner-dc-comics-kill-buzz>
Batman may have the upper hand

The problem with a superhero with no real superpowers beyond extreme wealth, 
clarity of purpose and a soupcon of insanity is that they start to look pretty 
silly when the genuine article hits town. It’s a challenge that Frank Miller 
got past in his iconic graphic novel The Dark Knight Returns by setting up a 
clash in which Batman takes on Superman with the help of kryptonite, acid and a 
special fully armoured body suit, just after Kal-El has survived the blast from 
a nuclear warhead. Entertainment Weekly describes a similar approach in Batman 
v Superman, which will see the pair engage in a “climactic rooftop brawl”, with 
the caped crusader donning a “reinforced mech-suit 
<http://www.ew.com/gallery/batman-v-superman-dawn-justice-first-look-photos/2232978_batman-and-superman-square-first-time>
 equipped with strength-augmenting armour and, yes, kryptonite”. Snyder has 
also reminded us that at 6ft 4in, Affleck is also considerably taller than the 
6ft 1in Cavill. As if that’s going to make any difference.

Our first glimpse of Wonder Woman might be in civilian mode

With Batman v Superman adopting a slowly slowly approach to building the wider 
DC Comics universe on the big screen, it looks as if the big Wonder Woman 
reveal might come after we’re introduced to Gadot asthe tiara-less Diana Prince 
at a “high-society function” 
<http://www.ew.com/gallery/batman-v-superman-dawn-justice-first-look-photos/2233003_mr-wayne-meet-ms-prince>
 where she appears to be flirting with Bruce Wayne. A similar approach worked 
well for Christopher Nolan’s version of Catwoman/Selina Kyle in The Dark Knight 
Rises, and should help to ground the new movie in the real world, or at least 
one more recognisable than the much loved – but distinctly hokey – 1970s Wonder 
Woman show starring Lynda Carter. “I love the fact that there was this Thomas 
Crowne Affair, Bond-y sexy scene that they wrote about two people who are 
pretending to be two different people who each know the secrets of the other 
person,” Affleck told Entertainment Weekly.

Can Warner Bros' wave of DC superhero movies sock it to Marvel?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/17/warner-dc-superhero-movies-batman-superman-wonder-woman-justice-league-to-watch>
Lex Luthor won’t always be bald

Jesse Eisenberg’s arch-villain is sporting a barnet that has been described as 
Rachel from Friends-esque, though I’m thinking moreearly 90s-era Liverpool and 
England footballer Steve McManaman 
<http://i.huffpost.com/gen/1384455/images/o-ROBBIE-FOWLER-STEVE-MCMANAMAN-facebook.jpg>
. But we’ve already seen Eisenluther with asinister bald bonnet in a highly 
publicised headshot 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2015/03/25/jesse-eisenberg-lex-luthor-batman-v-superman-dawn-justice>
 from March, so what gives? Presumably Batman v Superman will also act as a 
form of origins story for Superman’s nemesis, with the character emerging in 
follically challenged mode only later in the film. It must be said, they really 
are trying to cram a lot in to this one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbatman-v-superman-five-surprises-weve-learned-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435928391606%2Feceeb1cb-61d4-499c-bcc0-7613ae31927f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Batman%20v%20Superman%3A%20five%20surprises%20we've%20learned%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbatman-v-superman-five-surprises-weve-learned-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Batman%20v%20Superman%3A%20five%20surprises%20we%27ve%20learned%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbatman-v-superman-five-surprises-weve-learned-this-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435928391606%2Feceeb1cb-61d4-499c-bcc0-7613ae31927f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Henry Cavill and Ben Affleck as duelling superheroes. Photograph: PR 
If Snyder pulls this off, Warner/DC might even have an advantage over Marvel

Man of Steel <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/13/man-of-steel-review>
 may not have picked up the kind of critical plaudits or box office wonga that 
recentAvengers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-avengers> films have 
plundered, but Batman v Superman has even more hype going for it than anything 
the Disney-owned studio has yet given us. If Snyder can deliver a Dawn of 
Justice movie that stands up to his best work – 2009’s wonderfully epicWatchmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/mar/06/watchmen-film-review> or the 
blistering 2004 remake of zombie thrillerDawn of the Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/mar/26/dvdreviews.shopping7> - 
Entertainment Weekly confirms Warner will have him nailed on for at least two 
more movies 
<http://www.ew.com/gallery/batman-v-superman-dawn-justice-first-look-photos/2232983_new-batman-and-his-director>
. “It’ll be five years by the time the movie comes out,” he tells the magazine. 
“And then, if everything goes to plan, it’ll be another five years of Justice 
League. I’ll be 10 years of superheroes by the end of this.”

Joss Whedon: ‘Making The Avengers is tough. I may die…’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/18/joss-whedon-avengers-age-of-ultron>
But, while Snyder is contracted to Justice League part one in 2017 and part 
two in 2019, Marvel seems to have let go of the two main architects of its rise 
to prominence: The Avengers’ Joss Whedon and Iron Man’s Jon Favreau. 
ReplacementsJames Gunn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/06/james-gunn-aggressive-fans-joss-whedon-quit-twitter>
 (Guardians of the Galaxy) and the Russo Brothers have performed well so far, 
but it’s still a time of flux for the pioneering studio.

Batman v Superman could be even grimmer than the Christopher Nolan movies

With pulpy superheroes such as Wonder Woman, Aquaman and The Flash set to join 
Warner/DC’s stab at ashared superhero “cinematic universe” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/17/warner-dc-superhero-movies-batman-superman-wonder-woman-justice-league-to-watch>
, you might imagine that the days of a furrow-browed Nolanesque caped crusader 
are behind us. Holy smokes … there are even rumours that Robin (albeit the 
quite cool Carrie Kelley version from The Dark Knight Returns)might show their 
face in Snyder’s movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/20/batman-female-robin-jena-malone-extra-fine>
. Butshots of night-time scenes 
<http://www.ew.com/gallery/batman-v-superman-dawn-justice-first-look-photos/2233008_dark-dark-knight>
 from the film hint that Gotham is as moody a metropolis as ever. “It means 
that when it was supposed to look rainy and miserable, it had to be rainy and 
miserable,” Affleck told Entertainment Weekly. “The long dark night of the soul 
and whatnot.”

 