
The extremely protracted publicity campaign for Zack Snyder’s Batman v 
Superman: Dawn of Justice <https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2> 
continues to roll on with more details revealed at this week’s Licensing Expo 
in Las Vegas.

The film, which marks Warner Bros’s attempt to emulate Marvel’s cinematic 
universe, has suffered delays and saw a summer 2015 release pushed back to 
spring next year. While the trailer had hinted at what to expect, an official 
synopsis has now given fans a better idea of exactly what will face the DC 
heroes:

Fearing the actions of a god-like super hero left unchecked, Gotham City’s own 
formidable, forceful vigilante takes on Metropolis’s most revered, modern-day 
saviour, while the world wrestles with what sort of hero it really needs. And 
with Batman andSuperman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/superman> at war 
with one another, a new threat quickly arises, putting mankind in greater 
danger than it’s ever known before. 


Details on what this “new threat” are scarce. It’s already known that Jesse 
Eisenberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jesse-eisenberg> will be taking on 
the role of Lex Luthor but given the extensive cast, which also includesGal 
Gadot as Wonder Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/05/wonder-woman-man-of-steel-2-gal-gadot>
 andJason Momoa as Aquaman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/19/jason-momoa-aquaman-game-of-thrones>
, it’s likely that another villain will emerge.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxe1LrMqURuw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxe1LrMqURuw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxe1LrMqURuw&media=>
The Licensing Expo, where products are unveiled by entertainment brands each 
year, also gave Warner Bros the chance to show off the new Batmobile, which has 
been “single-handedly designed and fabricated in near complete seclusion by The 
Batman” according to accompanying notes.

It’s been described as an “infamous pursuit and capture vehicle [which] has 
earned its reputation as the apex predator on the mean streets of Gotham City” 
and can reach speeds of up to 205mph.

The action adventure sees Henry Cavill returning as Superman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/13/man-of-steel-review> and Ben 
Affleck <https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck>taking on the role of 
Batman for the first time. The cast also includesAmy Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amy-adams>, Laurence Fishburne, Jeremy Irons 
and Holly Hunter.

 * Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice opens March 26 2016 
 