
ITV gains nothing from the proposed cutbacks at the BBC, its chairman Archie 
Norman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> said today, as he 
promised a "day zero" revamp of the broadcaster that could include a fresh look 
at pay-TV.

Norman, who also highlighted ITV's digital strategy and programme-making 
divisions as key targets for revitalisation, said he did not believe that the 
broadcaster would be helped by director general Mark Thompson's proposals, 
which were in part designed to give commercial players more breathing space.

"I don't see any benefit," he said. "The savings the BBC will make on cutting 
back on peripheral activities will be re-invested in programming. I can't see 
how that will be of any benefit toITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv>
."

Norman, who has in the past said that a move to pay-TV services was not on the 
cards, said that a working up of plans to look at a potential pay-TV channel 
launch was "not a change of tune" but that ITV currently "had no suitable 
product for a pay platform".

"Pay wall, pay-TV, subscriptions... would it be a good idea in the future for 
some of our income to come from there? It may be – it is a more stable platform 
[for revenues]," he said. "[But] we have no product suitable for a pay platform 
right now. Speculation we might take ITV2, 3 or 4 onto a pay-TV platform is not 
realistic. Were we to develop a proposition in the pay [TV] market we would 
need a very different product than we have at this time. Is there in principle 
a case for looking at it [a channel] out of content and programming we have? 
Absolutely."

Norman said that the strategic review, which will be run by chief executive 
Adam Crozier for his arrival on 26 April with support from consultants LEK, 
would involve a "cold-eyed, realistic" look at ITV's position in the 
marketplace.

"Today is very much day zero," he said. "ITV has a long and interesting 
history but I am not here as a historian. I am here to build a four-to-five 
year future for ITV."

Norman also once again dismissed any notion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv-transformation-norman>
 that ITV would look at selling off its programme-making operation, despite 
reports that some shareholders would like to see that happen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/31/itv-demerger-threat>.

"I see production as a major part of our future," he said. "if I had one pound 
to invest [in ITV], and you asked me where I would invest it, I would invest it 
in content". He said that given the restrictions on the rights that ITV can 
exploit in deals to buy programming from other broadcasters and production 
companies, ITV had "every incentive" to develop own content business.

"Today we have a ticket to the races," he said, referring to the opportunity 
to look at future growth following a year of cuts and restructuring. "At the 
beginning of last year ITV was facing a fairly considerable threat with the 
advertising market falling at an almost unstoppable rate and [ITV with] a very 
stretched balance sheet."

However, he added that he remained frustrated with the "inherited archaeology 
of years of regulation" with structures such as contracts rights renewal, the 
mechanism that controls ITV1's ad rates, still in place.

"It is very important psychologically that we don't depend on regulatory 
change – we must play the field as we find it and not hold out hope on 
regulatory relief on any major scale," he said. "It takes years to change. We 
won't change it by pleading sympathy because ITV is not paying a dividend but 
because [regulation] is damaging creative Britain. There will be no material 
benefit [from regulatory change] for ITV over the next three to four years."

Norman also said that he was somewhat perplexed by the proposed legal action 
by STV, the Scottish ITV licensee, particularly given that he has never met its 
chief executive, Rob Woodward.

He admitted that the legislation that governs how ITV and its licensees 
interacts "is set up for conflict" but did not believe that disputes were in 
the best interests of any party.

"It is a storm in a teacup financially," he said. "We can carry on this way if 
that is the way it has to be but I'm sure it is not in the best interests."

Last month STV said it was considering yet another legal action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/25/stv-threatens-legal-action-x-factor>
 against ITV, accusing it of "prejudicial and aggressive" scheduling of 
lucrative spinoffs of hit shows such as The X Factor. In its results this 
morning ITV maintained that it is, in fact, STV that owes £20m over contractual 
obligations in the ITV Network budget.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 