
So the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> holds out the hand of 
friendship to the ailing newspaper industry and gets a kick up the backside for 
its trouble.

I pointed out yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/sep/07/the-real-reason-for-the-bbcs-regional-newspaper-reporting-pool>
 that the BBC’s plan to create a pool of 100 “public service reporters” would 
be used by publishers as a way to introduce further staff cuts.

In fact, those publishers obtusely see the initiative as way for the BBC to 
further its own supposed ambitions to become the sole purveyor of local news 
across Britain.

Ashley Highfield <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield> and Henry 
Faure, chief executives respectively of Johnston Press and Newsquest, will have 
none of it.

Highfield, who is also vice chairman of the publishers’ trade body, the News 
Media Association, thought it represented a takeover of local newsgathering by 
the corporation.

And John McLellan, director of the Scottish Newspaper Society, described the 
plan as a “Trojan horse”; a “further expansion of the BBC’s encroachment.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/07/bbcs-local-news-plans-a-trojan-horse-for-expansion-say-publishers>


He continued: “From a business point of view it might be, on the face of it, 
attractive. But it is not going to make any difference to the business plans of 
individual publishers.

“Whether they cover local courts or not is not going to make a difference to 
the overall picture.”

National newspapers weighed in with similar negative comments. The Daily 
Telegraph, repeating the unproven claim that the BBC’s“vast regional news 
operation is putting local newspapers and other commercial media out of 
business” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/media/11849647/The-bizarre-logic-of-the-BBC.html>
, called the plan “surreal”. It said:

“In effect, the BBC’s answer to a problem caused by there being too many BBC 
journalists providing local news is to recruit more BBC journalists to provide 
local news...

If this misguided plan has a virtue, it is to expose the institutional 
self-interest of the BBC. Far from existing to provide the high quality British 
public-service broadcasting that it still does so well and which the still 
country expects of it, the BBC now exists primarily to sustain itself and its 
influence.”

The Times, which cannot see any virtue in the BBC anyway, was predictably 
opposed to the idea in a leading article,Broadcasting behemoth 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/leaders/article4549115.ece>. 

It argued that the BBC’s proposals to aid regional newspapers - the pool of 
public service reporters, the sharing of its data journalism along with audio 
and video clips - were “symbolic rather than substantive.” It continued:

“Their aim is to strengthen local news services without adding to their 
costs... Local news providers are at particular risk of being squeezed out of 
business by the BBC’s 58 local news websites.

A local newspaper that has specialist knowledge of a region and deep roots 
within it does not enjoy the advantages of economies of scale and scope that a 
national broadcaster does.

Publishing is an extension of the BBC’s mission that was never envisaged, 
indeed would have been inconceivable, in its founding charter nearly 90 years 
ago.

It is against the ethos of an informed democracy that a single organisation 
should be entrusted with such a commanding market share. What makes it verge on 
the scandalous is that the pressures exerted by the BBC on local news services 
are unrelated to the quality of its output. They are a function instead of the 
fact that it has a captive source of revenue, through the television licence 
fee.”

Again, proof that papers are losing sales and readers because of the BBC’s 
news output is wanting.

More pertinently, the Financial Times contended that “100 reporters seems 
inadequate to the task of covering local stories across the country.” 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/eeaba556-555a-11e5-a28b-50226830d644.html>

And, echoing a point I made yesterday, the FT thought it “questionable why 
licence fee payers should want to subsidise such content”. It concluded:

“In a world in which television is merging with the web, it makes little sense 
to draw hard lines between what the BBC does on TV and online. To fulfil its 
remit the corporation needs to be present in both.

But rather than offer political sops to justify its online presence in 
sensitive areas, Lord Hall should set out what the BBC needs to do in text to 
fulfil its mission — and otherwise show restraint. Magazine features and local 
news do not make the cut.

The BBC has warned the income squeeze it faces will require deep cuts in the 
provision of services. This will necessitate hard choices. The website cannot 
be exempt from these.”

As far as the BBC is concerned, its proposals are aimed at stimulating “a 
consultation process” in order “to create a genuine partnership with the 
industry.”


But newspaper publishers, although they plead for cooperation, really want the 
BBC to fold its tent and walk away in the misguided belief that it will stop 
their audiences from deserting them.

Meanwhile, who is the loser? The public, of course, which is getting less and 
less information at a local and regional level.
 