
While many artists venture out into the world of retail for their own brand 
benefits, Beastie Boys’ Ad-Rock has designed a trainer for the good of the 
world.

Along with ethical LA shoe company Keep 
<https://keepcompany.com/collections/ramos/products/the-ramos-ad-rock>, the 
rapper has created a vegan trainer to raise money forPlanned Parenthood 
<https://www.plannedparenthood.org/>, the US non-profit organisation that 
provides reproductive healthcare, sex education and information to millions of 
people worldwide.

“I support a woman’s right to choose, and feel that women should not be 
punished for making decisions about their own lives and bodies,” said Ad-Rock 
in a statement. “If you have similar beliefs, you might wanna grab a pair.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fbeastie-boys-ad-rock-designs-trainer-to-fundraise-for-planned-parenthood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ef9665bd782de6037d04c5abb1204403978b925%2F0_89_2560_1247%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beastie%20Boys%E2%80%99%20Ad-Rock%20designs%20trainer%20to%20fundraise%20for%20Planned%20Parenthood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fbeastie-boys-ad-rock-designs-trainer-to-fundraise-for-planned-parenthood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beastie%20Boys%E2%80%99%20Ad-Rock%20designs%20trainer%20to%20fundraise%20for%20Planned%20Parenthood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fbeastie-boys-ad-rock-designs-trainer-to-fundraise-for-planned-parenthood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ef9665bd782de6037d04c5abb1204403978b925%2F0_89_2560_1247%2F2560.jpg>
 Keep x Ad-Rock Ramos trainers Photograph: keepcompany.com 
Adam Horovitz: ‘It’s weird not being a Beastie Boy. It’s all I did for 25 
years’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/12/adam-ad-rock-horovitz-beastie-boys-interview-while-were-young>
Ad-Rock, whose real name is Adam Horovitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/12/adam-ad-rock-horovitz-beastie-boys-interview-while-were-young>
, is one of many artists, including Run the Jewels’ El-P, who have aired their 
support for Planned Parenthood in the wake of Donald Trump’s election to the US 
presidency. In a letter  
<http://www.lifenews.com/2016/09/16/donald-trump-calls-for-defunding-planned-parenthood-i-am-committed-to-defunding-it/>
posted in September this year, Trump stated: “I am committed to defunding 
Planned Parenthood as long as they continue to perform abortions and 
reallocating their funding to community health centers that provide 
comprehensive healthcare for women.”

Earlier this month, Ad-Rock also gave a speech at a “stand up against hate” 
rally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/nov/21/beastie-boys-star-attends-rally-after-adam-yauch-park-defaced-with-anti-semitic-graffiti-video>
when a New York City park named in honour of the late Beastie Boys memberAdam 
‘MCA’ Yauch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/03/beastie-boys-confirm-no-more-live-performances-without-adam-yauch>
 was defaced with antisemitic graffiti.
 