
Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/beauty> journalism evokes images 
of an elegant desk adorned with antique Parisian perfume bottles, clusters of 
psychedelic lipsticks and beautiful thoughts inked across pink Post-it notes; 
but that's only when we're not languishing at the spa. In reality, we're human 
guinea pigs testing one potion after another, armed with scientific stats and 
the occasional allergic reaction. All in the hope that one day, someone will 
invent an eye cream that will end the dark circle turmoil.

Although many of the factors causing them are beyond our control (those pesky 
genes), I still want to understand why my eye area has taken a sudden turn for 
the worse. "The darkening in colour is due to the thinning of skin around the 
eyes as we age," explains Dr Nick Lowe, consultant dermatologist and professor 
at UCLA. "It lets the superficial blood vessels show through the skin, 
resulting in darkly pigmented circles." However, post-inflammatory pigmentation 
caused by sensitivity or eczema in the eye area also causes skin to become 
pigmented, especially darker skins, but needs to be treated immediately by a 
doctor.

Prevention and minimising the appearance of dark circles are both key in this 
beauty battle. All the usual suspects contribute to their woeful intensity, so 
getting enough sleep, lowering stress levels and leading a healthy lifestyle 
will all help in the fight. Ditching the KFC, cigarettes and actually using the 
gym rather than treating it like a walk-in shower will also prove useful. But 
unfortunately, a scoop of eye cream won't rectify these little lifestyle 
misdemeanours either. I go through pots of the gloop, to Lowe's utter dismay. 
"You should go easy on how much eye cream you apply. Excessive amounts can 
cause puffiness and block pores in the delicate eye area," he warns.
 From left: Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair Eye, Bobbi Brown Creamy 
Concealer Kit, Origins Plantscription Anti-ageing Eye Treatment. 
But, applied correctly, they definitely help to a certain degree by 
moisturising and plumping. Having tried every eye cream that has landed on my 
desk I've racked up a few favourites.Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair Eye 
(£36,esteelauder.co.uk 
<http://www.esteelauder.co.uk/templates/product/search_results.tmpl?query=advanced+night+repair+eye&x=0&y=0>
), Origins Plantscription Anti-ageing Eye Treatment (£35, origins.co.uk 
<http://www.origins.co.uk/product/3839/19623/Great-Gifts/Range/Skincare/Plantscription/Anti-aging-eye-treatment/index.tmpl>
), Bakel Cool Eyes (£75, spacenk.co.uk 
<http://www.spacenk.co.uk/product/code/200007855.do?showPrevNext=false>) and Dr 
Lowe's Dark Circles Correcting cream (£15.31,boots.com 
<http://www.boots.com/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/EndecaSearchListerView?storeId=10052&searchTerm=10097907.P&ta=1&typeAhead=true&langId=-1&catalogId=11051#container>
) are the few that delivered any noticeable improvement. Through my quest, I've 
also become aware that the constant removal of make-up with wipes and removers 
is tugging at my skin, causing it to weaken further and those dark circles to 
worsen. Switching toClinique's Naturally Gentle Eye Make-up Remover (£13, 
clinique.co.uk 
<http://www.clinique.co.uk/products/search/ecat.tmpl?search=Naturally+Gentle+Eye+make-up+remover>
) was a stroke of self-appointed genius. Although the area looks a little 
brighter than before, I still rely heavily on my trusty concealer.

You know a product is unspeakably good when you stop looking for something 
better. Bobbi Brown's Creamy Concealer Kit (£23.50, bobbibrown.co.uk 
<http://www.bobbibrown.co.uk/product/2335/15950/Makeup/Face/Correctors-Concealers/Creamy-Concealer-Kit/Award-Winner/index.tmpl>
)is easy to apply (pat gently around the eye area with your index finger,) 
doesn't settle into fine lines and comes with its own super-fine setting 
powder. The immense shade range means you'll never fall foul of the cardinal 
dark skin sin of applying a too-light concealer around the eyes, causing that 
reverse panda effect.

We've cared for our dark circles with creams, treated them lovingly with 
concealer, altered our lifestyles but for those who have tried everything else, 
dermatologists recommendFraxel lasering 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/04/14/fashion/thursdaystyles/14skin.html?pagewanted=print&position=>
, one of the newer laser treatments that is said to be more effective on darker 
skins. As I consider it for a moment, Lowe reminds me of one of the biggest 
causes of dark circles – sun damage. "Everyone, even those with darker skins, 
should wear wide, UV-protected sunglasses in sunlight and dab an SPF15 with UVA 
protection lightly under the eyes. If you don't even do that, there is no point 
doing anything else." Consider me told – I might never remove my shades again.

• Thanks to Dr Nick Lowe (drnicklowe.com <http://drnicklowe.com/>). Please 
email the fashion desk at fashion.desk@guardian.co.uk <mailto: 
fashion.desk@guardian.co.uk> or comment below for any specific questions or 
suggestions for future columns.

Anita is the beauty assistant at Stylist magazine.


 