
Every couple of seasons the trend for gothic makeup reappears – notably 
encouraged, this season, byan increasing love of Twilight 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/twilight> and all manner of bitey creatures 
of the night. But it's not a trend that bodes well for darker skins – what with 
pallor being the key facet and all that. Fortunately, I have more than a 
decade's experience of being a goth of colour (that's the official term) and 
have honed using darker, dense shades in a way that makes them look as dramatic 
as they do on paler skins. While going for a full-pelt gothic look only appeals 
to about 3% of the population, taking one facet, such as a smouldering 
forest-green eye or vinyl blackberry lip, is an easy way to move your makeup 
into an entirely new realm.
 Gothic makeup (clockwise from left): Yves Saint Laurent's Le Teint Touch 
Eclat Foundation, Urban Decay's Smoked palette, Benefit Watt's Up highlighter, 
Illamasqua's Growl lipstick, Morgana Cryptoria lipstick in Flirtatious Flapper 
and Mac Media lipstick. Photomontage: guardian.co.uk 
The ultimate dark lip

The joy of this season's goth-inspired look is that it breaks a big beauty 
rule – namely, allowing us to wear a dark eye and lip together. I've found that 
doing your lipstick first makes it easier to balance the intensity of the eye 
and lip together, and that using a lip liner in a similar shade is also 
non-negotiable (this may be a goth look, but bleeding lipstick is to be 
avoided). When it comes to choosing the ultimate dark, romantic lipstick,MAC's 
lipstick in Media 
<http://www.maccosmetics.com/product/shaded/168/310/Lipstick/index.tmpl>, £14, 
is a perfect glossy maroon,Illamasqua's Growl lipstick, £16 
<http://www.illamasqua.com/shop/growl-lipstick>, a matte vampish burgundy and 
thenearly black Morgana Cryptoria lipstick in Flirtatious Flapper 
<http://www.rowdydow.co.uk/lips/lipstick/morgana_cryptoria/724/1920s_lipstick/flirtatious_flapper>
, £8, rank highly in my trials. A slick ofNARS Lip Gloss in Nana 
<http://www.narscosmetics.co.uk/color/lips/lip-gloss/nana>, £17.50, over the 
top of any of these creates an unbelievably beautiful shine – but be warned – 
unless you're vigilant (or a mannequin) it tends to end up everywhere except 
your lips.

The captivating smoky eye

The smoky eye is staple beauty look, but instead of the traditional black or 
grey, a palette of dark greens, midnight blues and burgundy shades are a 
welcome seasonal update.Urban Decay's Smoked palette, £30-35 
<http://www.beautybay.com/cosmetics/urbandecay/smokedpalette/> with its dark 
metallic shades (another key trend this season) has all the options you'd ever 
want. Using brighter accents also brings life to a darker eye shadow – try
Illamasqua's Pure Pigments 
<http://www.asos.com/Illamasqua/Illamasqua-Pure-Pigment-Loose-Eye-Powder/Prod/pgeproduct.aspx?iid=809180&cid=8368&sh=0&pge=0&pgesize=200&sort=-1&clr=Conquer&utm_source=google_product_search&utm_medium=organic&utm_campaign=google_product_search&WT.tsrc=Google%20Product%20Search>
 in Ore or Beguile, £15.50, daubed gently into the inner corners of the eye or 
blended directly above the iris to catch the light every time you blink. When 
it comes to brows, shade them a little and brush upwards for a more natural 
look, or lighten them with a little foundation for an edgier finish.

The flawless base

Leave your base until last. Chances are that the smokey eye has caused a 
little fall out beneath the eye, so use your foundation brush to magic it away. 
A word of warning on the traditional advice offered for the gothic look: taking 
your foundation a shade lighter doesn't work on darker skins. It truly doesn't. 
Instead, the way to bring light to your face, to counteract all the dark 
make-up, is to switch the finish of your foundation to a luminous one.Sleek's 
Be Beautiful Blemish Balm 
<http://www.superdrug.com/face/sleek-makeup-be-beautiful-blemish-balm-medium/invt/532256/>
, £8.99, holds up well, even on oily skins, as doesYves Saint Laurent's Le 
Teint Touch Eclat Foundation 
<http://www.selfridges.com/en/Beauty/Categories/Shop-Make-up-colour/Face/Foundation/Le-Teint-Touche-Eclat-foundation_456-84033258-TOUCHEECLATFOUNDATION/>
, £28. Finally, finish your look with a dusting of light setting powder, such 
as my old faithfulMAC Blot Powder 
<http://www.maccosmetics.co.uk/product/shaded/159/301/Blot-PowderPressed/index.tmpl>
, £20, avoiding blusher (it's too made up) but adding a highlighter such as
Watt's Up, £24.50 <http://www.benefitcosmetics.co.uk/product/view/watts-up>, 
across the cheek bones.

However far down the valley of darkness you choose to traverse, the key with 
any strong editorial look is precision and blending.Laura Mercier Deluxe Travel 
Brush Collection 
<http://www.lauramercier.com/store/shop/Holiday-Colour-Sets-%26-Palettes_Deluxe-Travel-Brush-Collection_prod800004>
, £67, was a pricey purchase I made three years ago. The brushes are still 
going strong and fit into a clutch, or coffin bag, with relative ease and the 
difference they have made to the quality of my makeup application is truly 
remarkable.

• In her final column of the year, Anita will be giving out awards for the 
best beauty products for darker skins. Submit your favourites to her on Twitter:
twitter.com/ItsMeAnitaB <http://twitter.com/ItsMeAnitaB>
 