
To BB or not to BB, that's the beauty conundrum we're currently facing. 
Inexcusably bad puns aside,BB creams (beauty balms or blemish balms) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/2012/apr/20/sali-hughes-bb-creams> are a 
nifty amalgamation of skincare and cosmetic coverage with the added bonus of an 
SPF – all in one handy tube. The formula was initially created by a German 
dermatologist for use on her patients after surgery. They have been used 
cosmetically in Asia for decades, before gaining popularity over here in the 
last year or so. They may sound like glorified tinted moisturisers, but BB 
creams are thicker and better at concealing blemishes, so offer that little bit 
more coverage. BB creams also contain all manner of highly reflective 
ingredients to help light bounce off the skin more effectively. As a result we 
all look more radiant and therefore more youthful.

Sounds incredible, doesn't it? There's a downside, I'm afraid. BB creams 
target fairer skintones and the original formulations are high in white 
pigments. As we know, it has taken a long time to get a full, diverse range of 
foundations to colour-match darker skins, and the same is true of BB creams as 
well. However, while the range of BB creams for darker skins is diminutive, 
there are a couple thatdo cater to relatively dark skintones - and they're 
under a tenner.
 Left-right: Sleek's Be Beautiful Blemish Balm; Smashbox's Camera Ready BB 
Cream; Maybelline's Dream Fresh BB cream; Gosh's BB Cream. 
Sleek's Be Beautiful Blemish Balm, £8.99 (superdrug.com 
<http://www.superdrug.com/face/sleek-makeup-be-beautiful-blemish-balm-medium/invt/532256>
) andGosh's BB Cream, £9.99, (superdrug.com 
<http://www.superdrug.com/face/gosh-bb-cream-chestnut/invt/507554&bklist=>) are 
both available in dark shades that suit everyone up to a very dark black skin 
tone (think model Alek Wek and deeper). A personal favourite isMaybelline's 
Dream Fresh BB cream, £7.99 (boots.com 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Maybelline-Dream-Fresh-BB-Cream_1251099/>), which 
suits my medium-dark Indian skintone perfectly, as doesSmashbox's Camera Ready 
BB Cream SPF 35, £27, (smashbox.co.uk 
<http://www.smashbox.com/product/6032/21835/Face/SMASHBOX-CAMERA-READY-BB-CREAM-SPF-35/index.tmpl>
). Its peachy Universal Glow shade can be used under a light foundation as a 
skin-perfecting primer on all skintones too. And though it's not strictly a BB 
in the SPF sense,Illamasqua's Skin Base Foundation, £27, (illamasqua.com 
<http://www.illamasqua.com/shop/products/face-and-body/foundations/skin-base-foundation-sb-17>
) has shades to suit every skintone and does a similar job in terms of cover 
and consistency.

Following in the wake of the BB cream is the CC (colour correction or colour 
control) cream. CC creams focus more on colour-correcting (evening out redness 
or brightening skintones) and tend to be more translucent formulations than 
their heavier BB counterparts. More CC cream options are becoming available 
each week – but sadly, none specifically for darker skins just yet. However,
L'Oreal Paris Nude Magique CC Cream Anti-Fatigue, £9.99 (boots.com 
<http://www.boots.com/en/LOreal-Paris-Nude-Magique-CC-Cream-Anti-Fatigue_1305564/>
) has become my go-to primer base underneath my foundation.

So, that's the lowdown on BBs. It's worth noting that if you're in the US, the 
brilliant Iman ranges (by model and wife ofDavid Bowie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/2013/mar/12/david-bowie-eight-classic-looks-pictures>
,Iman Abdulmajid 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/mar/14/david-bowie-wife-hints-tour>) 
offers a BB cream for darker skins that's certainly worth buying. But watch 
this space; hopefully it won't be long before we have a full range of BBs and 
CCs at our disposal.

If you have tried any other BB creams that work on darker skins do let me know 
in the comments section below.

Anita is the beauty assistant at Stylist magazine 
 