
A decade of mismatched shades, wasted money and dashed hopes. It's all 
resulted in a foundation bottle-shaped chip on my shoulder. As I type this 
column, a surge of anger is rising, ready to pour into a diatribe of how my 
teenage foray into makeup buying was overshadowed by never finding the correct 
colour. Although brands like Fashion Fair and Iman catered to darker skins, 
they were so selectively available that my nearest stockiest was three hours 
away, down the never-ending M4.

But back then darker foundation shades, regardless of brand, were all flat and 
one-dimensional. Although we've had an array of darker shades for years now – 
thanks, mainly to MAC and Nars, but more recently Illamasqua, Laura Mercier and 
Sleek – it's really been the last year (since YSL launched their darker Touch 
Eclat shades in 2011 in fact) that the entire market for darker skins has 
shifted in our favour.

Benefit is expanding their foundation line to include darker shades for the 
first time. Julie Bell, the brand's executive vice president of Global 
Marketing, explains why it's taken so long, "Developing deeper foundation 
shades can be challenging. The range of skin tones is incredibly broad, and 
women with darker skin have varying undertones on different parts of the face – 
that makes it harder to find the perfect colour."

Lancôme, too, has focused intensively on perfecting their new shade range. 
Working alongside US research group Women of Colour, they aimed to completely 
understand the needs of all darker skin tones. Part of the process was finding 
a way around that grey, ashy colour that some darker foundations result in, by 
replacing some of the black pigments with blue, for example. The result is one 
of the most comprehensive foundation lines I've ever seen.

What's true of all these foundations is that they're ultra hi-tech and 
incredibly sophisticated. So, predictably, there is a price to pay. But a 
little beauty maths reveals that the cost per wear works out at around £1 a day 
for the price of these newer foundations, so they pay dues in around a month of 
daily wear.

So, on your next foundation sojourn remember these well-honed tips; never buy 
it on the same day you're testing (you will face sales-driven peer pressure), 
always ask for a tester to try at home and if you're unsure on the colour, then 
it's definitely the wrong one. I learned the hard and expensive way - my stash 
of reject foundations could probably make it around the world and back.
 (clockwise from left) Bobbi Brown Extra Repair Foundation, Benefit Hello 
Flawless, Lancome Teint Idole Ultra 24H, Estee Lauder Invisible Fluid, NARS 
Pure Radiant Tinted Moisturiser and Chanel Perfection Lumiere. 
The latest foundations for darker skins

Lancome Teint Idole Ultra 24h, £27 
<http://www.lancome.co.uk/_en/_gb/makeup/complexion/foundation/teint-idole-ultra-24h-01003x.aspx>
It took eight years in the making, but these 18 shades of silky, touch-proof 
colour are some of the best and darkest I've tried.

Chanel Perfection Lumiere, £36 
<http://www.chanel.com/en_US/fragrance-beauty/Makeup-Foundation-PERFECTION-LUMI%C3%88RE-123093>
This is one of the new breed of foundations that made it into my kit; mainly 
for its velvety texture and fuller coverage.

Estée Lauder Invisible Fluid Make-up, £27 
<http://www.esteelauder.co.uk/product/643/20670/Product-Catalog/Makeup/Face/Foundations/Invisible/Fluid-Makeup/index.tmpl>
They're not lying, it really is invisible! Estée Lauder also offer a brilliant 
colour matching service, complete with 10 day sample.

Benefit Hello Flawless Oxygen Wow, £24.50 
<http://www.benefitcosmetics.co.uk/product/view/parentsku/HELLOX>
Full, hydrating coverage that promotes healthy skin circulation? Benefit's 
first foray into the world of darker skins is a brilliant effort.

Bobbi Brown Extra Repair SPF 25, £36 
<http://www.bobbibrown.co.uk/product/5141/15906/Makeup/Face/Foundation/EXTRA-Repair-Foundation-SPF-25/New/index.tmpl>
Fourteen shades of rich, intensely moisturizing foundation that is best suited 
to drier skins. The colour is buildable, so you can layer it for fuller 
coverage – like a luxe, grown-up, tinted moisturizer.

Nars Pure Radiant Tinted Moisturiser, £27 
<http://www.narscosmetics.co.uk/the-latest/pure-radiant-tinted-moisturizer-spf30-pa/pure-radiant-tinted-moisturizer-spf30-pa.html>
Ditch the BB cream – this is all you need for light coverage and a sheer veil 
of colour and SPF protection as summer approaches.

• Anita is the Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/beauty> Assistant 
at Stylist magazine
 