
Last week on Twitter I asked for your beauty queries, and it seems like the 
same questions keep coming up – we're still struggling to find the basic 
products that do the job really well. So here are my thoughts on your 
questions, but feel free to add your suggestions at the end.

Q. What are the best foundation brands?

If you're on a tight budget, your best high-street option is Sleek 
<http://www.sleekmakeup.com/>, which is brilliant. That said, I truly believe 
good foundation is the one makeup product you should spend on. For light, 
natural coverageYves Saint Laurent Le Teint Touch Éclat Foundation 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Yves-Saint-Laurent-Le-Teint-Touche-Eclat-Foundation_1276286/>
 (£29,boots.com <http://www.boots.com>) is excellent and has a decent shade 
range (the very darkest skin tones aren't served though, sadly).Bobbi Brown 
Long-Wear Even Finish Foundation 
<http://www.bobbibrown.co.uk/product/5141/22257/Makeup/Face/Foundation/Long-Wear-Even-Finish-Foundation-SPF15/Best-Seller/index.tmpl>
 SPF 15 (£30,bobbibrown.co.uk <http://www.bobbibrown.co.uk>) is incredible – 
the formula is very natural and it really lasts all day. The shade range is 
excellent, too, as you'd expect. My full-coverage staple isMake-Up Forever HD 
Foundation 
<http://www.makeupforever.com/int/en-int/make-up/face/foundation/hd-foundation> 
(£32,preciousaboutmakeup.com <http://www.preciousaboutmakeup.com>). But be 
warned, it's so good at concealing flaws that it can leave your skin looking a 
little flat, so use theSleek Face Contour Kit 
<http://www.sleekmakeup.com/face-contour-kit-medium> (£6.49, superdrug.com 
<http://www.superdrug.com>) to counteract it.

Q. What luxury products are actually worth the money?

I've spent years and hundreds of pounds being disappointed by beauty products 
that promised so much and failed to deliver. But along the way I discovered one 
true luxury staple that is worth the money, and that's Crème de la Mer Ultra 
Rich Cream (£105,cremedelamer.co.uk <http://www.cremedelamer.co.uk>). Whenever 
my skin plays up I revert back to it; I use it as a night cream too and then in 
the summer I use a tiny bit every other day to keep my skin in balance. It's 
the one product I always rely on – and it lasts forever. I bought my pot at 
duty free a year ago and it's still going strong.
 Beauty composite 2 
Fragrance is the other area I personally think it pays to spend extra on – 
especially if you're in pursuit of something truly unique and sophisticated. Try
Frederic Malle <http://www.fredericmalle.com/eu/>, Maison Francis Kurkdjian 
<http://www.franciskurkdjian.com/>, Comme des Garçons 
<http://www.comme-des-garcons.com/> or Le Labo 
<http://lelabofragrances.com/us_en/> if you're in pursuit of a signature scent, 
and here's a cheeky money-saving tip: head to & Other Stories (stories.com 
<http://www.stories.com>) and pick up one of their body mists, such as Punk 
Bouquet Body Mist 
<http://www.stories.com/gb/AllProducts/Punk_Bouquet_Body_Mist/6085003-562210.1> 
(£12). Their perfumer is Ben Gorham, who is also the creator of the beautiful
Byredo <http://byredo.com> scents – so they're really unique but inexpensive 
too. Aside from fragrance and some skincare, the other luxury item I'd 
recommend isGivenchy Noir Couture Mascara 
<http://www.debenhams.com/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/prod_10701_10001_123222008199?CMP=SSH&tmcampid=28&tmad=c&sku=7602748&ci_sku=7602748&ci_src=18615224&$$ja=cgid:5632648687%7Ctsid:45357%7Ccid:105431527%7Clid:18283950120%7Cnw:g%7Ccrid:54192434647%7Crnd:9271756238061567315%7Cdvc:c%7Cadp:1o3%7Cbku:1&gclid=CLj1ucegob8CFXPKtAod4UgA-Q>
 (£22.50,debenhams.com <http://www.Debenhams.com>), which gives the most 
dramatic, thick and long lashes I've ever seen. Ideal when you've had four 
hours' sleep and need not to look like crap at work.

Q. What are the best skincare brands on the high street?

There are so many. Here are the standout brands and products for me: La 
Roche-Posay Effaclar Duo [+] Anti-Blemish Cream 
<http://www.boots.com/en/La-Roche-Posay-Effaclar-Duo--anti-blemish-cream_1440758/>
 (£15.50,boots.com <http://www.boots.com>) is a perfect moisturiser for oily 
and blemish-prone skins that targets large pores and reduces acne scars. It's 
key ingredient is niacinamide, which helps improve your skin's barrier function 
and structure over time. I don't use words like favourite lightly when it comes 
to beauty, butVichy Idealia Life Serum 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Vichy-Idealia-Life-Serum-30ml_1360844/> (£29.50, 
boots.com <http://www.boots.com>) earns the plaudit. It contains ingredients 
that fight environmental damage and free-radical production – but it also 
contains very subtle golden pearlised pigments that make darker skins look 
radiant (the silvery ones most brands use make our skins look ashy). The only 
makeup wipes I'd ever use areNeal's Yard Remedies Organic Facial Wipes 
<http://www.nealsyardremedies.com/organic-face-wipes> (£5.50, 
nealsyardremedies.com <http://www.nealsyardremedies.com>) – your face actually 
feels clean and refreshed after using them. Finally, I also rateAvène 
<http://www.avene.co.uk> for basics and body care, L'Oreal 
<http://www.loreal.co.uk> for high-performing anti-aging and Dr Nick Lowe 
<http://www.drnicklowe.com> for specific skin issues. Done.

Any other questions – drop me a comment below or tweet @itsmeanitab 
<https://twitter.com/ItsMeAnitaB>.

• Anita is the beauty and health editor at Women's Health 
<http://www.womenshealthmag.co.uk/> magazine.
 