
Shampoo and conditioner are the forlorn overlooked couple in our beauty 
regimes. These two products we devote the least amount of money and time to 
choosing – yet we probably use them every single day (at least I do). 
Previously, I admit, I was of the Bogof (horrible acronym) tribe, buying 
whatever happens to be on offer, just because spending any more seemed to be 
washing money down the plug-hole.

That was until I tried Bumble & Bumble's Mending range 
<http://www.bumbleandbumble.co.uk/product/50/9229/Products/Wear-and-Care/Bbmending/mending-conditioner/index.tmpl>
 on a recommendation, and saw, firsthand, the difference that a 
high-performance shampoo could make to my damaged, knotty, very fine hair. It 
was instantly easy to style and genuinely had that salon blow-dry look. 
Truthfully, it made me almost "like" my hair for the first time in as long as I 
can remember. Since then I've made haircare my primary focus when it comes to 
portioning out how much I'll spend on beauty a month, and it's definitely been 
worth every penny.

Over the past 12 months or so we've seen sophisticated solutions emerge that 
promise to revolutionise our hair-washing in all manner of ways. I've picked 
some of my favourites on the market, but before I continue, it's full 
disclosure time. None of them come cheap, but, used sparingly they'll last a 
while (I can stretch my favouriteRahua shampoo <http://rahua.com/> out for 
almost two months). And for anyone struggling with their hair, as I was, they 
could be worth a try.
 Clockwise from left: Sensai for women; Alterna Caviar Repair Micro-Bead Fill 
& Fix Treatment Masque; Nioxin System Kit 1; Mixed Chicks 
Best for very dry/afro hair, Mizani Supreme-Oil Sulfate-Free Moisturizing 
Shampoo, £18.25,mizani-uk.com <http://www.mizani-uk.com/>

Jam-packed with eight natural oils, this new Mizani range is just what dry 
hair needs in this brutally cold winter. My tester said it was the most 
softening shampoo she had used, and that she'd be switching to this range from 
now on.

Best for thinning hair – Nioxin System Kit 1 for fine natural hair, £27.99, 
Nioxin.co.uk <http://nioxin.com/en-UK/home-page.aspx>

Nioxin has a legion of die-hard fans and has had rave reviews from fellow 
beauty journalists. It's a three-step process, with a treatment aimed at 
stimulating the blood flow to the scalp, a tingly shampoo and aconditioner. It 
is said to start working in just four weeks, so I'd advise doing a trusty 
"before and after" photo on your scalp to measure the efficacy yourself.

Best for damaged hair – Alterna Caviar Repair Micro-Bead Fill & Fix Treatment 
Masque, £42,alternahaircare.com <http://www.alternahaircare.com/>

I'm a huge fan of this range. It's aimed at restoring chemically processed 
hair with an exotic cocktail of sea minerals, caviar extract and Omega-3. The 
standout product, for me, is the intensive conditioner that softens 
heat-ravaged hair such as mine. I keep it on overnight with a Dot Cotton-esque 
hairnet which is all kinds of hot.

Best for fine hair – Sensai, Shidenkai, from £22, harrods.com 
<http://www.harrods.com/> from end of Feb

When Sensai was doing its hair-loss research, it found that women have drier 
scalps than men, meaning that both need a different approach when it comes to 
thinning hair. Each of these systems are gender-tailored, and aimed at getting 
hair past that fine "baby" stage (if you've got thinning hair, you'll know what 
I mean) into a fully grown strand.

Best for curly/mixed-heritage hair – Mixed Chicks, from £10.95, 
britishcurlies.co.uk <http://www.britishcurlies.co.uk/>

Mixed Chicks has legions of fans (including Halle Berry) and is aimed at 
maintaining beautiful curly hair. My tester raved about its curl-defining 
ability and said it gave her hair bounce for the first time in years.

Which products do you recommend? Have you found any high-end hair treatments 
that are worth splashing out on?
 