
Winter commeth and with it arrives a sizeable skincare conundrum. Should we 
immediately hurl our light summer skincare over the nearest fence and invest in 
a host of weighty jars and oils to keep our skin in order? My answer would be 
no. Having ditched this archaic notion my skin has never looked better.

Much of this is due to the change in climate; the seasons are sporadic and 
each day brings an entirely new change in the humidity levels and weather. Our 
immediate environment is plied with ever-changing levels of air conditioning 
and heating. Add on to this our hectic, sugar-filled, caffeine-drenched 
lifestyles and it's obvious that the old-fashioned "change with the seasons" 
approach to skincare is headed into the abyss.

What's key is finding the right combination of moisturisers that work for you 
every day and throughout every season. Dermatologist Sam Bunting agrees: "I'm 
all for patients being their own dermatologist by investigating their skin's 
own needs daily. Our skin is a dynamic organ and it's usually evident to the 
naked eye and touch if it needs to be moisturised. When you wake up, examine 
your face in good light. If you see the sheen of our skin's natural oils, 
chances are you'll either not need a moisturiser, or, you'll just need a light 
one. If your skin feels papery, or tight then it's definitely in need of 
heavier moisturising."
 Face creams for dark skin 
It's also prehistoric to think that all darker skins are oily, especially as 
we age and sebum production slows down. So few of us actually have skin that is 
dry, oily or normal – a skin categorisation that was developed in the 1940s – 
that it's definitely time for an update on how we do things. "My advice is to 
just moisturise where you need it," Dr Bunting continues. "Around the eyes, 
mouth and neck where the skin is thinner and in need of moisture, whereas the 
chin, nose and forehead are oilier and might not." With that in mind, having a 
core moisturising edit that works for every day of the year is key. Here are my 
all-year-round moisturisers, and whilst they might not be for everyone (we're 
all different) if all the skincare in the world disappeared and I was left with 
these three products for eternity, I'd be pretty thrilled.

Crème De La Mer Moisturising Cream <http://www.cremedelamer.co.uk/>, £105

Skincare <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/skincare> afficinados fall into 
two groups. Those who think this brand is overpriced, and overhyped and those 
who it just works for. I fall into the latter camp and when my skin goes 
berserk or my eczema plays up, I pare everything back down to just this cream 
and it regains all calm. The trick to applying this original cream (there are 
other less heavy versions available) is to take the tiniest amount, rub into 
your palms and pat it on to your face. For a cheaper but super moisturising 
option Vichy Idealia Smoothing and Illuminating Cream For Dry Skin, £22, 
(boots.com) is unbeatable and also contains kombucha tea extract to regulate 
pigmentation. Big wins all round.


Estée Lauder DayWear Advanced Anti-Oxidant & UV Defense SPF 50 
<http://www.esteelauder.co.uk/product/688/13159/Product-Catalog/Skincare/By-Category/Moisturisers/DayWear/Advanced-Multi-Protection-Anti-Oxidant-SPF-15-Lotion/index.tmpl>
, £33

This is my ultimate day moisturiser, and one of the best choices I've found 
for a modest moisture surge. It's super light and never feels oily, and despite 
the high SPF, it doesn't turn darker skins that weird shade of grey that so 
many others do. It's one of the best skincare products ever created in my mind 
and has a sizeable dose of anti-ageing antioxidants that keep wrinkle-forming 
free radicals away.

Hydramax + Active Moisture Cream 
<http://www.chanel.com/en_US/fragrance-beauty/Skincare-Moisturizers-HYDRAMAX-%2B-ACTIVE-89447/sku/89448>
, £50, by Chanel

So many brands do gel moisturisers these days and L'Oréal Paris Triple Active 
Fresh Ultra-Hydrating Gel-Cream 
<http://www.feelunique.com/p/LOreal-Hydrafresh-Day-Ultra-Hydrating-Gel-Creme-Normal-Combination-Skin-50ml>
, £7.14 andAvene Cleanance K 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Avene-Cleanance-K-40ML_1574/>, £10.50, are two of the 
finest. But I've never found one quite as good as this Chanel's Hydramax; it's 
the lightest most easily absorbed moisturiser I've ever used. On oily skin days 
and super hot weather, it's an absolute saviour. It uses Camellia Alba PFA, an 
active ingredient that promotes optimum moisture retention within our 
individual skin cells.

Have a moisturising trio that works for you? Tweet @ItsMeAnitaB 
<https://twitter.com/ItsMeAnitaB> @guardianfashion 
<https://twitter.com/guardianfashion>
 