
The first glimpse of Disney’s Beauty and the Beast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/beauty-and-the-beast> reboot featuring Emma 
Watson has kept things pretty cryptic: there’s a spot of ancestor worship (via 
the Be Our Guest tagline, referencing the famous song from the 1990 cartoon), a 
couple of lines of dialogue (presumably from Ewan McGregor and Ian McKellen as 
Lumiere and Cogsworth), plus two hints of Watson herself: a nervous “Hello” and 
an out-of-focus shot of her leaning over a rose.

The trailer has instead very much majored on the production design, with 
extended scenes of (what we can safely assume) is the Beast’s deserted mansion 
as Belle/Beauty tentatively opens the Beast-shaped door. In its lush, 
candles-and-chandeliers art direction, it very much recalls last year’s 
Cinderella; rather interestingly, though, the snatch of McGregor/McKellen 
dialogue – “What if she is the one?” – suggests that the film is going to 
exploit the same prophecy-fulfilment structure that has fuelled the two Alice 
in Wonderland films, and is a key part of the way Disney has re-engineered its 
films aimed at early-teen girls, in the service of a new mission of empowerment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fbeauty-and-the-beast-trailer-emma-watson-disney-empowerment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf6877cc5a86643c5889f2c3d80b09767c527d19%2F71_0_1707_1024%2F1707.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beauty%20and%20the%20Beast%3A%20is%20Disney's%20empowerment%20mission%20on%20track%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fbeauty-and-the-beast-trailer-emma-watson-disney-empowerment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beauty%20and%20the%20Beast%3A%20is%20Disney%27s%20empowerment%20mission%20on%20track%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fbeauty-and-the-beast-trailer-emma-watson-disney-empowerment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf6877cc5a86643c5889f2c3d80b09767c527d19%2F71_0_1707_1024%2F1707.jpg>
 The one ... Mia Wasikowska in Alice Through the Looking Glass Photograph: 
Allstar/DISNEY 
It can’t have gone without notice that – at least since Brave – Disney has 
gone full throttle to eradicate the sappy princess/fairy from its films, and 
instead substitute sturdy, self-reliant role models who may be subject to 
emotional trauma, but aren’t subdued by it. In Brave, Frozen, Maleficent, male 
agency is mostly sidelined and/or removed, and mother-daughter or sister-sister 
relationships are key.

Alice Through the Looking Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alice-through-the-looking-glass>, which 
follows on from the Tim Burton’s 2010 Alice in Wonderland, is a case in point: 
the film opens with a 19-year-old Alice commanding her merchant ship as it 
battles pirates during a raging tempest. This is someone who can do without 
romance, as well as overcome the Victorian male prerogative with relative ease. 
As in the first film, Alice’s entry to “Underland” is configured in terms of 
answering the call of an oracle – like Belle, being “the one” who can lift the 
curse on the land. It’s a long way from Lewis Carroll’s Alice, which heralded 
the terrors and complexities of adulthood for its pre-teen protagonist.

Whether this applies to Beauty and the Beast remains to be seen; but the 
participation of Watson – UN Goodwill Ambassador and confidentfeminist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/19/emma-watson-year-off-acting-to-focus-on-feminism>
 – means that the film’s messages about empowerment will be examined closely. 
Let’s hope they don’t fall short.
 