
"I am an anarchist," says Ariel Pink <http://www.arielpink.com/>, running his 
fingers through his lank hair. "I'm into chaos."

Ariel – born Ariel Marcus Rosenberg – is also as close to what modern music 
has to a visionary. Like many auteur figures, he cuts an odd dash. 
Grungy-looking, with a stoop and neurotic mannerisms, he talks quickly, 
tangentially, constantly self-analysing.

On the subject of his music, though, he speaks fearlessly, with conviction. "I 
was been raised to believe I was an artist," he says. "I believed what my 
parents said and fulfilled it, like a prophecy."

Ariel has been making music since 1996, recording from a bedroom studio in 
Pico-Roberson, Los Angeles. A peculiar melange of psychedelia, 80s drivetime 
pop and white funk, Pink's music gains an extra weird frisson thanks to his 
taste for imperfect recording fidelity; his songs have a woozy sound akin to 
the fuzz of a well-used VHS tape. It's a sonic hallmark that's been 
influential, primarily on the current crop of so-called "chillwave" artists like
Washed Out <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/23/new-band-washed-out>, 
Toro Y Moi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/feb/25/chill-wave-twee-pop-genres>, and 
Memory Tapes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/11/new-band-memory-tapes>, touting 
lo-fi takes on 80s pop. Ariel's music is not nostalgic – he sounds like nothing 
but himself – but he is protective of the music he loves. "All we have is the 
past, but for people of the future, there's not even going to be a history 
there," he worries. "The history of recorded music has turned into a flat 
fucking screen of an iTunes playlist." He raises his voice: "I'm preserving 
something that's going extinct! That's all rock'n'roll has been since day one. 
It's all necrophilia."

Ariel is a child of eerie LA, the one of David Lynch's Mulholland Drive and 
Alex Cox's Repo Man, the one soundtracked by the Doors and the Germs. He sits 
far outside Hollywood, but observes it with fascination: "Some people don't 
have the stamina for LA, But the people that stay there, that learn to exist 
there, those people are very much what LA is about. It's a place where chaos 
reigns, dreams run amok. You get all these wonderful by-products from this 
tapestry of lost souls."

Ariel could have stayed on the outside were it not for meeting Animal 
Collective <http://animalcollective.org/> in 2003. He handed the band a CD-R of 
his music and they then released several Ariel Pink albums on their Paw Tracks 
imprint.

A proper record deal has previously eluded him; in the end, it took a new 
"professional" attitude and a full Haunted Graffiti band. His excellent 4AD 
debut,Before Today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jun/03/ariel-pink-before-today>, cleans 
up some of the rough edges, but there's still a perversity resistant to any 
marketing polish.

The Guide tells Ariel that reading what people say about his music, they 
always make it sound ironic or kitsch, but on actually listening, it's 
surprising how heartfelt it is. His eyes gleam: "Maybe that's the irony. I take 
it seriously; I take everything I do way too seriously."

Before Today is out now on 4AD
 