
Last weekend I attended the All Tomorrow's Parties festival, which was curated 
by Pavement <http://www.atpfestival.com/events/pavement.php>. It was brilliant. 
What? C'mon, everyone's heard ofPavement 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pavement_(band)>. "Slanted and Enchanted"? "Cut 
Your Hair"? How come you've never heard of Pavement, for heaven's sake?

Okay, not everyone has heard of them. It is important to remember this, just 
as it is important to remember that not everyone thinks the business output of 
Simon Cowell is rubbish, and that some people actually likeJamie Cullum 
<http://www.jamiecullum.com/>. While bewildering to me, the numbers don't lie: 
these people sell shedloads.

The staff at Butlins Minehead 
<http://www.butlins.com/resorts/minehead/index.aspx>, where ATP is held, were 
puzzled. "Are these bands famous?" asked the woman marshalling people into 
check-in. "I've never heard of any of them." She was a veteran of staffing 
ATPs, and chuckled recalling working the bar when theButthole Surfers 
<http://www.buttholesurfers.com/> were playing. They were nothing to her but a 
funny name and a lot of noise. This sentiment was echoed elsewhere: "Never 
heard of any of them, love." Elsewhere on the site, posters advertised upcoming 
concerts byPeter Andre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/06/peter-andre-review>, Stars from 
The X Factor andThomas the Tank Engine 
<http://events.hitentertainment.com/gb/home/index.asp?cid=fromThomasUK>.

I guess it is very easy to assume that everyone is interested in what you are 
interested in. "How can you not likePavement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pavement>?" isn't as worrying a thing to say 
as: "But how can you not believe in evolution?" – but both statements share 
similarities in tone:"This is obvious, how can you not see it"? How come some 
people get the alternative vibe of ATP, while others have never heard of it? At 
what point do individuals decide, well, I'm going with this type of music, 
literary genre, or political philosophy?

The answer, to me, is diversity, quality, and a shot of luck. The prevailing 
cultural cloud points to the easy mainstream – harmless and charmless. It takes 
some digging to find "the other", which is the problem with television talent 
shows; it reduces music and talent to the populist lowest common denominator 
where only the weight of numbers matters. There are really two music 
industries, and the mainstream one is a true capitalist industry: see a gap in 
the market, get someone to write the song to fill it, find the artist to 
perform it. It's about assembling a product, not art. The alternative is that 
people come together, write songs, perform them, and slowly build up a fanbase. 
But what outlet do they have if the cloud is raining down mediocrity? The cloud 
covers politics as well. The prevailing polity, shored up by a bats-attic 
electoral system, is the centre, trending right. But this is no choice. There 
are alternatives out there – but once again it takes some digging, and unlike 
music, a cult following and critical acclaim will get you nowhere, electorally 
speaking.

This isn't just a "rock thing", either – many commenters on this site talk 
about classical music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/mar/11/riches-radio-3-pop-song> 
with the same passion that I talk aboutalternative music 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qOM107PIxV8>, and some comments made about 
Radio 3's Through the Night chime with what I love about 6Music's Freak Zone 
and ATP – finding new things, some good, some bad, some brilliant. That's the 
outlet, and that's valuable.

In many fields – music, art, literature – it is possible for the mainstream 
and alternative to co-exist. The "industry" stuff makes the most money, which 
is its primary intention, but the other can just about make enough to live on, 
and to keep creating, which is its main desire. In politics, where the point is 
power, this is not possible. Cameron may bang on about Broken Britain, but 
there is noBroken Social Scene <http://www.myspace.com/brokensocialscene> in 
politics – yet.

So, as we wait to find out if this "new politics" will actually change 
anything, what to do? Remember that the Cowellition is not all there is. Get 
involved, organise, and, as the rest of life looks set to be a bit dire,put on 
some Pavement <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QTTgpTeb0Z8>, and enjoy.

• This article was commissioned after the author contacted us via the You tell 
us <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/may/13/you-tell-us> page. If 
you have a subject you would like us to cover then please get in touch
 