
When Tom Bradby arrived in Belfast as ITN's newly appointed Ireland 
correspondent in 1993, the Troubles were raging, Bishopsgate had just been 
bombed and the peace process was no more than a whispered rumour. The new film
Shadow Dancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/25/sundance-2012-shadow-dancer-review?intcmp=239>
 – adapted by Bradby from his late 1990s novel of the same name – shows how far 
we have come since then.

"It really hit home for me when I saw the Queen shaking hands with Martin 
McGuinness <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness> the other 
month," says Bradby, now ITN's political editor. "I was gobsmacked by that and 
very uplifted by it too. It shows that anything is possible in the world."

Shadow Dancer, to be released on Friday 24 August, opens in the early 1970s 
before switching to the 1990s when the British security forces had infiltrated 
every level of the Provisional IRA.Andrea Riseborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrea-riseborough> plays a Republican single 
mother who is coerced into spying on her extended family by an MI5 agent, 
played by Clive Owen. Both protagonists are eventually revealed to be pawns in 
a wider game – and forced to rely on each other in order to survive.

The film is based on Bradby's own experiences in Belfast, where he lived from 
1993 to 1996. His tenure covered the IRA ceasefire, Bill Clinton'sBelfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> rally and the fraught runup to the 
Good Friday agreement.

"It was my good luck to be there at a crucial time," he said. "I only got the 
job because the older, more experienced reporters didn't go for it. They were 
sick of the place and assumed that nothing would ever change.

"But three weeks into the job I heard the first whispers that the IRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> were thinking about taking a different 
path. Some colleagues were very cynical – they thought it was a trick. But I 
knew nothing about anything. I came without any baggage, which was probably for 
the best."

Shadow Dancer was directed by James Marsh, the British film-maker who won an 
Oscar for his 2008 documentaryMan on Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125351/man.on.wire>. Marsh admits that 
he initially hesitated over the project, reluctant to excavate such painful 
recent history. "It was about Ireland and the Troubles, and we are all glad to 
have got beyond that," he said.

Yet Bradby, now 45, feels that the film's themes speak to today's headlines as 
much as to the archive.

"Yes, the film is set in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, but it could have been 
anywhere. It's about people caught up at the heart of a vicious conflict and 
the choices they make in a life or death situation. A similar situation might 
just as easily be taking place in Cairo or Aleppo."

Shadow Dancer premiered at the Sundance film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/25/sundance-2012-shadow-dancer-review?intcmp=239>
 earlier this year, where it was greeted by positive reviews. The Hollywood 
Reporter called it a film of "riveting assurance" while the Guardian saw it as 
"a raw reminder of a sad and painful past".

On leaving Northern Ireland, Bradby progressed through stints as ITN's Asia 
correspondent and royal correspondent. He currently juggles his day job as 
political editor with his sideline as a novelist and is in the process of 
adapting another of his books – the Shanghai-based historical thriller The 
Master of Rain – for the screen.

Meanwhile, his recent visits to Belfast have reminded him how far the city has 
travelled in the past two decades. "I think I've always been more interested in 
humanity than politics," he said. "The best stories are the ones about the 
ordinary human beings who are caught in the vortex, mired in the misery. What's 
most inspiring about Northern Ireland is the way in which the people caught in 
that vortex were able to march themselves out of it."

In so doing, perhaps, they set an example for the politicians. "I'll tell you 
what was even more remarkable than McGuinness shaking hands with the Queen," 
said Bradby. "It was watching McGuinness and Ian Paisley sitting together at 
Stormont as though they'd been mates forever, laughing away like the Chuckle 
Brothers.

"We could never have conceived of that 20 years ago – the idea that two men 
with that much history would ever arrive at that kind of relationship.

"Although maybe it was that recognition of shared history that allowed them to 
get there. Maybe they got to the point where they stopped making judgments. 
They recognised that they had both been in the same boat all along."
 