
Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> have moved to the top 
of the Fifa world rankings for the first time following their 3-1 win over 
Israel on Tuesday night.

Marc Wilmots’ side had to beat Israel to top their Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> qualifying group, which they 
did thanks to three second-half goals, from Dries Mertens, Kevin de Bruyne and 
Eden Hazard, and in the process replaced Argentina at the top of the rankings.

Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/football/israel> went into the match in 
fourth place in Group B but still with hopes of reaching the play-offs, 
although those hopes rapidly disappeared after half-time. Tomer Hemed’s goal 
two minutes from time was scant consolation.

Euro 2016 qualifiers: 10 talking points from the international action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/14/euro-2016-qualifiers-10-talking-points>
Bosnia-Herzegovina grabbed the play-off place in the group, thanks to their 
3-2 win in Cyprus, who also harboured faint hopes of the play-offs at the start 
of the evening. The hosts went 2-1 up just before half-time but kept the lead 
for only three minutes, when Haris Medunjanin equalised. With Israel losing, 
Cyprus were still in with a chance of the play-offs if they could find another 
goal, but instead Bosnia’s Milan Djuric scored his country’s third and they 
held on for the final 23 minutes.

On a dramatic final night of qualifying, Turkey and Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia> claimed the last two remaining 
automatic berths for Euro 2016 while Norway and Hungary joined Bosnia in the 
play-offs.

Turkey beat Iceland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> 1-0 in 
Group A and in the process clinched third place and the automatic qualifying 
berth for the best third-placed team.

Turkey’s hopes of automatic qualification looked to be over when Gokhan Tore 
was sent off in the 78th minute but Selcuk Inan’s last-gasp goal earned them 
the win and, withKazakhstan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kazakhstan> 
beating Latvia 1-0 in Riga, courtesy of a 65th-minute Islambek Kuat goal, they 
pipped Hungary as the best third-placed team and will now play their first 
tournament since Euro 2008, when they reached the semi-finals.

There was also drama in Group H, with Croatia leapfrogging Norway into second 
place with a 1-0 win overMalta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/malta> in 
the National Stadium in Ta’Qali.

Croatia started the day in third but beat Malta, who finish bottom of the 
group, with a first-half goal from Ivan Perisic. Italy came from behind to beat 
Norway 2-1, extending to 50 their unbeaten run in home qualifiers.

Also in Group H, Bulgaria beat Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> 2-0 with goals from Mihail 
Aleksandrov and Dimitar Rangelov but both teams were already out of contention 
for play-off places.
 