
Eleven years after Belle and Sebastian transformed an English seaside resort 
into a summer camp for indie kids, the Bowlie Weekender is back. This time, the 
Glasgow band are to curate December'sAll Tomorrow's Parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/all-tomorrows-parties>, the festival that 
their 1999 event inspired.

Billed as Bowlie 2, the festival will round off a year of 10th-anniversary 
celebrations for All Tomorrow's Parties, including weekends curated by Matt 
Groening and Jim Jarmusch, and full-album performances by Iggy and the Stooges 
and Suicide.Belle and Sebastian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/belleandsebastian> will curate all three 
nights, 10-12 December, programming dozens of bands, films and a 24-hour 
television channel. They will also headline at least one evening.

Back in April 1999, the Bowlie Weekender "started it all", according to ATP 
organisers. Stuart Murdoch and co took over Camber Sands, Sussex, and filled it 
with friends. The Scots came out in full force – bands such as Camera Obscura, 
the Pastels, Teenage Fanclub and Mogwai. But among fans and DJs like Jarvis 
Cocker and Steve Lamacq, there were international acts too: the Flaming Lips, 
Sleater-Kinney, Cornelius and even Godspeed You! Black Emperor.

The event inspired the launch of ATP, first as an annual event, then a 
bi-annual festival and now a several-times-annual affair. All Tomorrow's 
Parties was even held at the same holiday camp, until its UK operation moved to 
Minehead in 2006. But although ATP has since been curated by everyone from 
Vincent Gallo to My Bloody Valentine, Belle and Sebastian have never been back 
– not even as performers. Perhaps they've been too busy trying on new cardigans.

Another ATP will take place a week before Belle and Sebastian's, 3-5 December, 
with curators yet to be revealed. In between, ATP will hold the, er, In Between 
Days series of gigs for those who wish to stick around (and pay up) for both 
jamborees. Tickets for Bowlie 2 will go on sale Monday, when the initial lineup 
will also be announced. Chalet berths start at £145.

Apart from Stuart Murdoch's God Help the Girl project, Belle and Sebastian 
haven't released an album since 2006's The Life Pursuit. They recently 
announced astring of festival dates <http://www.belleandsebastian.com/tour.php> 
in Europe and Asia, as well as plans to record their eighth studio album in Los 
Angeles. Writing on theband's blog 
<http://www.belleandsebastian.com/qa.php?about=music%20and%20recordings>, 
Murdoch described the new songs' themes: "nostalgia, empathy/pedagogy, desire 
(non-sexual), anatomy of doomed love, lust/jealousy, anatomy of barely tasted 
love, empathy for a stranger, nostalgia/denial, shock of change/self assertion, 
desire and uncertainty, self assertion/subtle kiss-off, spiritual desire [and] 
spiritual affirmation." Yes, that definitely sounds like Belle and Sebastian.
 