
Argo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148728/argo> director Ben Affleck 
has described suggestions that Iran is planning a film telling the other side 
of the1979-81 hostage crisis as a "badge of honour" 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/ben-affleck-iranian-plans-argo-411781?> 
for his critically acclaimed drama.

Speaking at the weekend prior to his film's surprise double win at the Golden 
Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/13/golden-globes-tina-fey-amy-poehler-live>
 on Sunday night – Argo won best film while Affleck won best director – the 
actor turned film-maker said he was pleased to have delivered something so 
powerful that the Iranian authorities felt the need to hit back.

"You have to understand, this is a sort of Stalinist regime in this place that 
is extremely repressive," Affleck told the Hollywood Reporter. "It's governing 
a nation full of millions of wonderful, amazing people, so to be part of this 
movieArgo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/argo> that seems to have kids up 
and paying attention – so this Stalinist regime feels the need to sort of push 
back somehow, I think is a tremendous badge of honour."

Last week, director Ataollah Salmanian told the Iranian news agency MNA that 
he was workingon a film to be called The General Staff, which was designed as 
an "appropriate response to the ahistoric film Argo". 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/11/iran-riposte-ben-affleck-argo>He 
said he hoped to secure funding from the Art Bureau wing of the Islamic 
Ideology Dissemination Organisation.

Argo, in which Affleck also stars as CIA agent Tony Mendez, dramatises the 
1979 "Canadian caper", in which six American diplomats fledIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> using Canadian passports in a scheme 
devised by the CIA, film industry professionals and the Canadian government. 
Argo was the name of the space fantasy movie concocted by agents to convince 
the Iranian revolutionary authorities that the diplomats had been in the 
country to look for filming locations.

Speaking at a Bafta dinner in Los Angeles on Saturday, Affleck denied he was 
disappointed at his failure to pick up an Oscar nomination for best director. 
Argo remains in the running for best picture and has nods in six other 
categories. "A few days ago, I woke up and the movie I directed and produced 
and starred inwas nominated for an Academy Award as best picture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/dec/21/oscars-argo-lincoln-zero-dark-thirty>
," said Affleck. "If you can't be happy with that, your prospects for a life 
with happiness are very, very limited."

Affleck added: "I would have been really disappointed if the movie hadn't been 
nominated. But it was, and I feel really happy and proud. This story you are 
talking about speaks to why, which is [that] the movie has had echoes out there 
in the world that are really profound. I think that's the most important thing."
 