
I remember first seeing Don't Look Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/35097/don.t.look.now> as a student and 
really enjoying it. But it wasn't my favourite Nicolas Roeg film.Performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36289/performance> and The Man Who Fell 
to Earth <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83745/man-who-fell-to-earth> 
were top of the pile. I've watched Performance dozens of times, each time 
seeing something new. I saw The Man Who Fell to Earth at the Everyman cinema 
when I was 20 and it was etched on my mind for ever more. 

But Don't Look Now was something I knew I had to watch, as it had such a 
reputation. It was already firmly established in the culture: the red coat of 
the child, the sex scene, the elliptical cutting. Roeg's perspective is always 
fascinating. He is not a purveyor of "filmed theatre", as so many directors 
are. His films are about the nature of time and space, about perception and 
emotion. I watched it in a great wave of movies. Godard, Scorsese, Cronenberg, 
Kubrick (I remember travelling to Paris to seeA Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/75644/clockwork.orange>, because you 
couldn't see it in the UK). I was probably seeing about five films a day, at 
the height of my viewing. I envy younger film fans approaching all those films 
for the first time.
 Do look now ... Donald Sutherland and Julie Christie in Nicolas Roeg's Don't 
Look Now (1973). Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Casey 
Fifteen years later, I sat down to watch it again. I think I was around three 
minutes into it and I turned it off. I felt a great panic come over me and was 
really upset.

It always amuses me when I find I've got new fears. A few years ago I was 
paralysed by a fear of heights that I didn't know I had. I couldn't explain it 
at all; it was totally involuntary, like a reflex. My mind knew I was safe, but 
something inside me said "NO". The same happened with Don't Look Now. As I 
watched it I could almost hear a static sound building up in the background. 
I've only had it with a few films, includingCome and See 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/34477/come-and-see>, Threads and Ghosts 
of the Civil Dead: a feeling of fight-or-flight of deep dread.
The Girl on the Stairs by Louise Welsh is a 'profoundly creepy read' that nods 
toDon't Look Now, above. Photograph: Moviestore collection Ltd / Alam/Alamy 
I could understand my fear of Don't Look Now. The accidental child death at 
the start is a parent's nightmare. (In the years since originally watching the 
film I have become a father.) When I was a student it didn't really impact on 
me. I lacked that perspective. Now I tend not to read the newspapers these 
days, to avoid tragic tales of children having accidents. It's like an icy 
needle in my heart. I think my first experience of horror (and, in a way, that 
of most British children of a certain age) was watching the public information 
films that used to get shown at school; death by train, building site, 
electricity substation and strangers.Don't Look Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/don-t-look-now> plays like that. It's a 
spectacular bit of 70s parenting. Mum and Dad indoors while the kids are out 
playing by a shallow pond. 

The DVD went back on the shelf and it took a few years to get back to it. The 
next viewing was easier. My son was older and I knew what I was getting myself 
into. That beginning sequence is so strong that it colours the whole film. The 
couple, played by Julie Christie and Donald Sutherland, never escape from the 
grief. It crushes them and it crushes the viewer. It felt to me that there was 
something trapped in the film itself – something terrifying and deeply sad. It 
never really shows its face, but lurks in the edits, in the performances and 
casting. The film starts with a child falling into a pond and the ripples of 
this event move through the film. 
 Don't Look Now Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
It's an odd feeling, the realisation that you may have to revisit films at 
every stage of your life. I thought I'd "done" Don't Look Now. I had no idea. I 
suppose I should have had a clue as it's a Roeg film. It's a kaleidoscope of 
meaning. I'm looking forward to seeing it again in 10 years' time.

• Ben Wheatley will interview Nicolas Roeg at a 40th anniversary screening of 
Don't Look Now on Sunday 8 September at Brighton's Duke of York's cinema. 
Tickets are available atwww.soundstageevents.co.uk  
<http://www.soundstage.thespace.uk.com/>

• Peter Bradshaw on the red coat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/18/dont-look-now-red-coat>
• Don't Look Now: third best horror ever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/22/dont-look-now-roeg-horror>
• An interview with Donald Sutherland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/30/television.television>
 