
Kill List <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140926/kill-list> director 
Ben Wheatley looks set to helm the long-gestating film adaptation ofHigh Rise 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High_Rise>, novelist JG Ballard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jgballard>'s classic tale of urban 
disintegration.

The Oscar-winning British producer Jeremy Thomas, garlanded when Bernardo 
Bertolucci'sThe Last Emperor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77920/last.emperor> took best film in 
1988, has been vying to bring Ballard's book to the big screen for more than 30 
years. With his penchant for splicing horror genre tropes with searing social 
realism, Wheatley looks the perfect fit to adapt a novel that sees the denizens 
of a luxury high-tech tower descend willingly into a murderous melee of chaos 
and destruction. He will direct from a screenplay by his wife and regular 
collaborator, Amy Jump (Kill List,A Field in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155966/field-in-england>).

Ballard's novels Crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/22/crash-jg-ballard-digested-classic>
 andEmpire of the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/78827/empire-of-the-sun> have 
previously been adapted by David Cronenberg and Steven Spielberg respectively. 
Wheatleytold ScreenDaily 
<http://www.screendaily.com/news/production/ben-wheatley-to-direct-jg-ballards-high-rise-for-rpc/5059730.article?blocktitle=FILM-PRODUCTION-NEWS&contentID=40145>
: "I love [his] work. This project started out with me looking at my bookcase, 
seeing the book and thinking: 'That would make a great film.'

"I started looking into who had the rights for the book and that led me to 
Jeremy, who has made some of my favourite films. It took me a few meetings just 
to get over the typewriter he has fromNaked Lunch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/apr/16/naked-lunch-william-burroughs>
 in his office."

Wheatley revealed he subsequently began studying notes and letters by the 
author of Concrete Island and Cocaine Nights that can currently be found at the 
British Library. "The idea is to be true to Ballard," he said. "It is such a 
rich and interesting time that it seemed a shame to set it anywhere other than 
England.

"I was born in 1972, three years before the book was written, so one of the 
attractions of the film was that I kind of imagine myself as one of the kids 
running around on the estate and my parents as the adults. The scope of the 
film is exciting. It will be challenging, like Crash, but it's not as dark as 
Kill List. The book is pretty out there, though."

Thomas, a long-term friend of Ballard, has been trying to get a film made 
since the 1970s.Splice <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/134999/splice>'s 
Vincenzo Natali was most recently on board to take charge of the cameras, while
Nicolas Roeg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolas-roeg> came close to 
directing a version in the late 1970s. Wheatley's version is said to be 
completely different to earlier proposed incarnations. A 2014 shoot is planned.

More on Ben Wheatley
 