
“Dear Father Christmas … ” Benedict Cumberbatch’s letter to Saint Nick begins. 
“It’s not for us to turn around and plead for your help with the environment, 
the migrant crisis, the NHS, education, food banks, human rights, 
fundamentalism and wars. Though God knows we need all the help we can get … you 
are for the children. Children who need some magic in a world where the borders 
between innocence and responsibility, playful imagination and cold, adult 
obstacles are continually shrinking. And this is what I’d like to ask you to 
help with. A little more time for those children to be children.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fbenedict-cumberbatch-celebrity-list-writing-letters-father-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04c4d15d8efd0fb75e411b8b22b8303e88aca3da%2F66_0_2744_4032%2F2744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benedict%20Cumberbatch%20heads%20celebrity%20list%20writing%20letters%20to%20Father%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fbenedict-cumberbatch-celebrity-list-writing-letters-father-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benedict%20Cumberbatch%20heads%20celebrity%20list%20writing%20letters%20to%20Father%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fbenedict-cumberbatch-celebrity-list-writing-letters-father-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04c4d15d8efd0fb75e411b8b22b8303e88aca3da%2F66_0_2744_4032%2F2744.jpg>
 Benedict Cumberbatch’s handwritten letter to Father Christmas. Photograph: 
Benedict Cumberbatch/Letters Live 
The British actor’s festive plea is one of several celebrity letters published 
by Letters Live on Monday, to mark both National Letter Writing Day on 7 
December, and their announcement of its 2016 programme. Letters Live is a now 
annual “celebration of the enduring power of literary correspondence” started 
by independent publisher Canongate, after the success of Shaun Usher’s 
bestselling bookLetters of Note 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/305119/>.

Each year, audiences flock to hear performers read letters from famous persons 
and historical moments; in the 2015 run, letters from individuals including 
David Bowie, Marge Simpson, Gandhi, Elvis Presley, Richard Burton and Che 
Guevara were read by performers including Sir Ian McKellen, Kylie Minogue, 
Russell Brand, Caitlin Moran, Tom Hiddleston, Sally Hawkins, Sir Ben Kingsley 
and Cumberbatch himself.

The latter has a long history of performing in the Letters Live events, and in 
2015, film production company SunnyMarch, which is part-owned by Cumberbatch, 
partnered with Letters Live to make the celebrity readings available to watch 
online.

Continuing his letter, Cumberbatch requests Father Christmas distract children 
“from the realities of a world gone mad so that they can laugh with their 
breath rather than sob with their tears. Especially those caring for family 
members, or suffering illness, hunger or poverty. Especially those hiding in 
buildings as bombs rain down, or being handed shaking with fear or cold into a 
boat to escape environmental disaster or war. Please help to light up their 
worlds with a moment of joy and hope.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG1890s8zs14&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG1890s8zs14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG1890s8zs14&media=>
“I guess I’ve done exactly what I said I wouldn’t ... Asked you to help with 
adult problems and solve some of the greatest worries we have for our 
children.” Cumberbatch finishes by promising “extra port and mince pies” and 
with a PS: “Please could I have that lightsaber now?”

The actor is not the only big name to request Santa go beyond his usual remit 
of toys and start tinkering in politics. “Perhaps this year you would consider 
not giving any presents to oil company executives and the politicians whose 
influence they buy?” Radiohead frontmanThom Yorke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thom-yorke> writes in his letter to Kris 
Kringle, “And for me, some reading glasses ... the blue ones.”

Musician Annie Lennox <https://www.theguardian.com/music/annie-lennox> 
requests assistance for the world’s refugees. “Could you ensure that entire 
generations aren’t forced to flee their homes in cities, towns and villages in 
war-torn countries from Syria to Nigeria because they are being continuously 
bombed, burned and brutalized at every turn ... could you very kindly put some 
sanity and compassion in the hearts of the criminal profiteers of hatred, 
bloodshed and warfare? Thank you Santa … I truly wish you existed for grown 
ups.”

Liberty director Shami Chakrabarti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/shami-chakrabarti> requests “whoever is reading 
to tweak the consciences of the powerful so as to empower the vulnerable ... 
save our Human Rights Act”, while comedian turned political philosopher Russell 
Brand voices his concern “about the net human gain from a jolly celestial 
benefactor granting consumer goods”, but finds time to thank Santa for “Jeremy 
Corbyn, Charlotte Church and the new series of Peep Show”.


In the spirit of the year in which Hollywood began discussing gender equality 
more openly, actorThandie Newton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/thandie-newton> asks for some spotlight 
for Mrs Claus. “I know she’s the force that keeps you full of beans. You 
wouldn’t be so jolly, energetic and kind without the presence of a woman in 
your life,” she writes. “She must be FANTASTIC. You must love her to bits. You 
should come too, to share the load, but it would be an enormous inspiration for 
all of us to feel her awesomeness!”

The first 2016 Letters Live shows are six evening shows, a matinee and a 
family special in March, held at the Freemasons’ Hall in London’s Covent 
Garden. Another 25 to 30 dates in 2016 have yet to be announced.

Letters Live has a history of supporting UK literacy initiatives, including 
author Nick Hornby’sMinistry of Stories <http://ministryofstories.org/>, a 
creative writing centre in east London for young people aged 8-18; andFirst 
Story <http://www.firststory.org.uk/>, an outreach literacy project founded by 
writer William Fiennes and theReading Agency <http://readingagency.org.uk/>. 
Earlier this year 
<http://826la.org/WP/2015/06/22/826la-and-letters-live-raise-350k-with-tell-me-a-story/>
, Letters Live raised over $350,000 for author Dave Eggers’ literacy charity 
826LA.

 * All of the above letters and the 2016 Letters Live programme are available 
to read onthe Letters Live website <http://letterslive.com/>.  