
Verizon is considering a bid for AOL, reports said on Tuesday, prompting a 
rise in the venerable internet company’s shares and a slew of questions as to 
what exactly Verizon would gain from the purchase, and what exactlyAOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> does these days.

Bloomberg News was the first to both report on the bid 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2015-01-05/verizon-said-to-approach-aol-about-possible-takeover-or-venture.html>
 and offer a reason as to why Verizon might find AOL so alluring. Citing 
“people with knowledge of the matter”, it said the telecoms giant was 
interested in the once internet giant AOL because of the latter’s technology 
relating to buying and selling advertisements online.

Verizon’s CEO, Lowell McAdam, said in a statement  
<http://www.cnet.com/news/verizon-ceo-throws-cold-water-on-aol-deal-rumors/>
that the company was not “having significant acquisition discussions” with AOL. 
McAdam did add, however, that “AOL, along with lots of other media companies 
are potential partners for us”.

Despite the surprise in some quarters that Verizon would be interested in the 
company former known as America Online – “AOL still exists and Verizon might 
want to buy it for some reason” ran Ars Technica’sheadline  
<http://arstechnica.com/business/2015/01/aol-still-exists-and-verizon-might-want-to-buy-it-for-some-reason/>
– AOL once dominated internet use.

Under its previous name it monopolised internet access in the US, before AOL’s 
cheery cheery “You’ve got mail” notification became synonymous with early email 
encounters.

AOL’s fortunes took a turn for the awful following its ill-fated merger with 
Time Warner Cable in 2000, however, and the company has never fully recovered. 
Not even when itbought Bebo 
<http://venturebeat.com/2013/07/01/bebo-bargain-after-selling-to-aol-for-850m-in-2008-founders-buy-it-back-for-1m/>
 for $850m in a valiant effort to do social media.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2Fverizon-mulls-aol-bid-media-telecommunications%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F6%2F1420577482491%2F9ccd2a6c-8e11-4136-a903-5153ad73bae2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Besides%20AIM%2C%20what%20would%20telecom%20giant%20Verizon%20get%20from%20AOL%20takeover%20deal%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2Fverizon-mulls-aol-bid-media-telecommunications%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Besides%20AIM%2C%20what%20would%20telecom%20giant%20Verizon%20get%20from%20AOL%20takeover%20deal%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2Fverizon-mulls-aol-bid-media-telecommunications%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F6%2F1420577482491%2F9ccd2a6c-8e11-4136-a903-5153ad73bae2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 AOL news app on an Android phone. Photograph: Richard Levine/Demotix/Corbis 
Verizon’s move to take over AOL is said to make sense, however, as it competes 
with AT&T in offering services beyond broadband and cellphone services. AT&T
bought DirectTV 
<http://www.cnet.com/news/at-t-to-buy-directv-in-pay-tv-combination-blockbuster-deal/>
 in 2014, and Verizon is said to be interested in AOL’s video and online 
content as well as their online advertising success. Less so AIM.

In addition, any takeover would land Verizon:

 * 2.3m AOL customers <http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2462192,00.asp> 
who still pay for dial-up internet access. Pew research suggests it is a 
combination of poverty, lack of availability and stubbornness that leads people 
tostick with 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/08/21/3-of-americans-use-dial-up-at-home/>
 the famous old beeping. In any case it is nice to think that there are some 
people out there still downloading their Britney Spears pictures in 
frustratingly slow instalments. 
 * Shingy. AOL’s “digital prophet 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/11/17/crystal-ball-3>”, a man who draws 
pictures of bears wearing zebra-print pants for a living and recently coined 
the phrase “HoMo” as a way of explaining the idea of people using their 
cellphones at home, could also be included in any potential deal. According to 
the New Yorker, Shingy’s salary would mean an ongoing cost of six figures each 
year, however. 
 * A bewildering number of people who still use aol.com as their homepage, 
despite the best efforts of their children and grandchildren. Even with its 
fluctuating fortunes, AOL remains one of the most popular websites in the world 
–fifth most popular 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-intersect/wp/2014/12/15/from-lycos-to-ask-jeeves-to-facebook-tracking-the-20-most-popular-web-sites-every-year-since-1996/>
 in 2013. Apart from anything else, that’s plenty of people to look at Verizon 
ads.  