
Running a charity can sometimes feel like a balancing act between innovation 
and minimising risk. In times of financial uncertainty,our expert panel 
discussed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/feb/23/charity-invest-in-the-future>
 when is the best time to invest in the future of your charity, what financial 
options are available and what risks need to be considered.

The panel: 

Kate Sayer - partner in Sayer Vincent 
<http://www.sayervincent.co.uk/home#.Uwt6BBnV3e4>

Louise O'Sullivan - social bond manager at Investing for Good 
<http://www.investingforgood.co.uk/>

Candice Motran - investment associate at Big Society Capital 
<http://www.bigsocietycapital.com/>

Simon Maclaren - trustee at Scottish Charity Finance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/finance> Group (SCFG)

David Hopkins - senior advisory manager, Charities and Grant Making Charities 
Aid Foundation <https://www.cafonline.org/>

Richard Hunt - client relations manager, Charities Aid Foundation 
<https://www.cafonline.org/>

Award-winning can often attract wanted attention

DH: awards are a great way of catching attention. By winning awards larger 
funders and supporters who may be willing to invest in you to upscale.

Have your case or upscaling prepared and be investment-ready

DH: Develop a specific case for support. In the same way as you would write a 
project proposal for a new programme and look for potential partners who have 
shown an interest in investing in promising organisations to see them scale.

LS: Have a business plan. In order to raise external investment, charities and 
third-sector organisations must be able to clearly set out their business plan 
(which should explain why funds are needed, what they will be used for and how 
this will help deliver the organisation's social mission. There is a level of 
grant support available to help build investment readiness (eg the ICRF, Big 
Venture Challenge) and the current climate, while challenging, does provide 
opportunities for growth.

KS: Be aware of your business model. Organisations need to be aware of their 
business model before they borrow or use reserves. If you do either, you need 
to be able to repay them - so you need to understand where this cash is going 
to come from.

Crowdfunding â€“ how viable is it?

DH: Crowdfunding is still finding its feet. Where it seems to work 
particularly well is either as an efficient means of getting smaller projects 
off the ground quickly; or as a way of leveraging in additional public money as 
match funding to sit alongside more traditional sources

CM: There is mixed consensus on crowdfunding. It is definitely a growing 
movement, with the UK Crowdfunding Association (UKCFA) gaining traction since 
its formation in 2012, especially on the lobbying front.

KS: Crowdfunding has its place. A longer-term financial strategy should 
incorporate plans to diversify sources and find new people to support your 
cause. In this context, crowdfunding and other web-based ideas are great as 
they are low-cost introductions to new sources and new people.

LS: It is a piece of the puzzle. It is part of the wider range of funding 
solutions that are now available to organisations. Crowdfunding can be 
particularly relevant for community based projects/organisations where engaging 
with and getting buy-in from donors or potential stakeholders on a localised 
level can be a powerful way to get projects off the ground.

Charities need to have a mixed-income portfolio

KS: It is better to have a diversified portfolio of income resources. This 
manages risk much better for organisations. Small organisations often rely on 
one main funder for virtually all their income, so that a cut or cessation of 
funding means closure.

DH: To thrive, charities will need a mixed-income portfolio. The key is this 
is figuring out which income sources are right for you as a charity and which 
are not.

What is the flavour of the month for funders?

SM: Work on developing good relations with funders. Be prepared to "re-align" 
your projects so that they match the funders' objectives. Be innovative.

CM: Be crystal clear. I think being crystal clear on your theory of change 
(what change your organisation is trying to make happen and how it goes about 
doing that) is key to achieving any funding!

Can charities afford the future?

DH: Here and now vs long term. There is a strong emphasis on the "here and 
now" and year-to-year financial performance in our world (and often among 
trustee boards) so there is work to be done for our sector to take a 
longer-term view.

SM: There may be little that can be done. Apart from building good relations 
with funders and ensuring that current funding delivers the results required by 
them, there may be little that can be done. Looking at turning aspects of the 
organisation into a social enterprise or funding stream are worth thinking 
about.

KS: Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> have to balance 
the current needs and the future viability of the charity. It would be 
pointless to make lots of people redundant this month, only to find that you 
have lost all your talent and have no way of obtaining funding in the future. 
So you may have to use reserves now to buy some time while you build a plan for 
a sustainable future.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/feb/23/www.theguardian.com/social-enterprise-network>
, join ourcommunity <https://register.theguardian.com/social-enterprise/>
 