
John Banville <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnbanville>
Novelist

I'm afraid I don't go in much for holidays. I once saw a postcard from Brian 
Friel, on holiday in France, who wrote: "Here for two weeks. One, with good 
behaviour." I know what he means. In these dog days, I'm reading Charles 
Townshend'sThe Republic: The Fight for Irish Independence 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141030043>
, a marvellous and beautifully judged study of that strange war. Cheating a 
little – because it's not due for publication until October – I have a proof 
copy of Colm Tóibín's luminous new novel,Nora Webster 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780670918140>
, set in Enniscorthy and environs in the late 1960s, and bound to be an 
enormous success. As for a classic, I'm afraid I'm rereading – oh dear – 
Nietzsche'sThe Gay Science 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780521636452>
, in a fine translation by Josefine Nauckhoff. This I consider Nietzche's 
greatest work, though I wish translators would call it The Cheerful Science, 
which is a far better and far less ambiguous Englishing ofFröhliche Wissenschaft
, with its sly echo of "frolics". For in these pages, frolics abound.

Ali Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alismith>
Novelist

I'm home for my summer holidays this year (taking an autumn holiday) with the 
pile of new books I've been waiting to read for months, including Paul Bailey's
The Prince's Boy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408851890>
, Sebastian Barry'sThe Temporary Gentleman 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571276950>
, Neel Mukherjee'sThe Lives of Others 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701186296>
 and Jacqueline Rose's forthcomingWomen in Dark Times 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408845400>
. Four writers I love, four brand new works, a surfeit of elegance and 
intelligence. Could summer get any better? Yes – a friend has just sent me 
Chekhov'sAbout Love and Other Stories 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199536689>
, translated by Rosamund Bartlett. First line: "A sweltering, muggy midday. Not 
a cloud in the sky." (If you're looking for me, I'm in the garden.)

Naomi Wolf
Author of Vagina: A New Biography


I am in the Hudson River Valley surrounded by beautiful thunderstorms, and 
reading the original 1855 edition of Walt Whitman'sLeaves of Grass 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199539000>
 for my doctoral thesis. Whitman hand-set the type and printed the volume 
himself, which I find quite moving. I also picked up a copy of David 
Perlmutter'sGrain Brain 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444791907>
, which makes the case that GMO-affected wheat, such as we are forced to eat in 
the US, is having terrible neurological effects on health.

William Dalrymple
Writer and historian

I'm looking forward to sitting by the pool outside Siena reading two classy 
new Indian novels – Akhil Sharma'sFamily Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571314263>
 and Deepti Kapoor'sA Bad Character 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224099615>
, both of which have received tremendous acclaim. For my big non-fiction read 
for the summer, I'll be taking on the second half of a huge, extraordinary tome 
on the deep past of the Mediterranean,The Making of the Middle Sea 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780500051764>
 by Cyprian Broodbank. It's a wonderfully sweeping and oddly unputdownable 
history of the region and full of the oddest facts imaginable – for example, in 
Mesopotamia c1750BC, a large piece of rock crystal was worth 3,000 sheep and 60 
male slaves. Broodbank is especially gripping on the Neanderthals, who ate 
peas, acorns, ostrich eggs and tortoises, built weapons but not boats, and 
lived "brief, hard lives of uncertain cognitive depth". The last stand of the 
Neanderthals was in Spain, where there is some evidence of inter-breeding and 
hybridity between us and our distant, defeated cousins. "It is a 
thought-provoking geographical coincidence, or no coincidence at all, that 
Iberia was the focus for the earliest hominins in Mediterranean Europe, and the 
place from where the last who were not us walked out forever into the night." 
Highly recommended.

Teju Cole
Novelist

I return every summer to George Seferis's Complete Poems 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780856462146>
, in the translation by Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard. Also on my desk at 
the moment are Peter Stamm's storiesWe're Flying 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847087669>
and Rana Dasgupta'sCapital: A Portrait of 21st-Century Delhi 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857860026>
. I'm excited by the new-to-me poet Sarah Lindsay and have been dipping into her
Debt to the Bone-Eating Snotflower 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Debt-Bone-Eating-Snotflower-Sarah-Lindsay/dp/1556594461>
. And I'm also reading two academic titles connected to my current project of 
writing about Lagos: Kristin Mann'sSlavery and the Birth of an African City: 
Lagos, 1760–1900 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Slavery-Birth-African-City-1760-1900/dp/0253222354/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1404821348&sr=8-1&keywords=slavery+and+the+birth+of+the+African+city>
, and Brian Larkin's study of infrastructure in Nigeria,Signal and Noise 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Signal-Noise-Infrastructure-Culture-Nigeria/dp/0822341085/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1404821502&sr=1-1&keywords=brian+larkin>
.

Helen Dunmore <https://www.theguardian.com/books/helen-dunmore>
Novelist

On holiday in Italy a few weeks ago, I read Philipp Meyer's novel The Son 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857209443>
for its gripping story of a young boy, Eli McCullough, abducted into a Comanche 
band in mid-19th-century Texas. I was also reading Emily Dickinson, who would 
have been Eli's contemporary. Their worlds are so different, but there's 
something Comanche in Dickinson's poetry. For many years, I found it daunting 
but now I love it. It's as fearsome and technically brilliant as the great 
chief Quanah Parker on horseback with his lance. I also took the Welsh poet 
Tony Curtis's brief, funny and illuminatingMy Life With Dylan Thomas 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Life-Dylan-Thomas-Tony-Curtis/dp/1907327215/ref=sr_1_8?ie=UTF8&qid=1404822312&sr=8-8&keywords=my+life+with+dylan+thomas>
: "Dylan was the mountain you had either to climb or bypass; tunnelling through 
him left you in the dark."

Robert Peston
BBC economics editor

I am not taking Thomas Piketty's Capital in the Twenty-First Century 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780674430006>
 with me, because it has been spoiled by all the blooming polemics I've read 
about it, and it's so enormous it will break the luggage allowance on the 
flight. Also I am currently bingeing on fiction, so will take Phil Klay's
Redeployment 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857864239>
 and David Grossman'sFalling Out of Time 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224097901>
. Klay is a sort of Wilfred Owen of the last Iraq war. And Grossman is the poet 
of grief. Eliot'sMiddlemarch <https://www.theguardian.com/international> will 
come too, as it has on many holidays. This time it will be read.

Philip French
Former Observer film critic

No books to be carried to exotic places. This is staycation time: what the 
government in the austere 1940s persuaded us to call "holidays at home". In my 
case it's been 10 woozy, pill-popping days in hospital having a knee 
replacement (with Geoffrey Grigson's great, final anthologyThe Faber Book of 
Reflective Verse 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Faber-Book-Reflective-Verse/dp/0571133002/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1404826365&sr=1-1&keywords=the+faber+book+of+reflective+verse>
 to carry me away from groaning 3am wards to tranquil places in the mind) 
followed by weeks with physios, crutches, Zimmer frames, sticks, rollators and 
oxygen.

My chief anticipated reading is The Unexpected Professor 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571310920>
, the autobiography of my esteemed exact contemporary John Carey with a near 
identical CV: lower-middle-class grammar school boy, national service officer 
in Egypt, going up to Oxford on the same day in 1954. How differently did we 
play the hands we were dealt? My hitherto unread classic is Georges Simenon's 
enticingroman dur, The Mahé Circle 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141394169>
, set on an island off the Côte d'Azur, published in 1944, hitherto 
untranslated into English. I've also dug out my 1911 Nelson's Library edition 
of Erskine Childers's classic espionage novelThe Riddle of the Sands 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199549719>
 (bought in 1948 for a shilling) because it just matches my present condition. 
Its hero, perfectly named Carruthers, a self-important, upper-midle-class 
Foreign Office employee stuck in a hot, deserted Edwardian London summer, is 
suddenly dragged out of his torpor by an invitation to join a friend on a yacht 
in the Baltic and finds himself involved in a scheme to frustrate a German 
naval invasion of Great Britain across the North Sea. An enduring masterpiece 
with authentic nautical maps.

Eben Upton
Raspberry Pi inventor

We are going to China on business in August and will try to tack a few days on 
the end to see Hong Kong when I'll be readingTo Rise Again at a Decent Hour 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780670917730>
 by Joshua Ferris. I'm a notorious luddite in my day-to-day use of technology, 
so this book about a curmudgeonly New York dentist coming to grips with a 
Twitter stalker sounds right up my street.

The Rhesus Chart 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780356502533>
by Charles Stross. Definite beach reading: the fifth book in the Laundry Files 
series of spoof spy novels, it's about a secret government department charged 
with fighting supernatural beasties.Yes Minister meets HP Lovecraft.

Finally, The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Origin-Consciousness-Breakdown-Bicameral-Mind/dp/0618057072>
 by Julian Jaynes. Is consciousness a recent development? Did all our ancestors 
hear voices in their heads? This one has been lurking on my bookshelf for half 
a decade and I hope finally to crack it this summer.

Maggie Gee
Novelist

I need to go to Madrid and Gibraltar for my next novel, but it will be too hot 
in August, so we plan to leave mobiles at home and spool around undiscovered 
beaches of Thanet, on trains/buses, with books and winey picnics. Bliss! I will 
be reading: Lyndall Gordon'sDivided Lives 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844088898>
, a follow-up memoir to her wonderfulShared Lives; Gabriel Gbadamosi's highly 
praisedVauxhall 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846591464>
; and for my classic, Thackeray'sBarry Lyndon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199537464>
 – why have I never read it, given thatVanity Fair is my all-time favourite 
novel?

Damian Barr
Author


I feel ashamed that I've never read Christopher and His Kind 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099561071>
 so Isherwood and I will be having some summer loving. David Nicholls's new 
novel,Us 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780340896990>
, is all about a family taking an epic holiday – as many emotions as air miles. 
I am also excited about Alex Preston'sIn Love and War 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571279456>
.Pilgrimage to Dollywood: A Country Music Road Trip Through Tennessee 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Pilgrimage-Dollywood-Country-Tennessee-Adventures/dp/0226536521>
 by Helen Morale promises to be a double delight.

Marina Warner
Author

I'm chairing the Man Booker international prize 2015, so there are heaps of 
novels I'd love to recommend or waiting to be read, but I mustn't tell. 
Sticking to other genres, the artist Marion Coutts has written a fierce love 
letter-cum-elegy inThe Iceberg 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781782393504>
 for Tom Lubbock, the artist and art critic who died three years ago. This is 
far more than just another book about grief. Sandra M Gilbert has found a 
funny, lively literary topic inThe Culinary Imagination 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780393067651>
, about every kind of meal in every kind of story. Giuliana Bruno's book
Surface: Matters of Aesthetics, Materiality and Media 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Surface-Matters-Aesthetics-Materiality-Media/dp/022610494X/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1404830938&sr=1-1&keywords=giuliana+bruno>
 is sumptuous, irresistible: it begins with Fortuny fluted silk and closes with 
Sally Potter's filmed colours and textures.The Poetry of Derek Walcott 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Poetry-Derek-Walcott-1948-2013/dp/0374125619>, 
selected by Glyn Maxwell, displays magnificently the poet's lyric dynamism and 
invention, sustained over 50 years in an endless play of breeze, sea and sky. 
I've just become a grandmother so I'm fascinated by Andrea Brady's poem-essay
Mutability 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857420909>
,in which she's forging a new way of thinking about the mutual absorption of 
mother and infant – before the child finds language for herself. David 
Constantine has just turned 70 and his new collection,Elder 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781780370989>
, has a beguiling archaic goddess on the cover and many dreams and adventures 
inside. As for a classic, I'm looking forward to Albert Cossery's 1945 novel,
Laziness in the Fertile Valley 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780811218740>
.

Mariella Frostrup
Observer columnist and radio/TV host

As presenter of Radio 4's Open Book, I'm never short of reading material but 
part of the pleasure of summer holidays is turning to the books I want to read. 
To improve my agony aunt skills this summer, when we'll be taking a staycation 
in Somerset and Dorset so we can finally finish our house, I'm devoting myself 
to self-improvement with a cluster of the many new books blessedly free of 
American psychobabble. What better way to start than by unblocking the paths to 
true inspiration withCreativity, Inc 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780593070093>
 by Ed Catmull. Next is Ruby Wax'sSane New World 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444755756>
, offering help in everyday mindfulness and finally, what wouldn't be nice about
Hardwiring Happiness 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846043567>
? Rick Hanson promises to help me achieve that goal. The trick to achieving
Gravitas 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780091954956>
, according to its author, Caroline Goyder, is to "fake yourself under 
pressure", which I'll also be learning more about. If I get through them all by 
autumn I'll be practically perfect and ready to start afresh on myObserver 
column readers!

Robert Macfarlane <https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-macfarlane>
Author and academic

I'll be in Trieste and Ljubljana in the late summer and plan to read Adam 
Nicolson'sThe Mighty Dead: Why Homer Matters 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007335527>
; and to feed my deep-running genre-fiction habit with the new Philip Kerr,A 
Man Without Breath 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781780876276>
. Like half a million other people, I'm much looking forward to David Mitchell's
The Bone Clocks 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780340921609>
. And I plan to return to VS Naipaul'sThe Enigma of Arrival  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Enigma-Arrival-Novel-Sections/dp/0330522868/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1404835099&sr=8-1&keywords=the+enigma+of+arrival>
(1987), as a means of seeing the English landscape from the outside.

Viv Albertine
Musician and writer

I'm going to Iceland this summer with my 15-year-old daughter. Sounds a bit 
odd, but I don't like the sun and nor does she. I keep checking the weather 
conditions in Reykjavik on my phone and when it says "rainy and cold" I think, 
Yay! The relief of not having to buy a bikini is massive.

I'll take four books. First is Any Other Mouth 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908754578>
 by Anneliese Mackintosh, which I picked up recently in a bookshop in 
Manchester. It was written by a girl who used to work in the shop and she 
sounded like my kind of person.

Then there's Dark Places 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780753827031>
 by Gillian Flynn. I loved herGone Girl. I'll take John Green's The Fault in 
Our Stars 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141345659>
 too. I'm very interested in contemporary young adult fiction, and this book is 
a huge hit with my daughter and her friends. Finally, I always take a self-help 
book away and Richard Bode'sFirst You Have to Row a Little Boat  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/First-You-Have-Little-Boat/dp/145554552X/ref=sr_1_2_bnp_2_pap?ie=UTF8&qid=1404834496&sr=8-2&keywords=richard+bode>
is so elegantly written.

Rachel Cooke
Observer writer and author

I've been saving up two novels for my holiday (in the south of France): Akhil 
Sharma'sFamily Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571314263>
 and Mona Simpson'sCasebook 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781472112453>
. They'll make a good pair: both take a child's view of the world; both are 
about families coming apart at the seams. I'll also be takingBricks & Mortals: 
Ten Great Buildings and the People They Made 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408843666>
 by Tom Wilkinson; I'm especially looking forward to the chapter on Lubetkin's 
Finsbury health centre, which is close to where I live. A classic I've always 
meant to read isAfter Claude 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/After-Claude-Review-Books-Classics/dp/1590173635/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1404835889&sr=1-1&keywords=after+claude>
 by Iris Owens, which was first published in 1973 and is the story of a 
break-up. Kenneth Tynan called it "barbed, bitchy and hilariously sour", which 
is good enough for me.

Rachel Joyce
Novelist

This summer, I'm going to return with my family to Embleton Bay in 
Northumberland. We discovered it when I was researching my new book. It's a 
vast arc of a white-sanded bay with views towards Dunstanburgh Castle and I 
can't wait to walk alongside the rock pools at 6am and pretend for a moment 
that it's mine. I will takeLife After Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780385618670>
 by Kate Atkinson andMeadowland 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857521453>
 by John Lewis-Stempel. A friend gave me a copy ofMiddlemarch, which I haven't 
read since I was a teenager.

Lara Feigel
Writer and lecturer

I've begun my summer reading with Hermione Eyre's novel Viper Wine 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224097598>
, a stylishly exuberant true story of the 17th-century beauty Venetia Stanley 
succumbing to potions to stave off the loss of youth. It's an oddly haunting 
book, unlike any other historical novel I've come across. For my summer holiday 
(in Cornwall, with a bucket and spade), I'll be packing Ruth Padel's new poetry 
collection,Learning to Make an Oud in Nazareth 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701188160>
 and Rebecca West'sA Train of Powder 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/A-Train-Powder-Rebecca-West/dp/1566633192>. Both West 
and Padel lead us to see political conflicts freshly by observing them through 
a wonderfully precise and very intimate lens.

Kate Kellaway
Observer writer

At the front of the summer queue is Akhil Sharma's Family Life – said to have 
been prodigiously long in its earliest drafts but now a short, 
semi-autobiographical novel about a Dehli family in New York and the tragedy 
that overtakes young Ajay's life. AlsoThe Shock of the Fall, 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007491438>
 a first novel about a schizophrenic by psychiatric nurse Nathan Flier (a Costa 
prize winner). And then, to offset what might otherwise be a desolation 
overdose, Angela Carter'sWise Children 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099981107>
, about south London thespians. I'm cheating here, actually, because I've 
already started it and her high-kicking prose is sublime.

Geoff Dyer
Author

No plans to go anywhere but I am looking forward to Jenny Offill's slender and 
smart new novelDept of Speculation 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847088734>
 and moving on to volume three –Boyhood Island 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846557224>
 – of Karl Ove Knausgaard'sMy Struggle sextet. I'll also be finishing Isabel 
Wilkerson'sThe Warmth of Other Suns 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Warmth-Other-Suns-Migration/dp/0679763880/ref=sr_1_sc_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1404832653&sr=8-1-spell&keywords=the+wearmth+of+other+suns>
, her magnificent history of the great migration of African Americans from the 
segregated south to the democratic promise – and challenges – of the urban 
north.

Christos Tsiolkas
Novelist

I am spending summer in Europe this year, in Greece and in France. I am 
working with a terrific photographer, Zoe Ali, on a collaboration calledA Boy, 
a Girl and a Gun. Apart from that, I am also reading and researching for a new 
book. What will I be reading? Plato, Petronius'sSatyricon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780198150121>
, David Malouf'sRansom 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099539520>
 and the letters of St Paul. I am eager to beginOlivier Assayas 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Olivier-Assayas-AUTHOR-May-29-2012-Paperback/dp/B00BOYJJ8A>
, a collection of essays on the film-maker, edited by Kent Jones. And I am very 
much enjoying readingSexual Life in Ancient Greece <>, a deliriously passionate 
and proto-queer ode to antiquity, written by Hans Licht, first published in 
Germany, in the 1920s.

Louise Doughty
Novelist

We have booked an apartment on a beach in Corsica; water sports for the boy, 
sun lounger for me. I've been reading a lot of non-fiction as research recently 
so it's going to be novels all the way. Harriet Lane'sHer 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780297865056>
, along with Jean Hanff Korelitz'sYou Should Have Known 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571307517>
 and, according to my resolution to read more fiction in translation,Summer 
House With Swimming Pool 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781782390718>
by Herman Koch. I would also like to catch up with the Caribbean writer Kerry 
Young, having recently seen her read fromGloria 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408843369>
, the sequel toPao. As for a classic, I've never read In a Glass Darkly 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199537983>
 by Sheridan Le Fanu.

Jess Walter
Novelist

This summer, at Pajaro Dunes in northern California, I'm planning to read We 
Are Called to Rise 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781471132582>
 by Laura McBride, because my wife says it's gorgeous and devastating. McBride 
is from my hometown, Spokane, Washington, which spits out writers like 
sunflower seeds. I'm also planning to read Tom Rachman'sThe Rise & Fall of 
Great Powers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444752342>
. His first novel,The Imperfectionists, was so good.

John Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-gray>
Philosopher

The classic I'm taking on holiday to New York is one that's been almost 
forgotten – Richard Hughes'sA High Wind in Jamaica 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099437437>
. First published in 1929, it's a surreal novel of childhood adventure that 
turns how we see the human mind upside down. From recent fiction, I'm taking 
another book that questions what it means to be human: Michel Faber'sUnder the 
Skin 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781782112112>
, the brilliant and unsettling novel that inspired Jonathan Glazer's 
astonishing film. My non-fiction choice is Adam Phillips'sBecoming Freud 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780300158663>
, for its wonderful epilogue on Freud's original sin, and much else.

Alex Preston
Novelist

Three weeks in Puglia will allow me to give full rein to my Italo Calvino 
obsession.Invisible Cities 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099429838>
 andCosmicomics 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Cosmicomics-Italo-Calvino/dp/0330319086/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1404900166&sr=8-2&keywords=cosmicomics>
 are the collections coming with me, but I'd read his shopping lists I love him 
so much.

I'm also putting together a reading list for the MA in creative writing I 
teach in Paris. So, sticking on the Oulipo vibe, I'll be reading Perec'sThings 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099541660>
 and rereading his astonishingLife: A User's Manual 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Life-Users-Manual-Georges-Perec/dp/0099449250/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1404900589&sr=8-1&keywords=Life%3A+a+user%27s+manual>
, one of my favourite novels.

My wife is taking two of the hottest debuts of the year – Zia Haider Rahman's 
In the Light of What We Know 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447231226>
 and Hermione Eyre'sViper Wine 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224097598>
. When I run out of reading material, I'll steal them from her as they both 
blew my socks off.

Elizabeth Day
Observer writer and novelist

I'm looking forward to a week in southern Spain in the company of Remember Me 
Like This 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444788051>
 by Bret Anthony Johnston. It has a fascinating fictional premise: a missing 
child who comes back and a changed family who have to get used to the idea. 
I've dipped into it already and the writing is clear and beautiful. Besides, a 
novel that comes with effusive quotes from John Irving and Alice Sebold has to 
be pretty good.

I'll also be packing The Good Soldier 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141441849>
by Ford Madox Ford. Despite a long-standing interest in novels written just 
after the first world war, to my shame I've never read it.

Sara Wheeler
Travel writer and biographer

I'm looking forward to Vanora Bennett's new novel The White Russian 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781780890043>
, as it sounds so exotic, set among the Russian emigré community in 1930s 
Paris. There is also a plump classic in my suitcase – Pushkin'sComplete Prose 
Tales 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099529477>
, in Gillon Aitken's translation. Is he going to be as good as Chekhov? As I am 
going to be somewhere off the coast of Maine, I am taking Ann Hood's latest 
novel,The Obituary Writer 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780393346770>
. Some years ago, I much enjoyed her debut –Somewhere Off the Coast of Maine.

Julie Myerson
Novelist

I'm going to be in Suffolk and I can't wait to read Thunderstruck 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224099523>
, Elizabeth McCracken's new short stories – I've just finished her brilliant 
memoir,An Exact Replica of a Figment of My Imagination, and want more of her 
direct, funny and heart-stoppingly honest take on things. Having failed to get 
into Herman Koch'sThe Dinner, I'm going to give him one more chance with Summer 
House With Swimming Pool  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781782390718>
– partly because I like the title and partly because one of my favourite 
authors, David Vann, is recommending it. Also on Vann's recommendation, I'm 
determined finally to read Cormac McCarthy'sBlood Meridian 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/search.do>. Both had better be 
good or I'm never listening to him again.

Julian Fellowes
Screenwriter and novelist

We're off to a villa on the Amalfi Coast this year and my plan is to lie flat 
with a book and a glass of something cheerful balanced on my stomach. I shall 
takeJosephine 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099551423>
, the new biography of Napoleon's empress by Kate Williams. I love the whole 
concept of accidental greatness and here we have an uneducated girl from 
Martinique who found herself at the centre of European affairs.

My classic would be Kipps: The Story of a Simple Soul 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Kipps-The-Story-Simple-Soul/dp/0755114361/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1404903471&sr=8-2&keywords=Kipps%3A+the+story+of+a+simple+soul>
 by HG Wells. Wells is not much credited with a sense of humour, butKipps is 
full of warmth. It is also a wonderfully perceptive analysis of British society 
at the time, which seems remarkably un-different from our own. Finally, I have 
recently discoveredThey Were Counted 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781841593531>
 by Miklos Banffy. It is an account of the last years of the Habsburg empire, a 
gently lyrical, romantic tribute to the strengths and weaknesses of that 
intense time, when the sun inexorably set on the old aristocratic values for 
ever.

Stephanie Merritt
Observer writer and novelist


I'm walking from coast to coast (a 200-mile route from Cumbria to Yorkshire) 
so I'm taking Rebecca Solnit's thoughtful and fascinatingWanderlust: A History 
of Walking to inspire me. I'm also taking Tana French's new novel, The Secret 
Place – she's a seriously talented writer and I love her Dublin Murder Squad 
series. I've been eagerly awaiting this one for ages.

Justin Cartwright
Novelist

For the beach at Hydra, where I am heading, I am looking forward very much to 
readingA Place in the Country by WG Sebald. I revere him and his unique style. 
Also on my list would beThe Brief and Frightening Reign of Phil by George 
Saunders <https://www.theguardian.com/books/george-saunders> (right). If you 
haven't discovered Saunders, get on to him immediately: he is a genius. The 
last book of his I read was his short story collectionTenth of December; he 
deservedly won the Folio prize a few months ago.

Recently, I read The Uses and Abuses of History by Margaret MacMillan, a 
Canadian who is warden of St Antony's College, Oxford. Reading it has made me 
eager to find a week or so to read her magisterial book,The War That Ended Peace
, apparently the definitive account of the Great War. I also want to readThe 
Idiot by Fyodor Dostoevsky, which somehow I have missed.

Salley Vickers
Novelist

I shall be taking John Burnside's latest poetry collection All One Breath 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224097406>
, Nicola Barker's novelIn the Approaches 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007583706>
 andBeowulf 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007590063>
 on my regular summer retreat to my old colleague Anthony Steven's beautiful 
old farmhouse in Corfu. Burnside is our most exciting living poet and I love 
his shrewd and delicate psychological observation, and Nicola Barker is a 
writer I admire because I could never write like her, yet we share a similarly 
subversive view of life. Her latest novel boldly takes a religious theme, a 
subject for which I am also known, but I bet she does it differently and with 
style. Finally,Beowulf, which I lazily ducked as an undergraduate; an omission 
I have been meaning to repair for some time.

Frank Cottrell Boyce <https://www.theguardian.com/books/cottrell-boyce>
Screenwriter and novelist

I'll be spending Summer in Sligo and lovely Dumfries and Galloway. The book 
I'll be reading aloud to anyone who comes to visit is Jon Klassen's utterly 
brilliantThis is Not My Hat 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781406353433>
 – a submarine tale of hubris and death (spoiler alert). All great picture 
books –Where the Wild Things Are, The Tiger Who Came to Tea, The Gruffalo – 
have their moments of darkness. But nothing as dark as the ending of this 
masterpiece. It has the world's funniest ever drawing of a crab pointing. I'm 
also taking Clive James's translation ofThe Divine Comedy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447242192>
. It's got an urgent clarity that makes you want to give it your full attention.

Robert McCrum
Observer writer

My summer classic is a short book I hope will distract from airport hassles. I 
recently saw Brian Friel's adaptation of Turgenev'sFathers and Sons 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141441337>
 in a wonderful Donmar production. But I've never read the novel and will take 
the Penguin edition with me on my travels to Turkey.

By contrast, as an injection of contemporary financial savvy, I'll also take 
Flashboys 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241003633>
by Michael Lewis. No one writes better about the cutting edge of American life. 
Finally, to unwind, watching the sun sink over the sea, I'll travel with
Homecoming 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571297191>
 by Susie Steiner, a name to watch.

Joe Dunthorne
Novelist

I take extra pleasure in books that are not yet available to the public so I 
intend to read the uncorrected proof of Ben Lerner's second novel,10:04 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/10-04-Novel-Ben-Lerner/dp/0865478104>. I'm also going 
to read PG Wodehouse'sJeeves Takes Charge 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Jeeves-Takes-Charge-Other-Stories/dp/0099777606>. Line 
for line, no other author brings me as much happiness.

Charlie Higson
Author and comedian

I do question the sanity of flying halfway round the world to sit in the shade 
reading a book, but I suppose these days time is the ultimate luxury. I don't 
want to be challenged on holiday. I want the familiar. We always go to our 
house in Italy and I always read at least one Bernard Cornwell. I'm working my 
way through his Sharpe novels and am up toSharpe's Revenge 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007452897>
. Sunshine, beautiful women, bloody battles. Bliss.

I recently discovered Robert Aickman's short stories, which are somewhere 
between Kafka and MR James via David Lynch, and am very pleased that Faber and 
Faber is republishing all his books. I'm takingDark Entries 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571311774>
. It's advisable to take a thick book that you can get lost in and a few people 
have recommendedThe Luminaries 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847084323>
 by Eleanor Catton, so I'm going to give it a go. If it doesn't work out, I'll 
use it as a float.

Josie Rourke
Theatre director

For me, holidays are all about lying around reading. I shall be lounging in La 
Rochelle on a bed of paperbacks and French cheese. I am looking forward to 
Rachel Holmes's excellentEleanor Marx: A Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780747583844>
. I loved herThe Hottentot Venus and she is a biographer with a sense of 
adventure that carries the reader along. My next directing project is a film 
noir musical,City of Angels, so there will be some work brushing up my Raymond 
Chandlers and Dashiell Hammetts. Kamila Shamsie's new novel,A God in Every Stone
 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408847206>
, is my special treat.

Julian Baggini
Writer and philosopher

The fact that I can't tell you exactly what Philology 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780691145648>
 means – and I bet not many others can either – makes James Turner's book of 
the same name an intriguing prospect. I'm keen to find out more about the 
one-time "queen of the human sciences" and how she was deposed.Nothing Holds 
Back the Night 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408843451>
 by Delphine de Vigan is about a woman who is convinced she is telepathic and 
converses with Lacan. Ideal for avoiding the beach. And maybe this will be the 
summer when I very belatedly get through George Orwell'sEssays 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141395463>
.

Scroobius Pip
Spoken-word artist


Sadly, I don't get holidays – I am always touring. This summer I will be going 
to Glastonbury, Bestival, Latitude  and Godiva, and I will be takingTape 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007511204>
 by Steven Camden. His spoken-word pieces have been a massive inspiration so I 
can't wait to see how his style translates to paper. Jodi Ann Bickley is 
another whose spoken-word stories have inspired andOne Million Lovely Letters 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444754803>
, a true-life tale, is worthy of the coverage it has received. Finally, 
Kerouac'sOn the Road 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141182674>
. It's a book I have had since I was a teen and drifted in and out of. Time to 
read it properly.

Curtis Sittenfeld <https://www.theguardian.com/books/curtis-sittenfeld>
Novelist

I'm really looking forward to reading the debut novel The Year She Left Us 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Year-She-Left-Us/dp/0062273345> by Kathryn Ma, 
which is about several generations of Chinese-American women; I've loved Ma's 
short stories. I'm also intrigued by Lily King's novelEuphoria 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Euphoria-Lily-King/dp/0802122558>, which is about a 
Margaret Mead-like anthropologist in 1930s New Guinea. Finally, and rather 
shamefully, I've never readMiddlemarch, so I want to tackle that and follow it 
up with Rebecca Mead's literary memoir,The Road to Middlemarch 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847085153>
. I heard Mead speak recently and she was wise and delightful. I'm headed to 
the mountains of Colorado but only briefly, alas – not for a remotelyMiddlemarch
-ish stretch.

To buy any of these titles for a special price, go to 
guardianbookshop.co.uk/observer-summer-reading 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/observer-summer-reading>

• This article was amended on 14 July 2014 to correct the spelling of Robert 
Aickman's name.
 