
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie

I loved Akhil Sharma's novel Family Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571314263>
 (Faber) because it feels emotionally true. I also lovedDaughters Who Walk This 
Path by Yejide Kilanko (Pintail), a debut novel set in western Nigeria, which 
on the surface is about a young woman coming of age, but is really an 
exploration of social taboos, gender and family. I have just started reading 
– and am really enjoying – Lily King's novelFather of the Rain (Atlantic); 
it's so well done.

Mary Beard
 Stoner by John Williams 
First I am going to read John Williams's Augustus 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099445081>
(Vintage Classics). His "campus novel"Stoner 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099561545>
 was last year's rediscovery, but the epistolary story of the first Roman 
emperor looks even better. I shall also be packing Edith Hall'sIntroducing the 
Ancient Greeks (WW Norton). Great to see how a feisty woman does the 
"introduction".

William Boyd

Berlin: Imagine a City 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780297868828>
 by Rory MacLean (Weidenfeld & Nicolson). Berlin vies with London, currently, 
as the coolest city on the planet. MacLean's wonderfully knowledgable overview 
of the city's history helps explain the place's enduring fascination.Hollow 
Mountain 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408846582>
 by Thomas Mogford (Bloomsbury) is the third novel in a highly original and 
compelling Mediterranean noir series featuring the resourceful and 
all-too-human Gibraltar-based young lawyer Spike Sanguinetti. Tremendous 
atmosphere, rich characterisation and ideally complex plotting.I Knew the Bride 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571308880>
 by Hugo Williams (Faber): it's rare that a book of poetry exhibits "grace 
under pressure" with such laconic aplomb. Williams's superb poems about his 
visits to a dialysis ward pull off a near-impossible balancing act: a haunting
memento mori leavened with wry, worldly amusement.

AS Byatt
 Philip Hensher, The Emperor Waltz 
I recommend two novels that have just been published – Neel Mukherjee's 
The Lives of Others 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701186296>
 (Chatto & Windus) and Philip Hensher'sThe Emperor Waltz 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007459575>
(4th Estate). The former takes place in Bengal in the 1960; the latter in the 
Bauhaus in 1920s Germany and 1970s London, with brief visits to fourth-century 
Rome and a present-day hospital ward. Both novels are splendidly thought out 
and extraordinarily readable. And then I'd like to add Jane Gardam's collection 
–The Stories 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408705681>
 (Little, Brown) – full of wit, unexpected turns of events and splendid 
writing. Every summer I bury myself in one author I read avidly late at night – 
this year it is Alan Furst, whose compulsive thrillers are just as exciting 
when revisited.

Shami Chakrabarti
 'Eleanor Marx: A Life' is a wonderful book … Shami Chakrabarti. Photograph: 
David Fisher/Rex Features 
I've just finished Eleanor Marx: A Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780747583844>
 by Rachel Holmes (Bloomsbury) and have already given copies as gifts, for 
holiday reading. It's a wonderful book: part biography of a great woman of 
letters and activism; part family drama and whodunnit. Feminism began in 
the 1870s not the 1970s and Eleanor Marx's progressive internationalism 
as translated by Holmes is so relevant today.A God in Every Stone by Kamila 
Shamsie (Bloomsbury) is my holiday novel as I love Shamsie's beautiful painting 
with words. I've enjoyed her previous books for the way that the sweep of human 
history touches and turns the intimate lives of her characters. Unsurprisingly, 
this book, like the Eleanor Marx biography, has already achieved widespread 
critical acclaim.

For those with the luxury of late post-school-holiday breaks, there are some 
really exciting offerings out in September. I am looking forward toThe 
Taxidermist's Daughter by Kate Mosse (Orion), Edge of Eternity 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780230710160>
 by Ken Follett (Macmillan) andWomen in Dark Times 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408845400>
 by Jacqueline Rose (Bloomsbury).

Sarah Churchwell
 A God in Every Stone by Kamila Shamsie 
As I am a Man Booker prize judge this year, my summer reading list consists of 
160 new novels that I can neither name nor (currently) endorse, although in 
late July my fellow judges and I will announce a longlist recommending 12 or 13 
novels for everyone's summer reading lists. Then, once I have reread the 
longlist, I am immensely looking forward to catching up on some non-novels, 
including (after a surfeit of 600-plus-page tomes) several short-story 
collections:Lying Under the Apple Tree 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099593775>
 by Alice Munro (Vintage),Tenth of December 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408837368>
 by George Saunders (Bloomsbury) andBark 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571273904>
 by Lorrie Moore (Faber). I also crave the astringency of some non-fiction, and 
am especially eager to read Jill Lepore'sBook of Ages (Knopf), the story of 
Benjamin Franklin's sister, Ian Leslie'sCurious 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781782064954>
(Basic), and Kevin Birmingham'sThe Most Dangerous Book: The Battle for James 
Joyce's Ulysses 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781784080723>
(Penguin). Once I can face a novel again, I look forward to being the last 
reader in Britain to finally begin Karl Ove Knausgaard'sMy Struggle 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780914671008>
(Vintage).

Margaret Drabble

For a moving and highly contemporary story full of suspense, take Bernardine 
Bishop's new novelHidden Knowledge 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444789867>
(Sceptre). If you're going to Italy (or even if not), I recommend a couple of 
books that illuminate Italian history of the fascist period: Lucy 
Hughes-Hallett'sThe Pike 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007213962>
 (4th Estate), an entertaining biography of the outrageously colourful poet and 
man-of-action Gabriele d'Annunzio, to be offset by Antonio Pennacchi's epic 
novelThe Mussolini Canal 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781909232242>
(Dedalus). The latter will make you want to head off at once to the Pontine 
Marshes.

Antonia Fraser

I can't recommend A God in Every Stone 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408847213>
 by Kamila Shamsie too strongly – this is her best novel yet, which is high 
praise to give to the author ofBurnt Shadows 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408800874>
. A young Englishwoman – an archaeologist in Turkey before the first world war, 
then a nurse to wounded soldiers – searches for her lost love whom she may have 
unwittingly betrayed. The narrative moves to the struggle for Indian 
independence and the boy she befriends, against the custom of culture and 
class, in a subtle tapestry in which love, history and archaeology all have 
their place. Exciting and, in the end, profoundly moving, this will solace you 
during the grimmest holiday. I intend to readTen Cities that Made an Empire 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846143250>
 by Tristram Hunt (Allen Lane), believing that his characteristically well 
researched and lively account of the imperial legacy in Boston, Bridgetown, New 
Delhi, Melbourne and so forth will serve as a substitute for sitting at 
airports on my way to visiting these colourful cities.

Mark Haddon
 Eimear McBride, A Girl Is a Half-formed Thing 
George Saunders's Tenth of December 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408837368>
, which won the inaugural Folio prize has been somewhat overshadowed by the 
very different but equally wonderfulA Girl Is a Half-formed Thing  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571317165>
by Eimear McBride (Galley Beggar), also shortlisted for the Folio prize and 
which went on to win several other awards including the Baileys. So I think it 
should be pointed out that reading both books is compulsory.

I was recently sent an advance copy of H Is for Hawk 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224097000>
 by Helen Macdonald (Jonathan Cape), which is out in August. It's about the 
author TH White and grief and training goshawks and is, as I promise on the 
cover, very hard to put down.

I'm also looking forward to reading Letters of Note 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781782112235>
 edited by Shaun Usher (Canongate), a collection of "correspondence deserving 
of a wider audience" in both facsimile and typescript. Jack the Ripper writes 
to the chairman of the Whitechapel vigilance committee. Mary, Queen of Scots 
writes about her impending execution. A telegram is sent from the sinking 
Titanic. Elvis Presley asks Richard Nixon if he can become a "federal agent at 
large". If you're not tempted by those four alone, you have a heart of stone. 
One last suggestion – if you're unwilling to leave the hammock or open your 
eyes – I'm re-re-listening to Seamus Heaney reading his own translation of 
Beowulf 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571203765>
(Faber). The original poem is one of the great works of literature; Heaney's 
genuinely thrilling translation will make you understand why – and he was 
blessed with one of the most beguiling voices I have ever heard.

Mohsin Hamid
 Mohsin Hamid is looking forward to reading Glenn Greenwald's No Place to 
Hide. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
The first in my towering pile of books is Glenn Greenwald's No Place to Hide 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241146699>
(Hamish Hamilton), because I think the government spying that he uncovered via 
Edward Snowden is terrifying and I'd like to know more. And the second isDecoded
 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141391472>
(Allen Lane), Mai Jia's debut novel about a Chinese secret-service 
cryptographer, which I've heard is brilliant – and is also, come to think of 
it, probably not unrelated to the first.

Philip Hensher

Most of my reading this year is of forgotten or neglected British short 
stories for a big Penguin anthology. But I'll take a break from Sapper, Stacy 
Aumonier, Lanoe Falconer and HA Manhood for a couple of special new novels. 
Early copies of Sarah Waters and David Nicholls look beautifully promising; 
Waters'sThe Paying Guests 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780349004365>
 (Virago) is a sumptuously subdued story of making do and getting by after the 
great war, Nicholls'sUs 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780340896990>
 (Hodder & Stoughton) is a wrenching examination of a journey through Europe 
that goes terribly wrong and a consideration of what it means to be a parent 
today. Apart from that, it's going to be the usual strategy of alternatingPG 
Wodehouse <https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse> and Elmore Leonard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/20/elmore-leonard>, their sunny 
temperaments perfect for the beach.

Nick Hornby
 Nicholson Baker, Travelling Sprinkler 
Nicholson Baker's Paul Chowder novels, The Anthologist 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847397829>
 (Pocket) andTravelling Sprinkler 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781781252789>
 (Serpent's Tail), are wonderful: chatty, bizarrely informative, wise, kind, 
unpredictable and funny. Chowder is a lovelorn, impoverished poet who, in the 
second book, has hit the Three Fs – Fifty Fucking Five – and is no nearer 
to achieving financial or emotional stability. He knows a lot, though.
The Anthologist is brilliant on the unlikely subject of rhyme (Chowder thinks 
blank verse is a fascist conspiracy); inTravelling Sprinkler, Chowder tells us 
about bassoons, cigars, Logic software, Debussy and protest songs. Will Hermes's
Love Goes to Buildings on Fire 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241003756>
 (Viking) is a book about more or less every piece of music made in NYC between 
1973 and 1977 – Television, Blondie and Talking Heads, of course, but also 
salsa, disco, free jazz and the first days of hip-hop. It's as authoritative a 
piece of social history as you'll come across – Hermes isDavid Kynaston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-kynaston> with a rhythm section. I 
am intending to read J Anthony Lukas'sCommon Ground (Vintage), 
a Pulitzer-winning book first published in the mid 1980s about race and class 
in Boston. After very strong recommendations from people I trust, I found that 
I owned it already. This seemed like a sign.

Hari Kunzru

In the early 90s I studied philosophy at Warwick University, at a time when 
the department was an incubator for radical ideas about the impact of new 
technologies on culture and society. A number of people from that time have 
gone on to do significant work in theory, literature and even music. This 
summer I'm looking forward to books by two former colleagues/fellow inmates.
#Accelerate: The Accelerationist Reader edited by Robin Mackay and Armen 
Avanessian, is published by Mackay's ownUrbanomic <http://www.urbanomic.com/> 
press, which is rapidly becoming one of the most significant philosophy 
publishers in the world. "Acceleration" is this year's theoretical buzzword and 
this collection examines its current usage and excavates its roots, which go 
back to the 19th century. Mark Fisher's essay collectionGhosts of My Life (Zero 
Books) faces up to his own experience of depression and links it to wider 
cultural and political concerns. Someone who wasn't at Warwick in the 90s, at 
least as far as I know, is Hassan Blasim, who has just won the Independent 
Foreign Fiction prize for his story collection,The Iraqi Christ 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781905583522>
 (Comma Press), which is also in my hand luggage.

John Lanchester
 Michael Lewis, Flash Boys 
Constantine Phipps's What You Want  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781848664340>
(Quercus) is unlike any other book published this year, indeed this century: a 
long verse-novel in rhyming couplets, about, as its subtitle says, "the pursuit 
of happiness". Dante, adultery, theme parks, psychotherapy – it's all here, but 
unjokily so, and one of the most moving things about the book is the unusual 
texture of its melancholy seriousness. Patricia Lockwood's poems,Motherland 
Fatherland Homelandsexuals(Penguin), funny, dirty and sex-mad, is a book I'll 
be taking on my summer travels; to get a flavour of her work, look online for 
the devastating prose poem"Rape Joke" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/shortcuts/2013/jul/26/patricia-lockwood-poem-rape-joke>
. Finally, this season has been unusual for seeing the publication of three 
very important books about money: Thomas Piketty'sCapital in the Twenty-First 
Century 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780674430006>
(Harvard), Atif Mian and Amir Sufi'sHouse of Debt (Chicago) and Michael Lewis's 
Flash Boys 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241003633>
 (Allen Lane), three very different, but not necessarily contradictory, takes 
on the great subject of the age.

Mark Lawson

Two long-awaited lives that I couldn't wait until summer to read were Updike 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780061896453>
 by Adam Begley (Harper) – which gives equal weight to my favourite novelist's 
life and books and the often eye-watering overlaps between them – andRoy 
Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224087506>
 by John Campbell (Jonathan Cape), which achieves an equally impressive balance 
between policies and peccadillos. Two works that I will read in the summer 
months are: John Carey's memoirThe Unexpected Professor: An Oxford Life in Books
 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571310920>
 (Faber) and Philip Hensher's novelThe Emperor Waltz 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007459575>
, which, from flicking, seems to continue his bold experiments with form.

Penelope Lively

Road Ends 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701188535>
 (Chatto & Windus) is the latest intricate and thought-provoking story of a 
remote Canadian community by Mary Lawson, author ofCrow Lake 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099429326>
. Olivia Laing'sTo the River 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847677938>
 (Canongate) is a fine instance of the new school of landscape-writing 
pioneered byRobert Macfarlane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-macfarlane>, vividly charting a slice 
of Sussex. But my find of the year has been Sarah Moss: I revelled inCold Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jun/20/cold-earth-sarah-moss-review> 
(Granta), a brilliantly tense mix of archaeology and conflicting personalities, 
and at once sought out her next novel,Night Waking 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847082701>
 (Granta). More please, Sarah.

Hilary Mantel
 Hilary Mantel recommends Toby Clement's Kingmaker: Winter Pilgrims, 'a savage 
and tender adventure story'. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Kingmaker: Winter Pilgrims 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781780891699>
 (Century) is a savage and tender adventure story, deeply researched and 
lightly told:Game of Thrones for real, with the bonus of style and sardonic 
wit. The climate is mostly chilly in Toby Clement's novel, as his characters 
struggle to survive civil war in 15th-century England, but the heart warms to 
his skilful, intelligent fiction. Stranger than fiction but just as gripping is
How to Ruin a Queen 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781848549982>
 (John Murray), Jonathan Beckman's masterly exploration of the "diamond 
necklace" affair, a bizarre scandal that some claim set Marie Antoinette on 
the road to the guillotine. Well-travelled imaginations will enjoy a jaunt with 
fiery polymath Christopher Potter;How to Make a Human Being 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/18/how-to-make-a-human-body-christopher-potter-review>
 (4th Estate) is a quirky investigation into our deepest nature, and calls on 
evidence from PG Wodehouse and Marcel Proust, Christopher Robin and Francis 
Crick, the Book of Revelation and the Worm Breeder's Gazette.

Charlotte Mendelson

I am a notoriously bad holiday book packer; I tend to panic and bring, say, 
Hard Times 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199536276>
. This year I want to read: Michael Cunningham'sThe Snow Queen 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007557677>
 (4th Estate) because he's my favourite writer; Sarah Waters'sThe Paying Guests 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780349004365>
 (Virago), because she's also my favourite writer; the Maudes's translation of
War and Peace (Oxford), because it's the best novel in the world; and enormous 
amounts of very bleak Rendellesque crime fiction.

Pankaj Mishra

A robust translation programme in India is finally making the richness 
and diversity of Indian fiction accessible to a broader audience. I am 
looking forward to readingHangwoman (Hamish Hamilton) by KR Meera, an acclaimed 
novelist in Malayalam. Other books on my list are Bilal Tanweer's novel
The Scatter Here Is Too Great 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224099110>
 (Jonathan Cape), Rüdiger Safranski'sRomanticism: A German Affair (Northwestern 
University Press), an account of one of the most influential, intellectual and 
literary movements of the modern age, and Hisham Aidi'sRebel Music: Race, 
Empire, and the New Muslim Youth Culture (Pantheon).

Blake Morrison

Meteorologists are predicting a hot summer so I'll be reading books designed 
to keep me from feeling too sunny: Pete Ayrton's weighty anthologyNo Man's Land 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846689253>
 (Serpent's Tail), featuring accounts of the first world war by 47 writers, 
some of them combatants, many of them from other parts of the world; Marion 
Coutts's memoirThe Iceberg 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781782393504>
 (Atlantic), which describes the three years between the diagnosis of her 
husband Tom Lubbock's brain tumour and his death; Hugo Hamilton's novelEvery 
Single Minute 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007324859>
 (4th Estate), about two friends, one of whom is terminally ill, spending a 
weekend in Berlin; an early proof copy ofEpilogue by an English-born, US-based 
writer called (no kidding) Will Boast (due from Granta), which recounts the 
deaths of his mother, father and brother; and a battered paperback of Ivan 
Turgenev'sFathers and Sons 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141441337>
 (Oxford), with its portrait of youthful nihilism, thwarted love and parents 
grieving for absent children.

Andrew Motion
 Andrew Motion recommends Sigrid Rausing's Everything Is Wonderful. 
Everything Is Wonderful 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780802122179>
, by Sigrid Rausing (Perseus), may not be exactly a typical beach read, but it 
is – because and in spite of its severities – a marvellously interesting piece 
of writing. An account of her time on a collective farm in Estonia in the 
1990s, all brought back with compelling and melancholy accuracy. Damon Galgut's 
new novelArctic Summer 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857897183>
 (Atlantic) is also preoccupied by varieties of sadness – but is so crisply 
written, with a deceptive simplicity and directness, that it feels full of 
affirmations. And then there'sThe Odyssey 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140449112>
, which I reread every year, this time accompanied by Adam Nicolson's 
intriguing account of his own Odyssey addiction,The Mighty Dead 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007335527>
 (William Collins).



Philip Pullman 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857521453>

Meadowland: The Private Life of an English Field 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857521453>
 by John Lewis-Stempel (Doubleday). Having recently acquired a meadow, I'm 
eager to learn from someone who knows not only all about the different kinds of 
life in such a place and how they all fit together, but who can also write so 
vividly. I've enjoyed Philip Hensher's previous books so much that I'm greatly 
looking forward toThe Emperor Waltz 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007459575>
 (4th Estate), which is satisfactorily hefty. And I'm going to reread Thomas 
Mann'sBuddenbrooks 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780749386474>
 (Vintage Classics) to marvel again at how a 25-year-old could have the 
impudence to take on such a huge subject and the genius to deal with it so 
majestically.

Ian Rankin
 Ian Rankin 'can hardly tear himself away' from Linda Grants Upstairs at the 
Party. Photograph:Rex Features 
Clothes Clothes Clothes Music Music Music Boys Boys Boys 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571297757>
 by Viv Albertine (Faber) – cumbersome title but a terrific read. Two sides of 
a record, with side one being the birth of punk and rise of Albertine's band 
the Slits, and side two comprising her life afterwards, filled with huge 
challenges. Gripping and moving. I've just startedUpstairs at the Party 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844087495>
 by Linda Grant (Virago) and can hardly tear myself away from it. Grant always 
writes with incisive elegance and here paints a compelling picture of 1970s 
England in a plot that revolves around the disappearance of a charismatic 
student. She's been shortlisted for the Man Booker prize before, and this is 
shaping up to be a stunner.The Secret Place 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444755572>
 by Tana French (Hodder & Stoughton) isn't published until August, but I've 
managed to snatch a prepublication copy and will be taking it with me on 
holiday. Her previous novel,Broken Harbour 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780340977651>
, was a clever and compelling mystery set in post-crash Ireland. No idea what 
this one's about but that doesn't matter – Tana French always delivers.

Ruth Rendell
 Emma Healey, Elizabeth Is Missing 
I don't much like the word "thriller", especially when it's applied to 
serious, thoughtfully written novels such as Louise Doughty'sApple Tree Yard 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571278640>
 (Faber), the first of her books I've read. It's about a passionate love affair 
but has its own extraordinary originality. Since I read a lot, I like to be 
able to say that I've never read anything like it. Much the same applies to the 
very differentElizabeth Is Missing 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241003503>
 by Emma Healey (Viking). Maud is very old and aware of the slow coming of 
dementia, while her daughter does her best to control her impatience with her 
mother's vagaries and what she sees as absurd assumptions. Yet, as the tension 
mounts, the reader knows Maud is right. A novel I've just read for the second 
time but look forward to reading again is Edward St Aubyn'sNever Mind 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447202936>
 (Picador), the first volume in his brilliantly written nightmarish sequence. 
I have already read the other four in the Melrose Family box set, but will read 
them again, ending withAt Last 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330435925>
 where Patrick hopes that, with his parents gone, he may find freedom at last.

Kamila Shamsie

Sabrina Mahfouz is one of the most original, smart, and interesting younger 
voices in the UK, andThe Clean Collection 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781472534132>
 (Bloomsbury Methuen) brings together her plays and poems. There's no shortage 
of first world war material around, but for me the most surprising and 
affecting remainsIndian Voices of the Great War – Soldiers' Letters 1914-18, 
edited by David Omissi (Palgrave Macmillan). And Tobias Hill'sWhat Was Promised 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408840900>
(Bloomsbury Circus), which tells the stories of three families of Londoners 
from 1948-88, is as textured, beautifully written and ultimately gripping as 
anyone who knows his work would expect.

Lionel Shriver
 Lionel Shriver was immediately hooked by James Lee Burke's Wayfaring 
Stranger. Photograph: Richard Saker/Rex Features 
I'm not a big crime reader, but James Lee Burke is unusually literary, and 
his novelWayfaring Stranger 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781409128816>
 (Simon & Schuster) is unusually literary even for him. The first couple of 
pages hooked me right away. Besides, he wrote a lovely note to me this year, 
though we'd never crossed paths, and he seems like the nicest man in the world. 
(Writers are all too rarely spontaneously generous with other writers.) I 
always like Amy Bloom's books, andLucky Us 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847089366>
 (Granta) entails a complex relationship between two girls that becomes an even 
more complex relationship between two women. Finally,Gods in Alabama by 
Joshilyn Jackson (Hodder) – something old and borrowed; why, part of the cover 
is blue! Strongly recommended by a reliable friend, and bound to take me back 
to my buried southern American roots.

Helen Simpson

Don't go on holiday without Lorrie Moore's Bark 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571273904>
, short stories remarkable for their sharpness of wit and depth of feeling. I'd 
also pack Elizabeth McCracken'sThunderstruck & Other Stories 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224099523>
 (Jonathan Cape), her first collection in 20 years and well worth the wait. A 
grippingly unputdownable novel for the beach is Thomas Mann's family saga
Buddenbrooks 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780749386474>
, to which Birgit Vanderbeke'sThe Mussel Feast 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908670083>
 (Peirene Press), written just before the fall of the Berlin Wall around the 
figure of a tyrannical father, provides a darkly funny chaser.

Colm Tóibín

I am reading Roy Foster's Vivid Faces (Allen Lane), which, on the basis of the 
early chapters, will change the entire way we see the 1916 Rebellion in 
Ireland. He has explored the social, intellectual and sexual lives of the 
revolutionary generation, man and women, and thus created a vivid picture of a 
world much more various and daring than previously seen. By widening the scope 
of the study of the rebellion, he has created a template for future historians. 
On the subject of sex and generations, I have also read Peter Stamm'sSeven Years
 (Granta), in Michael Hoffman's translation. With his delicate touch, his way 
of using the minimum of means to suggest the maximum of emotion, Stamm has been 
a big discovery for me, I am looking forward to his new bookAll Days are Night.

Jeanette Winterson
 Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett, Holly Baxter, The Vagenda: A Zero Tolerance Guide to 
the Media 
The Vagenda 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224095808>
 by Holly Baxter and Rhiannon Lucy Coslett (Square Peg) is a brilliant expose 
of women's mags and marketing – laugh-out-loud and painfully funny. This gives 
me hope for women and for feminism and for fun. Five hundred pages at the beach 
may seem like a lot butEleanor Marx: A Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780747583844>
by Rachel Holmes is a well-paced, well‑written biography: clever, moving and a 
joy to read. Kamila Shamshie'sA God in Every Stone 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408847206>
 has strong storytelling and is a page-turner that is also a literary delight.
Mrs Moneypenny's Financial Advice for Independent Women 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780670923298>
 (Penguin) should be in every woman's beach bag and it will help you to pay for 
the holiday.
 