
AS Byatt <http://www.asbyatt.com/> 


Novelist


Top of anyone’s reading pile should be two beautifully written and original 
recent English novels – Will Cohu’sNothing But Grass 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283652/s/nothing-but-grass/>
 (Chatto & Windus £16.99) and Melissa Harrison’sAt Hawthorn Time 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/275376/> (Bloomsbury 
£12.99), which kept me awake until 3.30am. Years ago, I chose Gogol’sDead Souls 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dead-souls-7.html> (Penguin £9.99) as the book 
I always meant to read – I did in fact read it, but suddenly feel the need to 
read and remember it again.

David Mitchell <http://www.davidmitchellbooks.com/> 

Novelist 

I shall be staying at home this summer and am looking forward to reading 
Shooting Stars <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/shooting-stars-2.html> by 
Stefan Zweig (Pushkin Press £14.99). Literature in translation is enjoying a 
quiet surge in popularity andPushkin Press <http://pushkinpress.com/> is in the 
vanguard of this welcome change. This book is one of its recent offerings. 
Originally published in German between 1927 and 1940, these “historical 
miniatures” are accounts of 10 events, great, small and quirkily selected, 
which altered history. Zweig the storyteller assists Zweig the historian to 
fill in the blank spaces, but the result is still erudite, learned and always 
exuberant. Zweig’s contemporary admirers include John Gray, Clive James and Wes 
Anderson, which is good enough for me.

Jeremy Paxman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremy-paxman> 

Broadcaster, journalist and author 

I shall be taking three books on holiday. I may need to pay an excess baggage 
charge for Robert Caro’s monumental biography of the most powerful man in New 
York,The Power Broker 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/306716/> (The Bodley 
Head £35). The story of how Robert Moses made and broke people and places is 
astonishing. It comes so highly recommended that it is unignorable.

I also look forward to finishing Rain 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/308009/>, by the young 
British writer Barney Campbell (Michael Joseph £16.99), a raw novel about the 
war in Afghanistan and what it did to the young men and women sent to fight 
there. Campbell is a veteran of the conflict and the book smells completely 
authentic.

I hope also finally to tackle Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/anna-karenina-21.html>, which has been on my 
conscience for years. I bet it’s a treat.

David Nicholls <http://www.davidnichollswriter.com/>

Author and screenwriter


I seem to be in the middle of a run of fine novels – Anne Enright’s The Green 
Road 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283515/s/green-road/> 
(Jonathan Cape £16.99), Sarah Hall’sThe Wolf Border 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/wolf-border.html> (Faber £17.99), Atticus 
Lish’sPreparations for the Next Life 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283092/s/preparation-for-the-next-life/>
 (Oneworld £14.99). I loved Kent Haruf’s posthumous novella, the small-town 
love storyOur Souls at Night 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/295727/s/our-souls-at-night/>
 (Picador £12.99) and also got great pleasure from revisiting PJ Kavanagh’s 
heartbreaking coming-of-age memoirThe Perfect Stranger 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/282368/s/the-perfect-stranger/>
 (September Publishing £14.99). I was a big fan of Paul Murray’sSkippy Dies 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/skippy-dies.html> (Penguin £8.99) so will be 
pouncing on his new book,The Mark and the Void 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/307980/> (Hamish 
Hamilton £18.99). This is also going to be the summer where I start (and finish)
Middlemarch <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/middlemarch.html>.

Frank Cottrell Boyce  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/frankcottrellboyce>

Screenwriter and novelist 

I’m taking Akenfield <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/akenfield.html> by 
Ronald Blythe (Penguin £9.99). It’s a survey of English village life, written 
in the 1960s but looking back towards the first world war. I always meant to 
read it. Now I will.

Foul: The Secret World of Fifa <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/foul.html> by 
the heroic Andrew Jennings (HarperCollins £9.99) was actually published in 2006 
but no one – me included – took any notice. It could not be more relevant now. 
Football is the fullest expression of predator capitalism. Fifa is where we are 
all headed.

And two forthcoming children’s books: The Wolf Wilder 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/289113/> by Katherine 
Rundell (Bloomsbury £12.99) andAubrey and the Terrible Yoot 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/332253/> by Horatio 
Clare (Firefly Press £6.99).

Rachel Joyce 

Novelist and playwright 

We are spending our holiday in a French village at the foot of Mont Ventoux 
that is sleepy all year but gets filled with cyclists every summer, eager to 
tackle the mountain. I plan to sit and applaud them while reading a stash of 
hardbacks. (No room for clothes in the suitcase. Just a hat, sundress and 
flip-flops.) I will be takingInstrumental 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/instrumental.html> by James Rhodes (Canongate 
£16.99) because I like his electric energy,Threads: The Delicate Life of John 
Craske <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/threads-272410.html> by Julia Blackburn 
(Jonathan Cape £25), which I have already read but it’s my favourite book of 
the year, andRemembered for a While 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/remembered-for-a-while.html> (John Murray 
£35), a beautiful book aboutNick Drake 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aXnfhnCoOyo> compiled by his sister, 
Gabrielle. I’ve also foundBonjour Tristesse 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/bonjour-tristesse-3.html> by Françoise Sagan 
(Penguin £7.99). I devoured it as a teenager and I’m curious to read it again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436370932702%2F9c78128e-f1c3-45ab-954e-a079a2cf85b4-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436370932702%2F9c78128e-f1c3-45ab-954e-a079a2cf85b4-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Ferdinand Mount: ‘vivid and frequently witty writing’. Photograph: Graeme 
Robertson 
Penelope Lively <http://www.penelopelively.net/> 

Novelist 

Ferdinand Mount’s The Tears of the Rajas 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/tears-of-the-rajas.html> (Simon & Schuster 
£25) is more than 700 pages and I would happily have it longer – vivid and 
frequently witty writing about the intense and often catastrophic relationship 
between India’s multiple local rulers and their British overlords during the 
run-up to the mutiny. Julia Blackburn has a talent for choosing esoteric and 
intriguing subject matter.Threads 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/threads-272410.html> (Jonathan Cape £25) is 
the story of a Norfolk sailor/artist whose medium was wool embroidery – his 
masterpiece a remarkable evacuation of Dunkirk.

I have always had a resistance to Trollope. I shall try Can You Forgive Her? 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/can-you-forgive-her.html> (Penguin £9.99). And 
I shall be in deepest west Somerset – where else would anyone want to be?

William Dalrymple <http://www.williamdalrymple.uk.com/> 

Writer and historian 

The acclaimed Pakistani historian Ayesha Jalal’s recent book The Pity of 
Partition: Manto’s Life, Times, and Work across the India-Pakistan Divide 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/pity-of-partition.html> (Princeton Unversity 
Press £19.95) is top of my summer reading pile. It is about partition’s 
greatest chronicler, who just happens to be her great-uncle, Saadat Hasan 
Manto. The madness he witnessed at partition and the trauma he went through 
turned him into a helpless alcoholic and brought an early death at the age of 
42. But the same pain also transformed Manto into a short story writer whose 
work can be mentioned in the same breath as Chekhov, Gogol and Maupassant.

Having read Jalal’s thoughtful biography, I look forward to going back to the 
original writing:Bombay Stories 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/bombay-stories.html> and Selected Stories. 
These should be read in conjunction with Nisid Hajari’sMidnight’s Furies 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/290733/> (Amberley 
£20), a pacey new narrative history of partition which makes the complex and 
tragic story of the great divide into a page turner: no mean feat.

My other must-read this year is Bernini’s Beloved: A Portrait of Costanza 
Piccolomini by Sarah McPhee (Yale University Press £35), a brilliantly 
researched biography of the woman who was mistress not only of the greatest of 
all Roman sculptors, Gian Lorenzo Bernini, but also his younger brother, Luigi. 
This extraordinary biography recreates the life and passions of Renaissance 
Rome like no other book I have ever read. I’ll be packing it when I go to Rome 
to see the wonderful Bernini exhibition currently on at theFondazione Roma Museo
 <http://www.fondazioneromamuseo.it/it/baroccoroma.html>, Palazzo Cipolla, 
which includes Bernini’s deeply sensual portrait bust of Costanza.

Sebastian Faulks  <http://www.sebastianfaulks.com/>

Novelist, journalist and broadcaster 

I will be taking Acts of the Assassins 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/acts-of-the-assassins.html> by Richard Beard 
(Harvill Secker £16.99);Paradise City 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/285608/s/paradise-city/>
 by Elizabeth Day (Bloomsbury £16.99);Tokyo 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/298218/> by Nicholas 
Hogg (Cargo £8.99) andA God in Every Stone 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/god-in-every-stone-263799.html> by Kamila 
Shamsie (Bloomsbury £8.99). We are going to Italy, so to balance these fierce 
young talents I’ll probably take old Dante too.

John Banville <http://www.john-banville.com/> 

Writer 

I detest holidays and have to be dragged off on them; books are the only 
consolation. This year, to County Carlow and Lucca, I shall takeClive James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/clive-james>’s Sentenced to Life 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/274808/s/sentenced-to-life/>
 (Picador £14.99), his superb, late poems on mortality, his own and everyone 
else’s. Also in my bag will be Pascal Garnier’sBoxes 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/284141/> (Gallic Books 
£7.99), which is sure to freeze the cockles of my heart nicely. For those 
unacquainted with Garnier’s work, think Simenon and Patricia Highsmith mixed, 
with jokes added to the black brew. And I shall be rereading Theodor Fontane’s 
ineffableEffi Briest 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/274394/>, in a new 
translation by Mike Mitchell (Oxford World’s Classics £8.99).
 Joanna Biggs, the author of All Day Long: A Portrait of Britain at Work. 
Craig Taylor <http://grantabooks.com/Craig-Taylor> 

Journalist and playwright 

My trip this summer is to meet a new nephew. He happens to be called 
Sebastian, so my classic must beBrideshead Revisited 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/brideshead-revisited-5.html> (Penguin £8.99), 
as the name is forever linked to Waugh. I love reading about what people do all 
day, so I’ll be taking along Joanna Biggs’sAll Day Long: A Portrait of Britain 
at Work 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/275696/s/all-day-long/>
 (Profile £14.99). A few weeks ago, I procured a copy of Chris Bachelder’sThe 
Throwback Special(WW Norton, £16.99). It’s best to keep the plot secret. 
British eyes glaze when the words “American football” appear. But as a fellow 
American-football-hater, I love what Bachelder’s novel says about ritual and 
masculinity, and I appreciate the sly experimentalism. I’m not a big fan of 
mixed martial arts either, but I can’t wait to read Kerry Howley’sThrown 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/328478/> (Hamish 
Hamilton £14.99). Maybe I’ll spend all summer reading great books about 
unwatchable sports.

Kirsty Wark  <https://twitter.com/kirstywark>

Journalist, broadcaster and writer


This summer, unusually, we are staying in Scotland and having a few short 
sojourns, one of which is to theThree Chimneys <http://threechimneys.co.uk/> on 
Skye, a culinary and sensory treat – so I recommend the eponymous cookbook. I’m 
takingOld Mortality <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/old-mortality.html> by Sir 
Walter Scott (Oxford World’s Classics £12.99) with me to reread after many 
years, as I love the setting of this covenanting tale and Scott is a consummate 
storyteller.

I am a judge on the Walter Scott prize for historical fiction 
<http://www.bordersbookfestival.org/walter-scott-prize> and this year we chose 
a wonderful novel by John Spurling,The Ten Thousand Things 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ten-thousand-things.html> (Duckworth £16.99), 
in which he brings to life again the ancient Chinese artist Wang Meng, and 
through him we become immersed in a time of epic turmoil in China’s history. 
When he won the prize John Spurling said his novel had been rejected by 44 
publishers. Oh what they missed.

At the Metropolitan Museum of Art <http://www.metmuseum.org/> in New York 
recently, I exited through the gift shop but not before looking enviously at a 
beautiful book,The Great American House by Gil Schafer III (Rizzoli New York). 
And of course with one click online on my mobile phone, it was mine to enjoy 
back home on the odd rainy Scottish summer’s day.

Alexander McCall Smith <http://www.alexandermccallsmith.co.uk/> 

Writer and lawyer


We shall be in Italy, near Montalcino. I shall have with me Andrew Pettegree’s 
intriguingThe Invention of News 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/invention-of-news-252950.html> (Yale 
University Press, £12.99), an account, as the subtitle has it, of how the world 
came to know about itself. I shall also have Edward Mendelson’sMoral Agents 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/282034/> (NYRB, 
£12.99), a new collection of his wonderful essays on 20th-century American 
writers. The never-finished classic is going to be Proust. Who among us can put 
a hand up and say: “I’ve read the whole thing”? Dreamy, prolix, funny – Proust 
is not intended to be finished.

Jackie Kay  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jackiekay>

Poet and novelist 

Since the life of the poet is very peripatetic, I am relishing the thought of 
a holiday at home, staying put and reading my advance copy of Lucia Berlin’s 
selected stories,A Manual for Cleaning Women 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/322586/> (Picador 
£14.99) – her stories are peopled with sharp, unpredictable, vital characters 
(often drunk!). They hit you with a force the moment you happen upon them. I’m 
looking forward to rereadingSpunk, the powerful and irreverent stories of Zora 
Neale Hurston, who dazzled during the Harlem Renaissance. I imagine Berlin and 
Hurston could have been great friends if times had allowed. AndCurriculum Vitae,
 Muriel Spark’s autobiography – been meaning to read this for years. Plus three 
writers I came across at theliterary festival in Franschhoek 
<http://www.flf.co.za/>, South Africa – Ivan Vladislavic’s tremendous 101 
Detectives <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/298203/> 
(And Other Stories £10), Beverly Rycroft’s incisive, moving poems about love 
and illness,Missing <http://www.beverlyrycroft.com/publications.php> (Modjaji 
Books £15.95) and everything byThando Mgqolozana 
<http://thandomgqolozana.bookslive.co.za/>, who impressed me by saying he was 
opting out of literary festivals altogether.

Helen Dunmore <http://www.helendunmore.com/> 

Poet, novelist and children’s author 

I have just bought Elena Ferrante’s My Brilliant Friend , because friends have 
praised her superb handling of women’s lives and friendships. There are two 
further novels in the trilogy and so that should take care of the summer’s 
fiction reading. My nonfiction treat would beGrowing Citrus: The Essential 
Gardener’s Guide by Martin Page (Timber Books £19.99). I have two lemon trees 
and acalamondin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calamondin>, which produce 
good-sized, fragrant but oddly shaped fruit, so perhaps there’s more that they 
need. My classic choice is to search out the Ladybird bookWhat to Look for in 
Summer, written by EL Grant Watson and illustrated by CF Tunnicliffe. The 
series is ravishingly illustrated, botanically accurate and evocative of 
childhood.

Maggie Gee  <https://twitter.com/maggiegeewriter?lang=en>

Novelist and academic 

Oh, reading in the summer garden – what bliss. I shall eat up Irenosen 
Okojie’s debut novel,Butterfly Fish 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/butterfly-fish.html> (Jacaranda Books £12.99), 
which I’ve read in draft and it is vital, vivid, witty, truthful; can’t wait to 
read it as a book. Also longing to rereadMaureen Duffy 
<http://www.maureenduffy.co.uk/>’s brilliantly prescient novel about Scotland 
shearing off from the UK,In Times Like These (Jonathan Clowes £8.99) – she has 
the long view of the historian, setting a sharply observed near future against 
the 6th-century coming of St Columba to Scotland. Her predictions are coming 
true day by day.

My classic: loving Thackeray’s Vanity Fair 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/vanity-fair-9.html> (Penguin £8.99) as I do, I 
should have readBarry Lyndon <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/barry-lyndon.html>
(Oxford World’s Classics £9.99), and by August, read it I must… or shall I just 
watch his “uncommonly flexible” little Becky puppet tread the boards once again?

Joe Dunthorne  <http://joedunthorne.com/>

Novelist, poet and journalist 

I’m not going anywhere this summer so have no fear of hauling around the 800 
pages of Granta’sNew American Stories 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/316449/> (£12.99). 
It’s edited by Ben Marcus and has stories by many wonderful writers including 
Lydia Davis, Rivka Galchen and Denis Johnson. I’ve also orderedA Sport and a 
Pastime <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/sport-and-a-pastime-2.html> by James 
Salter (Picador £8.99), a writer who I’ve often been recommended but, 
shamefully, it took his passing away for me to finally listen. If I were going 
on holiday, though, I would undoubtedly sit in a deckchair readingHappiness 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/305439/>, the debut 
collection by one of my favourite poets,Jack Underwood 
<https://twitter.com/underwood_jack> (Faber £10.99).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436371455974%2F1a50c3e0-bc5c-46c3-92c4-975853af0fe0-1020x715.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436371455974%2F1a50c3e0-bc5c-46c3-92c4-975853af0fe0-1020x715.jpeg>
 Harper Lee: her Go Set a Watchman is an ‘obvious must-read’. Photograph: Rob 
Carr/AP 
Shami Chakrabarti <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shamichakrabarti> 

Director of Liberty and author

Top of my pile is Go Set a Watchman 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/297369/s/go-set-a-watchman/>
 by Harper Lee (William Heinemann £18.99). The recently uncovered accompaniment 
toTo Kill a Mockingbird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/16/robert-mccrum-100-best-novels-harper-lee-to-kill-a-mockingbird>
 comes out in mid-July and is an obvious “must-read” for all of us who turned 
to human rights via the American classic. Next comesEdge of Eternity 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/edge-of-eternity.html> by Ken Follett 
(Macmillan £20). I’ve been itching to read the latest from this Liberty member 
and master storyteller since it came out last autumn. And for my classic, I’ll 
chooseWhat Moves at the Margin by Toni Morrison (University Press of 
Mississippi): I am really looking forward to immersing myself in Carolyn 
Denard’s collection of three decades of the Nobel Laureate’s work.




Charlotte Mendelson <http://charlottemendelson.com/> 

Novelist and editor 

Like everyone else in Italy I’ll be reading Elena Ferrante; will there be 
enough copies to go round? I may spend my holiday hanging out in underpasses, 
offering drugs in exchange for Book Two of the Neapolitan trilogy. During the 
long waits, by torchlight, I’ll begin Albert Cohen’sBelle du Seigneur (Penguin, 
£19.99), because everyone says it’s a masterpiece; Jenny Offill’sDept. of 
Speculation <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dept-of-speculation-264702.html> 
(Granta £7.99); Ali Smith’sHow to be Both 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281596/s/how-to-be-both/>
 (Penguin £8.99), which I’ve been pretending to have read for over a year; and, 
despite the panic this induces, a carefully rationed selection from my 
ever-decreasing pile of unreadRuth Rendells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/02/ruth-rendell-obituary-crime-writer>
.

Rachel Cooke 

Journalist and writer 

I’ve known what I’ll be reading this summer – in France and Italy – since 
about March, which tells you a lot about me, if not the books themselves. In 
fiction, I’m going to get with the programme and read Elena Ferrante’sMy 
Brilliant Friend and Patricia Duncker’s Sophie and the Sibyl 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/275378/s/sophie-and-the-sibyl/>
 (Bloomsbury £16.99), in which, I hear, George Eliot is brought vividly to 
life. In nonfiction, I am going to read Peter Korn’s memoir of woodworkingWhy 
We Make Things and Why it Matters 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/why-we-make-things-and-why-it-matters-252533.html>
 (Square Peg £15). I think it will do my soul some good. My classic:The Old 
Wives’ Tale <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/old-wives-tale-2.html> by Arnold 
Bennett (Vintage £9.99), about two sisters whose lives take radically different 
courses. I want something really fat and satisfying and provincial and this is 
it.

Julian Baggini  <https://twitter.com/microphilosophy>

Philosopher and writer 

No comfort blankets on the beach for me. Reading Tobias Jones’s A Place of 
Refuge 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/282292/s/a-place-of-refuge/>
 (Quercus £20), about his experiment in opening his family home to people in 
crisis, will make me feel guilty and selfish, while Daniel A Bell’sThe China 
Model: Political Meritocracy and the Limits of Democracy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/286088/> (University 
Press Group £19.95) will provide some uncomfortable challenges to my liberal 
beliefs. The only fictions this year are that I will actually take a holiday 
and that George Orwell’sEssays <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/essays-10.html> 
(Penguin £14.99) are not destined to be on my summer reading list for ever.

Sara Wheeler 

Travel writer and biographer 

I’m looking forward to Pushkin Hills 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/pushkin-hills.html>, a Russian novel by Sergei 
Dovlatov (Alma Classics £7.99) that only appeared in English two years ago. I’m 
fascinated by the way Pushkin reverberates down the years in Russia, one of the 
many things that never changes there. As I’m going to the Mani, I’m taking a 
classic of Greek history,Deep Into Mani, by Peter Greenhalgh and Edward 
Eliopoulos (Faber). Then I plan to lie under an olive tree to devour Rosie 
Thomas’sDaughter of the House 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281481/> 
(HarperCollins £12.99), out this month.

Josie Rourke 

Artistic director, Donmar Warehouse 

I am 20 pages in and already hooked on Laura Barnett’s romantic counterfactual 
The Versions of Us 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/296146/s/versions-of-us/>
 (Weidenfeld & Nicholson £12.99), which is a kind of literarySliding Doors 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oSBu80PCnE4>. I’ll be catching up with Owen 
Sheers <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/owen-sheers>’s new thriller I Saw a 
Man 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/293960/s/i-saw-a-man/> 
(Faber £14.99). I loved his novelResistance (Faber), another counterfactual, 
incidentally. This winter, I’m directingChristopher Hampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/christopherhampton>’s play of sexual 
intrigue among powerful aristocrats in pre-revolutionary France,Les Liaisons 
dangereuses. In preparation, I’ll be working through Choderlos de Laclos’s 
original, epistolary novel, using my schoolgirl French and a big Collins 
dictionary. We’ll see how long I last before reverting to an English 
translation…

Robert Peston  <https://twitter.com/peston>

Broadcaster, author and journalist 

It is a summer to indulge my obsessions. First book on my list, Why 
Information Grows 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/293330/> by César 
Hidalgo (Allen Lane £20), is about how different countries are better and worse 
at generating and organising information – and how prowess in organising 
knowledge makes a country richer. Maybe it will help me to understand the great 
flaw in Britain’s economy, our crappy productivity (output per hour worked). 
Second book is about the most productive British football team of all time, my 
beloved Arsenal: it isAmy Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/amylawrence>’s Invincible 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281661/> (Penguin 
£9.99), the story of Arsenal’s 2003-4 season when the Gooners achieved the 
unique feat of never losing a single game. Finally, like many secular Jews, 
I’ve spent most of my life chasing after a non-religious Jewish identity, and 
fancy rereading Giorgio Bassani’s heartbreakingThe Garden of the Finzi-Continis 
(Penguin £9.99).

Helen Simpson  <http://www.helensimpsonwriter.com/>

Novelist and short story writer 

I’ve chosen two new novels for my staycation: Jenny Erpenbeck’s The End of Days
 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/297635/> (Portobello 
Books £8.99) for its epic sweep and ingenious structure, and László 
Krasznahorkai’sSeiobo There Below 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/316399/s/seiobo-there-below/>
 (Profile £16.99) for a good chewy read. Plus a classic? I was looking at a 
slew of Penguin central European classics in my local Oxfam bookshop window 
when two young workmen in hi-vis vests and helmets stopped outside and one of 
them started pointing at the pile of books I was holding. I opened the door and 
asked, which one? It was Josef Skvorecky’sThe Cowards (Penguin) – “Very good 
stuff!” he said earnestly. “From my country,” to his friend. So that’s my 
classic read this summer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372048518%2F580df5f3-11ae-4a26-969b-9915be69c5cd-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372048518%2F580df5f3-11ae-4a26-969b-9915be69c5cd-2060x1371.jpeg>
 Helen Oyeyemi: ‘does tricksterish and vigorous things with old stories’. 
Photograph: Photograph: Linda Nylind 
Marina Warner  <http://www.marinawarner.com/index.html>

Writer, historian and mythographer 

I hope to have a quiet time at home this summer, but I’ll go to Venice to see 
the Biennale, with a week in Paris. I’ll takeBoy, Snow, Bird 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/boy-snow-bird.html> by Helen Oyeyemi (Picador 
£12.99). I like the way she does tricksterish and vigorous things with old 
stories. I will also packAve Maria by Sinan Antoon. The Iraqi-born poet has won 
huge praise forThe Corpse Washer 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/corpse-washer.html> (Yale £15.99); this new 
book explores the figure of Mary in the religions of the Middle East – rather 
crucial in these times of religious strife. My classic will beThe Atom Station 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/atom-station.html> by Halldór Laxness (Vintage 
£8.99), translated by Magnus Magnusson. His voice has a very funny peculiar, 
refreshing and intriguing mix of comic irony and metaphysical angst.




Fiona Maddocks <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/fiona-maddocks>


Observer classical music critic 

I’ll be in Norfolk, the landscape of Graham Swift’s ever rereadable Waterland 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/waterland.html> (Picador £8.99, but my choices 
are Irish.Colm Tóibín <http://www.colmtoibin.com/>’s taut language and sense of 
silence work for me. I was gripped byBrooklyn 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/brooklyn.html> (Penguin, 2009). Now I’ll read 
Nora Webster <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/nora-webster-267407.html> 
(Penguin £7.99). By association, my classic is Betty Smith’sA Tree Grows in 
Brooklyn <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/tree-grows-in-brooklyn.html> (Arrow 
£8.99), the 1943 American coming-of-age bestseller about an impoverished 
Irish-American family. To explain the context of all these Irish lives, I’ll 
first read Roy Foster’sVivid Faces: The Revolutionary Generation in Ireland, 
1890-1923 (Penguin £10.99), just out in paperback 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281653/>. There’s also 
a debut novel that stands out: Laura Barnett’s subtle and complexThe Versions 
of Us.

Geoff Dyer 

Author 

I’ve been in London watching Wimbledon – on TV. Now that it’s all but over, 
I’ll be readingThe Argonauts 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/321090/s/argonauts/>, 
the always-brilliant Maggie Nelson’s meditation on her relationship with her 
transgender husband (Ingram International £23). Also looking forward toAnand 
Gopal <http://anandgopal.com>’s in-depth narrative of America’s catastrophic 
involvement in Afghanistan,No Good Men Among the Living (Metropolitan Books), 
andThe Sellout (Farrar Strauss Giroux), the new novel by Paul Beatty (of White 
Boy Shuffle fame). Having just reread A Fringe of Leaves (even greater than I 
remember), I’ll be continuing myPatrick White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/09/patrick-white-voss-100-best-novels-robert-mccrum>
 revival. Will I finally get beyond 40 pages ofRiders in the Chariot 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/riders-in-the-chariot.html> (Vintage £9.99)?

Blake Morrison  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/blakemorrison>

Writer and journalist 

While by the east coast, I’ll have Julia Blackburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/mar/13/life-on-rocks-john-craske-saved-by-sea>
’sThreads (Jonathan Cape £25) with me, her illustrated biography of John 
Craske, a Norfolk fisherman who turned to painting and embroidery when he fell 
ill.Marine <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/284132/> by 
Alan Jenkins and John Kinsella (Enitharmon £9.99) will also be essential 
reading – two very different poets both writing about the sea. Philip Glass is 
one of my favourite composers: I’ve just started his memoirWords Without Music 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/275176/s/words-without-music/>
 (Faber £22.50). I’m looking forward to Claire Lowdon’s novel,Left of the Bang 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/292824/> (Fourth 
Estate £14.99): she’s a fresh and sharp-minded writer. And I’ve always meant to 
read Zola’sGerminal – it’s now on the Kindle.

Curtis Sittenfeld  <http://www.curtissittenfeld.com>

Writer 

I have two first novels in the summer reading pile I’ll take on a trip to 
Rhode Island, one serious-sounding and one rather fizzy.Girl at War 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/285593/s/girl-at-war/> 
by Sara Novic (Little, Brown £14.99) is about a child soldier named Ana in 
Croatia in the early 1990s. I’ve heard that it’s dark but powerful. Meanwhile,
Movie Star by Lizzie Pepper by Hilary Liftin (Viking) is a fictitious memoir by 
a Hollywood actress who, based on the book’s flap copy, bears a strong 
resemblance to Katie Holmes. Part of the reason I’m intrigued is that Liftin is 
a veteran celebrity memoir ghostwriter, so I trust that she knows this world 
well. As for a classic, last year at this time in this forum, I declared my 
intention to finally readMiddlemarch. Since it didn’t happen, I’m hereby 
renewing my vow.

Lucy Hughes-Hallett  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/06/lucy-hughes-hallett-prize-biography-interview>

Cultural historian and biographer 

This year, I’m staying at home to watch the grass grow in our Suffolk garden, 
and finishingDeath and Mr Pickwick 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283520/s/death-and-mr-pickwick/>
 by Stephen Jarvis (Jonathan Cape £20), a novel as crowded, rude and 
brilliantly inventive as the great pre-Dickensian caricatures it celebrates. 
I’ll be reading Julia Blackburn’s hauntingly originalThreads (Jonathan Cape 
£25). The story of John Craske – fisherman, invalid and master embroiderer – is 
one of its many strands. And I’ll be moving on to the second volume ofMiklós 
Bánffy’s Transylvanian trilogy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Miklos+Banffy&order=relevance&dir=desc>
, written in the 1930s, with its wise, voluptuous, disenchanted vision of an 
aristocracy in decay, an east European counterpart toThe Leopard.

Elizabeth Day  <http://www.elizabethdayonline.co.uk/>

Author and Observer journalist 

This summer, I seem to have organised my reading material but not any actual 
holiday. But even if I don’t go anywhere sun-soaked or glamorous, I fully 
intend to be readingSweet Caress 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323374/> by William 
Boyd (Bloomsbury £18.99), which I’ve been looking forward to for ages, andHigh 
Dive <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/293722/> by 
Jonathan Lee (William Heinemann £16.99). Lee is a brilliant writer and this – a 
fictionalised take on the 1984 IRA bombing of the Grand Hotel in Brighton – 
sounds right up my street. Is it too awful to admit I’ve never readAnna Karenina
? Well, I haven’t. So I’ll finally be reading that too.

Lara Feigel  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lara-feigel>

Academic, critic and author 

I am holidaying in Italy, where I will enjoy returning to Twilight in Italy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/279451/> (IB Tauris 
£8.99), DH Lawrence’s sensuous celebration of southern heat and colour, written 
as he wandered around the country with Frieda. But I tend to be rather restless 
on holiday, so I will return imaginatively to London in all its gritty 
greyness, accompanied by the pellucid prose of Jon Day’s brilliant
Cyclogeography: Journeys of a London Bicycle Courier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/25/cyclogeography-review-jon-day-cycle-courier-london>
 (Notting Hill Editions £14.99), and to the struggle of the everyday, with Karl 
Ove Knausgaard’sDancing in the Dark 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-struggle.html> (Harvill Secker £17.99) and 
Rachel Cusk’sA Life’s Work <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/life-s-work.html> 
(Faber £8.99).

Damian Barr  <https://twitter.com/damian_barr>

Journalist and author 

I’ve found a secret garden in Brighton with high flint walls and shade-dappled 
corners. I am going to cool my feet, and some bottles, in the pond. I discovered
To Kill a Mockingbird when I turned 13 – I wonder if I’ll revert to my teen 
self when I reread it in prep for the new Harper Lee. I will have to ration 
Janice Galloway’s new short story collection,Jellyfish 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/298215/> (Freight 
£12.99). I keep forgetting I haven’t readThe Girls of Slender Means 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/girls-of-slender-means.html> (Penguin £8.99) 
so maybe I’ll take that to my secret garden too.

Justin Cartwright <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/justin-cartwright> 

Novelist 

This summer, I am going to read A Complicated Kindness 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/298894/> by the 
Canadian Miriam Toews (Faber £6.99) because I loved her book,All My Puny Sorrows
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/05/all-my-puny-sorrows-review-raw-tale-death-wish>
 – funny, desperate and joyful. I also have my eyes onNora Webster by Colm 
Tóibín (Penguin £7.99) for his unfailing ability to draw the reader into his 
world. I was beguiled byRobert Macfarlane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-macfarlane>’s Mountains of the Mind 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/mountains-of-the-mind.html> (Granta £9.99), 
its beautiful prose and wonderful insights, and I am longing to read his latest
Landmarks <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/landmarks-265227.html> (Hamish 
Hamilton £20). The classic:Middlemarch. Every two years I get the urge to take 
the plunge. It is one of our greatest and most influential novels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436547616654%2F7da2b89f-d948-4e75-9159-c817471ebc5d-2060x1449.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436547616654%2F7da2b89f-d948-4e75-9159-c817471ebc5d-2060x1449.jpeg>
 Illustration by Sarah Tanat-Jones. 
Stephanie Merritt  <https://twitter.com/thestephmerritt>

Journalist and author 

This summer, I’m finally going to start Elena Ferrante’s Neapolitan series 
that so many people are raving about, beginning withMy Brilliant Friend. One 
friend was recently so engrossed in the latest volume that she refused to 
travel in the car with her family on holiday and instead went separately by 
train so she didn’t have to interrupt her reading, so I want to find out what 
the fuss is about. Though I should probably have started them last summer when 
I was staying in the Bay of Naples, for an added sense of place – this year 
I’ll be on the Île de Ré in France.

I’m also on a mission to reread my way through Ruth Rendell’s Barbara Vine 
novels. I think the current fascination for domestic noir – psychological 
thrillers based around family secrets – owes a great deal to her influence and 
she’s still the best. I’ve just finishedA Dark-Adapted Eye 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dark-adapted-eye.html> (Penguin £8.99) so I’ll 
be taking the next one,A Fatal Inversion (Penguin £8.99).

Viv Albertine <http://vivalbertine.com/> 

Musician 

I wasn’t going to go away this summer as I blew so much on last year’s holiday 
to Iceland – totally worth it – but my daughter has just taken her GCSEs and I 
want to treat her. Also, this may be the last summer we go away together; she’s 
16 and it will probably be all friends and festivals from now on. We’re going 
to Deià, a coastal village in Mallorca, which I’ve heard so much about over the 
years from arty friends, people who lived childhoods that I could only dream 
of. I offered my daughter the choice of two weeks in a cheap hotel or five days 
at La Residencia, a five-star luxury spa hotel that used to be owned by Richard 
Branson. Guess which one she chose.

I’ll be taking with me Country Girl 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/country-girl-2.html>, Edna O’Brien’s memoir 
(Faber £9.99). O’Brien’s first novel,The Country Girls 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/country-girls-2.html>, was the first book I 
read as a girl that talked about me and to me. I think she is a goddess, 
powerful, extraordinary, a true artist and an activist. I can’t wait to read 
about all her adventures and knock-backs.

I’m also going to take Wallcreeper 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/311225/s/mislaid-the-wallcreeper/>
 byNell Zink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/04/nell-zink-jonathan-franzen-clear-distinction-taking-career-seriously-writing-seriously>
 (Fourth Estate £20). First published last year when she was 50, though she has 
been writing for many years. A mixture of sex, birding and marriage hell 
appeals to me. I’m always interested in women writing honestly about sex and 
sexual politics because I can’t figure the whole thing out at all. My classic is
La bâtarde, a memoir by Violette Leduc. I read it in the 1970s and it inspired 
some of my lyric writing inthe Slits 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hR3LUsnRlgQ>. This book is extremely raw and 
revealing and the writing makes me want to cry. It is exquisite.

Julie Myerson 

Author and critic 

I hope to be on a roof terrace in Rome in September with Jonathan Franzen’s 
Purity <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323757/> 
(Fourth Estate £20), Anne Enright’sThe Green Road 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283515/s/green-road/> 
(Jonathan Cape £16.99) and TC Boyle’sThe Harder They Come 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/285612/> (Bloomsbury 
£18.99). Their previous novels all gripped me on my last holiday and I want the 
same feeling all over again! I’m also takingLet Us Now Praise Famous Men 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/let-us-now-praise-famous-men.html> (Penguin 
£14.99), James Agee and Walker Evans’s classic about families in the 1930s 
American deep south: I’d never heard of it until recently, but one look at the 
photographs and I knew I had to go there.

Kate Kellaway  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/katekellaway>

Observer journalist and critic 

Who needs a Kindle when you can travel light with Notting Hill Editions 
<http://www.nottinghilleditions.com/>’ beautiful, slender, pocketable 
hardbacks? They are my latest infatuation and a couple will go to France with 
me:Essays on the Self 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/276922/> by Virginia 
Woolf (£14.99), because I have not revelled in her prose for so long, and John 
Wilson Foster’sPilgrims of the Air 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/pilgrims-of-the-air.html> (£14.99) about 
American passenger pigeons which looks beckoningly odd. I love James Salter’s 
sensuous writing andA Sport and a Pastime (Picador £8.99), a novel set in 
France, is reputed to be his best.

John Gray 

Philosopher 

When going on holiday, I tend to take with me books I’ve already read. One 
I’ll be carrying this summer isThe Death of Napoleon 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/296415/> (£8.99), a 
novella by the Belgian-Australian sinologist and essayist Simon Leys (real 
name: Pierre Ryckmans), which has just been reissued byNew York Review of Books
. A meditation on the insignificance of power, it’s the story of how Napoleon 
escapes from St Helena, leaving a double behind him, hoping to join a secret 
organisation that will return him to imperial glory. But when the journey of 
the ship on which he is working incognito as a cabin hand is rerouted Napoleon 
finds himself alone, ends up living with a watermelon seller and – well, I 
won’t spoil the plot.

Though I’ll be travelling mostly in Europe, I’ll be taking with me and 
rereading two classics dealing with faraway places: Joseph Conrad’sAlmayer’s 
Folly, set in Borneo in the late 19th century, and Joseph Mitchell’s Up in the 
Old Hotel <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/up-in-the-old-hotel.html> (Vintage 
£11.99), a collection of stories about New York City in the 1940s, which 
invokes a world that is no less exotic and has also vanished.

Robert McCrum <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/robertmccrum> 

Associate editor, the Observer 

I’m going on holiday to the Aegean very soon and want to travel light. So I 
will take some new poetry,The Curiosities 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/275165/s/the-curiosities/>
 by Christopher Reid (Faber £14.99); some stories,The Boy Who Could See Death 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/boy-who-could-see-death.html> (Viking £14.99) 
by Salley Vickers, a favourite writer; andHistories by Herodotus (Penguin 
£9.99), a classical classic I’ve never read from cover to cover. Poems, 
spectral tales and the beginnings of Greek history should make a nice mix with 
the wine-dark sea.

Margaret Drabble <https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaret-drabble> 

Novelist, biographer and critic 

I shall read more of mystery woman Elena Ferrante’s Naples novels, having just 
read the first,My Brilliant Friend, which transports the reader to the Naples I 
saw on my first visit long ago. I’m also readingFiona Rintoul 
<http://weepress.co.uk/>’s first novel, The Leipizig Affair 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/leipzig-affair.html> (Aurora Metro £8.99), a 
page-turner that reminds one of the horrors of the cold war and the astonishing 
fall of the Berlin Wall. And I’ll read anotherJosé Saramago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jose-saramago> – perhaps All the Names 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/all-the-names.html> (Harvill Secker £8.99), 
one I’ve missed. I always spend the summer in Somerset and travel in fiction.

Val McDermid  <http://www.valmcdermid.com/>

Novelist 

Summer is the time for great storytelling and I’ve been saving up Margaret 
Atwood’sStone Mattress <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/stone-mattress.html> 
(Bloomsbury £18.99), a collection of nine tales that I expect to enthral me as 
I drift down the waterways of Burgundy. And thanks to my book group, I’ve 
rediscovered my love for Robertson Davies withFifth Business which will no 
doubt lead me to the rest of theDeptford trilogy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/deptford-trilogy.html> (Penguin £18.99). I’ve 
never readHG Wells <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hgwells>’s The War of the 
Worlds <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/war-of-the-worlds-12.html> (Penguin 
£5.99) and I’m planning to put that right because I’m currently adapting John 
Wyndham’sThe Kraken Wakes <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/kraken-wakes.html> 
for radio.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436437641260%2Fe32deaab-2b89-40cc-935e-d3d0d8cb5746-1020x652.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436437641260%2Fe32deaab-2b89-40cc-935e-d3d0d8cb5746-1020x652.jpeg>
 Ryan Gattis: his All Involved is ‘a visceral exploration of the LA riots 
through the eyes of a series of characters’. Photograph: PR 
Mariella Frostrup <https://twitter.com/mariellaf1> 

Journalist and broadcaster 

I’m a glutton for a saga in summer with long idle days allowing for deep 
literary immersion and Sunjeev Sahota’sThe Year of the Runaways 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/295666/s/the-year-of-the-runaways/>
 (Picador £14.99) is just the ticket. It enters the lives of a group of young 
men, driven by circumstance, discrimination and poverty to make the perilous 
journey from the Indian subcontinent to the UK and the mysterious young Sikh 
woman whose fate becomes intertwined with theirs. To tell you any more would be 
to spoil the richly rewarding experience of being buried in its pages.

Keeping the temperature high, Ryan Gattis’s novel All Involved 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283799/s/all-involved/>
 (Picador £12.99) is a visceral exploration of the LA riots through the eyes of 
a series of characters, from gang members to firefighters in one LA ghetto. It 
offers not only a journey down memory lane – I was in the city the day the 
riots kicked off – but also a long overdue exploration of the lives of those 
trapped by the daily violence and injustice that resulted in the controversial
Rodney King <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rodney-king> verdict igniting 
the city in a maelstrom of anarchy.

For thriller lovers not tied up with Stieg Larsson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stieg-larsson> sequels, Orient 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/orient.html> by Christopher Bollen (Simon & 
Schuster £16.99) is expansive, immersive and particularly perfect if you’re 
heading to America’s east coast on vacation. An unsettling tale of culture 
clash and homicide set in a picturesque fishing village at the newly 
fashionable far end of Long Island, it’s that rare beast – a beautifully 
wrought page-turner.

The classics on my bedside table tell a tragic tale of frustrated ambitions. 
Every year, far from diminishing, the list of books unread just seems to get 
longer. I’m hoping that a 10-day trip to my childhood stamping ground of 
Connemara will allow enough breathing space finally to digestUlysses 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=James+Joyce+Ulysses&order=relevance&dir=desc>
, the only Joyce novel I’ve got left to tackle and certainly for me the most 
daunting. That should keep me busy until summer turns again to autumn.




Louise Doughty <http://www.louisedoughty.com/> 

Novelist, playwright and journalist 

We’re off to Slovenia, where we will be joining an InterRailing teenager and 
exchanging a bag of clean clothing for one full of laundry to bring home – I’m 
not sure how much room there will be in the luggage for books. I’m a judge for 
the Costa Novel prize so it will be mostly novels but there will have to be 
some nonfiction for variety. I’m going to take James Rhodes’sInstrumental 
(Canongate £16.99) and an acclaimed memoir by my fellow Costa judge, Cathy 
Rentzenbrink,The Last Act of Love 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/309942/s/the-last-act-of-love/>
 (Picador £14.99). As far as classics are concerned, I’ll probably need some 
light relief: I’ve never readDiary of a Nobody 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Diary+of+a+Nobody+grossmith&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 by George and Weedon Grossmith.

Antonia Fraser <http://www.antoniafraser.com/antonia_fraser.aspx> 

Biographer, historian and novelist 

I plan to be in Cornwall – in body, that is, at Land’s End, but in spirit I 
plan to be in the Ardennes, readingAntony Beevor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/antony-beevor>’s new book. I am a tremendous 
fan of his writing.Ardennes 1944: Hitler’s Last Gamble 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281684/s/ardennes-1944/>
 (Viking £25) is obviously a grim story as the pace of reprisals among the 
civilian population rises, quite apart from military atrocities (although it 
can hardly be grimmer than the same author’sBerlin). Nevertheless I shall gaze 
out from among the Cornish rocks at the rough sea and feel glad I am not living 
in even rougher times and territory.

For fiction, I am halfway through Elena Ferrante’s amazing compulsive 
Neapolitan trilogy: that isThe Story of a New Name 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/story-of-a-new-name.html>, following on from 
My Brilliant Friend, with Those Who Leave and Those Who Stay 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/those-who-leave-and-those-who-stay.html> still 
to come. Ferrante was a recommendation from a book-mad friend for which I am 
eternally grateful (there are plenty of other books I note happily). The 
classic: on my way, as it were, to see the new film ofFar From the Madding Crowd
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/03/far-from-the-madding-crowd-review-solid-needs-more-mud>
, I couldn’t resist watching theold version 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wEO9TMRHMYg> with Julie Christie and Terence 
Stamp; so I never got there. Now it’s back to source: I’m going toread Hardy’s 
book again 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=far+from+the+madding+crows&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 for the first time in 40 years.

Philip Hensher <https://twitter.com/philiphensher> 

Novelist 

Virginia Baily’s Early One Morning 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/306159/> (Virago 
£14.99) is a real treat; a beautifully written account of the long consequences 
of war, set in a richly evoked Rome of the 1970s. Perhaps not exactly holiday 
reading, but I really admiredSalil Tripathi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/saliltripathi>’s superb and harrowing The 
Colonel Who Would Not Repent <https://twitter.com/saliltripathi?lang=en> 
(Aleph), a fine and judicious account of the horrors of the Bangladesh war of 
independence. The classics I’m taking away are the collected short stories of
Malachi Whitaker <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marjorie_Whitaker>. Preparing 
The Penguin Book of the British Short Story (out in November) I made many 
discoveries. She was one of the finest. She wrote four sublime collections in 
the early 1930s before retiring. Her last four decades were silent.Honeymoon is 
the best of her volumes, a masterpiece.

Mark Haddon <http://www.markhaddon.com/> 

Novelist 

We’re off to the south of France and the Pembrokeshire coast. I’ll be packing 
Per Petterson’sI Refuse <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-refuse.html> 
(Harvill Secker £16.99) and Paul Kingsnorth’sThe Wake 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/wake-266734.html> (Unbound £8.99). An unread 
classic?The Anatomy of Melancholy has been glaring at me for many years, but 
The Sorrows of Young Werther 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/sorrows-of-young-werther-2.html> (Oxford 
World’s Classics £7.99) is sitting next to it and is a thousand pages shorter, 
which might just swing it.

Susannah Clapp 

Observer theatre critic and author 

In (I hope) sunny Siena I shall relish Karin Altenberg’s crystalline evocation 
of dark Dartmoor. HerBreaking Light 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/breaking-light-264413.html> is now out in 
paperback from Quercus (£8.99). The novelist Elizabeth Taylor was one of the 
most subtle writers of the 20th century. I have read all her books saveAngel 
and plan to put that right by takingVirago’s edition 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/angel.html> (£9.99) with me. Having dipped 
into John Lahr’s rambunctious biographyTennessee Williams: Mad Pilgrimage of 
the Flesh <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/tennessee-williams.html> (Bloomsbury 
£30), I see it will be invaluable. I’ll be carrying it as excess baggage.


Alex Preston 

Journalist and author 

I’ll be driving from Miami to New York with a proof of Sebastian Faulks’s novel
Where My Heart Used to Beat 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323049/> (Hutchinson 
£20, out September). It’sEngleby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/may/06/fiction.sebastianfaulks> meets 
Birdsong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/25/birdsong-review-sebastian-faulks>
, apparently; sounds like heaven. I’ll also be takingThe Seed Collectors 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/306714/s/the-seed-collectors/>
 by Scarlett Thomas (Canongate £14.99). She’s a gloriously inventive novelist 
and I’ve heard very good things about this one. Finally,Adam Foulds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/adam-foulds> recommended VS Naipaul’s The 
Enigma of Arrival 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/290056/> (Picador 
£9.99) during a conversation on Facebook. I’ll read it sipping juleps in 
Charleston.

Ian Rankin <https://twitter.com/beathhigh> 

Novelist 

John Niven manages the trick of being both profane and humane. His latest 
novel,The Sunshine Cruise Company 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/reservoir-oaps.html> (William Heinemann 
£14.99), describes itself as “Thelma & Louise 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2iBFmKlO4BY> meets The Lavender Hill Mob 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-_wbootYMio>”. Sold. Philip Kerr’s second 
world war private eye is back inThe Lady from Zagreb 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/282191/> (Quercus 
£18.99). This time, Bernie Gunther must solve a case for propaganda minister 
Goebbels – or else. I’ll also be taking Graham Greene’sThe Confidential Agent 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/confidential-agent.html> (Vintage £8.99). I 
found it on my bookshelves and have no memory of reading it. Time to put that 
right, over a pint of the local beer at one or other of Cromarty’s two pubs, 
having eaten my fill of seafood.

Hari Kunzru <http://www.harikunzru.com/> 

Novelist and journalist 

I’m hearing very good things about Jenny Erpenbeck’s The End of Days, which 
recently won theIndependent foreign fiction prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/27/jenny-erpenbeck-wins-independent-foreign-fiction-prize>
. I’ve got a pile of unread fiction that is about to collapse and bury me, but 
in an ideal world, I’ll finally get to read Marlon James’s Jamaican epicA Brief 
History of Seven Killings 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/brief-history-of-seven-killings-272989.html> 
(Oneworld £8.99) and one of the newly translated novels by the ludic Spanish 
novelist Enrique Vila-Matas, eitherThe Illogic of Kassel 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/320771/> (Harvill 
Secker £16.99) orA Brief History of Portable Literature (WW Norton £8.99). 
Perhaps both.

Salley Vickers <http://www.salleyvickers.com/> 

Novelist 

I’m retreating to Gladstone’s Library <https://www.gladstoneslibrary.org/>, a 
wonderfully evocative venue, where one can read, write and sleep in the 
seductive environs of Gladstone’s own books, to complete my latest novel,Cousins
. And thus taking with me Richard Burton’sThe Anatomy of Melancholy (melancholy 
being a relevant subject) along with the second and third of theElena Ferrante 
cycle 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Elena+Ferrante&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 of novels, which follows the fortunes of a pair of Neapolitan girls as they 
grow and change. The first,My Brilliant Friend ( Editions £11.99), was hugely 
readable and absorbing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372199993%2F96d72758-be71-4a89-b5da-85a4b5c967f0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2015-observer-summer-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372199993%2F96d72758-be71-4a89-b5da-85a4b5c967f0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Robert Macfarlane: ‘writes about landscape with such scalpel-sharp precision’. 
Photograph: Andy Hall 
Laura Barnett <http://www.laura-barnett.co.uk/> 

Journalist and author 

I’ll spend much of this summer in my garden, cherishing every sentence of 
Landmarks by Robert Macfarlane. He writes about landscape with such 
scalpel-sharp precision and always leaves me with a cache of shiny new words. 
Then, in August, I’ll head to Greece, armed withSome Luck 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/some-luck-256596.html> by Jane Smiley (Picador 
£7.99) – I adoredPrivate Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/may/30/private-life-jane-smiley>, and 
can’t wait to start this novel, the first in a new trilogy – and Carson 
McCullers’sThe Ballad of the Sad Café 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ballad-of-the-sad-cafe.html> (Penguin £9.99). 
I’ve been meaning to read it for years and my paperback edition is almost 
weightless – ideal for my beach bag.
 