
Premieres

Queen Sugar
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy1GVEAVv4E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy1GVEAVv4E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy1GVEAVv4E&media=>
Ava DuVernay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ava-duvernay> made an 
Oscar-worthy splash with Selma and her next stop is television. Who’s going to 
say no when Oprah Winfrey comes a-courting? Created by DuVernay, Winfrey and 
Melissa Carterbased on the book of the same name 
<http://nataliebaszile.com/book/>, Queen Sugar follows estranged sisters Nova 
(True Blood’s Rutina Wesley) and Charley (Dawn-Lyen Gardner) as they move to 
rural Louisiana to run the sugar plantation their father left them. Can these 
women’s complicated pasts be resolved so that they can find a future for the 
family business? We’re going to love finding out.OWN, Tuesday 6 September at 
10pm EST

Atlanta
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4UEcNkhkYPI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4UEcNkhkYPI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4UEcNkhkYPI&media=>
Most people see the rap industry on TV through Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/25/lee-daniels-taraji-p-henson-empire>
, which looks at the millionaires at the top of the game. Atlanta is the total 
opposite. Writer, director and starDonald Glover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/30/donald-glover-rapper-comedian-martian-star>
 plays Earnest, a semi-employed Atlanta native who is struggling to get into 
the game and sees an opportunity when his cousin Paper Boi (Brian Tyree Henry) 
has a single that heats up the charts. But hip-hop is only the excuse for this 
funny and keenly observed portrait of what it’s like to be black in America. 
Whether or not you’re into rap, this very well might be your new favorite show.
FX, Tuesday 6 September at 10pm EST

Quarry
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF_1HkMHggWk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF_1HkMHggWk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF_1HkMHggWk&media=>
Full disclosure, I’ve had the pleasure of meeting Quarry creators Michael D 
Fuller and Graham Gordy several times and they are quite delightful. But so is 
their first series about a Vietnam vet (Logan Marshall-Green) who returns home 
from the war struggling with re-entry and a society that doesn’t know what to 
do with him. He ends up enmeshed in the criminal underworld of Memphis in the 
early 70s. It’s worth it just for the killer facial hair alone.Cinemax, Friday 
9 September at 10pm EST.

New to streaming 

StartUp
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM_XSewKQQa0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM_XSewKQQa0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM_XSewKQQa0&media=>
Free streaming platform Crackle has been expanding past Jerry Seinfeld’s 
Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/may/01/jerry-seinfeld-comedians-in-cars-getting-coffee-the-five-best-episodes>
 and trying their hand at original series. Their latest foray boasts an 
all-star cast featuring Adam Brody and Martin Freeman as a guy trying to get 
involved in a digital currency (think bitcoin) and the FBI agent who is hot on 
his trail when he winds up involved with some shady characters. Set in Miami, 
this isn’t about the tech industry in the same way thatHalt and Catch Fire  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/31/halt-and-catch-fire-computer-drama-second-season>
orSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/29/silicon-valley-satire-mark-zuckerberg-san-francisco-tech-bay-startup>
 are, but a more conventional cat-and-mouse drama with a bit of hacking thrown 
in for extra spice.Crackle, 6 September. 

One Mississippi
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCb5VUOalPjk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCb5VUOalPjk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCb5VUOalPjk&media=>
Standup comedian Tig Notaro  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/11/tig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good>
rocked the comedy world witha legendary set about her breast cancer diagnosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/oct/19/tig-notaro-reveals-cancer-on-stage>
. Now, with the help of co-creator Diablo Cody and executive producer Louis CK, 
she’s back to do it all over again with her first sitcom. Notaro plays a woman 
returning to her home town after her mother’s sudden death and trying to fit 
into a world that she doesn’t understand any more. This was one of the better 
pilots that Amazon showed fans and it received such high marks it was ordered 
to a full series. Count on this one to be a hit.Amazon Prime Video, Friday 9 
September. 

Catch up

Supergirl
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJLWMqflKoZg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJLWMqflKoZg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJLWMqflKoZg&media=>
It’s a bird, it’s a plane, it’s … a perky blond girl saving the day. The Man 
of Steel is one of the few DC Comics heroes not to be on the small screen these 
days, but his cousin sure is kicking ass. A modest hit for CBS last season, 
this show is moving to the CW in the fall to join Greg Berlanti’s other 
superhero smashes like The Flash, Arrow and Legends of Tomorrow. Now you can 
stream the whole first season when it hits Netflix on 9 September. While this 
caped crusader is great to watch, the real gem of the series is Calista 
Flockhart as her demanding boss. Maybe they should rename this The Devil Wears 
Spandex.

Around the web

Luke Cage Street Level Hero Music 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsm2KIrQTm0&feature=youtu.be>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVmcur3INOE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVmcur3INOE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVmcur3INOE&media=>
When thinking about an upcoming series, people tend to focus on the plot, 
actors, directors and writers. But what about the music? This short featurette 
about the upcoming Netflix series featuring the Marvel Comics badass is all 
about what you can expect on the soundtrack. Music supervisors Adrian Younge 
and Ali Shaheed Muhammad talk about how hip-hop influenced the story of this 
hero in Harlem. They even get the stamp of approval from rappers like Method 
Man and A$AP Ferg. 30 September can’t come soon enough so that we can listen to 
– I mean watch – Luke Cage.

TV news

Both Oliver Twist 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/oliver-twist-procedural-set-at-925383>
 and Camelot 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/fox-updating-king-arthur-as-924730> 
are coming to the small screen

Meet the new characters for Stranger Things season two 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/stranger-things-season-2-meet-three-new-characters-925040>

Company is 3D printing a replica of Game of Thrones’ Winterfell  
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/russian-winterfell-castle-planned-game-925710>

AMC cancels Feed the Beast 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/feed-the-beast-cancelled-amc-david-schwimmer-1201851376/>
 