
Visibility still matters in 2015. Whether it applies to racial diversity on 
television screens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/19/the-great-awards-whitewash-diversity-loses-out-on-the-red-carpets>
 or female authors onbookshelves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/18/you-might-not-think-youre-a-sexist-until-you-take-a-look-at-your-bookshelf>
, visibility continues to be one of the greatest hindrances to success for 
struggling artists. And as we continue to grow into an increasingly fractured 
society, visibility will continue to rise as the primary method of obtaining a 
semblance of success in the artistic and entertainment fields.

It comes as no surprise then that many musicians and fans were upset yesterday 
upon the announcement of the nominees for thelatest edition of the BET awards 
<http://www.bet.com/shows/bet-awards/2014/nominees.html>. For the disgruntled, 
the nominations were just further affirmation of the status quo. Although the 
BET awards began 14 years ago, the list of nominees has largely been the same. 
Beyoncé and Jay Z (deservedly) have earned the most nominations, at 46 and 42 
respectively. But surprisingly, Chris Brown, who is typically derided, has won 
the most awards for any man, at 12. Other repeat winners include the biggest 
names regardless of genre: Kanye West, Nicki Minaj, Drake and Lil Wayne. This 
is not a diversity of nominees for an award show aimed at a more diverse 
musical audience. Dev Hynes, who has worked with artists like Solange and 
creates music under the name Blood Orange, was particularly upset.

“Why isn’t BET awards just called the ‘Mainstream Rap/RnB/Pop with black 
people’ awards?” Hynes tweeted yesterday morning. Hynes was upset by the award 
show’s narrow focus on the above music categories, neglecting artists who don’t 
fit squarely in that one box.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Fbet-awards-nominees-mainstream-ambrose-akinmusire-dangelo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432046164193%2Fc8b50d31-e517-45af-ad03-41868db7e384-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BET%20awards%20draw%20anger%20over%20snubbed%20acts%20%E2%80%93%20but%20is%20it%20really%20all%20that%20surprising%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Fbet-awards-nominees-mainstream-ambrose-akinmusire-dangelo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BET%20awards%20draw%20anger%20over%20snubbed%20acts%20%E2%80%93%20but%20is%20it%20really%20all%20that%20surprising%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Fbet-awards-nominees-mainstream-ambrose-akinmusire-dangelo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432046164193%2Fc8b50d31-e517-45af-ad03-41868db7e384-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ambrose Akinmusire: worthy of a BET? Photograph: Andy Sheppard/Redferns via 
Getty Images 
“Lol my point is we are more than just ‘rappers’ and ‘RnB’ singers. Where’s 
Ambrose Akinmusire’s award?” he later added. Akinmusire, a 32-year-old jazz 
trumpeter from Oakland, released the critically acclaimed The Imagined Savior 
Is Far Easier to Paint in early 2014. Despite the heft and singular brilliance 
of Akinmusire’s album, he – like many other artists not working within narrowly 
defined mainstream music – was left out of the awards.

Later that day Azealia Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/music/azealia-banks>
, who is also nominated for best female hip-hop artist, criticized the award 
because it caters to and honors the same artists year after year.

“I really hate getting nominated for @BET awards. They’re so bogus,” Banks 
began. “The female rap award at the bet awards goes to nicki every year, it’s 
not even a real award anymore lol it’s a bit of a running joke.”

But what artists and fans fail to realize is that despite representing output 
created by black artists or artists working within black genres (a major, 
important distinction from the blatant racism of most award shows), the BET 
awards are like any other mainstream award show. Airing on a still-popular 
cable channel, the BET awards cater to the broadest audience possible and 
therefore choose the most mainstream artists year after year. The awards are 
less recognition for talent over the past year and more a method of ensuring as 
many eyes as possible are watching the screen to create higher ratings and more 
buzz. The bottom line wins again.

Consider the Grammys, which never airs the less-mainstream categories in their 
long list of nominees and instead focuses on artists who top the Billboard 200. 
What distinguishes the Billboard music awards from any other award show? Very 
little, only that by outlining their intentions from the start (these are the 
Billboard awards and not, say, the Pitchfork awards) artists and fans are aware 
that what you hear on Top 40 radio is what you’ll see and hear on the screen.

Rather than use the built-in audience of a well-known award show to highlight 
less mainstream artists, the BET awards and other subsequent award shows push 
the same agenda and artists, creating a circle of the same acts again and 
again. The new artists who break through to our screens are the same artists 
who have already broken through to where it matters most for award show 
producers: on the radio and in other people’s bank accounts. This isn’t a 
matter of talent or drive or vision, because really, when is it ever when it 
comes to most of the mainstream? It is unfortunate and frustrating, especially 
in an era when it is more difficult for smaller artists to garner those larger 
audiences, but one thing is certain: it won’t change anytime soon.

So who missed out?

Here’s our alternative list of nominees who have been unfairly overlooked.

Dawn Richard: too good to ignore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/feb/13/dawn-richard-too-good-to-ignore>
Best Female R&B/Pop Artist

In an alternate world, Dawn Richard would be nominated and win for the 
lyrically and instrumentally audacious Blackheart. It is without a doubt one of 
the best records of the year and a progressive and necessary step forward in 
R&B.

Best Male R&B/Pop Artist

Class of 2015: Rat Boy, SOAK, Alex Burey, Aurora, Tink
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/apr/21/class-of-2015-rat-boy-soak-alex-burey-arora-tink>
It’s rather ludicrous to look at the nominees and see D’Angelo and the 
Vanguard’s Black Messiah not included. Is it a typo? Why else would the most 
political and one of the most successful R&B records of 2014 be missing?

Best Female Hip-Hop Artist

Compared with other categories, the women in this list minus Iggy Azalea 
deserve their nominations. One of the best and only wild cards of the year came 
with Tink’s nomination. If they looked deeper in Chicago, they would find other 
killer acts like Dreezy, who dropped her Schizo mixtape in 2014 after a long 
wait.

Best Group

How about Run the Jewels, whose confrontational and political new album was a 
much-needed breath of fresh air in today’s political climate?
 