
‘Confidential”. “My friend from Q”. “Our friend”. In emails newly released by 
the US State Department,Cherie Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/01/hillary-clinton-lobbied-by-cherie-blair-qatari-royal-emails>
 demonstrates to her old enemies in Whitehall how they erred by overlooking one 
of the most imaginative amateur diplomats since the old Etonian, James 
Lonsdale-Bryans, who flew to Italy in 1940 and attempted to strike a peace deal 
with the Nazis.

It has been Mrs Blair’s scarcely less ambitious project not merely to 
strengthen Anglo-Qatari relations, but to cultivate in the US, also, a greater 
appreciation of a kingdom that is perhaps best known to Britons for its 
savagery towards foreign workers,hospitality to the Afghan 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/05/04/us-qatar-afghanistan-idUSKBN0NO0M920150504>
 Taliban and soon-to-be-completedannexation of London  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2014/dec/09/london-qatar-royal-family-regents-park-200m-palace-harrods>
. In just a few years, the Qatari royal family has achieved with hard cash – 
and, no doubt, credit where it’s due, the undying support of Mrs Blair – 
something of which Napoleon and Hitler could only dream: the permanent 
besmirching, with the Shard, of the capital’s skyline; the colonisation of its 
iconic buildings and businesses; even the affections, it is said, of the royal 
family.

It is a further testament to Mrs Blair’s under-the-radar approach to 
international relations that, had it not been for her friend Mrs Clinton’s 
indifference to online security, we might never have discovered the former’s 
persistence and loyalty to the (Qatari) crown. In 2009, while Mrs Blair’s 
husband was busy, as ever, juggling Israel and luxury goods, Mrs Blair was not, 
as previously believed, fully occupied as a QC and charity worker, venture 
capitalist and mistress of the property empire she founded in the bizarre 
buy-to-let venture inspired by her personal trainer’s then boyfriend, a 
notorious conman.

In reality, as disclosed in an exchange of 19 emails, Mrs Blair was as much, 
if not more, committed as her husband to forging better western-Middle-East 
relations by way, in this case, of a meeting between Mrs Clinton and Sheikha 
Mozah bint Nasser al-Missned, the second of three (concurrent) wives of Qatar’s 
former ruler. The friends work together, for some reason, on disability inQatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar>. “I am sure the conversation,” Blair 
assured Clinton, “would be about the US/Qatar relationship generally.”

If Mrs Clinton was surprised that, when the sheikha wished to get her 
country’s “relationship with the US on to a more positive footing”, she should 
have picked as her intermediary Cherie Blair, QC and healthcare speculator, she 
did not show it. And for all one knows, Mrs Blair’s freelance foreign office is 
already the first port of call for any self-respecting diplomat. At any rate, 
Blair has finally avenged herself on a “system” that, as chronicled in her 
autobiography, consistently refused to recognise her towering diplomatic 
potential, even after she was deployed, in 2001, to publicise the oppression of
burqa-wearing Afghan women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/nov/21/afghanistan.terrorism>. Later, 
in 2003, she was there to muster support for war. “I became ever more 
determined,” she wrote, “not to sit on the sidelines and do nothing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F05%2Fbeware-powerful-woman-cherie-blair-hillary-clinton-qatar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F4%2F1436004418342%2F29c17738-fdc6-4f96-8d36-c2f508f32ac1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beware%20powerful%20women%20intoxicated%20with%20their%20agendas%20%7C%20Catherine%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F05%2Fbeware-powerful-woman-cherie-blair-hillary-clinton-qatar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beware%20powerful%20women%20intoxicated%20with%20their%20agendas%20%7C%20Catherine%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F05%2Fbeware-powerful-woman-cherie-blair-hillary-clinton-qatar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F4%2F1436004418342%2F29c17738-fdc6-4f96-8d36-c2f508f32ac1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Just between you and me: Hillary Clinton and Cherie Blair Photograph: JASON 
REED/REUTERS 
A further attraction for “her highness”, as Blair perhaps jokingly calls her 
Qatari chum, given her recorded abhorrence for antique rigmarole (“I never 
really got the hang of the protocol business”), was the “woman-to-woman” aspect 
of this date. Whether the sheikha was signalling, here, her enthusiasm for a 
debate about women’s rights under sharia law in Qatar, or for a more intimate 
chat relating, say, to the relative merits of polygamy versus philandering, 
this women-only aspect was plainly considered an advantage by all concerned.

The meeting duly went beautifully and Mrs Blair expressed her satisfaction 
with the sort of Manichaean gush one recalls from her husband’s man-to-man 
sessions with George Bush. “It’s fantastic to see you doing so well,” she told 
Mrs Clinton, “and when I see what a difference you are making it reminds me why 
politics is too important to be left to the bad people.”

Responding to questions about her pro-Qatari efforts, last week, Blair’s 
office reiterated that: “She was merely acting as a conduit – on a 
woman-to-woman basis – between Sheikha Mozah andHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>.”

In strictly physical terms, of course, it would have been as tricky for the 
“basis” to have been any different. So if we discard the possibility that 
“woman to woman” is meant as a euphemism for “too like a hen night to matter”, 
the spokesperson’s intention was, presumably, to advertise the heightened 
prospect of international harmony that justified Mrs Blair’s exercise, given 
women’s visceral tendency to bond with other women.

If that seems a somewhat risky assumption, thinking of the difficulties that 
Mrs Blair herself once experienced with a chilly, but indisputably female 
Princess Anne, it is no more so than that behindWoman’s Hour’s latest “power 
list”. Listeners, the programme-makers believe, will find nothing risible in 
second place for a woman whose principal talent, it’s often alleged, is to 
cultivate self-loathing in others. Which is admittedly a power of sorts, for
Anna Wintour <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour>, and not one 
that either Angela Merkel or Christine Lagarde is ever likely to enjoy.

But traditionally Woman’s Hour has been against egregious attacks on female 
self-esteem. Even if the whole point of a list like this is, obviously, to 
generate aWoman’s Hour-validating tide of futile controversy, and that 
programme’s audience must, statistically, include a handful of Galliano fans 
and Met Ball attendees who are totes thrilled for Anna, it must have required a 
prodigious commitment to insensate, hormonally based solidarity for the judges 
to assume homelier listeners would endorse their passion for this fur-wearing 
colossus of the fashion industry. Not forgetting Ms Wintour’s own, sisterly 
outreach work, back in 2011, on behalf ofAsma al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2014/dec/09/london-qatar-royal-family-regents-park-200m-palace-harrods>
, “A Rose in the Desert”. Even the broad-based Women’s Equality party assumes 
its donors are uniting around something more complicated than biology.

Supposing this instinctive, woman-to-woman bonding is capable of suppressing 
rational thought, there must be an argument for fighting any compulsion that 
would lead a principled person like, say,Cherie Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/cherieblair> or Hillary Clinton, to 
overlook conventional objections to – to name just a few Qatari traditions – 
imprisonment for poets, the use of slave workers, the killing of homosexuals in 
accordance with sharia law. If emotional attachment to “my friend from Q” has 
indeed led the once proselytisingly anti-burqa Mrs Blair to appreciate the case 
for, say, lashing women adulterers, and persuaded this ostentatiously 
anti-royal figure to perform undreamed-of acts of sycophancy, we can only 
rejoice that no Qatari money seems to be involved – excluding a donation to Mrs 
Blair’s charities – and wait for them to fall out.

Having once, myself, been lucky enough to enjoy a woman-to-woman tête-à-tête 
with Mrs Blair, when she summoned me for a telling off, I can certainly attest 
to the occasional failure of a similar sexual identity to transcend personal 
differences. Above all, I recall, she seemed mystified to have been criticised 
by a member of her own sex. I wonder if this ever happens to men?
 