
Gordon Brown's tour of the Gulf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/02/saudiarabia-creditcrunch>, 
seeking money to bolster IMF funds, suggests his plans for a Bretton Woods II 
conference are less ambitious than the occasion requires.

Brown says he's confident that the Saudis will assist with bolstering the IMF 
coffers – allowing it to lend to more cash-strapped economies like Iceland, 
Hungary, Pakistan and Ukraine. Good news for the IMF, which has suffered dry 
years as emerging lenders sprung up in the developing world andpotential 
recipients shun the fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/29/imf-iceland-recession-crunch>
, justly frightened and indignant by the economic policies that will be foisted 
on them as a result of borrowing.

But resuscitation of the fund – and the wider Bretton Woods system – is 
decidedly not good for a more stable and equitable world. Whenjoined other 
world leaders <> in calling for a Bretton Woods II conference, many hoped that 
this might signal fundamental reform of the "Washington Consensus" ideology 
which lies behind the international financial institutions and which has landed 
us in the current mess. The fear is now that what Brown and others mean by such 
reform is simply acknowledging the new global balance of power by allowing a 
handful of new countries "into the club".

Last week over 700 organisations from around the world signed a statement 
<http://www.choike.org/bw2/index.html> calling for fundamental reform of the 
Bretton Woods institutions (notably IMF and World Bank). This must include 
reform of tax, lending, banking and trade systems – and a total re-think of the 
role of the state in the economy. The actions of western governments' 
intervening to prop up their own economies is alone surely proof of the 
bankruptcy of these policies.

But in order to achieve this, it is essential to include those who have 
suffered most and had least say in the economic system up to now: poorer 
developing countries and representatives of citizens groups, social movements 
and trade unions.

The G20 meeting in Washington DC on November 15 
<http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/afp_world_business/view/384651/1/.html> 
has been posited as the first step on the path to reform. Unfortunately, most 
countries in the world won't be there. As such the conference can only be a 
first step towards what is needed, but it would be worthwhile nonetheless if it 
helps western leaders see what a critical condition the economic system is in.

It isn't a matter of resuscitation, the Bretton Woods institutions as 
currently constituted must be consigned to history and a new economic system be 
created on a very different sort of power dynamic.

Read more on the Jubilee Debt Campaign <http://www.jubileedebtcampaign.org.uk/>
 website.
 