
Efforts by David Cameron to parachute his former health secretary, Andrew 
Lansley, into a plumUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> role have met with furious 
opposition from numerous of the world’s leading international disaster-relief 
organisations.

More than 80 of the world’s most important NGOs, including Oxfam, Save the 
Children and Christian Aid, have signed a letter to the UN secretary general, 
Ban Ki-moon, that implicitly criticises the appointment of a politician without 
long-standing experience of humanitarian crises to the role ofemergency relief 
coordinator <http://www.unocha.org/about-us/headofOCHA>, a position currently 
held by the UK’s Baroness Amos.

The letter, seen by the Observer, says: “At a time of proliferating 
humanitarian crises, we believe it is critical to secure the service of a 
highly qualified and experienced humanitarian leader who can work with our 
organisations to ensure ... initiatives generate meaningful change, whilst also 
effectively representing the interests of millions of people affected by crises 
globally.”

Cameron’s support for an international role for Lansley was revealed in an 
exchange of letters 
<http://www.itv.com/news/anglia/update/2014-07-15/andrew-lansley-to-step-down-as-south-cambridgeshire-mp/>
 late last year. The former health secretary and leader of the House of Commons 
wrote to the prime minister: “I am grateful to you now for expressing your 
support to me to take such a role in international public service in the months 
ahead.”

Cameron replied: “You have much more to give in terms of public service, and I 
look forward to being able to support you in doing so in the months and years 
ahead.”

The NGOs’ letter calls for the UN secretary general to establish a panel of 
experts to help him select the candidate – a move that would stymie Lansley’s 
hopes of landing the job.

The prime minister is thought to be determined that a Briton will retain the 
role after several key UN positions recently went to people from other European 
member states. However, Lansley is up against some strong candidates, including 
Germany’s Martin Kobler, currently the head of the UN’s mission in the Congo.

Lord Malloch-Brown, a former UN deputy secretary general and a crossbench 
peer, has warned against Lansley’s appointment, suggesting it would be an “act 
of great cynicism to allow someone who does not have background”.

Some 6,000 people have signed a petition against Lansley’s  
<http://www.avaaz.org>appointment posted by Avaaz, 
<https://secure.avaaz.org/en/uk_lansley_loc/> the online campaigning 
organisation.

“Victims of wars and natural disasters need an experienced leader to run the 
global system they rely on for survival,” said Sam Barratt, campaign director 
at Avaaz.

“Cameron’s choice of Lansley simply couldn’t be worse and thousands of people 
are calling onBan Ki-moon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon> to 
hire on merit, not nationality. It seems the closest Lansley has ever been to a 
disaster zone is the one he left behind in the Department of Health.”
 