
Tonight, BBC One unveils its big new circus-based sitcom Big Top 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00p9467>, starring, among others, Tony 
Robinson and John Thomson. I think it could actually make history – as the 
first sitcom ever that makes its situation seem markedly less funny than it 
actually is in real life.

Prison isn't generally known for its hilarity, so it was easy for Porridge 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O3dO-itjWtI> to be funnier than the situation 
it was based on. Being a member of the French resistance during the second 
world war wasn't especially jolly either, so it wasn't hardfor 'Allo 'Allo! 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qyLZOWqsDQM> to out-funny that. A basement bar 
surrounded by habitual alcoholics who all suffer from varying levels of 
self-loathing? Depressing. And yetCheers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n2C-XMFHEMQ> is one of the most-loved sitcoms 
ever. But here's the problem - Big Top is set in a circus.

And circuses are hilarious. Grown men waddling in giant shoes throwing buckets 
of confetti over terrified toddlers? Tiny cars with spluttering engines? 
Flowers that squirt water? Unbeatable classics, the lot of them. But a sitcom 
set in a circus, starring Amanda Holden, Ruth Madoc and that woman from 
EastEnders who abused Phil Mitchell's son andthen threw herself off a factory 
roof <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YVpuDHsYIlg> on the day of her wedding? 
It's got its work cut out, you have to admit.

So why choose a circus? Because every other kind of workplace already has a 
sitcom, perhaps? If you work in a shop there'sAre You Being Served 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0h8nU6A5jsE>. If you work in a police station 
there'sThe Thin Blue Line 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sZQhpUEKbCM&feature=PlayList&p=26E4171B7B2EC5BA&playnext=1&playnext_from=PL&index=6>
. If you work in a hotel there'sFawlty Towers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H-oH-TELcLE>. TV newsroom? Drop The Dead Donkey 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EkoBUFafIUI>. A church? Father Ted 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Whbc5YJz7OU>. A school? Please Sir!. The 
government?Yes Minister 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7xYI3M2098w&feature=PlayList&p=4007E473402A0A45&index=0&playnext=1>
. A hospital? Only When I Laugh. PR?Ab Fab 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jAgBeAFZVgI&feature=PlayList&p=95B4A0516CDD87CF&index=0&playnext=1>
. A mining spaceship trapped in the depths of the galaxy?Red Dwarf 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aWnFWclW0Qs&feature=PlayList&p=B42D4A12C6D49C07&index=0&playnext=1>
. An office? Actually, no, there has never been a sitcom about an office.

But you get the picture. Whatever profession you can think of, Google is ready 
and waiting to tell you about a sitcom about it. There's an optician in Live! 
Girls! Present Dogtown. Mike Brady was an architect. A character in Jam & 
Jerusalem was a lollipop lady. Cannon And Ball played shopping centre security 
guards in Plaza Patrol. At the time he won an Oscar for writing Chariots Of 
Fire, Colin Welland was starring in an ITV sitcom about plumbers called 
Cowboys. Hope It Rains was set in a seaside waxworks museum. Whatever you can 
think of, it's already been done.

That only left a makers of Big Top with a handful of remaining original 
options. And given that it's anAmanda Holden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/amanda-holden> vehicle, too, all 
professions where the staff don't wear hotpants presumably had to be 
jettisoned. That meant fruit packing, car assembly, third world 
football-stitching and recruitment consultancy were out – which left either a 
circus or an illegal human trafficking ring. And since viewers would be coming 
to Big Top from The One Show, they probably wouldn't want to be depressed any 
further. And that's how Big Top came to be a circus. Probably.

But that brings us back to the original point. Can a sitcom about a circus be 
funnier than a real circus? Tonight's episode involves a frisky health and 
safety inspector, frisky ferrets, and an entirely less than frisky pace – it is 
a long half-hour. I wouldn't hold your breath.
 