
Angry academics and students defending the Sir John Cass Faculty of Art, a 
leading London training ground for designers and artists, have won support from 
some of the biggest names in British culture, including Tate directorSir 
Nicholas Serota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/23/nicholas-serota-tops-art-world-power-100-list>
, international architectsLord Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2015/sep/08/inside-richard-rogers-ycube-homes-for-homeless-people>
 andSir David Chipperfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/dec/01/berlin-beats-london-for-architecture-david-chipperfield>
, galleristIwona Blazwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/aug/19/art.art> and artists Sir 
Anish Kapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/19/anish-kapoor-versailles-sculpture-vandalised-how-should-i-respond>
 andJeremy Deller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/01/art-venice-biennale-jeremy-deller-zero-hours-contracts>
.

They are all calling for a halt to plans to move the Cass from its building in 
Aldgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/18/killing-the-cass-would-be-a-tragedy-for-british-design>
 and its merger with the rest of the London Metropolitan University campus 
further north in Holloway.

The letter, published in the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2015/nov/22/dont-destroy-sir-john-cass-faculty-london-metropolitan-university-open-letter>
on Sunday, says: “The Cass is a wonderful example of interdisciplinary activity 
– an outward-facing community located in London’s East End, making everything 
from architecture to city plans, furniture to film, fine art to precious 
objects. It engages the most up-to-date industries and practitioners; works 
with local partners and communities; hosts an enviable diversity of students 
from all walks of life and travels the world with its work; a model that is 
successful, dynamic and a civic asset.”

The authors complain that “threats to move the Cass, dubbed the Aldgate 
Bauhaus … would destroy its own rich ecology and diminish the diversity and 
opportunities of its East End location”.

The plan, it is argued, would “deconstruct the schools of art, architecture 
and design” as well as uprooting students and closing courses down. The authors 
add: “The issue is not just about changing address and revisiting the menu, it 
is about a failure to respect the integrity of hands-on creative education or 
understand the real skills involved that make it attractive to students and 
their employers and enable it to thrive. Homogenisation is not the way forward.”
 