
Political consultant Stephanie Cutter knows a thing or two about winning 
elections, having served as Obama's deputy campaign manager during his 2012 
reelection campaign. She'll be speaking about the role of the internet in the 
political process, both within in India and beyond, at next week's Big Tent
Activate <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate> Summit in Delhi. 
She found some time in her busy schedule to tell us why the internet offers a 
great opportunity for the political process in India.

It's predicted that by 2020 India will have more than 600 million people 
online. Where are the political opportunities and what are the challenges of 
such size and scale?


With dramatic online growth in India, more and more people are going to rely 
on online outlets and social media networks for their news and information and 
to connect with one another. In this presidential election in the United 
States, more Americans than ever before relied on online sources to get their 
information, including half of all young voters. With 45 million on Barack 
Obama's Facebook page, more than 13 million signed up at BarackObama.com, and 
more than 100 million visiting our Youtube page, we had significant ability to 
go around the media filter to communicate, and that was priceless.

The open internet has tremendous potential to enhance the democratic process - 
increasing transparency and voter engagement, creating the ability to organise 
and be heard politically and enabling citizens to hold politicians to account. 
But we're also seeing closed systems in some countries being used to monitor, 
track and subjugate citizens and undermine the political process. How do you 
effectively fight that battle to keep the internet open and free from 
unpolitical influence?

The open Internet is simply about the freedom of speech, and the demand for 
that freedom has to come from a simple source -- citizens. Whether it's voting 
at the ballot box, or using their collective economic or grassroots power, I 
hope that it will be demanded.

What can Indian voters and indeed India politicians learn from the use of the 
internet American politics?

The Internet empowers both average voters as well as politicians in the 
political process. Voters can have a greater say in the political conversation, 
simply through participating in social media and having access to unlimited 
sources of information to help them form opinions about issues and candidates. 
Conversely, politicians can more directly reach voters, without the media 
filter, and create movements. From a tactical point of view, the Internet also 
allows campaigns to have better tools to organize and target voters.

You're speaking on a panel at the Big Tent Activate Summit focusing on the 
role the internet has to play in the political process within India. What can 
we expect from you?

I've done many campaigns, and have seen the evolution of the Internet as a 
critical tool in politics. I hope to provide some perspective about it's been 
used to create a more democratic process.

And finally, what are you most looking forward to at the Big Tent Activate 
Summit on the 21st?

I expect some diverse points of views to be shared, and I'm looking forward to 
it. From privacy to open access and freedom of speech, these are discussions 
that need to take place as the Internet becomes a factor in politics, economies 
and society.

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/media-network/start.php> 
to theGuardian Media Network <http://guardian.co.uk/media-network> â€“ this 
content is brought to you byGuardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. 
 