
It is 10 years since Arthur Mathews and Graham Linehan's cult comedy Big Train 
came to a final halt. While they were not quite a runaway success at the time, 
Big Train's two BBC series did prove to be an express route for the show's cast 
with Mark Heap, Julia Davis, Kevin Eldon, Catherine Tate, Simon Pegg,Amelia 
Bullmore <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/amelia-bullmore>, Rebecca Front and 
Tracy-Ann Oberman graduating from the surreal comedy to dominate British comedy 
acting.

It was their talent, combined with the Father Ted creators' brilliant writing, 
that helped to produce one of the most original and most consistently funny 
sketch shows in years. With its subversion of everyday situations by the 
surreal or macabre, the cast's believable portrayals and evident chemistry put 
the comedy into a class of its own. But few could have predicted they would all 
go on to such stellar careers. Big Train's impeccable casting looks visionary 
10 years on.

Pegg has since conquered the dead and Hollywood, and it's clear why with 
performances like this: theon-call surgeon sketch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CKRBYGhqI8Y> is probably Pegg's finest two 
minutes – although his smug manwho has a problem with doors 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7z14eZN7ZjA> makes a worthy runner-up. Pegg's 
Spaced collaborator Heap, meanwhile, has stolen the show in just about every 
comedy (and the odd drama) since, from Jam to Green Wing and Friday Night 
Dinner. And no wonder. Hisparanoid man  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pUEV4rnu5V8&feature=related> is chillingly 
perfect, and not even Robert Webb couldmove like this 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uaWo6xxCKdo>.

Tate, who gloriously fell out of love with Heap and in love with a traffic 
light <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SPgwOxHk1sw> on Big Train, went on to 
have three multi-award-winning eponymous series, and can now be seen in The 
Office: An American Workplace when not on the West End stage. Also frequently 
on stage is Oberman, who like Bullmore – recently on screen in Twenty Twelve 
and Scott & Bailey – has created award-winning comedies and plays.

Davis, meanwhile, (here testing her acting skills as well as her stomach while 
giving a press conferenceon a fairground attraction 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tbMI0l32mUQ&feature=related>) has made the dark 
comedies Human Remains and Nighty Night. The latter also starred Front and 
Eldon who, together with Heap, have elevated to glorious levels every comedy 
they have appeared in since Big Train rolled out of town, from Jam to Green 
Wing and The Thick of It.

Unusually for the genre, almost every sketch in Big Train proves as funny on 
later viewings as it did on the first. Choosing favourite moments is difficult 
– although ensemble pieces likethe Tom Henderson sketch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EtllWIiOTuA> showcase the cast to perfection. 
For many, the jockey sketches andshowjumping firemen 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fCPhkxskRVs> are the stand-out moments (look 
out for a sublime Eldon in the latter). Chairman Mao rising from his deathbed 
to perform Virginia Plainwith Roxy Music 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uNBOknvbPL8>, the Do You Speak English sketch, 
a cat and a mousehaving a post-pub rumble 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hOun2I5I_co>, and the mundane adventures of 
Ming the Merciless highlight the show's surreal, brilliant silliness.  

Only one other comedy, also from the same inventive period of the 90s, can 
boast that it brought together such a talented cast: The Day Today. Just as 
Chris Morris (who directed the pilot Big Train episode) and Armando Iannucci 
gave us Steve Coogan, Patrick Marber, David Schneider, Peter Baynham and Doon 
Mackichan, Mathews and Linehan assembled a line-up for which new comedies today 
would stampedelike a herd of wild jockeys 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I3FruN_Lu5g&feature=relmfu>. With such 
credentials, it's baffling that more people didn't board Big Train.
 