
A long string of socially costly misdeeds by major private US banks have been 
exposed since the current crisis hit in 2007. The latest concerns an obscure 
enterprise namedMortgage Electronic Registration Systems 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mortgage_Electronic_Registration_Systems>, or 
Mers.

Founded in 1995 <http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/06/business/06mers.html>, this 
private company in Virginia never employed more than 50 people full-time. Big 
private banks (Bank of America, JP Morgan Chase, etc) and housing finance 
companies, like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, founded Mers in order to speed the 
processing of mortgages into mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Investors were 
willing to buy these new securities (bundles of Americans' mortgages). Most 
importantly, US financial institutions wanted the huge profits from producing 
and trading MBS.

Different local procedures for registering mortgages and processing the 
paperwork for trading mortgages had been slow and cumbersome across the US, but 
financial mega-corporations were impatient – so they created this fast, 
computerized way of registering mortgages and mortgage trades. Mers achieved 
its purpose during the housing boom that occurred from 1995 to 2007. But when 
mortgage defaultsprecipitated 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/09/21/us-mortgage-repurchases-idUSBRE88K18120120921>
 the housing crash and then broader economic crises, banks and lenders used 
Mers to foreclose on defaulted mortgages.

Mers, it now turns out, was lax and loose, as well as fast, in processing 
foreclosures. Beyond facilitating mortgage transactions, it often represented 
ultimate lenders (who alone can legally initiate foreclosures) whose exact 
identities were sometimes questionable. In so doing, Mers violated state laws 
that strictly regulate foreclosure procedures.

On 16 August 2012, the supreme court of Washington state voted unanimously 
<http://seattletimes.com/html/businesstechnology/2018934163_mers17.html> that 
Mers had improperly initiated foreclosures on thousands of mortgages. Victims 
of such foreclosures can now contest them, and other states are moving to do 
likewise. The already badly depressed housing market has thus been dealt yet 
another blow – economic uncertainties multiply with the prospect of US courts 
becoming further clogged by litigation over these foreclosures.

The Mers mess created by profit-driven mega-banks is relatively small compared 
to the other disasters those banks have produced over the last five years. The 
large private banks were major players inaggressively promoting mortgages 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/10/01/eminent-domain-mortgages_n_1917391.html>
 to millions who could not reasonably be expected to afford them. These 
financial institutions took extraordinary and excessive risks (often with other 
people's deposits) in the new MBS markets and their associated credit default 
swap markets. We know now that deals between the big banks and the rating 
companies (especially Moody's, Standard & Poor's and Fitch) wrongly inflated 
risk evaluations of those securities. We also know now that insurance 
mega-corporations (especially AIG <http://www.thecasualtruth.com/node/262>) 
could not deliver the insurance protections they had sold to banks and other 
lenders when mortgages defaulted and MBS values dropped.

The private mega-banks' imprudent, often unethical and sometimes illegal 
activities were major causes of the global economic crisis since 2007.

Conventional economics teaches that banks are financial intermediaries. They 
connect those with money to save and lend – their depositors and investors – 
with people and businesses seeking to borrow: a vital economic function. As 
trustees of other people's money, they are expected to assess, carefully and 
prudently, the risks of lending that money. When borrowers default, lenders 
usually bear a significant part of the responsibility for failing to see, 
evaluate and avoid such loans. Borrowers, after all, are expected to over-value 
their projects, just as lenders are supposed to play the role of skeptical, 
diligent risk assessors. Collapsed global credit markets in 2008/2009 exposed 
the private mega-banks' colossal failures to perform that role.

In recent months, large US private banks and other mega-financial firms have 
been caught – and oftenfined millions 
<http://www.salon.com/2012/07/03/barclays_head_forced_out_jpmorgan_head_remains/>
 – for still other misbehavior. They have, variously: imposedillegal 
<http://www.foxnews.com/us/2012/09/12/ap-impact-regulator-barks-industry-shudders/>
 extra fees and costs on customers;laundered 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/25/business/us-said-to-investigate-money-laundering-at-hsbc.html>
 money from illegal enterprises; and improperly pushed disastrous financial 
deals on budget-stressed city officials, as inStockton 
<http://www.deseretnews.com/article/765606101/In-the-red-From-California-to-Pennsylvania-places-like-Stockton-and-Pittsburgh-are-running-out-of.html>
, California. Last February, five major US banksagreed to pay $25bn 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/02/10/us-mortgage-settlement-idUSTRE81600F20120210>
 to settle state and federal claims about their "questionable mortgage 
practices". Major bankswill also soon face penalties 
<http://money.cnn.com/2012/07/13/investing/libor-bank-losses/index.htm> for 
their roles in the Libor interest-rate manipulation scandal, exposed last 
summer.

These unethical and/or illegal and/or self-servingly incompetent actions by 
Big Finance have proven to be incredibly costly to the entire world economy. 
Private profit drove all these bank behaviors and, even when penalized, banks' 
fines were trivial compared to the profits those behaviors realized. Thus, they 
continue and extend the list of big private banks' misdeeds. The public fumes, 
the politicians hype new bank regulations, the courts impose fines … and banks 
keep finding "new financial profit opportunities".

Big banks' failures raise an obvious question: can finance safely be left in 
their private hands? If any public enterprises displayed comparably awful 
records of misdeeds, demands to privatize them would be deafening. Yet, 
neoliberal economic fundamentalism keeps the reverse logic unspoken and, by 
many, unimagined. Instead, public money and Fed-lowered interest rates keep 
bailing out and subsidizing the same mega-banks that so grievously failed their 
economic function and the public's trust.

One obvious alternative to this deeply and repetitively dysfunctional private 
banking system is socialized banking. Once freed from neoliberal 
fundamentalism, the US could rationally debate and compare the costs and 
benefits of private versus socialized banks, and various possible mixtures of 
them. After all, the US has accumulated experience with the very different kind 
of banking represented by thousands of workplace and community credit unions. 
We can also draw uponNorth Dakota's success 
<http://www.governing.com/columns/public-finance/col-case-state-owned-bank-north-dakota.html>
 for decades with its state-owned bank. Other countries' experiences with 
public and publicly accountable financial enterprises can also help build 
better financial institutions than we have with big private banks. Another 
alternative would reorganize all banks into workers' self-directed enterprises, 
where workers and communities affected by bank policies together direct and 
operate banks.

To ignore alternatives to private mega-banks condemns us all to 
longer-lasting, more socially costly and recurring crises. That is the chief 
lesson of all the mega-banks' misdeeds – from misusing Mers to manipulating the
Libor <https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor>, to utterly inadequate risk 
assessments of the new century's financial markets.
 