
The gesture was as bold as it was typical of Bild, Germany’s biggest-selling 
tabloid. In response to readers’ complaints about its decision to publish the 
image of drowned three-year-old Syrian refugee Alan Kurdi last week, the 
Berlin-based dailypulled every one of its news pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/08/bild-photos-aylan-kurdi-complaints>
 on Tuesday.

On Wednesday, the right-leaning paper went further in its outspoken backing of 
the refugees’ cause, publishing a special four-page insert in Arabic welcoming 
refugees who had reached the capital and explaining where they could get help.

Headlined, “Welcome. You have finally reached Berlin, what do you need to do 
now?” the supplement included a map of the capital, labelled in Arabic, 
pointing out refugee housing centres, health clinics, language schools offering 
free German lessons and children’s playgrounds.

In contrast to its nearest British equivalents, the Sun and the Daily Mail, 
the German tabloid, often criticised as scurrilous, sensationalist and 
inflammatory, has been broadly sympathetic to the human plight of the tens of 
thousands of refugees and migrants who have reachedEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> this summer.

In its Tuesday edition, the paper said its decision to remove all news 
photographs was intended to “show the importance of photos in journalism” and 
that it was “worth fighting every day for the best”. It replaced all 
photographs in its print edition,which sells 2.2m copies a day 
<http://www.statista.com/statistics/304799/bild-circulation/>, with grey 
rectangles, and images on its website were also greyed out until midday.

The supplement published on Wednesday also featured a short list of useful 
German phrases with their Arabic translations, and an explanation of the 
country’s asylum regulations, and a message from the mayor of Berlin, Michael 
Müller, also in Arabic, saying refugees would find the German capital “an open, 
tolerant and international metropolis.”


Bild has long been critical of immigration in general terms. Headlines in 
recent years have included “Every fourth baby comes from abroad” and “The 
bitter truth about foreigners and benefits: 90% of Lebanese and 26% of Turks 
are supported by our state”. But it has been highly vocal in its support for 
refugees, particularly those from Syria.

“We are helping,” one front-page headline said last month 
<https://twitter.com/eurocrat/status/637733072591560704>, above a picture of 
two exhausted children. The Daily Express front page of the same day 
proclaimed: “Migrants swarm to Britain.” Bild has also beenfiercely critical of 
David Cameron 
<http://www.bild.de/politik/ausland/fluechtlingshilfe/die-drueckeberger-europas-42387406.bild.html>
, describing Britain as “the slacker of Europe” for taking only 114 refugees 
for every million people, against Germany’s 905.

Unlike most British newspapers, including the Guardian, Bild gave a prominent 
slot to a particularly shocking picture of Kurdi, who died with his mother and 
brother as the family tried to reach Greece, lying face down on a Turkish 
beach. The paper said the image had prompted dismay and compassion and “shaken 
a million people awake”.

The Guardian’s decision to publish shocking photos of Aylan Kurdi | Open door: 
Jamie Fahey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/07/guardian-decision-to-publish-shocking-photos-of-aylan-kurdi>
Bild would always be in favour of publishing controversial images, it said on 
Tuesday, because “the world must see the truth in order to change”. Strong 
photos “arouse emotions. They show beautiful, but also cruel moments. They let 
us sympathise with other people.”

Sympathy, it is fair to say, has not always been Bild’s strongest suit. During 
the past five years of Greece’s economic crisis, the paper’s 10 million readers 
have been treated to headlines such as: “How the Greeks spend our wonderful 
euros”, “Not one cent for Greece”, “Will they break our banks?”, “It’s all 
their fault!”, “They don’t need our help!” and “Who can still believe the 
Greeks?”

The paper was founded by publisher Axel Springer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer> in 1952, and bears the motto 
unabhängig, überparteilich - independent, nonpartisan. It sees itself above all 
as the champion of hard-working, law-abiding and penny-conscious Germans, happy 
to take on whomever or whatever may threaten their best interests.


Bild has long been fiercely nationalist. It insisted for decades on referring 
to the former EastGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> as the 
Soviet occupation zone. It remains unashamedly populist, although its famous 
scantily-cladSeite-Eins-Mädchen, or Page One Girls, were relegated to an inside 
page in 2012.

How does UK refugee commitment compare with other countries?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/sep/08/uk-refugee-plan-comparison-european-countries>
It is almost invariably the subject of more complaints to the German press 
council than any other newspaper, but its stance often surprises. In January 
this year, it launched a strongly-worded petition against the anti-Islamisation 
protest group Pegida.

Perhaps the most damaging charge against Bild is that it wields too much 
political power. In 2011, itsrival Der Spiegel mounted a special investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/28/spiegel-magazine-bild-germany-right>
 its “moral standards and journalistic quality” and concluded it was an 
incendiarypublication that acted as a “rightwing faction” for Angela Merkel’s 
conservative Christian Democratic Union (CDU) party.

“In the corridors of the Reichstag, the ministries and also in the 
chancellery, there is a pronounced tendency to take Bild’s headlines at face 
value … as a valid expression of the popular mood,” Der Spiegel wrote. Where 
Bild leads, it argued, Merkel follows.

It may indeed influence CDU policy in much the way the Daily Mail may 
influence Britain’s Conservatives, but media analysts in Germany say it does 
not wield the same clout as papers such as the Sun. German newspapers don’t 
usually endorse political candidates and Bild could not “make a chancellor in 
the way that Rupert Murdoch once made Tony Blair”, the independent Institute 
for Media Policy in Berlin has noted.

In any case, in the worst refugee crisis that Europe has witnessed since the 
second world war, Berlin has not appeared to need much prompting from the 
country’s biggest-selling newspaper. Unlike Britain’s government, Germany’s 
has, unhesitatingly,opened its arms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/08/germany-500000-refugees-a-year-clashes-lesbos>
.

Germany says it could take 500,000 refugees a year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/08/germany-500000-refugees-a-year-clashes-lesbos> 