
My father-in-law, Bill Hemphill, was an American "country boy" who displayed 
acumen and generosity in business, civic duty and during the second world war. 
He has died aged 90 in Greensboro, North Carolina, the town where he was born, 
and to which he devoted himself.

Bill's grandfather was a farmer; his father lost money in the depression and 
went on to work in a restaurant. Bill served during the war in the Eighth and 
Ninth US Air Forces, was responsible for setting up bases in southern England, 
as part of the D-day effort, and reached the rank of captain.

Returning to the US with his British war bride, Joan, he took a degree under 
the GI bill at Bowling Green College, Kentucky (now theWestern Kentucky 
University <http://www.wku.edu/>). He went on to become an accountant and then 
a founder of the mortgage insurer United Guaranty Corporation. Bill took a 
leading role in expanding this company into a national business, then 
negotiated its merger with the huge American International Group, going on to 
serve as a director of AIG.

Passionate about many things, including education, equality of opportunity, 
healthcare and literature, Bill contributed immeasurably to Greensboro. He and 
Joan were the founding co-chairs of theGreensboro Public Library Foundation  
<http://greensborolibraryfoundation.org/>and funded a branch library which was 
named in their honour. As a trustee, then vice-chairman and chairman of the 
board of the Moses H Cone memorial hospital, he worked to develop this facility 
into a large medical centre with strong funding and a policy of free treatment 
for those who cannot afford to pay.

Bill's view of US politics was shrewd and incisive. He brought practicality to 
his assessment of all problems and characters. But the big brain and 
exceptional vision were matched by a generous love for Joan, his two sons, Lee 
and Ross, and four grandchildren, who survive him.
 