
 Heather Mallick asks: When you and your family were living in the US, did you 
see any evidence that Americans were aware of the damage they were inflicting 
on the planet and were trying to do something about it, even as individuals? 
We're recycling like mad in Canada, walking more, shopping less and shovelling 
instead of snow-blowing. But it's useless, isn't it, unless the Americans pitch 
in?


Bill replies: Certainly a lot of Americans are very aware of the environmental 
damage that human beings are doing to the planet - we actually did a lot more 
systematic recycling in New Hampshire when we lived there than we do now in 
Norfolk, so in that respect America seems to be doing very well, although these 
things do of course vary a lot from state to state. In general, though, I think 
that Americans are much more wasteful than people in other countries, 
particularly with things like petrol. There were people who would call at our 
house, for instance, and come in to see us for 15 minutes and leave their car 
running. It used to drive me mad. People would even pop into the shops and 
leave their motor on - I have no idea why. American homes are superheated, too, 
and tend to use a lot more fuel. I can't remember the exact figure, but 
Americans are supposed to constitute something like 5% of the world's 
population and use up something like 25% of its resources, so clearly America 
has a lot more to do.

 Matthew Diamond asks: I very much enjoyed your Short History Of Nearly 
Everything. It would clearly have been impossible to include the history of 
science in its entirety - but why no coverage of Michael Faraday? Without him I 
wouldn't be able to send this email.

Bill replies: I quite accept that Michael Faraday should have been in there, 
but then so should lots of other people -Gallileo, for instance. It simply 
wasn't always possible to put all these people in; not because they weren't 
deserving but because they just didn't sometimes fit in to the type of story I 
was telling. So yes - there were quite a number of unfortunate oversights, but 
that was kind of by design. It just couldn't be comprehensive.

 Matt Faulknor: Given that "Big Bang" is an unfortunate misnomer for the 
moment of expansion and stretching space that gave birth to our universe, what 
would you like to call it instead, if it were up to you?

Bill replies: Oh, I like Big Bang - I like the fact that it was coined with 
the intention of ridiculing the whole thing by someone who didn't believe in 
it, and yet it became the label that's used. Just in terms of tradition and 
affection, I would keep it.

 Cathleen Kirkwood asks: With all the places you've been to, the research you 
have conducted, and the things you've seen, what's your position on the 
existence or not of a god/spirit/creator?

Bill replies: I'm not a spiritual person, and the things I've done haven't 
made me one, but the one thing I did appreciate when I was writing A Short 
History was that conventional science and a belief in god are absolutely not 
incompatible. You can be a scientist and believe in god: the two can go hand in 
hand. What certainly struck me during my research was that the very fundamental 
creationist views - the literal biblical interpretation of how the world was 
created - is much, much less exciting than real science. If you believe in god, 
it's much more fantastic to believe that he created this universe billions of 
years ago and set in motion this long train of activities that eventually 
resulted in us. I think that's so much more satisfying, more thrilling, than 
the idea that it was all done in seven days.

 Julian Aiken asks: If you had the misfortune to be stranded in a Travel Lodge 
outside Milton Keynes for the night, which scientist from history would you 
most like to share your fate and your room?

Bill replies: Oh jeez - a very strangely worded question, but I suppose ... 
The two people that I really, really liked as human beings and really wished I 
could have spent time with were Albert Einstein and [the Danish theoretical 
physicist] Nils Bohr. They seemed to be particularly interesting people. But, 
they were also 20th-century figures, and there are people who have met them and 
have reported on what they were like in the flesh, so I think it would be more 
valuable to bring back somebody from an earlier time that no living person has 
ever spoken to. In that case I would go for Isaac Newton. I think he was in 
many ways the most interesting person I wrote about. I wouldn't be the best 
person to meet him because he was such a genius, and I wouldn't be able to ask 
him meaningful questions - you really need someone from the Royal Society to go 
and talk to him - but I'd just like to see him. I'd love to spy on him, to go 
to Cambridge and watch him at work. He was possibly the smartest man who ever 
lived.

 Malcolm Davidson asks: Pluto was discovered only because it caused a "slight 
perturbation" in the orbits of the planets then known. It perturbs me to this 
day, and not merely slightly. Is Pluto a planet or is it just a little ball of 
uninteresting and perhaps smelly ice very far away from us? Or is it both? 
What's the difference between a planet and a dirty little stain of cosmic 
debris? Should we trim the list of planets in our solar system to eight? Or, if 
we are going to keep Pluto on the list, what about adding others? I've heard 
that there are more filthy balls of slush lurking out past Pluto ...

Bill replies: First of all, I'm no expert on these things, but it is almost 
certainly the case that Malcolm is quite right: Pluto is not technically a 
planet. I wrote about that at some length in the book and explained why. Pluto 
doesn't really fit in, and it is likely that there are other ice balls out 
there that are as big as it is. On the other hand, I think the the 
International Astronomical Whathaveyou Society's decision to keep Pluto as a 
planet when its status was reviewed a couple of years ago was really down to 
sentiment. We're used to having Pluto - it's the little guy that's right out 
there on the very edge. And for that reason alone I'm glad to see it included. 
As I said in the book, we live in a great big, mostly empty universe. We can do 
with all the friends we can get.

 Edwin Sudhir asks: Travel writing or science writing - which was the most 
interesting experience?

Bill replies: The thing I really enjoy about my existence, my work, is the 
variety of it. I did a science book as a break from travel writing, but I'd be 
happy at some point to go back to it - or equally to go off and doing something 
else entirely. I really enjoy going to a library and spending the day doing 
research - to me that was the most pleasurable part of the science book. So - 
not writing the same kind of book over and over again is to me the real 
pleasure of what I do.

 Peter McGinty asks: Many of the topics you touch on in your book 
(supervolcanoes, large hadron colliders under the Alps) have recently made it 
into the mainstream media. Did your book ride the crest of a wave or has it 
created its own?

Bill replies: Certainly it didn't create a wave - I think it's just 
coincidence that some of these subjects have come up. Some of the subjects that 
I was writing about in the book were things that had already been covered in 
other media before - that's how I knew about them. And when you're writing a 
book about the whole history of the universe, certain things you touch on are 
likely to have been brought up by other people before. So I think it's just 
coincidence that these things are making news elsewhere now.

 Dan Alilpaz asks: Before the inception of the universe, there apparently 
existed only a singularity, outside of which existed 'nothing'. My question is 
simple: what is the 'nothing' that you speak of that exists outside the 
singularity? Can it be explained?

Bill replies: No. There may be astrophysicists or really brainy people who can 
somehow grasp the idea of total nothingness, but as hard as I try, the closest 
I can come to it is just an idea of a big, dark, empty space. But of course 
there was no space, no time, no existence of any kind - not even a dot, nothing 
at all you can focus on. And I personally don't think the human mind can really 
get to grips with that. I don't think anybody can really meaningfully imagine 
'nothing'. Certainly not me.

 Steve Brown: Are you a scientific optimist or pessimist? Will science save 
the day via innovations such as clean nuclear fusion, or is it a Frankenstein 
monster about to attack all the global villagers, in a 
rogue-GM-crops-decimate-all-plant-life scenario?

Bill replies: ... I don't know. It's hard not to be kind of pessimistic about 
human beings generally, because we do tend to mess things up. If you just look 
at, say, the history of extinctions, we've killed off an awful lot of animals - 
and I don't think we're doing a very good job of looking after the planet now. 
But being a pessimist is just such a gloomy way of looking at things, so I have 
to hope for the best - life wouldn't be worth living if we didn't have hope. 
And I also do think that human beings often do do wonderful, correct, brilliant 
things. So, on balance, I'd like to be optimistic about the future.

Â· Those of you whose questions we asked will receive your signed copy of A 
Short History within the next week. We will contact you for address details 
shortly.
 