
Birmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> city council’s chief 
executive has said there could be “catastrophic consequences” for some people 
in the city because years of cuts have forced it to slash funding for key 
services for vulnerable people.

Mark Rogers, who runs the biggest council in England, said the effects of six 
years of austerity meant Birmingham’s youth service had “all but gone”, 
homelessness prevention services had been cut by so much that rough sleeping 
had quadrupled, and far fewer elderly people were eligible for care at home.

In an interview with the Guardian, he also said a network of children’s 
centres designed to serve the city’s most deprived communities had been 
dismantled so that now only the “super-deprived” were being helped, and even 
these remaining services were under threat.

Rogers said the council had reached “a deadly serious situation for too many 
vulnerable people who face the prospect of not having their needs met”. He said 
that as a non-elected official it was not his place to use words such as 
“catastrophic”, but added: “We are fast reaching the point where there could be 
catastrophic consequences for some people.”

Rough sleeping on rise in Birmingham after cuts to homelessness services
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/02/rough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services>
The council has almost halved its headcount since 2008, from around 24,000 to 
12,500, and says staff numbers could be as low as 8,000 by 2020. By that point 
the council will have made £800m worth of cuts since the era of austerity began 
in 2010, and expects to have lost 50% of its grant from central government.

Eligibility for adult social care has been restricted so that only people with 
“substantial and critical” needs now receive help. Rogers said: “We are having 
to be much more stringent about that eligibility. We get the legitimate 
criticism that people providing home care support are only there for 15 
minutes.”

As the government debates how to bridge a vast national social care funding 
gap, this year another £28m was cut from Birmingham’s adult care budget of 
£230m. The council is still cutting 10% a year. “The big disaster that is 
coming is if the government doesn’t do anything for social care,” Rogers said.

He said 2017/18 would be the toughest year yet for the council, with expected 
reductions of £113m to the council’s overall budget, on top of the £650m 
already cut since 2010. “It is the seventh year of cuts and next year has the 
last huge slug in it.”


He said he regretted the cuts he had been forced to make to important 
services, and listed half a dozen areas. In addition to social care, he singled 
out cuts to homelessness prevention services as one of the reasons whyrough 
sleeping in the city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/02/rough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services>
 had quadrupled since 2010. This month a homeless man died on the coldest night 
of the winter so far, and charities said the risks of more people dying were 
“massively increased” because of the cuts.

Rogers also highlighted cuts to council youth services. “The youth service has 
all but gone. In 2010 it would have been seen as one of the exemplar programmes 
in the country, we would have had dozens of youth services. Now we have just 
two youth centres, with the possibility of further reduction.”

He said Birmingham was in the “unenviable position” of competing with 
Liverpool to be classified as the city in England worst affected by local 
authority cuts, but councils throughout the UK faced similar difficulties. The 
Local Government Association said councils in England and Wales had dealt with 
a 40% real-terms reduction to their core government grant between 2010 and 
2015, and had made a total of £20bn in savings, losing 350,000 full-time staff 
members.

 “We are not desensitised to what’s happening, but we have got used to having 
to do this systematically. We need to take the least worst decisions that we 
can,” Rogers said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbirmingham-council-chief-years-of-cuts-could-have-catastrophic-consequences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f72eef3e85a1642785f78fa462067872f47a8f4%2F0_375_5632_3380%2F5632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Birmingham%20council%20chief%3A%20years%20of%20cuts%20could%20have%20catastrophic%20consequences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbirmingham-council-chief-years-of-cuts-could-have-catastrophic-consequences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Birmingham%20council%20chief%3A%20years%20of%20cuts%20could%20have%20catastrophic%20consequences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbirmingham-council-chief-years-of-cuts-could-have-catastrophic-consequences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f72eef3e85a1642785f78fa462067872f47a8f4%2F0_375_5632_3380%2F5632.jpg>
 Birmingham town hall and council HQ. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
Birmingham had 40 advice centres in 2010; now there are just four. “I think 
those information and advice and guidance services that help people who haven’t 
quite tipped into severe distress are the things that I most wish we still had.

“We know the more impoverished someone is, obviously, the less money they 
have, the less ability they have to travel around to find help and advice. We 
had quite an extensive network of neighbourhood advice centres, council-funded 
places where people could get advice on a range of issues, particularly 
housing. We have consolidated them down to a very small number.”

The council has not reduced bin collection services, and libraries and sports 
centres so far remain largely unaffected, so the scale of the cuts is not 
visible to many residents. Around 80% of the council’s budget is spent on 20% 
of the population, the most vulnerable people who are most reliant on state 
support (and who are often least able to protest against reductions in 
services). “It is those vulnerable people who are disproportionately hit,” 
Rogers said.

He was concerned about ongoing cuts to the children’s centres in the city. The 
council has put the remaining services out to tender and is looking to 
recontract at a considerably lower cost, with further cuts of at least 10%.

“They have halved already in number. They were designed to serve the most 
deprived communities; now they are serving the super-deprived communities and 
that is under threat because of the need to save,” Rogers said.

The survival of some nursery provision is also under threat. This was a 
particularly sensitive area, he said with an unhappy laugh, “given that giving 
children a good start is one of the council’s priorities”.

Rogers was also sorry about cuts made to environmental health inspections. “We 
are doing far less monitoring than we would like to around basic food hygiene 
and safety. We haven’t seen an increase in food poisoning yet but we have 
removed the preventive aspect of that work, giving advice on how to keep 
restaurants and cafes fit for serving food, so we know we will have a less safe 
picture in the future.”

'I worry about money all the time': the Jam reality in Birmingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/i-worry-about-money-all-the-time-jam-reality-in-birmingham-just-about-managing>
The former leader of Birmingham council, Sir Albert Bore, warned of the 
difficulties to come as soon as cuts were announced, predicting the “end of 
local government as we know it” and sketching out a graph he dubbed the “jaws 
of doom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/dec/18/local-government-cuts-jaws-doom-bite>
”, with one line showing the needs of residents soaring and a second showing 
funding plummeting, creating an image vaguely evoking the open mouth of a 
crocodile about to bite. Now that the council is in the midst of the funding 
reductions, the predictions no longer feel alarmist.

This year will be the most challenging because all the easy savings have 
already been made. The council’s huge downsizing so far has mainly been 
achieved through voluntary redundancies and by not staffing unfilled posts, but 
the next wave of job cuts is more likely to include compulsory departures. “We 
could be as low as 9,000 or 8,000 by 2020,” Rogers said.

He refused to subscribe to the Conservative argument – voiced most powerfully 
by the former communities secretary Eric Pickles – that local government was 
previously bloated. “I don’t subscribe to the language of being fat or flabby,” 
he said, although he acknowledged that “with hindsight we could have spent that 
money with greater efficacy”.

He believed the imposition of large cuts was not simply a response to the 2008 
banking crisis. “Deficit reduction enabled first the coalition and then the 
straight Tory government to pursue a straight Tory objective of a smaller 
state.”

Rogers said he was not personally depressed by the work he had to do, but 
recognised that his colleagues were under intense pressure. “I know that at 
this time of year in particular, large numbers of staff will feel seriously 
worried, as they should be, about their job security, because every year the 
council has had to get smaller.

“Keeping your professionalism, while all around you each year there are fewer 
services, fewer staff, is one of the great challenges for every leader. How do 
you maintain the confidence of your staff when their jobs seem to be constantly 
under threat?”
 