
As bitcoin <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/bitcoin> shifts further 
from the twilight world of hackers, beyond speculators and early adopters 
towards the brink of "early mainstream", its proponents are confronted with a 
problem: while merchant usage is on the rise, consumers are so far unconvinced. 
So how to go about persuading them otherwise?

To become a ubiquitous means of payment in the minds of ordinary consumers – 
which means being seen as a better option than either credit cards orPayPal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/paypal> – bitcoin must evolve into a 
medium of exchange, rather than just a store of value.

The bitcoin ecosystem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2014/apr/30/bitcoin-made-simple-video-animation>
 has advanced at breakneck speed, passing through the various growing-up stages 
along the way: first came miners (creation), then exchanges (buy/sell), next 
digital wallets (storage) and vaults (more storage). That got us to store of 
value, and now we're moving to medium of exchange (ie payment service provision 
for merchants and setting-up for transactional usage).

While dollar volumes at giants like Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> and eBay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ebay> are adequately served by existing 
systems, a major opportunity exists to create the next compelling consumer 
payment method for the internet-era – which would be the first major innovation 
in the space since the launch of PayPal in 1999. Bitcoin is the obvious 
contender. However, from a user's standpoint it's still far from seamless, 
requiring a log-in process similar to accessing an online bank account (the 
alternative QR code method is little better.) That needs to change.

I believe the best way to achieve that is to build apps with seamless 
one-click interfaces, which make the consumer experience as straightforward as 
possible. This is starting to happen, with consumer services mimicking 
traditional banking apps, layered on top of state-of-the-art storage, being 
developed by the likes ofXapo <https://xapo.com/#home>. Similarly, Apple might 
be getting ready to embrace cryptocurrency apps 
<http://www.coindesk.com/apples-virtual-currency-policy-update-good-bad-bitcoin/>
, according to their WWDC statement.

Above all, bitcoin needs to become an instinctive transaction mechanism 
available at our fingertips. The protocol would be used as an invisible and 
embedded means of transaction (with merchant acceptance deemed as standard), 
where the consumer technology instantly acquires a bitcoin with which to settle 
– transforming it, in effect, into the elegant rails over which the payment 
glides.

Where may these use cases emerge? One of bitcoin's distinct advantages is its 
ability to transport cross-border payments effortlessly. If you are, say, from 
the UK and shopping on a US site, a card transaction will entail a foreign 
exchange fee, while your bank/card company will be likely to take a wider 
spread on the exchange rate, plus levy a one-off charge for a foreign payment.

Remittances are a derivative of cross-border payment flows, and we have been 
meeting entrepreneurs working on such projects. Another opportunity might lie 
in "social tipping" – that's bitcoin as a by-product of some beneficial 
activity on the internet (perhaps sharing capacity, or webpage real estate).

As with any new protocol, there are initial uncertainties. Yet over time, as 
the wave of entrepreneurial innovation increases, I would expect to see a 
network effect occur, similar to the evolution of email (or perhaps telephony). 
From there on, the opportunity is almost limitless. Today, bitcoin is 
predominantly about payments, but it's also a broader transaction mechanism, 
whose myriad uses we can only begin to imagine.

Jan Hammer is a partner at Index Ventures <http://indexventures.com/>. Index 
Ventures are speaking at this year'sGuardian Activate London Summit on 17 July, 
2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 