
Joss Whedon may not have created the Marvel Cinematic Universe, that wildly 
ambitious tangle of interweaving superhero movies, but he certainly gave it 
much of its vim and verve. Rather like the outlandish technology featured inthe 
cult film-maker’s creepy Dollhouse TV show 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3yxPO5gngNU>, in which brainwashed human 
beings are imprinted with off-the-shelf personalities for the entertainment of 
rich clients, Whedon took an existing property and upgraded it to the next 
level.

Comic-Con trailer rundown: from comedy Batfleck to Guy Ritchie's 
streetfighting King Arthur
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/25/comic-con-trailers-justice-league-doctor-strange-suicide-squad>
The Iron Man movies benefited from Robert Downey Jr’s knack for a charismatic 
one-liner way before The Avengers hit theatres. But Whedon made himself the 
master of laser-honed superhero badinage with the release of the 2012 debut for 
Earth’s mightiest heroes, setting a template for sharp and witty comic-book 
banter that the Russo brothers retained for this year’s Captain America: Civil 
War, and will no doubt revisit during the upcoming Infinity War movies.

In the wake of The Avengers’ $1.5bn blastoff at the global box office, the 
creator of Buffy the Vampire Slayer briefly seemed to have been handed the keys 
to the Marvel universe. There were plans for him to direct several more movies, 
and the TV series Agents of Shield set off under the stewardship of his brother 
Jed (with Joss writing the opening episode). Yet Whedon has been candid about
the struggles he faced getting follow-up Avengers: Age of Ultron into cinemas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/05/joss-whedon-nightmare-avengers-sequel-latest-trailer>
, signalling viaa speech at the Oxford Union 
<http://www.slashfilm.com/joss-whedon-marvel-cinematic-universe/> earlier this 
year that he was unlikely to be involved in future Marvel movies.

But hang on. Whedon now seems to be saying he might be up for an unexpected 
return 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2016/07/24/comic-con-2016-joss-whedon-would-direct-a-black-widow-movie-if-marvel-asked>
, providing he gets to take charge of Scarlett Johansson in a long-mooted solo 
outing for karate-kicking, ex-Soviet hellcat Black Widow. With his history of 
pushing strong female characters to the fore, and the fact that Marvel hasn’t 
yet announced a director, this seems like perfect synthesis. The leather-clad 
agent is already firmly ensconced as a key member of the Avengers, so the 
studio might be willing to give Whedon a little more free rein than it usually 
allows directors when introducing new heroes. And no one knows Natasha Romanoff 
better.

Comic-Con 2016: the good, the bad and the unbearable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/25/comic-con-2016-san-diego-good-bad>
But if Whedon is ready to return to work, might other movie franchises need 
his help even more? In 2009,the film-maker offered to revamp Terminator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/nov/06/terminator-firefly-joss-whedon>
 if the owners of James Cameron’s once-great dystopian saga would agree to sell 
it to him for $10,000. Sadly, Whedon’s tongue-in-cheek query fell on deaf ears 
and we ended up getting last year’s completely pointless Terminator Genysis 
instead. The really bad news is thatthanks to Chinese audiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/24/global-box-office-terminator-genisys-bride-wars-hitman-agent-47>
, the saga might not yet have been lowered into molten steel for a final time.

The remarkable thing about 1984’s Terminator and its 1991 sequel T2: Judgment 
Day is how grounded in reality each movie felt compared to the plasticky 
non-events that came later. Whedon is the only director (bar Cameron) capable 
of returning the franchise to its doom-laden blue-collar humanist-feminist 
roots, and has even gone on record to declare his undying love for cancelled TV 
spin-off Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles.

But what about Star Wars, currently expanding faster than Jabba the Hut’s 
waistline? Whedon is the only film-maker other than George Lucas to have 
invented his very own space opera galaxy, filled with enough planets, creeds 
and spaceships to fill a dozen movies, if only the studios had backed him. Fans 
of the excellent TV series Firefly, and its big-screen spin-off Serenity, may 
have almost given up on the prospect of more material. It beggars belief that 
Disney hasn’t had employees parked outside Whedon’s home for the past few years 
tapping up the one guy who really knows about this stuff to make his first trip 
to a galaxy far, far away.

JJ Abrams did a fabulous job of returning Star Wars to its knockabout 
planetary romance roots with The Force Awakens. But Whedon is an original 
thinker, with the cosmic chops to send the long-running saga successfully into 
radical new territory.

Could Margot Robbie's all-female superhero movie be DC's trump card?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/margot-robbie-harley-quinn-suicide-squad-dc-marvel-comic-book-films>
It would also be fascinating to see what the cult director turned Hollywood 
powerhouse might do with poisonous little scream queen Harley Quinn. Whedon 
once spent yearstrying and failing to convince Warner Bros to greenlight his 
Wonder Woman movie 
<http://screenrant.com/joss-whedon-wonder-woman-sandy-139177/>, only to see it 
languish in development hell. But the studio is now embarked on anambitious 
slate of 10 comic-book movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/17/warner-dc-superhero-movies-batman-superman-wonder-woman-justice-league-to-watch>
 between now and 2020, as it vies to play catchup with Marvel. And there has 
beentalk of a spin-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/margot-robbie-harley-quinn-suicide-squad-dc-marvel-comic-book-films>
 for The Joker’s favourite squeeze if David Ayer’s Suicide Squad turns out to 
be the full-throttle Day-Glo supervillain rave-up we’ve been led to expect.

Why not give the movie to a pop culture hero who has always pushed female 
empowerment and last year declared himselfmore than up for directing a DC movie 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2015/04/26/joss-whedon-still-interested-in-directing-a-dc-movie>
 provided Warner let him throw in a few jokes? After all, I hearthe studio is 
coming around to the idea that brooding heroes are yesterday’s news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/25/comic-con-trailers-justice-league-doctor-strange-suicide-squad>
, and a Whedon-led Quinn outing might easily manifest as the first $1bn 
female-fronted comic book flick.

On the other hand, perhaps in a cultural zeitgeist of ever increasing sequels, 
prequels, reboots and rehashes, we should be celebrating the fact that Whedon 
appears to have stepped off the studio hamster wheel. Maybe, just maybe, he’s 
working on something – shock, horror! –entirely original to blow the whole 
shebang wide open.

In the meantime, that Black Widow movie would do very nicely indeed. Are you 
listening, Mr Feige? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/09/black-widow-movie-gets-firm-commitment-from-marvel-boss>
 