
I’m a black Dutch author and illustrator of picture books and I’d like to tell 
you something about my work. The idea for my main character Princess Arabella 
came from a story I heard about a little black girl who was offered the role of 
princess in a school play, which she declined, simply because she didn’t 
believe that a princess could be black. I decided then and there it was high 
time for a black princess to appear in a picture book! Once the book was 
ﬁnished I had to look for a publisher of course. After some research I thought 
Eenhoorn, a Belgian publisher, would be the best candidate. I wrapped all the 
illustrations carefully and sent them by mail to Belgium. After that it was 
just a matter of waiting for a response…


Diverse voices: the 50 best culturally diverse books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/13/50-best-culturally-diverse-childrens-books>
“It was a rainy day,” my publisher told me later. “I had just attended what 
was supposed to be a meeting to celebrate an organization that provides books 
for children who are having difﬁculties learning Dutch as a second language. 
They were mainly children from a Moroccan background”. The books my publisher 
brought to read to them didn’t relate to them at all. Frustrated and 
disappointed she returned to the ofﬁce only to ﬁnd my ﬁrst manuscript and 
illustrations for Princess Arabella carefully wrapped at her desk!

This was 10 years ago and now there are 10 Arabella books published and more 
to come!Princess Arabella’s Birthday 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/413356/> was very 
well received, won prizes and was translated into many languages. However when 
it came to selling the rights to the US things got complicated. “It’s her 
hair”, white American publishers whispered, embarrassed, “her hair looks 
uncombed, our audiences will be offended”. I was bafﬂed, how could Arabella’s 
and her mum the queen’s hair be offensive to anyone? I modelled it after 
traditional African hairstyles after all? This of course had everything to do 
with African American history. A history marked by slavery and where 
generations after still reﬂected the white dominant culture. However, there has 
been a trend going on for some time now for black women to have their own 
natural hairstyles. And it seems that women nowadays get to make a choice as 
how to wear their hair and not out of an imposed sense of social pressure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fdiversity-black-girls-can-be-princesses-too-mylo-freeman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b2ef28f6f0d4af32cc74280c5b8297b8a3f0a19%2F0_0_965_777%2F965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20girls%20can%20be%20princesses%20too%2C%20that's%20why%20I%20wrote%20my%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fdiversity-black-girls-can-be-princesses-too-mylo-freeman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20girls%20can%20be%20princesses%20too%2C%20that%27s%20why%20I%20wrote%20my%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fdiversity-black-girls-can-be-princesses-too-mylo-freeman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b2ef28f6f0d4af32cc74280c5b8297b8a3f0a19%2F0_0_965_777%2F965.jpg>
 Princess Arabella, and her mother, complete with natural hair styles. 
Illustration: Mylo Freeman 
Princess Arabella’s hair has never been an issue for Nigerian publisher 
Cassava Republic <http://www.cassavarepublic.biz/>, who has already sold the 
rights to South Africa and more African countries to come.

But since Arabella was first published in 2006, hardly any books with black 
leading characters have been published in Holland. Even though our major cities 
are becoming more and more diverse, there are no Dutch equivalents of publisher
Tamarind Books <http://www.tamarindbooks.co.uk/> or stories like Mary Hoffman’s 
Amazing Grace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/13/mary-hoffman-amazing-grace-25-years-diversity>
 (illustrated by Caroline Binch) or the Lulu books fromAnna McQuinn 
<http://www.annamcquinn.com/books.html> to be found here in Holland. 

Publishers will say that there are not enough offers from authors from a 
Surinamese or Moroccan background. But does a children’s book with a black 
protagonist have to be written by a black author? When you think that every 
author writes from their own experience perhaps this makes sense. In that 
respect it also makes sense that a Nigerian-based publisher likeCassava Republic
 <http://www.cassavarepublic.biz/> is one of the ﬁrst in England to publish a 
book like Arabella.

Instead of colouring his own face black, he had used a pink crayon.
Verna Wilkins 
Trinidadian, Verna Wilkins, founder of Tamarind 
<http://www.tamarindbooks.co.uk/> started her publishing company in 1987 after 
a shocking incident with her own child. He had been asked at school to write a 
book called “This is Me”. He had drawn a picture of himself on the front cover 
however instead of colouring his own face black, he had used a pink crayon. 
Verna asked him why he had done this, to which he replied that he had to colour 
his face pink because it was a book!

When you ask booksellers why there are so few diverse books in their bookshops 
some will say that they just don’t sell well enough or that white parents are 
put off by black characters.

What are the best diverse books for children and teenagers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/14/what-are-the-best-books-on-diversity-for-children-and-teenagers>
Here in Holland, where books are only printed in hardcover and cost around 14 
euros, the Princess Arabella books were ﬁrst picked up mainly by librarians and 
white parents. I started to put a lot of energy in promoting my books through 
social media where I could meet my black audience and started to visit black 
hair and beauty conventions. And I’m happy to say it worked. I usually rent a 
table, fill it with as many books as I can possibly carry and wait for the 
mums, grandmothers and aunts to ﬂock around. So contrary what the American 
publishers feared, my books reach their audience via black natural hair!

My books are now known to both audiences even though they might purchase the 
books through different outlets. I get so many positive reactions from black 
mums and also white mums with mixed race children. They always tell me how 
happy they are to ﬁnd books that their children can identify with. One of the 
extra perks is ﬁnding the most endearing pictures of little four-year-olds 
dressed up as Arabella in my mailbox.

In the mean time I’m happy to ﬁnd that Princess Arabella transcends race. 
Proud Surinamese moms send me pictures of their beautiful dark-skinned 
four-year-olds dressed up as princess Arabella. And when I visited a 
predominantly white school a few weeks ago, a little blond girl stood up and 
said: “Sorry, but I don’t think Arabella is a real princess!” I gasped and 
thought… here it comes. “Her dress is orange and not pink’, she said. A real 
princess wears pink!”

Children are not colour-blind. Through diverse picture books children will 
have an opportunity to learn on an unconscious level to feel empathy and 
identify with others from a different ethnic background to their own. Children 
need both mirrors and windows. Many children of colour see the world only 
through windows but they also need mirrors. Other children only see mirrors and 
they need to see the world through windows.

Mylo Freeman’s Princess Arabella Mixes Colours 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/413355/> and Princess 
Arabella’s Birthday 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/413356/> (published 
by Cassava Republic) are both available from the Guardian bookshop.
 