
Marvel Studios hope to confirm a Black Widow movie starring Scarlett Johansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarlettjohansson> as the hard-kicking 
superhero, according to a new interview with its president, Kevin Feige.

Speaking to Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/05/kevin-feige-marvel-studios-captain-america-civil-war-iron-man-doctor-strange-black-panther-1201750467/>
, Feige said the Disney-owned studio saw the former Shield agent as a key 
candidate for a forthcoming solo outing, ahead of fellow Avengers Falcon, War 
Machine and Hawkeye.

Scarlett Johansson to play 'first American flapper' Zelda Fitzgerald
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/22/scarlett-johansson-to-play-first-american-flapper-zelda-fitzgerald>
“We’ve announced the next nine movies, 10 counting Civil War, through to the 
end of 2019,” said Feige. “Where we go beyond that are ongoing discussions that 
we’ll focus on in the next few years because we have a lot to do before then … 
I would say certainly the one creatively and emotionally that we are most 
committing to doing is Black Widow.”


He added: “We think she’s an amazing character. We think Scarlett Johansson’s 
portrayal of her is amazing. She’s a lead Avenger and has amazing stories in 
her own right to tell that we think would be fun to turn into a standalone 
franchise.”

Johansson’s ex-KGB superhero, otherwise known as Natasha Romanoff, has proven 
one of the most popular figures in the Marvel cinematic universe, thanks to 
appearances in the Iron Man, Captain America and Avengers films. But a solo 
Black Widow movie was conspicuous by its absence fromMarvel’s announcement in 
October 2014 of 10 new interlinked comic book films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/30/superhero-comic-book-movies-cinemas>
, the company choosing to build its first female-led movie around the 
lesser-known Captain Marvel character instead.

In June last year, fans mounted an international flashmob campaign calling for 
Black Widow to get her own film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/08/black-widow-flashmob-campaign-marvel-scarlett-johansson>
. Acolytes dressed as the superhero in red wigs and skintight leather gathered 
in 16 US, Canadian and Australian cities with the Twitter hashtag #WeWantWidow.

Johansson has also called for the character to get a standalone movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/21/scarlett-johansson-black-widow-spin-off-movie>
. “If you want to see a Black Widow spin-off movie, then I want to see it,” she 
told reporters on the red carpet for Captain America: The Winter Soldier in 
2014. She added: “We’ll see. We will put the request in toMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> tomorrow.”

Johansson features as Romanoff in the current Marvel offering, Captain 
America: Civil War, in a small but pivotal role. Reports also suggestshe was 
paid $20m 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/scottmendelson/2015/11/09/scarlett-johansson-was-worth-20-million-for-avengers-age-of-ultron/#6a437bd3438c>
 to appear as Black Widow in 2015’s Avengers: Age of Ultron, despite her 
relatively meagre screen time.
 