
The web video search service Blinkx <http://www.blinkx.com/> has signed a deal 
with the digital TV software firmMiniweb <http://www.miniweb.tv/> that will put 
its search and interactive services on set-op boxes across the UK.

For Blinkx, this deal is about integrating the diversity of web video and the 
functionality of web search with the ubiquity of the TV set, which is still, 
for most people in the UK, the centre of home entertainment. The Blinkx service 
offers comprehensive video search that indexes everything fromYouTube to the 
formal web TV services offered by major broadcasters, along with recommendation 
and personalisation features. The index stretches to something like 35m hours 
so far.


Web video is merging with web TV. Photograph: Aaron Escobar 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/aaronescobar/2170448724/>/Some rights reserved 
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en_GB>

Miniweb currently supplies the white-label interactive software for Sky's 
set-top boxes, though there's no guarantee that this new deal will mean Blinkx 
is on offer to that lucrative nine million-strong audience. Rather, this sets 
up Blinkx for future partnerships with tailored elements of the Blinkx service.

Most importantly - and the part that will attract the digital TV stations - is 
the potential here for interactive advertising because profiles of Blinkx users 
can be used to target ads. It also means broadcasters could recommend specific 
catch-up TV shows to viewers based on their viewing context.

"This will allow web-like business models to emerge on TV, said Miniweb chief 
executiveAndrew Carver, "which enables our business partners to benefit from 
valuable targeted advertising and revenues shares from TV viewer transactions."

The most recent Blinkx innovation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2009/feb/05/blinkx> was a 
one-click feature on their website that would offer a serendipitous mix of the 
latest news or the latest viral internet sensations. A few more clicks and you 
can tailor a mix of content based on keywords.

This new deal though - the latest in a sea of around 450 content and 
technology partnerships - marks a major move into a space that is still pretty 
open. While the web TV market is packed with competition -iPlayer, YouTube, Hulu
,Joost, Babelgum, Current TV and dozens of other aggregator sites -Â  there has 
been minimal crossover onto 'serious' telly, with just some modest integration 
of services like iPlayer and4OD on Virgin Media, for example. 

Integration of web services on digital TV has plenty of challenges - not least 
the battle of input design on remote control - but it's wide open and hotting 
up.
 