
The government today set out plans to improve access to family doctors, 
promising to extend opening hours and open dozens of new GP surgeries and local 
health centres.

At least half of all GP practices will open on Saturday mornings or one or 
more evenings a week, under plans set out by the leading cancer surgeon and 
health minister, LordAra Darzi <https://www.theguardian.com/society/aradarzi>.

More than 100 new GP practices will be established in areas that lack 
sufficient family doctors, to try to tackle health inequalities in deprived 
areas.

Another 150 GP-run health centres will also be set up in convenient locations, 
opening from 8am to 8pm, seven days a week.

The health secretary, Alan Johnson, said the measures would ensure that "more 
people can see a GP where they want to and at a time they want to".

The blueprint 
<http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/dh_079077>
 for improving patients' access to GPs is part of a Â£100m scheme to overhaul 
patient care and speed up the pace of medical innovation in the NHS.

From next year hospital patients will also be routinely screened for the 
superbug MRSA on admission to hospital, says Lord Darzi's interim report.

The screening programme will initially cover all elective admissions, then 
cover all emergency admissions over the next three years.

All hospitals will also face hygiene inspections to ensure they are doing 
enough to prevent superbug outbreaks.

The populist measures are likely to fuel accusations by the opposition that 
Lord Darzi's report has been speeded up in an attempt to win votes in any snap 
general election.

Speaking on GMTV, the minister denied the launch of the report had been rushed 
out as a "vote winner".

"I had this report ready on October 1," said Lord Darzi. "The launch is today 
because I am meeting 72 clinical leaders across the country who will be leading 
this review until June of next year."

He said the interim report was always due to be published this month, before 
the Treasury's comprehensive spending review.

The spending review has also been brought forward to next Monday, possibly 
also to pave the way for an election. The health secretary, Alan Johnson, has 
been battling to secure an above-inflation settlement for the NHS and for 
social care for older people.

Geoff Martin, of the campaign group Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Emergency, said: "It appears that 
this report is being rushed out as part of a possible pre-election frenzy and 
is being lashed together on the grounds of political expediency rather than the 
long-term interests of patients."

Gordon Brown last night put Lord Darzi in charge of a new Health Innovation 
Council, which will accelerate the introduction of hi-tech medical devices, 
diagnostics and drugs. It will be presented as providing the foundation for "a 
21st-century NHS providing a world-class service".

Lord Darzi, who was appointed as health minister when Mr Brown became prime 
minister in June, is planning to produce reports in the spring on the future of 
the NHS in the nine English regions outside London. Each region will submit 
eight reports on the main areas of NHS activity. He has enlisted 72 leading 
doctors to supervise the work.

This timetable would allow Labour to go into an early election claiming it has 
no plans to close hospital services. Any that emerged next year would be driven 
by the clinical judgment of local doctors and nurses, not by government, health 
ministers could say.

The Liberal Democrat health spokesman, Norman Lamb, said: "By putting off all 
decisions on service changes till next year, Labour can safely go into an 
election without the axe of closures hanging over the ballot box."

The shadow health secretary, Andrew Lansley, said: "Ara Darzi is an honest man 
set among thieves. He is a trusted clinician who is being used by Gordon Brown 
to push through this government's plan to downgrade local services across the 
country despite the fact that there is no clinical evidence for this."

The report was broadly welcomed by Unison, the UK's largest health union. Its 
head of health, Karen Jennings, said: "The move towards increasing the number 
of GPs, nurses and health care assistants in some of the poorest areas of the 
country is also welcome, alongside more convenient opening times.

"However, we would want to see that provision coming through the NHS and not 
the private sector."

Last year a survey found that 14% of patients - about 5 million people - were 
unhappy with their GP's opening hours.
 