
The controversy surrounding the award-winning Blue is the Warmest Colour took 
a further twist when directorAbdellatif Kechiche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/abdellatif-kechiche> accused one of his lead 
actors of slander and appeared to threaten legal action against her. The 
film-maker described French star Léa Seydoux as an "arrogant, spoiled child" 
and dismissed her recent statements as a "perverse fraud and manipulation". He 
added, "I will come back. It is for her to explain in court."

Blue is the Warmest Colour stars Seydoux and 19-year-old Adèle Exarchopoulos 
as young lovers in Lille, and has earned a prohibitive NC-17 rating in the US 
due to a number of explicit sex scenes. The film won the Palme d'Or award at 
the Cannes film festival in May but hassince faced criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/04/blue-is-the-warmest-colour-actors-director>
 from both Seydoux and Exarchopoulos. Seydoux described the shoot as "horrible" 
and said she would never work with Kechiche again.

The director has now hit back in an open letter 
<http://www.rue89.com/rue89-culture/2013/10/23/abdellatif-kechiche-a-ceux-voulaient-detruire-vie-dadele-246826>
 to the Rue69 website. "Miss Seydoux, who after having repeatedly thanked me 
publicly and privately and having wept in my arms at Cannes for allowing her to 
take this noble role ... has, against all odds and all personal coherence, 
radically changed her attitude towards me," he writes. "After having been 
celebrated and glorified thanks to the Palme d'Or won by Blue is the Warmest 
Colour, she started to drag me through the mud with lies and exaggeration."

Kechiche, 52, has recently suggested he would now rather his movie not be 
released. "I think this film should not go out, it is too sullied," he said 
last month. Seydoux's allegations, he added, meant that he was now "living like 
a curse".

Meanwhile Seydoux's co-star appears to have overcome her initial qualms about 
the film and is currently promoting Blue is the Warmest Colour in the UK press. 
A GQ press release claimed that Exarchopoulos had "stripped down" for a "sexy 
photo shoot" in the November issue of the men's magazine.

Blue is the Warmest Colour opens in the US on 25 October and the UK on 22 
November.
 