
With the vast Lovell telescope 
<http://www.jodrellbank.net/visit/whats-here/lovell-telescope/> as its 
backdrop, the first everBluedot festival <http://www.discoverthebluedot.com/> 
will take place later this month, in and around the Jodrell Bank observatory in 
Cheshire. The three-day event will combine a weekend music festival with an 
interdisciplinary scientific symposium, scheduling big-name musicians alongside 
prominent scientists and technologists. Taking its name from thePale Blue Dot 
<http://www.planetary.org/explore/space-topics/earth/pale-blue-dot.html> 
photograph of Earth made famous by Carl Sagan, Bluedot’s unusual programme 
hopes to inspire the sense of curiosity and wonderment suggested by its 
surroundings. “Bluedot offers an experience unlike any other,” says festival 
director Ben Robinson, “with over 300 cutting-edge artists pushing the 
boundaries of live performance.”

The festival will be divided into several different areas, each one programmed 
according to different themes. The Nebula stage, “where new stars are born”, is 
the arena for up-and-coming musicians; the Roots stage, situated in nearby 
woodland, covers folky and acoustic acts; and the Lovell stage, directly behind 
the famous telescope, will host the headliners, all of whom have a certain 
scientific flavour. These include French electro-pioneerJean-Michel Jarre 
<http://jeanmicheljarre.com/>, famed for his majestic, hi-tech concerts; the 
shape-shifting Canadian innovatorCaribou <http://www.caribou.fm/>; and the 
brainy, maths-flecked Manchester rockersEverything Everything 
<http://www.everything-everything.co.uk/>. 

Music aside, Bluedot will assemble dozens of individual experts and speakers. 
“Arts and culture, space, science and technology,” says Robinson, “all with the 
same appreciation for innovation, creativity and exploration”. Professor Brian 
Cox and Robin Ince will be bringing their science radio showThe Infinite Monkey 
Cage <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00snr0w/episodes/downloads> to the 
Lovell stage, with physics enthusiastCharlotte Church 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn25171-singer-charlotte-church-says-physics-rocks-her-universe/>
 as a guest panellist, while the neurologistsProfessor Vaughan Bell 
<https://vaughanbell.net/micro-cv/> and Dr Tiffany Watt-Smith 
<http://www.sed.qmul.ac.uk/staff/wattsmitht.html> will grace the Close 
Encounters venue nearby. Many of the leading astronomers who work at Jodrell 
Bank will be giving talks at the dedicated Space Pavilion, and there will even 
be late-night stargazing demonstrations from astrophysicistTim O’Brien 
<https://twitter.com/Tim_O_Brien?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^author> 
and TV astronomerPete Lawrence <http://www.digitalsky.org.uk/>. The cosmic 
atmosphere extends even to the festival’s food and drink. At the theatrical
Restaurant at the End of the Universe 
<http://www.discoverthebluedot.com/restaurant.php>, Michelin-decorated chef 
Aiden Byrne has created a menu inspired by “astronomy, the cosmos and 
futurism”. Elsewhere, the creatively namedG’astronomy Village 
<http://www.discoverthebluedot.com/stage/the-g'astronomy-village> offers 
space-age street food and irreverent lectures on culinary science.

At the Mission Control area, an exhibition will be devoted to the astronaut 
Tim Peake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/03/tim-peake-negative-effects-brexit-uk-science>
’s recent mission to the International Space Station, with discussions and 
workshops, while a digital artwork commissioned from Brian Eno will be 
projected on to the face of the Lovell telescope at night. Meanwhile, in a 
venue known as Contact, speakers includingHelen Keen <http://www.helenkeen.com/>
 andTim Burgess <http://timbooktwo.co.uk/> will approach the space theme with 
more levity and the famously reclusive fantasy authorAlan Garner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/24/fantasy-author-alan-garner-celebrated-in-new-tribute-first-light>
 has agreed to conduct a book-signing. An admirer of Jodrell Bank, Garner set 
sections of his 2000 novel,Boneland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/29/boneland-alan-garner-review>,at 
the observatory.

As part of the festival, the Observer has been invited to programme a series 
of talks at the Close Encounters stage on Sunday 24 July. The lineup, which 
focuses on alternative, grassroots approaches to science and communication, is 
detailed below, and we are also offering a pair of VIP tickets to the entire 
weekend, including luxury camping, a “galactic banquet” and a unique tour of 
the Lovell telescope’s control room (see below).

Win an exclusive VIP weekend at Bluedot

The first Bluedot festival takes place from 22-24 July 2016. Brought to you by 
the team behind the Live from Jodrell Bank concert series, Bluedot’s mission is 
to entertain and inspire through a weekend of stellar encounters, live music, 
DJ sets, comedy, talks, workshops, installations and live experiments. The
Observer science and technology team will be hosting a stage at Bluedot on 
Sunday 24 July, and to celebrate, we have an exclusive VIP Bluedot weekend up 
for grabs.

The prize includes VIP tickets, a galactic banquet for two at the Restaurant 
at the End of the Universe devised by Michelin-starred chef Aiden Byrne, plus 
posh glamping for the weekend (a bell tent with a proper bed and all the 
trimmings) and an exclusive behind-the-scenes tour of the control room of the 
Lovell telescope. To enter, go totheguardian.com/members-bluedot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership>.

For more information on the festival or to buy tickets, see 
discoverthebluedot.com <http://www.discoverthebluedot.com/>.

The Observer at Bluedot: the line-up on the Close Encounters stage, Sunday 24 
July

Simonne Jones <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kn92fZHbWDY>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8260e5ad89bb4b4cfb837a54d1fe5d651db0b3e%2F0_73_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8260e5ad89bb4b4cfb837a54d1fe5d651db0b3e%2F0_73_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Simonne Jones performs at Sonar festival 2014, Barcelona, Spain. Photograph: 
Jordi Vidal/Redferns via Getty Images 
Six years ago, Simonne Jones was on course for a steady scientific future. She 
had graduated from the University of Maryland with a degree in biomedical 
research, she had worked for three years in a laboratory studying the genetic 
behaviour of HIV and was on course to study medicine at St George’s, London. 
After her research into HIV awareness earned her funding for a trip to Ghana, 
however, she came to a surprising realisation. “I was living in the bush, 
proctoring my research,” she says, “and I had this awakening that there are 
more similarities between science and music than one would think.”

Jones had been writing songs for years and studied music production on the 
side at university. When faced with the decision between a career in science or 
music, she chose both. After moving to LA and, subsequently, to Berlin, she 
began to make music inspired by her scientific expertise. While this may seem 
an eccentric decision for a promising young scientist, Jones sees very little 
distinction between her twin spheres. “I realised I was doing them [science and 
music] for the same reason,” she says, “to explore unanswered questions: who 
are we? Where do we come from? What does our existence have to do with the 
universe on a greater scale?” After her aunt, the provocative electronic artist 
Peaches, got her a job as a studio producer, she began applying the same 
diligent rigour to her music as she had to her research.

The result of this transformation is the EP Gravity 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kn92fZHbWDY>. The five songs are studded with 
references to quantum entanglement and astronomy, while one track is entirely 
built from sounds recorded during a trip to the Amazon. She may have abandoned 
mainstream science, but Jones has, in her own words, “made up for it with my 
own little musical laboratory”, where she builds and modifies instruments, and 
hones her skills as an engineer. “The more you dive into it,” she says, with 
the conviction of a convert, “the more art and science seem united.”

Kyle Evans <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vz1RzRyH5Oc>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43d3884b1ca2903803ec951ed435e8a2f8d125ee%2F0_0_1725_1035%2F1725.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43d3884b1ca2903803ec951ed435e8a2f8d125ee%2F0_0_1725_1035%2F1725.jpg>
Maths teacher Kyle Evans won this year’s FameLab UK – a competition that 
rewards the most engaging three-minute presentations about science – with his
cheerful and punctiliousmaths-themed folk songs.

Philipp Boeing <https://twitter.com/PhilippBoeing>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04b07c333211eb3e68f3ab6e65ac7b0021abb9e5%2F60_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04b07c333211eb3e68f3ab6e65ac7b0021abb9e5%2F60_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Along with fellow former UCL undergraduate Bethan Wolfenden, Boeing has 
designed, crowdfunded and marketeda portable, state-of-the-art biology 
laboratory <https://www.bento.bio/>, giving researchers with fewer resources 
the opportunity to conduct sophisticated genetics experiments.

Emer Maguire <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ZbRmHnybw0>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59ed291199ab82002827998ab003c969c95b6693%2F0_15_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59ed291199ab82002827998ab003c969c95b6693%2F0_15_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Maguire was last year’s FameLab UK winner, schooling the judges on the 
neurological chemicals associated with love. A part-time musician and comic, 
she is a student of clinical anatomy at Queen’s College, Belfast.

Krtin Nithiyanandam <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c67HkyQfr78>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b5b78287c9f6f46a60bd1de3e2a747db65c51c4%2F0_0_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b5b78287c9f6f46a60bd1de3e2a747db65c51c4%2F0_0_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Photograph: Olivier Anbergen/Google 
GCSE student Nithiyanandam won the Scientific American innovator award at last 
year’s Google Science Fair for his research into the early diagnosis of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Now 16 years old, his TEDx talk earlier this year received 
a standing ovation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf1c26d16867f08610520ae091a18b64aba0b9a8%2F0_134_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bluedot%3A%20exploring%20the%20festival%20frontier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbluedot-festival-frontier-jodrell-bank-jean-michel-jarre-brian-cox-underworld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf1c26d16867f08610520ae091a18b64aba0b9a8%2F0_134_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Jonathan Higgs of Manchester band Everything Everything, who will perform at 
Bluedot. Photograph: Rob Ball/WireImage Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Faurora-seen-by-tim-peake-from-international-space-station-timelapse-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aurora%20seen%20by%20Tim%20Peake%20from%20International%20Space%20Station%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0timelapse%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Faurora-seen-by-tim-peake-from-international-space-station-timelapse-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aurora%20seen%20by%20Tim%20Peake%20from%20International%20Space%20Station%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0timelapse%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Faurora-seen-by-tim-peake-from-international-space-station-timelapse-video&media=>
Aurora seen by Tim Peake from International Space Station – timelapse video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/mar/29/aurora-seen-by-tim-peake-from-international-space-station-timelapse-video> 