
The British National party – the most successful far right organisation in the 
UK's history – is facing meltdown at this month's elections.

Just five years ago it was surfing a wave of success, with leader Nick Griffin 
and his colleagueAndrew Brons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-brons> elected to the European 
parliament and more than 50 councillors sitting in town halls up and down the 
country.

But that high point was short lived. Dogged by bitter infighting and financial 
turmoil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jan/03/bankruptcy-nick-griffin-blow-bnp>
, scores of key activists have left, and now, after a series of disastrous 
elections, it has just two councillors, and experts say both Griffin and Brons 
are facing defeat in a few weeks time – leaving the UK effectively "BNP-free".

Matthew Goodwin, from the University of Nottingham and co-author of Revolt on 
the Right 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Revolt-Right-Explaining-Extremism-Democracy/dp/041569051X>
, said the party's demise was in large part down to Griffin's "catastrophic 
leadership".

"British politics is on the verge of being free of BNP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/bnp> representation for the first time in 
a decade," said Goodwin. "The party is currently polling between 0% and 1% 
which is well below its position in 2009 when Griffin and Brons were elected. 
They are almost certain to lose both these seats and that would effectively be 
the end of the party as we know it."

The BNP's implosion began with Griffin's disastrous appearance on BBC Question 
Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/oct/23/bnp-nick-griffin-question-time>
 after his election in 2009. It was followed by a series of costly legal 
battles, including a case taken by the Equalities Commission which challenged 
the party's allegedly racist membership rules.

As the party's finances worsened, lack of discipline, heightened by personal 
rivalries and concerted campaigning by opponents, led to several key activists 
either being sacked or leaving to join smaller far-right groups. In 2012 even 
Brons quit the party to form his own organisation – the British Democratic 
party.

"Griffin has managed to alienate pretty much everyone who is anyone on the far 
right in the UK and we are seeing the results of that," said Goodwin.

The financial turmoil facing the party was underlined earlier this year when 
Griffin was declared bankrupt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jan/03/bankruptcy-nick-griffin-blow-bnp>
 following a dispute with a firm of solicitors over outstanding debts of 
£120,000.

Now even in its former strongholds of Yorkshire, the Midlands and east London 
it is struggling to field candidates or run effective campaigns.

"We are also seeing the BNP's collapse at the local level in areas like 
Burnley, Barking and Dagenham and Barnsley where the number of candidates is 
massively down on 2010."

The party's two remaining borough councillors are in Pendle in Lancashire and 
Charnwood in the Midlands. Only one of them, Pendle councillor Brian Parker, is 
up for re-election later this month.
 