
Police searching for the boyfriend of Annie Lennox’s daughter have recovered a 
man’s body after the couple capsized while kayaking inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> state.

Tali Lennox, 22, and photographer Ian Jones, 32, were kayaking on the Hudson 
river, near the upstate hamlet of Staatsburg, when their vessel capsized on 
Saturday.

Lennox, a model and artist, was rescued by a passing boat and a search was 
launched for Jones, who was not wearing a lifejacket.

A man’s body was pulled from the water on Monday near to the Poughkeepsie 
yacht club. Police said it matched Jones’s description and that they have 
suspended their search.

The Dutchess County sheriff’s office said 
<http://www.poughkeepsiejournal.com/story/news/2015/08/10/sheriffs-body-found-hudson-river-likely-missing-kayaker/31421613/>
: “Just after 12:00 pm on [Monday] a human male body was located in the Hudson 
river near the Poughkeepsie yacht club. The body has been removed, and is 
scheduled to undergo an autopsy on Tuesday to determine the cause of death and 
identification.

“The body matches the description of Mr Ian Jones, who has been missing in the 
Hudson river since the morning of Saturday after a kayaking accident. While 
there is a strong possibility that the body recovered is that of Mr Jones, it 
remains only a possibility at this time.

“Further information will be released once the autopsy is completed and 
official identification made, and at this time the search for Mr Jones has been 
suspended until further notice.”

Lennox, who also uses the surname Fruchtmann after her Israeli film-maker 
father Uri, grew up in Notting Hill, west London. She has previously modelled 
for brands including Topshop, Prada and Miu Miu before moving to New York City 
in 2012 to pursue a career as an artist. She had her first solo art show at a 
Soho gallery in March.
 