
Landing at the Allama Iqbal 
<http://www.storyofpakistan.com/person.asp?perid=P007> International Airport in 
Lahore it's hard not to admire its aspirationalism. Designed in the style of a 
Mughal Palace - faux-alabaster domes, distinctive red sandstone fa√ßade and 
white marble floor - its clean functionalism stands in stark contrast to the 
surrounding smog-blurred landscape of urban sprawl. It represents the way 
Pakistan wants to be seen - a modern nation with a distinct Muslim identity 
looking confidently out at the chaos surrounding it.

The scene in the departure lounge tells a different story. The plasma screens 
above the heads of the passengers show the latest Bollywood music videos, the 
gift shop (full of cheap Chinese toys and knock-off perfumes) features 
Bollywood gossip rags CineBlitz and Filmfare in its magazine rack (hiding 
badly-produced Pakistani rivals), andAbhishek Bachchan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abhishek_Bachchan> (son of Indian film guru 
Amitabh) stares down from the billboards holding Motorola's latest mobile 
gadget.

It's indicative of a significant trend: 60 years after partition cleft the 
subcontinent into two irreconcilable parts, the Indian cultural juggernaut is 
clawing back the borders - and shaping Pakistan's cultural future.

Since the 1965 war, India's cultural industries had been officially frowned 
upon and often completely censored: Bollywood films and music were not 
sanctioned for commercial release, Indian television channels were jammed as 
many Pakistanis could catch them through their simple television aerials, 
Indian magazines were not allowed into the country. The reason was simple: 
Pakistan and India were at war. Antagonists over Kashmir and Bangladesh, 
fighting for military supremacy and superpower patronage, strategists in both
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> and India knew the 
importance and power of cultural warfare.

Fervently nationalistic Pakistanis eagerly patronised distinctively Pakistani 
art forms. It began with the explosion of patriotic songs. My father, a student 
activist at Lahore University in the mid-1960s, remembers fellow students 
eavesdropping on similar propaganda songs heard on AllIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> Radio, and finding the homegrown ones 
more impassioned and lyrically clever.

And so it went: if India had playback sensations Lata Mangeshkar and Muhammad 
Rafi, Pakistan had Malika-e-Tarannum (Queen of Melody) Noor Jehan and 
Shahenshah-e-Ghazal (King of Couplets) Mehdi Hasan. Lollywood - Pakistan's 
Lahore-based film industry - responded to Bollywood blockbuster stars Dilip 
Kumar and Rekha with Waheed Murad and Shabnam.

Radio and television featured, among other things, historical dramas penned by 
gifted Urdu writers, serialised over weeks and months. These popular programmes 
were subversive epics tackling difficult subjects like the authoritarian power 
of the landowning elite.

Needless to say, advertising featured only Pakistani or recognisable western 
celebs.

Both nations mobilised their cultural resources to promote their political 
claims and enhance their military might. Indian films showed theirjawans 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jawan> fighting against mountain insurgents. 
Pakistani cinema dramatised noble freedom fighters resisting foreign occupation.

The prohibition, though, was always leaky. Hard as Lollywood tried, it never 
had the shine, glamour or entertainment value of its Mumbai cousin. Bootlegged 
videotapes flooded the market. Makeshift satellite dishes followed, hammered 
out of scrap metal by the enterprising working class, and began appearing on 
the rooftops across Pakistan's sprawling cities: privileged and (working) poor 
alike had Indian film and television beamed into their homes.

On frontlines of the culture wars, Pakistan's ramparts fell. Indian culture is 
now everywhere. Almost every shop down the street where my grandfather lived 
for almost 50 years now plays Bollywood tunes. The liberalisation of the cable 
industry by the Musharraf regime, coupled with the lifting of the prohibition 
on Indian television channels, means that tens of millions now have unfettered 
access to Indian news, films, game shows and dramas. Pirated Bollywood DVDs and 
Indian music CDs are available in every bazaar. Growing access to the internet 
means that any future attempts at blocking cross-border content will prove 
difficult.

Why does it even matter?

On a recent flight from Lahore to Islamabad, I observed a parade of Pakistani 
celebs - a fashion designer, a pop princess (and her band), and a music 
producer - chat and cavort their way through a 45-minute journey. If I closed 
my eyes, it sounded like an Indian chat show. They spoke Urdu with plenty of 
English words thrown in, wore desi chic (variations on tight kurta and tight 
jeans) and said "totally" (pronounced toh-ta-lee) way too much. Pakistani 
pop-culture looks and sounds like Indian pop-culture (imitations, ultimately, 
of American, MTV-inspired pop culture).

This kind of ersatz culture divides people and further removes the elite and 
hyper-privileged from their fellow citizens and renders their lifestyle even 
more inauthentic, ever more globalised and meaningless. Religious sentiment on 
the other hand sees such culture as excessive, promoting lax morals and 
questionable dress. It is seen as western and Indian cultural imperialism.

The political impact of the culture wars is also significant. When a thaw in 
political relations inevitably came, it was cultural diplomacy that took the 
lead. Qawwali master Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan gave his voice to Bollywood 
soundtracks. Pop idol Adnan Sami sang duets with Asha Bhosle. Despite the 
Kargil flare-up, which almost spiralled into war, Indian cinema has taken some 
bold moves to challenge anti-Pakistan sentiments. Films like Main Hoon Na 
squarely blame Indian extremists for maligning Pakistan and impeding peace. 
Veer Zara told the story of a cross-border romance. So-called filmi types now 
shuttle back and forth between the two countries. When Bollywood stars come to 
Karachi or Lahore for a film festival or special screening they are mobbed. The 
media coverage is the kind given to foreign leaders on state visits. Genuine 
joint ventures are slowly increasing.

The impact? Among the young, upwardly mobile, aspirational middle class India 
is no longer the devil on Pakistan's borders. At dinner parties in Islamabad, 
Lahore and Karachi the "grandchildren of midnight" speak about "getting over 
Kashmir" and newspaper columnists complain of being economically gazumped; left 
behind while India's IT boom creates a new privileged techno-class. At a dinner 
in Islamabad, one guest - a 50-something property developer - surmised that it 
was only a matter of time before South Asia shared a joint currency and a 
common market. A minority opinion surely, but one that would have been welcome 
in only a handful of gatherings - private or public - only a short time ago.

For the masses it has the potential to moderate opinions about the Indian 
"other". I am not sure if it has accomplished the same across the border.

No doubt, the current political crisis in Pakistan has deep roots. Having 
returned from Pakistan recently, I have never seen such open anger against the 
military and other political authorities. Religion will certainly continue to 
be a powerful force - and integral part of the national character. Wariness 
about the "Indian threat" may have waned somewhat, but it is by no means gone. 
There is much that divides Pakistan and India - I am not simple-minded enough 
to think that will change quickly.

In a country rife with poverty, conversations about culture may seem an 
indulgence. But pop-culture consumption is widespread. A country as diverse and 
complex as Pakistan deserves and needs a new national narrative that will 
mobilise its people against its true enemies - namely social, economic and 
political injustice. To simply accept a mish-mash, foreign influenced 
pop-culture culture is a mistake. The presence of a powerful Indian product 
will force Pakistan's cultural industries to change and force to think about 
the role of culture - both traditional and modern - in a society so divided and 
in trouble. Its impact should not be underestimated.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 