
Duncan White 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/books/what-to-read/the-schooldays-of-jesus-by-jm-coetzee-is-maddening-obscure--and/>
 summarised a critic’s dilemma in his Daily Telegraph review ofThe Schooldays 
of Jesus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/18/the-schooldays-of-jesus-jm-coetzee-review>
 by JM Coetzee. “When you try to describe Coetzee’s novels – bleak, unsparing, 
experimental – they sound unappetising,” he wrote, and in many of the reviews, 
his latest really does. For White, “Coetzee pulls it off”, but others were not 
so sure. The novel, billed as an “allegorical tale”, tells the story of strange 
child David and his makeshift family in a sort-of exile, with dance classes. 
“The novel devolves into a long, tangled debate – rather fascinating – as to 
whether art, science, or mathematics is the best way to understand the 
universe,” wroteJohn Sutherland 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/the-schooldays-of-jesus-by-jm-coetzee-hjhmhck65>
 in The Times, explaining that this novel is difficult to understand without 
having first read its predecessor,The Childhood of Jesus – or even having read 
it. The Evening Standard’sDavid Sexton 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/books/the-schooldays-of-jesus-by-j-m-coetzee-review-a3324001.html>
 was won over, just about: “Frustrating, yes, but not just that. There were 
moments when I found it almost too affecting to read without pausing to recover 
myself.” But the Mail’sStephanie Cross 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-3747843/LITERARY-FICTION.html> 
remained unconvinced: “It’s a combination that can be surprisingly involving, 
but, as richly suggestive as this wilfully opaque fable often is, by the end 
perplexity wins out.”

Reviewers felt in safer hands with Falling Awake, Alice Oswald’s new poetry 
collection.Jeremy Noel-Tod 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/books-falling-awake-by-alice-oswald-sh8l5r5q5>
 in the Sunday Times compared her to Ted Hughes,Kate Kellaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/24/falling-awake-alice-oswald-review-nature-notes-from-frontier-of-language>
 in the Observer found “echoes of TS Eliot” and “a less fey Emily Dickinson”, 
andCharlotte Runcie 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/books/what-to-read/is-alice-oswald-our-greatest-living-poet/>
 in the Daily Telegraph felt that the poet laureateship should be awarded next 
to “this gardener-classicist who is bringing the British landscape to life in 
poetry again, making music out of death, invoking Greco-Roman ghosts and 
summoning rivers out of limestone”. In the Literary Review,Yasmine Seale 
<https://literaryreview.co.uk/everything-in-flux> felt that readers of Oswald’s 
previous books,Dart and Memorial, “may miss the majestic coherence of their 
book-length poems, but … the pieces included here are held together by Oswald’s 
luminous, almost alien powers of observation.”

The Cultural Revolution: A People’s History 1962-1976 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/11/cultural-revolution-peoples-history-frank-dikotter-review>
 by Frank Dikötter – the final part of a trilogy – also found near-universal 
acclaim. In the Literary Review,Graham Hutchings 
<https://literaryreview.co.uk/apocalypse-mao> called the trilogy “a major 
contribution to scholarship on modern China ... that is unequalled, certainly 
in the English language. Much of this has to do with his use of official 
archives in China, to which access is difficult and, given current trends in 
the country, likely to become more so.” The Observer’sNick Fraser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/09/cultural-revolution-peoples-history-frank-dikotter-review>
 wrote: “The Mao message is ultimately a simple and terrifying one, defined by 
the pervasiveness of lies and power. It would seem, sadly, that humans are 
easily swept along by things they don’t really believe.” “The catalogue of 
atrocities in the first two books was relentless, unrelieved by any possibility 
of hope or respite,” wroteMike Parker 
<http://www.tribunemagazine.org/2016/07/legacy-of-a-paranoid-sociopath/> in 
Tribune. “Mao shines through Dikötter’s trilogy as a neurotic, paranoid 
sociopath ... one of history’s true monsters.” In the Sunday Times, the 
historianNiall Ferguson addressed the contemporary context. “The real cultural 
revolution, in short, is that the [current] leader of the Chinese communist 
party needs to grapple with pretty much the same problems as his western 
counterparts. And my bet is that Xi [Jinping] understands better than most 
western China-watchers that the worst possible remedy would be to resort 
to ‘Maostalgia’ – and risk rousing the ‘monsters and demons’ of 50 years ago.”
 