
A Very Expensive Poison, Luke Harding’s account of the murder of Alexander 
Litvinenko <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko>, was 
described as “a riveting tale” byOliver Bullough in the Observer. Regarding 
Vladimir Putin’s intervention in Syria, he wrote: “For those tempted to approve 
of his actions, I would recommend reading this book to learn how an honest 
man was murdered for revealing the corruption at the heart of Putin’s system, 
and to be more cautious about the Kremlin as a result.” In the Evening Standard,
Robert Fox found it “a brilliant account of the killing and its continuing 
resonance … This extraordinarily pacy book – I downed it in two sessions – by 
the Guardian’s former Moscow correspondent is one of the best political 
thrillers I have come across in years.” ForIan Critchley, in the Sunday Times, 
agreed it had “the pace of a thriller. But it is also an expert examination 
of the wider role of Putin’s government in world affairs and his fraught 
relationship with the west … Harding’s book adds fascinating depth and context 
to an extraordinary story.”

“There is a peculiar type of stress you often find among north London literary 
sorts,” notedJohanna Thomas-Corr in the Evening Standard. “How do you resolve 
your conflicted feelings about Alain de Botton?” Those conflicts were much in 
evidence among reviewers of the philosopher’s second novel,The Course of Love 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385670/s/the-course-of-love/>
, which aims to provide practical help to readers by dissecting the emotional 
dynamics of a fictional modern marriage. Thomas-Corr herself “found it rather 
good … My bet is that if De Botton’s name were taken off this book it would be 
feted by the sort of people who are in thrall to Milan Kundera and Adam 
Thirlwell.” Other reviewers begged to differ. ForLidija Haas in the Sunday 
Telegraph, “what’s strangest aboutThe Course of Love is how little seething 
desire it contains: neuroses and perversions remain disappointingly well 
mannered … If this is the worst marriage has to throw at us, we can probably 
handle it.” In the Sunday Times,Peter Kemp deplored the marriage guidance 
element in particular, arguing that “describing De Botton as a thinker is like 
calling someone who just about knows how to turn on a tap a hydraulics 
engineer”. In the Times, Lionel Shriver occupied the middle ground, calling the 
book “a laudable project”, but lamenting the fact that it “loses its initially 
inviting playfulness, instead getting bogged down in heavy, flattening 
psychotherapeutic jargon”.

The publication of the third and final volume in Frank Dikötter 
<http://frankdikotter.com/>’s epic history of China, The Cultural Revolution: a 
People’s History provided ample opportunity for those so inclined to take aim 
at leftwing politics in general. WhileMichael Sheridan in the Sunday Times 
described it as a “brilliant book” that “leaves no doubt that Mao almost ruined 
China and left a legacy of paranoia that still grips its modern dictatorship”, 
forGeorge Walden, in the Times, it illustrated the failures of “American 
leftist feminists” and other western lefties, whose gullibility “extended to 
the very nature of the revolution”. In the Daily Mail,Roger Lewis merrily 
identified a contemporary equivalent of the Red Guard: “Those egregious 
and intolerant Oxford and Cambridge students who want to tear down historical 
statues of Cecil Rhodes or Queen Victoria … are behaving in a way that Chairman 
Mao would at once recognise and condone.”
 