 The chipboard is down in Blaenavon. Today the small town in South Wales 
launches its greatest experiment since 1787, when three businessmen leased 
seven square miles of rough, heathery land to build an ironworks equipped with 
dazzlingly modern steam technology.
Yesterday light was shining through the once boarded-up windows, and the town 
was roaring with vacuum cleaners and reeking of fresh paint. Today, Blaenavon 
relaunches itself as Booktown Blaenavon. Nine new bookshops will open 
simultaneously, specialising in subjects from cookery to psychic healing, six 
more shops are in the pipeline, and the Castle Inn has put up a shelf of 50p 
books.

The betting shop, the flower shop and the hardware shop are sparkling with new 
paint, bunting flutters across every narrow street, and flower baskets rattle 
on their chains in the stiff valley breeze.

In the heart of the town, opposite one chapel and next door to another - the 
Blaenavon Evangelical Church, with its board demanding "why not make this your 
spiritual home?" - a witch was polishing the window of her new shop, Cobwebz.

Louise Rockett lived on benefits for the past 12 years, gradually moving with 
her family further up the valleys from her original home in Newport, until the 
giant step of today's shop opening.

She has a better track record as a tarot reader than many. When her sister was 
buying a house Mrs Rockett read the cards and diagnosed a serious crack in one 
wall: she was right, and her sister got Â£600 off the purchase price.

"The outsiders are very hopeful," she said, "but the townspeople are very, 
very sceptical. They say it to me when they wouldn't say it to the others. But 
it is going to work - with a witch in the village how can it not? And 
everything I give out I get back threefold, so think how well I am going to do."

"This is the best hope the town has had in decades," said John Rodger, 
director of the Blaenavon Project, which led a successful campaign for the town 
to become a World Heritage Site.

It may now rank with the Taj Mahal and the Pyramids, but the town is also a 
graveyard of industrial jobs, as first iron, then steel, and finally King Coal 
collapsed.

The hills on which the town is built are still honeycombed with iron and coal, 
but the last coal mine closed in 1979, and reopened in the 1980s as the Big Pit 
mining museum, staffed by former miners.

The ironworks which built the town were already long gone, leaving a legacy of 
remarkably handsome public buildings and the solid iron grave markers of the 
families of the ironmasters. The population fell from 12,000 in the 1920s to 
the present precariously maintained 6,000. The 70 shops declined to a handful 
of shaky survivors, until there were more boarded up than functioning 
businesses on the main street, bitterly nicknamed Plywood City.

Stephanie Nummelin is from Blaenavon but left, as all the young people did, 
and is more than a little surprised to find herself back where she started. 
After travelling the world with her husband, she was running a children's 
bookshop in nearby Abergavenny when she heard of the Blaenavon experiment. 
Brownings - children's books and transport; her husband is a steam train buff - 
opens today. "Brave or foolhardy: which way do you want to call it?" she said.

"We've got to keep our balance," John Rodger said. "We need this to work, but 
we need to keep the character of the place. We don't want this to be a bloody 
Cotswold village."

Chance would be a fine thing at the bottom of the hill, where the new owners 
of the Left Bank and Broadleaf Books, facing one another across the street, are 
desperately hoping that visitors will notice that there are more new shops 
beyond some of the last remaining boarded-up fronts.

John Rodger calls Joanna Chambers "the lead dog", the first to sign up to open 
a Blaenavon bookshop. Broadleaf Books will sell natural history and photography 
books, reflecting the twin passions of owners Ms Chambers and Lata 
Griffith-Unny. Ms Griffith-Unny remortgaged her home to raise her share, while 
Ms Chambers invested every penny she saved over 12 years running a large 
bookstall in Abergavenny Market.

"Both of us have run out of money now. I'm in debt. This has to work," Ms 
Griffith-Unny said fervently. They open today, but yesterday they sold their 
first book to a live visitor.

James Hanna spent the day running up and down the steep main street with boxes 
of books. He is the American who sold his bookshop in New Orleans, moved to 
England, and became a business partner of the eccentric Richard Booth, 
self-proclaimed King of Hay-on-Wye, who turned that town into the world's 
largest second hand bookshop.

Mr Hanna has now become an international missionary for the power of books to 
save communities, and has spent every day of the last six months making 
Blaenavon happen.

As he headed back to his office to put in an order for 20,000 more books from 
the warehouse, the sun came out. "We're going to do it!" he roared. "What did I 
tell ya?"
 