
Two unusual memoirs impressed the critics this month. Peacock and Vine 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/peacock-and-vine.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, by AS Byatt, is “a short but luminous book”, according toNick Rennison in the 
Sunday Times, in celebration of two men: “William Morris, high priest of the 
English Arts and Crafts movement … master of a dizzying variety of skills”, and 
“Mariano Fortuny, similarly multitalented, but less well known in Britain … 
one of a dynasty of Spanish artists [who] worked as an architect, photographer 
and inventor.” Or, asFrances Wilson put it in the Daily Telegraph: “William 
Morris, the roly-poly pre-Raphaelite with the bushy beard who made wallpaper a 
political cause [and] Mariano Fortuny, who designed Albertine’s favourite gown 
inA la Recherche du Temps Perdu”. Both admired the small but beautiful 
mini-biography, whileTanya Harrod in the Literary Review 
<https://literaryreview.co.uk/the-dressmaker-the-decorator> thought it 
“fascinating and original … We are given two lives as well as something 
approaching a miniature autobiography, for in following the twists and turns of 
her research we come closer to Byatt herself”. 

In the Darkroom 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/in-the-darkroom.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Susan Faludi is also, to some extent, a biography of two people: her 
violent, aggressively masculine father, Steven, who told her, in his later 
life, that he had begun living as Stefánie. Inthe Observer, Rachel Cooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/19/susan-faludi-in-the-darkroom-review-elegant-masterpiece-identity-gender-nazi-hungary>
 was moved by this “out-and-out masterpiece of its kind”, particularly by 
a scene in a Holocaust museum. “First, it bewildered me, and then it disgusted 
me, and then, as she stood in that basement allowing the rage to rise inside 
her at last, it filled me with pity.” TheNew Statesman’s Helen Lewis 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/feminism/2016/07/identity-papers-gender-and-jewishness-susan-faludis-memoir-her-father>
 was also impressed by Faludi’s sensitivity and avoidance of cliche. “Her 
father’s story resists the easy narratives so often applied to transgender 
memoirs: the butterfly emerging from a chrysalis, the rebirth, the person who 
can ‘at last be myself’. For most people, most of the time, identity isn’t that 
simple.” In the Financial Times,Horatia Harrod was also touched by the book: 
“[It] is filled with questions of history and identity, but it is above all an 
extraordinary act of love.”

An unusual novel also delighted and confounded the critics, with the Scotsman’s
Stuart Kelly 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/book-review-a-field-guide-to-reality-by-joanna-kavenna-1-4176257>
 even expressing sympathy with the publishing industry, which can barely keep 
up with Joanna Kavenna’s varied and prodigious output. Her new novel,A Field 
Guide to Reality 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/a-field-guide-to-reality.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, he wrote, “deals with the nature of light and enlightenment, quantum physics 
and strange attractors, grieving and gifting [but] is bristling with acute 
little observations … There is a very English kind of surrealism at play … This 
novel of Roger Bacon and baked beans, a comic metaphysical thriller, is 
a nebulous and sharp delight.” The plot concerns Eliade Jencks, explainedSofia 
Laing in the Telegraph, “whose casual but significant acquaintance with an 
Oxford professor moves him to leave her his great work, the ‘field guide’ … It 
doesn’t emphasise the ‘standard’ features of a novel, such as Forsterian round 
characters or narrative tension. Instead it opts to push the boundaries of what 
the novel is, playfully borrowing from other forms and genres … ” WhileDavid 
Collard in the Literary Review 
<https://literaryreview.co.uk/the-meaning-of-light> found it to be “a 
sophisticated and occasionally opaque roman des idées, part Alice’s Adventures 
in Wonderland 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/alice-s-adventures-in-wonderland-28.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, part Gulliver’s Travels 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gulliver-s-travels.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
”, theDaily Mail’s Harry Ritchie 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-3668566/LITERARY-FICTION.html> 
called it simply: “not only weird but rather wonderful … extremely ambitious, 
inventive and written with a sure lightness of touch.”
 