
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie

 Tobys Room 
Eghosa Imasuen's Fine Boys (Farafina Books, available on Kindle) is, simply 
put, a very good read. It is about middle-class life in 1990s Nigeria, boys 
coming of age amid the lure of violence and the pull of young love. It is 
moving, funny and emotionally true.

Pat Barker's Toby's Room 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/aug/10/toby-room-pat-barker-review> 
(Hamish Hamilton) is magnificent; the characters have psychological depth, and 
she deals, in an honest, knowledgeable way with gender and art during the first 
world war. I finished it eagerly, wanting to know what happened next, and as I 
read, I was enjoying, marvelling and learning.

Simon Armitage



I've become a big fan of the short novel of late, something about the length 
of a day return from Leeds to London, so Denis Johnson'sTrain Dreams  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/13/train-dreams-denis-johnson-review>
(Granta) was always going to appeal. Stark and terse, it's the story of 1920s 
lumber-man Robert Grainier, whose existence is consumed by America's 
uncontrollable expansion. He is pioneer, dreamer, everyman, and his life among 
the trees, forest fires and bawdy towns speaks both of paradise and apocalypse, 
all told with Johnson's maverick approach to grammar and structure.

Often overlooked as a poet now, Stephen Spender wrote over a million words of 
journal entries. The index ofNew Selected Journals: 1939-95 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jul/29/stephen-spender-journals-review> 
(Faber) reads like a cross betweenWho's Who and a London restaurant guide, but 
name-dropping and menu choices aside, some of his later writings as body and 
spirit begin to fail are touching and humane.

In Meme <http://www.publishersweekly.com/978-1-60938-127-1> (University of 
Iowa Press) Susan Wheeler intercuts fragmentary poetic reflection with snatches 
of vernacular phrasing ("wait I'm not done fucking yet") to explore broken 
relationships – parental, romantic and with the self. The overall effect is 
dazzling, upsetting at times, and like nothing I've read before.

Diana Athill

 Kathleen Jamie, Sightlines 
There's been an embarrassment of riches this year, but here are two to be 
treasured and reread. In Tom Lubbock'sUntil Further Notice, I Am Alive 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781847085313/until-further-notice-i-am-alive>
 (Granta) he regrets that no "teaching how to die" is available. His own 
awe-inspiring book is just that. It is unforgettable and profoundly valuable. 
While Kathleen Jamie'sSightlines 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/travel-guides/9780956308665/sightlines>
 (Sort Of Books), a collection of brilliant and enticing essays about natural 
phenomena, tingles with life. John Berger called her a "sorceress", and so she 
is.

William Boyd

Two tremendous new collections by two of my favourite poets enlivened this 
year's reading. Jamie McKendrick'sOut There  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/26/out-there-jamie-mckendrick-review>
(Faber) displays all his prodigious strengths – a roving, quirky erudition, 
spectacularly precise observation and a beguiling, shrewd wit. And Christopher 
Reid, after the triumph ofThe Song of Lunch 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/jun/13/song-of-lunch-christopher-reid> 
shows inNonsense  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/28/nonsense-christopher-reid-review>
(Faber) that he is the modern master of the long narrative poem – at once wryly 
amusing and moving. Both these poets superbly exemplify Coleridge's definition 
of the form: "The best words in their best order."

Donald Rayfield's Edge of Empires 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781780230306/edge-of-empires-a-history-of-georgia>
(Reaktion Press) is a wonderful history of Georgia, lifting the lid on that 
country's torrid, rambunctious past (and present). Impeccably researched, 
limpidly written and full of insight.

AS Byatt

 Lawrence Norfolk, John Saturnall's Feast 
There were four novels I confidently expected to see on the Man Booker lists, 
or even as the winner. Philip Hensher'sScenes from Early Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/apr/29/scenes-early-life-philip-hensher-review>
 (Fourth Estate) is an extraordinary feat of imagination, telling of the birth 
of Bangladesh in colour and light. Lawrence Norfolk'sJohn Saturnall's Feast  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/21/john-saturnalls-feasts-lawrence-norfolk-review>
(Bloomsbury) is a brilliant, erudite tale of cookery and witchcraft in 1681.

Patrick Flanery's Absolution 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/16/absolution-patrick-flanery-review> 
(Atlantic) is a wonderfully constructed and gripping novel about betrayal and 
shadows in South Africa. Grace McCleen'sThe Land of Decoration 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/23/land-decoration-grace-mcleen-review>
 (Chatto & Windus) is both sinister and sharply intriguing, with a completely 
convincing 11-year-old narrator caught in fundamentalism, school persecution 
and the edge of the miraculous. None of them resembles anything else. The fact 
that none of them was on the Man Booker lists may simply indicate that we are 
going through an extraordinarily various and imaginative period for British 
fiction.

Rachel Cusk


The best book I read this year was Karl Ove Knausgaard 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/09/karl-ove-knausgaard-memoir-family>
'sA Death in the Family 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781846554674/a-death-in-the-family>
 (Harvill Secker); in fact, I continue to read parts of it at regular 
intervals. It is both an account of mid-life and of childhood remembered from 
mid-life, with the death of the author's father bringing these two periods into 
relation. It is what might be called a work of extreme autobiography, and is 
full of artistic, moral and technical daring. Knausgaard's commentaries on 
painting, particularly onRembrandt's self-portraits 
<http://www.rembrandtpainting.net/rembrandt_self_portraits.htm>, are very 
beautiful. The idea that a self-portrait arises out of an abandonment of the 
notion of solace underpins Knausgaard's own self-portrait; yet solace is 
precisely what it offers.

Richard Ford

 Lionel Asbo Photograph: Cape 
Lionel Asbo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780224096201/lionel-asbo-state-of-england>
 (Jonathan Cape) by Martin Amis – it'd be quite enough for this terrific, 
boisterous novel just to piss off all the rumpled grumpies and tight-knickered 
critics who like to tell us what's funny and what's serious (they're almost 
always wrong). But this novel manages to be both funny and serious, and (as 
always with Amis) to be very, very on-the-money about the culture – and not 
just British culture – and along the way to get at what we're uncomfortably 
thinking and don't want others to know we're thinking. Satire? Fairy tale? Send 
up? There's not enough of it for me. Amis does the reader a brilliant, generous 
(and cathartic) favour.

Philip Larkin: Letters to Monica edited by Anthony Thwaite (Faber) – I don't 
ordinarily like reading people's letters. Usually, too many punches get 
knowingly, smirkingly pulled. Larkin, of course, is different: hilarious, 
pathetic, niggardly, mischievous, baiting, amusingly domestic, insincere, 
placating and occasionally loving, and brilliant, incisive and true; he's us, 
in our best and worst selves – written better than we could write it. Why else 
would a critic argue that he's the "best-loved poet of the past 100 years"? In 
these letters, no less than in his poems, he stands rather nakedly before us – 
only this time with a damp dish towel over his wrist, the room gone a bit too 
cold, thinking about listening to the radio from bed.

Ancient Light 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jun/22/ancient-light-john-banville-review>
by John Banville (Viking) – this sumptuous novel has also inspired a lot of 
chin-pulling and critical brow-furrowing about its "relation" to other Banville 
novels, and its apparent self-consciosness, and mirroring, and to its being 
about story-telling itself and the role of memory, blah, blah, blah. Me, though 
– I just read it for the sentences and the smarts, and for the copious sexy 
parts, and for the absolutely edge-of-my-chair exhilaration over just what the 
author might write on the next page. I had, occasionally, to stop reading it, 
just so I could look forward to going back. Not many experiences provide that 
much pleasure; and very rarely do we find it available anymore in novels.

Jonathan Franzen 


I was taken with a couple of Brazilian novels, not new this year but new to me.
Chico Buarque's <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2004/jul/18/fiction.features3> 
Budapest 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780747573654/budapest> 
(Bloomsbury) is exactly the literary collision it sounds like, South America 
meets Central Europe, but what a delicious recipe for a story this turns out to 
be. Buarque's the real deal, hilarious and innovative and deftly profound. The 
premise of the novel is ridiculous – a Brazilian ghost writer completes his 
self-effacement by disappearing into Budapest – but Buarque sells it so well 
that, by the end, your own existence feels equally ridiculous.

Bernardo Carvalho's Nine Nights 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780099470335/nine-nights> 
(Vintage) is also a hybrid, of fiction and historical fact, and it seems for a 
while to be treadingHeart of Darkness ground, telling the story of a real-life 
American anthropologist who killed himself in the Amazon in the 1930s. About 
halfway through, though, it kicks into a more powerful gear. Carvalho starts 
bringing urgent news of a modern Brazil coming to full consciousness of its 
double identity as colonised and coloniser, and he deploys his fact/fiction 
hijinks to produce an ending that is still haunting me, months later.

John Gray

 Robert Macfarlane, The Old Ways: A Journey on Foot 
If you want a truly innovative and radical perspective on reshaping the 
economy, read Robert and Edward Skidelsky'sHow Much Is Enough: The Love of Money
,and the Case for the Good Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jun/29/how-much-is-enough-skidelsky-review>
 (Allen Lane). The book has not yet received the wide attention it deserves, 
but I found the way it applies to some of Keynes's boldest ideas about 
economics and the good life thought-stirring and extremely refreshing. Robert 
Macfarlane'sThe Old Ways: A Journey on Foot  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jun/10/old-ways-robert-macfarlane-review>
(Hamish Hamiliton) is also a meditation on the good life, but one that unfolds 
in walking as Macfarlane recounts his own peregrinations and those of other 
wanderers, now and in the past. Powerfully evocative and beautifully written,
The Old Ways is a vividly ruminative travelogue, including among its many 
delights a wonderfully perceptive section on the poet of pathways and roads 
without ends, Edward Thomas.

David Hare


Two books from 2012 may well be read in 50 years' time. In an abject year for 
journalism, Katherine Boo's portrait of a Mumbai slum,Behind the Beautiful 
Forevers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9781846274497/behind-the-beautiful-forevers-life-death-and-hope-in-a-mumbai-slum>
(Portobello), the result of three years' honest witness among the 
disadvantaged, sets a gold standard for exactly what a gifted reporter may 
still do alone. You put it down enraged, entertained and richly informed about 
people who live in makeshift quarters at the end of an airport runway.

Another lasting achievement is David Thomson's The Big Screen. It's always 
claimed that the greatest critics are the ones other critics admire, but 
Thomson is that almost unknown phenomenon: a critic practitioners admire.The 
Big Screen is a one-volume history of the moving image. Nobody else could match 
its sweep, its erudition, its discernment or its warmth. Give it to anyone who 
wants to learn about cinema.

Robert Harris

 Robert A Caro, The Passage of Power 
My book of the year, by a landslide majority, was The Passage of Power 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781847922175/the-passage-of-power-vol>
, the fourth volume in Robert A Caro's vast life of Lyndon B Johnson (Bodley 
Head). The adjective "Shakespearean" is overused and mostly undeserved, but not 
in this case. LBJ emerges from this biography as a fully rounded tragic hero: 
cowardly and brave, petty and magnificent, vindictive and noble, a man of 
vaunting ambition and profound insecurities. Caro marries profound 
psychological insight with a brilliant eye for the drama of the times. Two 
examples stand out. One is his account of John F Kennedy's assassination as 
seen – or rather not seen – by Johnson, who had his head pressed to the floor 
of his limousine by a secret service agent, and who was literally dragged to a 
safe room in the Dallas hospital: a more riveting narrative than any fiction. 
The other is the mutual loathing between LBJ and Robert F Kennedy, which will 
presumably reach its full, poisonous flowering in Caro's fifth volume. I can't 
wait.



Tom Holland <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/tom-holland>

There is a risk that nominating as my book of the year a 759-page tome on the 
evolution of attitudes to wealth between the fourth and sixth centuries will 
look like a shameless attempt to get myself into Pseuds' Corner. I hope, 
though, that readers will trust me when I assure them that Peter Brown'sThrough 
the Eye of a Needle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/grrlscientist/2012/aug/17/2> (Princeton 
University Press) is a masterpiece on every level: one that can be read with as 
much pleasure by someone who knows nothing about late antiquity as by an 
emeritus professor in the subject. That it is a great work of scholarship goes 
without saying; but it is also wise, warm and populated by a truly amazing cast 
of characters. At a time when books on money are two-a-penny, Brown's book sets 
the gold standard.

Michael Holroyd

 Rose Tremain, Merivel: A Man of His Time 
The most powerful novel I have read this year is Jérôme Ferrari's Where I Left 
My Soul 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/nov/02/left-soul-jerome-ferrari-review>, 
translated from the French by Geoffrey Strachan (Maclehose Press). It is a 
devastating story that shows how the victims of torture often become torturers 
themselves. The most enjoyable novel was Rose Tremain'sMerivel: A Man of His 
Time <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/14/merivel-rose-tremain-review> 
(Chatto & Windus), which is a wonderfully entertaining sequel to her Restoration
. Among biographies, I particularly admired the subtlety and skill of Maggie 
Fergusson'sMichael Morpurgo: War Child to War Horse 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780007387267/michael-morpurgo-war-child-to-war-horse>
(Fourth Estate). This is a story full of family problems which she confronts 
with insight and sensitivity.



EL James <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/el-james>

It's been a whirlwind year for me so finding time to read has been difficult. 
However, I managed to consumeShadow of Night 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fantasy/9780755384747/shadow-of-night>
(Headline), Deborah Harkness's follow up toA Discovery of Witches, and what a 
rich, thrilling and educational tale it is. I graduated in history, so I 
appreciate the depth and detail Harkness brings to her work. Of course she's a 
professor in the subject, and knows whereof she speaks. The second in her All 
Souls trilogy,Shadow of Night finds Diana Bishop, an American academic and 
spellbound witch, transported to Elizabethan England on the trail of an 
ancient, missing alchemical manuscript and hoping to glean lessons in 
witchcraft at a time when such practices could be considered, at best, risky. 
She is accompanied by Matthew Roydon, a vampire with a well-hidden agenda, and 
acolyte of the mysterious School of Night. From 16th-century London to 
Sept-Tours in France and on to the seat of the Holy Roman Emperor in Prague, we 
journey with Diana and Matthew in search of the document. It's a captivating 
and romantic ripping yarn.

Hari Kunzru

 A History of Bombing Photograph: Granta 
I have a notebook where I write down everything I read and watch, the art I 
see, and so on. Looking through it I see I read very few newly released books 
this year. One revelation in fiction was Nanni Balestrini'sThe Unseen 
<http://libcom.org/library/unseen-nanni-balestrini> (translated by Liz Heron, 
Verso) an extraordinary novel about the Italian Autonomia movement of the 
1970s. He's hugely famous in Italy, but frustratingly very little has been 
translated. I was also powerfully affected by Sven Lindqvist'sA History of 
Bombing  <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v23/n16/patrick-wright/dropping-their-eggs>
(translated by Linda Haverty Rugg, Granta) which feels, as we move into the era 
of drone warfare, compelling and morally urgent.



Nick Laird <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/nick-laird>

In fiction published this year, Denis Johnson 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/07/09/specials/johnson.html>'s Train Dreams 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/13/train-dreams-denis-johnson-review> 
(Granta) was the best thing I read. Despite its brevity, it manages both to 
look closely and widely, tracking the history of a labourer who loses his 
family while at the same time chronicling in miniature the history of the 
American west. It's compulsive and, finally, unspeakably eerie.

The best non-fiction was John Jeremiah Sullivan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/aug/27/john-jeremiah-sullivan-interview>
's collection of essays: Pulphead: Notes from the Other Side of America 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9780099572350/pulphead-notes-from-the-other-side-of-america>
 (Vintage). Whether he's writing about the southern literary tradition or 
smoking pot in Disneyland, the man is astute, funny and wonderful company.

The big book of the year in poetry for me was Louise Glück's Poems 1962-2012 
(out in the UK in February). She relies almost exclusively on lineation and 
tone for her effects, and writes spare, pointed lyrics of remarkable power. And 
Chris Ware'sBuilding Stories 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/comics/9780224078122/building-stories>
 (Jonathan Cape) was masterful, beautifully constructed, beautifully drawn 
tales of domestic boredom, agony and bliss.

John Lanchester
 Ian McEwan, Sweet Tooth 
Peter Campbell was a friend and colleague for a quarter of a century, so there 
was never much doubt that the book which meant most to me this year would be
Artwork 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/gallery/2011/oct/28/peter-campbell-london-review-of-books-covers>
(Profile), a selection of his LRB covers and other paintings. There's a calm 
and melancholy and emotional intelligence in his work, which has all the more 
impact for being gathered together. I sometimes find collections of a single 
artist's work a little claustrophobic, but that isn't the case with Peter; that 
must be related to the spaciousness of his mind, his openness, which he could 
convey extraordinarily well in painting as well as in his writing. There's also 
the fact, which seems to be more highly valued by laymen than by the pros, that 
his pictures are very pleasing to look at.

Book production was an interest, and a skill, of Peter's, and I think he would 
have been very impressed byWine Grapes: A Complete Guide to 1,368 Vine 
Varieties, Including Their Origins and Flavours 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/food/9781846144462/wine-grapes-a-complete-guide-to-vine-varieties-including-their-origins-and-flavours>
 by Jancis Robinson, Julia Harding and José Vouillamoz (Allen Lane). This 
thousand-plus-page monument combines 21st-century science with the ambition, 
scale and authority of 19th-century scholarship. It may be the nerdiest wine 
book ever published (and, trust me, that's a competitive title) but it's also a 
work of astounding scholarship, and as a piece of book-making, is an outright 
masterpiece.

Another sorely missed friend, Ian Hamilton, makes a startling appearance in 
Ian McEwan's highly entertainingSweet Tooth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/aug/23/sweet-tooth-ian-mcewan-review> 
(Jonathan Cape), as forceful and as cool in the book as he was in real life, 
and in the same Soho pub, too.

Other new works of fiction I enjoyed this year were Zadie Smith's sweeping NW 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/aug/26/nw-zadie-smith-review> (Hamish 
Hamilton) and Colm Tóibín's powerfulThe Testament of Mary 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/19/inspiration-testament-mary-colm-toibin>
(Viking).

Mark Lawson

In a year when the past and present affairs of broadcasting dominated 
headlines for months, figures from the medium provided three splendidly 
entertaining books.Ban This Filth!: Letters from the Mary Whitehouse Archive 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/26/ban-this-filth-ben-thompson-review>
 (Faber), edited by Ben Thompson, finds the morality campaigner comically wrong 
on many matters but impressively prescient about pornography and paedophile TV 
personalities.

A front-of-camera superstar, Clare Balding, offers stonking royal and showbiz 
anecdotes in the sharply charming memoirMy Animals and Other Family 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/16/clare-balding-animals-family-review>
 (Viking), while a behind-camera legend, Phil Redmond, gives a masterclass in 
media studies inMid-Term Report: From Grange Hill to Hollyoaks via Brookside 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781846059841/mid-term-report>
 (Century).

James Fenton's Yellow Tulips: Poems 1968-2011 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/07/yellow-tulips-james-fenton-review> 
(Faber) finds a senior poet displaying retrospective and contemporary power; 
while a junior one, Julia Copus, demonstrates both technical virtuosity and 
autobiographical courage inThe World's Two Smallest Humans 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/aug/12/julia-copus-smallest-humans-review>
 (Faber).

Translated into English three decades late, Silent House 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780571275922/silent-house> 
(Faber) confirms Orhan Pamuk as one of the greatest and most prophetic of 
political novelists, and a timely reprint of Gore Vidal'sCollected Essays 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780349105246/united-states-v-essays>
(Abacus) is some consolation for the loss this summer of a dazzling writer and 
talker.

Jonathan Lethem


 Magnificence 
I'm just finishing up Magnificence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780393081701/magnificence-a-novel>
 (WW Norton & Co), Lydia Millet's third and concluding book in her unnamed 
trilogy (withHow the Dead Dream and Ghost Lights). The books manage to function 
as three elegant, darkly comic, slim novels with overtones variously of Muriel 
Spark, Edward Gorey and JG Ballard, full of contemporary wit and devilish 
fateful turns for her characters, and then also to knit together into a 
tapestry of vast implication and ethical urgency, something as large as any 
writer could attempt: a kind of allegorical elegy for life on a dying planet. 
Ours, that is.

Yiyun Li


Seven years ago, I had the good fortune to watch a young woman, Amy Leach, 
defend a collection of essays about nature in front of a committee. From what 
angle do you approach the world in your writing, one scholar asked: are you an 
environmentalist, are you a Christian writer, what right do you have to 
represent sea cucumbers and peas and ostriches and constellations, and – oh, 
how one has to face this most profound and profoundly absurd question as a 
writer – what are you? Marilynne Robinson, who sat on the committee too, joined 
the conversation with a polite yet firm rebuttal to the scholar's question, 
quoting aptly John Donne: "All things that are, are equally removed from being 
nothing."

What a joy now to be able to bring together both Marilynne Robinson's essay 
collectionWhen I Was a Child I Read Books 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/08/marilynne-robinson-when-child-read-books-review>
 (Virago) and Amy Leach's collectionThings that Are (published in the US by 
Milkweed Editions this year and out in the UK next June) as two of my favourite 
books of the year. The clear-sightedness and articulacy of the two writers; 
their fearlessness in tackling the questions and issues of our time and other 
times, our species and other species; their ardent curiosities; their 
connection to Emerson, Emily Dickinson, to name two of their intellectual 
forebears – all these remind us how books written not from timidity or 
narrowness make us feel more alive than we would allow ourselves to imagine. 
But above all, it is satisfying (and I'm grateful, too, as one of her pupils) 
to know that Robinson has created a space under which the next generation of 
writers can continue the exploration.

Robert Macfarlane
 Artemis Cooper, Patrick Leigh Fermor: An Adventure 
Artemis Cooper's biography of Patrick Leigh Fermor 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/21/leigh-fermor-adventure-cooper-review>
 (John Murray) is an outstanding account of an extraordinary life; tender and 
evocative, without ever hardening into hagiography.

Hunger Mountain 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/philosophy/9781611800166/hunger-mountain-a-field-guide-to-mind-and-landscape>
 (Shambhala Press) by David Hinton – whose translations of classical Chinese 
wilderness poetry I have been reading since I was a student – is a very 
different kind of book about walking: a meditative series of foot-journeys 
through upstate Vermont and the intellectual landscapes of Chinese philosophy.

Lastly, Ted Benton's entomological opus Grasshoppers & Crickets 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/scienceandnature/9780007277247/grasshoppers-and-crickets>
 (Collins New Naturalists) led me into the weird world of British orthoptera, 
with their edible nuptial gifts, "mate-guarding", harems and extraordinarily 
complex songs. No field or meadow will seem or sound the same again.

Hilary Mantel



Widely praised but in no way over-praised, The Yellow Birds 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/aug/31/the-yellow-birds-kevin-powers-review>
 byKevin Powers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/nov/13/kevin-powers-the-yellow-birds?intcmp=239>
 (Sceptre) is a novel by a young ex-soldier who served in Iraq, and is 
remarkable for its intensity of both feeling and expression. In this book about 
death, every line is a defiant assertion of the power of beauty to revivify, 
whether beauty shows itself in nature or (later) in art. Graves, Owen and 
Sassoon would have recognised this war and the strange poetry it has bred.

There is contested territory also in Naomi Alderman's The Liars' Gospel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/06/liars-gospel-naomi-alderman-review>
 (Viking), a visceral retelling of the events surrounding the life of Jesus. 
Her would-be messiah is a puzzling drifter marginal to his own story; the 
ferocity of Barabbas and Judas seizes the narrative and occupies its centre 
ground.

Pankaj Mishra


Anyone interested in modern Indian literature – its history and prospects, how 
it has been made and frequently unmade – cannot afford to overlook Arvind 
Krishna Mehrotra'sPartial Recall, a representative collection of essays from 
one of India's best poets and critics. Ananya Vajpeyi'sRighteous Republic: The 
Political Foundation of Modern India 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/politics/9780674048959/righteous-republic-the-political-foundations-of-modern-india>
 (Harvard) radically advances our understanding of political traditions in a 
major non-western country. Revisiting an apparently pivotal event in the 
history of modern imperialism, Partha Chatterjee'sThe Black Hole of Empire 
(Princeton) grippingly uncovers a larger history of power and statecraft.

I found Paul Elie's Reinventing Bach 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/music/9780374281076/reinventing-bach>
 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux) to be a stimulating and enjoyable account of how and 
what we hear when we listen to this great composer. An excellent new 
translation by Michael Kimmage of Wolfgang Koeppen'sJourney Through America 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780857452313/journey-through-america>
 (Berghahn Books) alerted me to this wonderful German novelist.

Set in present-day London, Genie and Paul (Myriad Editions), a superb first 
novel byNatasha Soobramanien 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/16/debut-author-natasha-soobramanien>
, contemporarises with brilliant effect the 18th-century French classicPaul et 
Virginie. I was also entranced by Marina Warner's encyclopedic and pathbreaking 
study,Stranger Magic: Charmed States and the Arabian Nights (Vintage).

Blake Morrison

 Behind the Beautiful Forevers Photograph: Portobello 
As a western journalist writing about a Mumbai slum, Katherine Boo had many 
barriers to overcome. ButBehind the Beautiful Forevers is a triumph. She 
doesn't preach, she's not voyeuristic and rather than intrude on the action she 
saves the story of her own involvement for the afterword.

Most fiction pales in comparison – not Richard Ford's Canada, though. Despite 
the material (a bank robbery and two murders), it's the least sensational of 
novels, gently paced and even in tone. "Through all these memorable events, 
normal life was what I was seeking to preserve for myself," the narrator says, 
and the co-existence of ordinariness and evil is part of the point.

Christopher Reid's collection Nonsense is memorable both for a bravura 60-page 
narrative describing the journey of an academic widower and for the definitive 
poem about espresso coffee ("little cup of melancholy, / inch-deep well of the 
blackest / concentrate of brown").

Andrew Motion


Two of the Mighty Dead have been brought back to life in exemplary fashion: 
Shakespeare in Lois Potter'sThe Life of William Shakespeare: A Critical 
Biography 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9781118281529/the-life-of-william-shakespeare-a-critical-biography>
 (John Wiley), which very cleverly uses expert theatre-knowledge as a way of 
making her enigmatic subject seem plausibly substantial; and Keats in Nicholas 
Roe'sJohn Keats: A New Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780300124651/john-keats-a-new-life>
 (Yale), which puts the poet properly in his place. And Barry Cunliffe's 
beautiful and enthrallingBritain Begins 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780199609338/britain-begins>
 (Oxford) puts us all in our place.

David Nicholls

 Zadie Smith, NW 
This was the year I reset my alarm in an attempt to read more, and I'm 
delighted that I did. I loved Laurent Binet's smart, originalHHhH 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/may/16/hhhh-laurent-binet-review> 
(Harvill Secker) and, despite never having watched more than 30 seconds of 
baseball, thoroughly enjoyedChad Harbach's funny, moving The Art of Fielding 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jan/12/art-fielding-chad-harbach-review> 
(Fourth Estate). Zadie Smith'sNW was a fine London novel, Robert Macfarlane's 
The Old Ways sent me out on many long walks, and I was both amused and appalled 
by the anti-hero of Ben Lerner's Leaving the Atocha Station 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781847086891/leaving-the-atocha-station>
 (Granta). I finally got round to Patrick Ness and Siobhan Dodd'sA Monster Calls
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781406311525/a-monster-calls>
 (Walker) and found it quite devastating, and also discovered the under-rated 
US novelistJohn Williams. Stoner 
<http://www.nybooks.com/books/imprints/classics/stoner/> (NYRB Classics) is a 
sort of mid-westJude the Obscure, and Butcher's Crossing 
<http://www.nybooks.com/books/imprints/classics/butchers-crossing/> is like a 
western by Joseph Conrad; both wonderful books, beautifully written.

Lawrence Norfolk


Two dystopian thrillers to begin with. The Uninvited 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jul/20/uninvited-liz-jensen-review> by 
Liz Jensen (Bloomsbury Circus) reworks John Wyndham'sThe Midwich Cuckoos into a 
dark parable of psychotic children and their hapless parents, while Peter 
Heller'sThe Dog Stars 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/aug/03/science-fiction-roundup-reviews> 
(Headline) might be described as an airborne version ofThe Road crossed with a 
post-apocalyptic romance. Both engage deep emotions to spine-chilling (and 
suspenseful) effect.

The strangest and most strangely beguiling book I read last year was Traveller 
of the Century 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jun/21/traveller-of-century-andres-neuman-review>
 by Andrés Neuman (Pushkin Press), in which a young literary translator arrives 
in a 19th-century German town and finds himself unable to leave. It is an 
alluring parable about how otherness at once kindles and defeats desire.

Finally, another encounter with otherness: Bunting's Persia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/poetry/9780983889304/buntings-persia>
 is reissued this year by Flood Editions and collects translations made by 
Basil Bunting of medieval Persian poetry. These lines were translated from 
original verses by Manuchehri, who wrote more than 1,000 years ago.

Much do I wonder at one whom sleep bears away
where there is yet a bottle of wine in the house
and yet more wonder at him who drinks without music …

Edna O'Brien

 The Yellow Birds Photograph: Sceptre 
In the great tradition of Hemingway and Tim O'Brien, Kevin Powers's 
exquisitely writtenThe Yellow Birds draws us in to the combat zones of Iraq: 
the watch, the wait ("Stay alive, Stay alert"), the bungle, the slaughter and 
the irreparable aftermath. It should be essential Christmas reading for Tony 
Blair, George W Bush and their cohorts.

In sumptuous language, Jeet Thayil's Narcopolis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/feb/17/narcopolis-jeet-thayil-review> 
(Faber) depicts the hallucinogenic sensibilities of those trapped in the opium 
rooms of Mumbai and by extension, the city itself, with its assortment of 
broken and stranded people, doomed to live in the shadows.

Sharon Olds's taut and beautiful poems in Stag's Leap 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/21/stags-leap-sharon-olds-review> 
(Jonathan Cape), explore the civil war of love and hate in the marital heart. 
As its title suggests, Sam Riviere's book of poems 81 Austerities 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/aug/03/81-austerities-sam-riviere-review> 
(Faber) has a wry, sardonic touch, with, however, an underlying power that 
signals a gifted new voice.

Jeremy Paxman

This was a wonderful year for non-fiction. The Secret Rooms by Catherine Bailey
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/nov/16/the-secret-rooms-catherine-bailey-review>
 (Viking) is a compelling story of a family secret. It's been five years since 
her last piece of work,Black Diamonds 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2007/apr/14/featuresreviews.guardianreview31> 
(Viking), and I now see why, for this is a remarkable piece of research which 
throws a bright shaft of light on powerful people, hypocrisy and the first 
world war.

And the funniest book of the year for me was Dear Lupin: Letters to a Wayward 
Son 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/may/11/dear-lupin-roger-mortimer-charlie-mortimer-review>
 (Constable & Robinson), a collection of brilliantly written letters from a 
world-weary father (Roger Mortimer) to his feckless son, Charlie. They could 
offer a money back guarantee if you don't laugh – the publishers' money would 
be safe.

Annie Proulx 

 David Quammen, Spillover: Animal Infections and the Next Human Pandemic 
The Passage of Power is the fourth volume of Robert A Caro's huge and intimate 
study of Lyndon B Johnson, the deeply flawed president who pushed through a 
civil rights law and became mired in the Vietnam war. A major work of history 
and biography.

Spillover: Animal Infections and the Next Human Pandemic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/11/spillover-animal-infections-david-qaummen-review>
 (Bodley Head) by David Quammen is a cliffhanger account of dangerous zoonotic 
viruses spilling over from animals to humans, and the researchers who study 
these pathogens.

America's Other Audubon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/art/9781616890599/americas-other-audubon>
 (Princeton Architectural Press) by Joy M Kiser is the story and reproduction 
of a rare 19th-century book, Genevieve Jones'sIllustrations of the Nests and 
Eggs of Birds of Ohio 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/arts-post/post/joy-m-kiser-on-americas-other-audubon/2012/05/03/gIQA0avlzT_blog.html>
, today considered a masterpiece. It is a soulless reader who will not be moved 
by the artist's tragic story.

Philip Pullman


The Old Ways by Robert Macfarlane contains one of the creepiest ghost stories 
I've ever read. Quite apart from that, it's a beautifully written, moving, 
thrilling account of a number of walks Macfarlane took along ancient tracks and 
pathways in Britain and further afield, shod and barefoot, alone or with a 
companion. It reminded me of the astonishing variety of things you can see when 
you go at walking speed, and of how strange and rich the world is.

Philip Hensher's The Missing Ink 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/art/9780230767126/the-missing-ink-the-lost-art-of-handwriting-and-why-it-still-matters>
(Macmillan) is barmy, delightful and spot-on. He laments the decline of 
handwriting, not in a precious way, not because he wishes everyone were a 
quill-wielding aesthete, but because it's a human activity that could be 
forgotten, or ignored, or done badly, or done well, and why not do it well? He 
also celebrates the great Marion Richardson, whose handwriting patterns used to 
delight me when I was eight or nine. I'm with him all the way.

Ian Rankin
 Keith Ridgway, Hawthorn & Child 
The novel that has impressed, mesmerised and bamboozled me most this past year 
isHawthorn and Child 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jul/11/hawthorn-child-keith-ridgway-review>
 by Keith Ridgway (Granta). It begins as a police procedural, then spins 
outwards, never quite coming back to explain the mystery. Along the way we 
learn that a secret cabal of wild animals may underpin life in contemporary 
London, we hang out at art exhibitions, visit an orgy at a gay sauna, and 
wallow in gorgeous (if unsettling) writing. A novel or a series of loosely 
connected short stories? I don't really care. Whatever it is, it's great.

Lionel Shriver


Two novels stand out for me in 2012: TC Boyle's San Miguel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/12/san-miguel-tc-boyle-review> 
(Bloomsbury), an involving historical read and yet another illustration of this 
author's astonishing range. There seems to be no subject or genre that Boyle 
won't tackle with brio. I'd also recommend Lawrence Osborne'sThe Forgiven 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780307889034/the-forgiven> 
(Hogarth), a haunting story of expats in Morocco that has really stayed with 
me. In retrospect, I wonder if the clash between the locals and the western 
interlopers in this novel arises not because they don't understand each other, 
but because they do.

In non-fiction, Edward Luce's Time to Start Thinking: America and the Spectre 
of Decline 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/may/11/time-start-thinking-edward-luce-review>
 (Little, Brown) changed my vision of the American future, and not for the 
better. If Luce is right, there's bound to be a knock-on effect in the UK, so 
Britons have no reason to read about the increasingly dire situation across the 
pond with any glee.

Helen Simpson

 Alice Munro, Dear Life 
Some artists – Titian and Verdi, for example – wax stronger with age, and 
Alice Munro <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/alice-munro>, now in her 80s, is 
one of their number. The 10 stories and four quasi- autobiographical pieces in 
her new collection Dear Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/nov/08/dear-life-alice-munro-review> 
(Chatto & Windus) are as deep and surprising and unsparing as any that she has 
written. In "Dolly", a passionate love triangle, the protagonists are in their 
70s and 80s – "'We can't afford rows,' he said. No indeed. I had forgotten how 
old we were, forgotten everything. Thinking there was all the time in the world 
to suffer and complain."

Ahdaf Soueif


Two novels available only in Arabic. First, The Confessions by Rabee Jaber. 
Jaber won the 2012 International Prize for Arab Fiction 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/28/rabee-jaber-international-prize-arabic-fiction>
 forThe Druzes of Belgrade, but I was totally gripped by this early, slight 
novel, possibly the most humane and understated take that I've read on the 
Lebanese civil war. AndWhen the Queen Falls Asleep by Huzama Habayeb: a 
brilliant novel of the Palestinian diaspora. Funny and gritty, and bursting 
with life and humour.

A Card from Angela Carter 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jan/25/card-from-angela-carter-review> by 
Susannah Clapp (Bloomsbury) is a small masterpiece; in close-up, a warm and 
intimate portrait achieved with the most minimal, impressionistic strokes, in 
wide-angle what its author calls "a zigzag path through the 80s". With lots of 
those original and revelatory turns of phrase prized by readers of Clapp's 
Observer theatre reviews.

Richard Parkinson is assistant keeper of the pharaonic collection at the BM 
and his approach to his subject is empathetic and imaginative. InEloquent 
Peasant, he sees the continuity of life in Egypt, uses modern photographs to 
make points about the ancient text and brings the poem to life and relevance 
through a full and accessible commentary.

Diarist, nature-lover and lawyer, the Palestinian author Raja Shehadeh allows 
more of his anger to blaze through in the pages ofOccupation Diaries 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/aug/05/occupation-diaries-raja-shehadeh-review>
 (Profile) than he did in his award-winningPalestinian Walks. Shehadeh is 
always honest, elegant and a heart-wrenching pleasure to read.

Kate Summerscale

 Sarah Wise, Inconvenient People: Lunacy, Liberty and the Mad-Doctors in 
Victorian England 
Elizabeth Jenkins's Harriet 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781903155875/harriet> 
(Persephone) is a fictional account of a true crime, "the Penge Mystery" of 
1877, in which a slow-witted young woman was apparently starved to death by her 
husband and his family. First published in 1934 and reissued this year, 
Jenkins's novel is a superb, gripping portrait of moral corruption. For more 
Victorian horror, I recommend Sarah Wise'sInconvenient People: Lunacy, Liberty 
and the Mad-Doctors in Victorian England 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/nov/09/inconvenient-people-sarah-wise-review>
(Bodley Head). Wise is a terrific researcher and storyteller. Here she has 
woven a series of case studies into a fascinating history of insanity in the 
19th century.

Colm Tóibín


The emotional power of Richard Ford's Canada arises from a sense of grief and 
loss embedded in the writing, and the imaginative sweep of the book, which 
enters the spirit of a sensitive, vulnerable and intelligent teenage boy and by 
implication enters the spirit of America itself.

Paul Durcan's Praise in Which I Live and Move and Have My Being 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/30/praise-live-paul-durcan-review> 
(Harvill Secker) is a book filled with contemporary life, but the poems also 
have a way of evoking enduring human values, in all their odd tones and 
surprising textures, as much as the contemporary moment.

Michael Gorra's Portrait of a Novel: Henry James and the Making of an American 
Masterpiece 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/07/portrait-novel-henry-james-gorra-review>
 (WW Norton & Co) is literary criticism at its most lucid and engaging, as it 
shows James embarking on his great work and displays Gorra, filled with 
enthusiasm and insight, as the book's most ideal and intelligent reader.

Claire Tomalin

 Simon Armitage, Walking Home 
Two witty books by poets have been companions to me this year. Simon Armitage's
Walking Home 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jul/06/walking-home-pennine-armitage-review>
 (Faber), an account in prose of how he took on the Pennine Way, held my 
interest to the end, partly because I was so pleased it wasn't me stumbling up, 
down and over the terrible terrain, assailed by stinging rain and blinding fog, 
and having to read poems to those who cared to come and listen in the evening – 
and also because Armitage makes a really good read out of his comfortless 
adventure. Christopher Reid's new volume, Nonsense, is as good as his A 
Scattering and as funny as The Song of Lunch. There is now no English poet 
whose work I look forward to as much as Reid's: he has a voice purely his own, 
and a mastery of prosody. Whether he is making you laugh or smile or shudder, 
what he writes is the real thing.

Sue Townsend


Have you ever seen Mr Magoo standing on the end of a girder, arms outstretched 
over the void? Well, I'm Mrs Magoo. I've not been able to read a book without a 
magnifier since I turned into her 10 years ago. But I didn't stop buying books 
– hardbacks for preference. I like the weight and the heft ofCanada by Richard 
Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/books/richard-ford>. It is written with a 
quiet, hypnotic brilliance that almost had me weeping with envy. I particularly 
like the opening lines, which take you by the throat and drag you through the 
narrative: "First, I'll tell about the robbery our parents committed. Then 
about the murders, which happened later." At its heart are the Parsons, a 
dysfunctional 1950s American family. Thank God for dysfunctional families. They 
are to fiction what donkeys are to haulage.

Rose Tremain

 Richard Davenport-Hines, Titanic Lives: Migrants and Millionaires, Conmen and 
Crew 
In a year that marked the centenary of the sinking of the Titanic, Richard 
Davenport-Hines'sTitanic Lives 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/apr/13/titanic-lives-richard-davenport-hines-review>
(HarperPress) was by far the most gripping book on the subject. From his eerily 
powerful first lines about the iceberg – "There were no witnesses. It didn't 
look like a moment from history" – he manages to maintain an extraordinary 
forward momentum, yet at the same time rescue from the deep the biographies of 
hundreds of people. It was also the first account of the disaster to make me 
see that the people in the lifeboats were terrified, not only because of the 
terrible spectre of the sinking ship and the screams of the dying, but also 
because they didn't know whether they, too, would yet perish. We know that the 
Carpathia is going to rescue them; they didn't. Davenport-Hines's sense of what 
to reveal when is perfectly tuned.

A footnote on Tom Wolfe's Back to Blood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/31/back-to-blood-tom-wolfe-review> 
(Cape), reeling from a Brit-crit smacking: I want to tell readers that there is 
more dynamism, risk-taking and crazed energy in Wolfe's writing than in all the 
Brit novels I've read this year.

Jeanette Winterson


Marina Warner's Stranger Magic is as absorbing, wise and playful as the 
Arabian Nights tales themselves. A book about the triumph of imagination over 
experience. Don Paterson:Selected Poems 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/may/18/selected-poems-don-paterson-review>
(Faber). Been reading him for 20 years. Never disappointed. His poetry is a 
love affair with life – wide glorious chaotic life. Poetry that "sheds veil 
after veil". AM Homes:May We Be Forgiven 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/19/may-we-be-forgiven-am-homes-review>
(Granta). Forget the boys talking to each other. This is the great American 
novel for our time. Adam Phillips:Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jun/13/missing-out-adam-phillips-review> 
(Hamish Hamilton). Freud and Shakespeare brought together for an extended 
rumination on happiness and hatred. Othello would rather murder the world than 
change.

Slavoj Žižek

 In Praise of Love 
What I read with greatest pleasure in 2012 were the two short books by Robert 
Pippin, the first among American Hegelian philosophers:Hollywood Westerns and 
American Myth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/film/9780300172065/hollywood-westerns-and-american-myth-the-importance-of-howard-hawks-and-john-ford-for-political-philosophy>
 (Yale University Press) andFatalism in American Film Noir 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/film/9780813931890/fatalism-in-american-film-noir-some-cinematic-philosophy>
(University of Virginia Press). Surprisingly for the author of more than a 
dozen studies of Hegel's logic and phenomenology, the books are about US 
popular culture: the first deals with the problem of passage from the violence 
of the Wild West to the modern rule of law in classic westerns (The Searchers, 
Red River), while the second, dedicated to the problem of subjective agency and 
fate in film noir, culminates in a perspicuous reading of Tourneur's classicOut 
of the Past. A Hegelian analysis of western and noir – can one imagine a better 
combination of philosophy and pleasure? Not to mention the fact that Pippin's 
political conclusions are unexpectedly radical: the western book clearly 
demonstrates how the move to the rule of law has to rely on illegitimate 
violence.

In a more romantic mood, I hope that Alain Badiou 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/may/18/alain-badiou-life-in-writing>'s 
In Praise of Love 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/philosophy/9781846687792/in-praise-of-love>
 (Serpent's Tail), a bestseller in France, will repeat this success in English. 
The book is exactly what its title indicates: a celebration of passionate 
sexual love against superficial hedonism. The true transgression today is no 
longer sex, but a dedicated commitment to love.

And I was glad that Jo Nesbø 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/28/jo-nesbo-salman-rushdie-norwegian-thriller>
'sThe Bat 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/crime/9781846551451/the-bat-a-harry-hole-thriller>
 (Harvill Secker), the first in the series of Harry Hole thrillers, is finally 
available in English. Henning Mankell, whose latest novels seem to be losing 
their creative edge, has found a worthy successor in Nesbø's dark police 
procedurals taking place in a depressive Ingmar Bergman landscape. His later 
novels, withThe Snowman arguably the best among them, bear witness to how there 
can be more art in a good detective novel than in pretentious "serious" novels.

• Compiled by Ginny Hooker.

• This article was amended on 29 November 2012, inserting Pankaj Mishra's name 
above his selection of titles.

Buy any of the Guardian's books of the year 2012 from the Guardian Bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk> and save at least 20% (with free UK postage 
and packing).
 