
Chimamanda Adichie <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/chimamandangoziadichie>
 Sebastian Barry, On Canaan's Side 
I admired the lovely sentences and moving story in Sebastian Barry's On 
Canaan's Side (Faber) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jul/20/on-canaans-side-sebastian-barry-review>
, about an Irish-American woman looking back at her life.Binyavanga Wainaina's 
One Day I Will Write About This Place 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781847080219/one-day-i-will-write-about-this-place>
 (Granta) is a strange, allusive, tender memoir about growing up in 
middle-class Kenya. Tracy K Smith's poems inLife on Mars 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk:80/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781555975845>
 (Turnaround) are startling and exquisite.

Tariq Ali <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/tariqali>
 Thomas Penn, Winter King: The Dawn of Tudor England 
Shifting alliances at home and abroad, ruthless accumulation of capital and 
endless court intrigues form the backdrop to Thomas Penn'sWinter King: The Dawn 
of Tudor England 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/16/winter-king-thomas-penn-review> 
(Allen Lane), a chilling and enticing portrait of Henry VII, the founder of the 
Tudor dynasty that created a centralised English state. Well written and well 
researched, the book helps us understand why Shakespeare decided to give this 
Henry a miss. It would have been difficult to prettify him. The Royal National 
Theatre should seek to remedy this omission rapidly:Winter King has a very 
modern feel.

A winter nightmare is the subject of Afgantsy: The Russians in Afghanistan 
1979-89 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/mar/26/afgantsy-rodric-braithwaite-review>
 (Profile) by Rodric Braithwaite. Written largely from material obtained from 
Soviet archives, this account explains why the Afghans hate being occupied and 
each chapter offers a warning to the Nato occupiers of today.

Elias Khoury's latest novel, As Though She Were Sleeping 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857050519>
(Maclehose Press), returns to a golden age. Beirut in the 30s, unoccupied 
Palestine and a love affair recalled through a set of dream sequences: an Arab 
spring of a very different sort.

Simon Armitage <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/simonarmitage>

Although most people knew him as a novelist and indeed a painter, Glyn Hughes 
had been quietly publishing poetry since the 60s.A Year in the Bull-Box  
<http://www.arcpublications.co.uk/catalogue/book.php?description_id=413>(Arc 
Publications) is a poem-sequence detailing the turning of the seasons and the 
eternal processes of nature from the vantage point of a "bull-box" (that's a 
stone hut to you and me) in the Ribble Valley. It is also a meditation on 
mortality, written as Hughes succumbed to the cancer that wasto take his life  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2011/jun/02/glyn-hughes-obituary>earlier 
this year. In those last 12 months he seemed to have found a grace and 
contentment that is both humbling and inspiring, and I don't ever remember 
being as moved by a book of poems. I also want to mention a pamphlet,Pages from 
Bee Journal <http://www.seanborodale.com/beejournal.html> (Isinglass) by Sean 
Borodale. A lot of poets seem to be writing about bees these days, but like the 
honey he describes, "disconcerting, / solid broth / of forest flora full of 
fox", these are poems so dense and rich you could stand a spoon in them.

John Banville <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/johnbanville>
 Eileen Battersby, Ordinary Dogs 
Eileen Battersby's Ordinary Dogs  
<http://www.faber.co.uk/work/ordinary-dogs/9780571277834/>(Faber) must be the 
most reticent autobiography ever written, since the author is no more than a 
shadowy presence behind the figures of the two dogs, Bilbo and Frodo – "the 
guys", as she calls them – who shared her life for more than 20 years. It is a 
wonderful book, cleanly and honestly written, funny, wise and valiant, and 
entirely free of sentimentality.Writing Beckett's Letters 
<http://www.sylpheditions.com/Cahiers/16.html> by George Craig (Sylph Editions) 
is, strictly speaking, a pamphlet rather than a book, but it speaks volumes. 
Craig is the translator of the Beckett correspondence, the second volume of 
which was recently published, and his account of the joys and miseries of the 
task is elegant, exemplary and enlightening. In Harold Bloom'sThe Anatomy of 
Influence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/05/anatomy-influence-harold-bloom-review>
 (Yale) the great American critic returns to an old theme – artists form 
themselves out of an agon with their illustrious predecessors – and, in his 
80th year, is as provocative, as gloriously preposterous and as captivating as 
ever.

Julian Barnes <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/julianbarnes>
 Alice Munro, New Selected Stories 
Is there a better short story writer in the world than Alice Munro? In her New 
Selected Stories 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701179885>
 (Chatto & Windus) she gives the long story the meatiness of a novel, and moves 
through time with an ease few can match.The Wine of Solitude 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/14/wine-solitude-irene-nemirovsky-review>
 (Chatto & Windus) continues our rediscovery (in Sandra Smith's fine 
translations) ofIrène Némirovsky 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/irene-nemirovsky>'s work: it's an unerring 
portrait of a neglected, baleful and punitive daughter. Among homegrown 
fiction, I most admired Edward St Aubyn's At Last 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/may/08/at-last-edward-st-aubyn-review> 
(Picador), and Alan Hollinghurst'sThe Stranger's Child (Picador)  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/25/strangers-child-alan-hollinghurst-kunzru>
– the most originally and brilliantly structured novel I've read in a long time.

Sebastian Barry <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/sebastian-barry>
 Ali Smith, There But For The 
Seething with inventiveness, humanity, wit and language fit for the Big Rock 
Candy Mountain, indomitable and adroit, full of angelic swagger and pretend 
pratfalls, Ali Smith's gleamingThere but for the 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/01/ali-smith-there-but-for-the-review>
 (Hamish Hamilton) took the biscuit this year.

A book that moved the heart and soul and head down into a sombre gear, and 
recalled to some degree the purposes of Primo Levi – to shine a clear, bare 
light on what happened in historical darkness – Steve Sem-Sandberg's novelThe 
Emperor of Lies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jul/08/emperor-lies-steve-sem-sandberg-review>
(Faber) is both a remembrance of vanished evils, and a warning to modern kings 
and conquerors.

Belinda McKeon's subtle Solace 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/aug/12/solace-belinda-mckeon-review> 
(Picador) and Kevin Barry's rampagingCity of Bohane  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/may/14/city-bohane-kevin-barry-review>
(Jonathan Cape) put up two gallant new flags for the Irish novel.

William Boyd <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/william-boyd>
 Sarah Raven, Sarah Raven's Wild Flowers 
Sarah Raven's Wild Flowers  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408813942>
(Bloomsbury) is a complete delight. Massive, all-encompassing, superbly 
illustrated with Jonathan Buckley's photographs, it is clearly a labour of love 
– and the evidence of that is there on every page, not least in Raven's 
tirelessly informative, absolutely precise and beautifully vivid prose.

If Wild Flowers is the reference book of the year then Claire Tomalin's 
Charles Dickens: A Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/02/charles-dickens-life-tomalin-review>
 (Penguin Viking) takes the biography laurels. Written with immense knowledge 
and literary poise, it presents a portrait of the novelist unrivalled in its 
complex humanity. Dickens lives and breathes in these pages; Tomalin's 
instinctive grasp of the man himself is engrossing.

Seek out Jim Clark's Dream Repairman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/07/dream-repairman-jim-clark-review> 
(easily available online), one of the best books written about the movie 
business – but seen from the film editor's angle, which makes it very rare. 
Also very candid, very shrewd and very funny.

AS Byatt <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/asbyatt>
 Philip Hensher, King of the Badgers 
There but for the  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/01/ali-smith-there-but-for-the-review>
is a brilliant title for a brilliant novel. Ali Smith invents new forms of 
fiction in the interstices between parts of a sentence – commenting "but the 
thing I particularly like about the word but … is that it always takes you off 
to the side …" The story is about a man who leaves a tedious dinner party, 
locks himself into a bedroom and refuses to leave. His hostess calls in the 
press and he becomes a cause celebre. He is put together in a series of stories 
from different, tangential points of view. The novel is both funny and moving – 
it succeeds because of Smith's extraordinary skill with ordinary language. I 
also loved Philip Hensher'sKing of the Badgers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/mar/26/king-badgers-philip-hensher-review>
 (Fourth Estate), a tale about the disappearance of a child from an English 
coastal town. Hensher is both maliciously witty and ultimately generous – 
difficult to pull off, but he does it with authority.

Jonathan Coe <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/jonathancoe>
 Richard Lloyd Parry, People Who Eat Darkness: The Fate of Lucie Blackman 
People Who Eat Darkness 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/feb/27/people-who-eat-darkness-lucie-blackman-review>
 (Jonathan Cape) by Richard Lloyd Parry is a chilling account of the murder of 
Lucie Blackman in Japan 11 years ago. Parry shows a rare compassion and a 
refusal to judge: despite the horrors of the crime, almost the most upsetting 
feature of his story is the blameless ordinariness of the life Blackman left 
behind in England.

I thought the Man Booker judges – intentionally or not – played a brilliant 
game this year. They chose a diverse and challenging shortlist and then, having 
royally offended the literary establishment by excluding so many of their 
current favourites, they proceeded to wrongfoot everybody by choosing a winner 
of impeccable merit. Result! However, it's depressing to see that some novels 
continue simply to pass under the radar. In a year when the judges were looking 
for "readability" and books that "zip along", it was sad they overlooked a 
novel which had these qualities, as well as being wise, funny and sometimes 
distressing –It Had to Be You <http://www.davidnobbs.com/it-had-to-be-you.asp> 
(Harper), the 18th novel by David Nobbs. I'm sure they would have loved it if 
they had noticed it.

Julia Donaldson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/julia-donaldson>
 Nicola Killen, Fluff and Billy 
I was inspired to read Elen Caldecott's Operation Eiffel Tower 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408805732>
 (Bloomsbury) when I saw her talk about it at the Edinburgh book festival and 
was as entranced as all the eight-to-twelves. The book is about three siblings 
who try to raise money for their parents (on the verge of breaking up) to have 
a romantic weekend in Paris. Some scenes are funny (the children's attempted 
forgery is hilarious); others are poignant, particularly their visit to a B&B 
when they can't think what to say to their dad.

My favourite picture books were both about friendship. Fluff and Billy 
<http://nicolakillen.blogspot.com/2011/10/story-of-fluff-and-billy-part1-where.html>
 by Nicola Killen (Egmont), a young, simple story of two penguins who fall out 
and make up, has beautiful illustrations and a satisfying patterned text. The 
more sophisticatedI Don't Want to be a Pea! 
<http://www.annbonwill.com/id24.html> by Ann Bonwill and Simon Rickerty (OUP) 
features a hippo and a bird arguing about what to wear for a fancy-dress party. 
It's all in dialogue, so parents and children can have fun doing the voices.

Illustrated books don't have to be for the very young. A Monster Calls  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/may/07/monster-calls-patrick-ness-review>
by Patrick Ness and Siobhan Dowd (Walker) is a novel about a teenager whose 
mother is dying of cancer. The idea of a yew-tree monster telling stories to 
the boy was conceived by Dowd shortly before her own death. Ness responded to 
the challenge of writing the book. It's a powerful story, made unforgettable by 
Jim Kay's inky illustrations.

Roddy Doyle <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/roddydoyle>
 Daniel Woodrell, Outlaw Album 
We live in a time of deep recession but, here in Dublin, things still start 
at "brilliant" and work their way up.The Outlaw Album 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/sep/30/outlaw-album-daniel-woodrell-review>
 (Sceptre) is a collection of stories by one of the world's great novelists, 
Daniel Woodrell, and it's brilliant. I'm fond of big dark Russian books, so I 
loved Elif Batuman'sThe Possessed: Adventures with Russian Books and the People 
Who Read Them 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/10/elif-batuman-possessed-russian-literature>
 (Granta). It's exhilarating, funny and … brilliant. Jennifer Egan's novel,A 
Visit from the Goon Squad 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/02/jennifer-egan-goon-squad-review> 
(Corsair), is so good, so original, so surprising and wonderful – it's just 
absolutely fuckin' brilliant.

Margaret Drabble <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/margaret-drabble>
 Julian Barnes, The Sense of an Ending 
Two remarkable short novels, one of which won the Man Booker prize 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booker-prize>, one of which is yet to find a 
publisher, though it is so good it surely will. Julian Barnes'sThe Sense of an 
Ending 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jul/26/sense-ending-julian-barnes-review1>
 (Jonathan Cape) has rightly been highly praised for its economy and elegance. 
Some also found it funny, but I found it melancholy, as it explored paths not 
taken, disasters not averted, sadnesses never accommodated. I then read 
Barnes's short stories,Pulse 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jan/08/julian-barnes-pulse-rachel-cusk-review>
 (Jonathan Cape), some of which are wickedly funny, but I liked best the sad 
Scottish landscapes of "Marriage Lines". The unpublished novel by my Cambridge 
contemporary Bernadine Bishop is about bowel cancer, but it is not sad at all, 
it is full of wit, good humour, interesting characters, a wonderfully imagined 
baby, and a deftness of plotting that seems effortlessly natural. It's 
astonishingly fresh and real.

Helen Dunmore <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/helen-dunmore>
 Sean O'Brien, November 
November 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/10/sean-obrien-november-poetry-review>
 (Picador) by Sean O'Brien is a sombre and beautiful collection of poems, shot 
through with his sardonic humour. The elegies for his mother and father are 
perhaps the most moving poems that he has yet written, and, like the best of 
such poems, they are both intimate and universal.

Irène Némirovsky's The Wine of Solitude  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/14/wine-solitude-irene-nemirovsky-review>
is a brilliant coming-of-age novel and the most autobiographical of 
Némirovsky's works. Many people now knowSuite Française 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2006/mar/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview2>, 
but her other novels shouldn't be overshadowed by it. I particularly loved the 
scenes set in Finland during the civil war, and the portrait of a loveless 
relationship between a young girl and her mother. Némirovsky is so honest and 
she never fluffs a line.

Geoff Dyer <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/geoff-dyer>

I had some reservations about Pulphead 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/30/books/review/pulphead-by-john-jeremiah-sullivan-book-review.html?pagewanted=all>
, a collection of essays by John Jeremiah Sullivan (FSG, USA). TheDavid Foster 
Wallace <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/david-foster-wallace> influence seemed 
so pronounced, there was the conspicuously dubious taste and a fondness for 
deranged critical hyperbole – I mean, who would even bother to listen to Guns 
N' Roses, let alone claim that Axl Rose achieved "the greatest white male rock 
dance moment of the video age"? But then I thought: hey, what a great category 
of praise to invent! By then the DFW doubt had retired itself and JJS's prose 
was working its own hard-to-fathom magic. It has a ramshackle loquacity, a 
down-home hyper-eloquence and an off-the-wallishness that is almost lapidary. 
I'm still puzzling my way though the life – Sullivan was born and lives in the 
American South; as a teen he went through an evangelical Christian phase 
(beautifully revealed in the opening piece, "Upon this Rock") – and the writing 
that's resulting from it, but am feeling the way publishers do when they come 
across a new voice, fully formed and quite distinctive. Assuming a UK edition 
is forthcoming, might I pitch in with the suggestion that the cover features a
William Christenberry <http://www.christenberryonline.com/> photograph?

Jonathan Franzen <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/jonathan-franzen>
 Ben Lerner, Leaving the Atocha Station 
Ben Lerner's recent novel Leaving the Atocha Station 
<http://www.coffeehousepress.org/2011/06/leaving-the-atocha-station/> (Coffee 
House Press)and Joshua Cody's new memoir[sic] 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/nov/04/joshua-cody-sic-extract> 
(Bloomsbury) are undoubtedly the kind of books that the former Swedish Academy 
secretary Horace Engdahl had in mindwhen he faulted American authors 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2008/oct/01/us.literature.insular.nobel> for 
their insularity and self-involvement. Both books are also hilarious and 
cracklingly intelligent, fully alive and original in every sentence, and abuzz 
with the feel of our late-late-modern moment; and one senses that these are the 
qualities of American literature that actually annoyed Engdahl.

Leaving the Atocha Station is the story of a mentally unstable, 
substance-dependent young poet brilliantly and excruciatingly wasting a 
fellowship year in Madrid.[sic] is the story of a moderately depraved young 
musical prodigy who is suddenly stricken with near-fatal cancer. The former is 
worth whatever Amazonian contortions are required for a British reader to lay 
hands on it.

John Gray <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/johngray>
 Norman Davies, Vanished Kingdoms: The History of Half-Forgotten Europe 
Norman Davies's Vanished Kingdoms: The History of Half-Forgotten Europe 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/28/critical-eye-reviews-roundup> 
(Allen Lane) is many rare things, rolled into one. An exercise in salvage and 
retrieval, recalling from oblivion some of history's losers; an encyclopedia of 
unremembered Europe, recounting the stories of Europe's failed states, some 
never having had a chance of survival, others casualties of events or folly; a 
personal ramble, by a great historian, through some of the continent's lost 
byways – it's all of these, and a book that any reader interested in modern 
Europe will be sorry to finish. It's also – though Davies is too civilised and 
graceful a writer to labour the point – a warning. "Successful statehood," he 
writes, "is, in fact, a rare blessing." I only wish that this wonderfully 
exhilarating and melancholy book would be read by our leaders, and borne in 
mind when they next consider exporting our accidentally successful arrangements 
by military force to some other country.

David Hare <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/david-hare>
 Simon Hoggart, A Long Lunch: My Stories and I'm Sticking to Them 
The title of the biggest ego in American letters is never anyone's for long, 
but with her shameless book of essaysThe Professor and Other Writings 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/23/terry-castle-the-professor-review> 
(Harper) Terry Castle grabs the crown and hugs it to her. This is the critic as 
narcissist, literature just the stuff you stand on to get a better look in the 
mirror. But the techniques and strategies honed by such sumptuous self-love 
make this Stanford academic murderous when she sets about other great egos – 
chiefly those of her exes, her mother and Susan Sontag.

Two British memoirs seem reticent by comparison. Simon Hoggart denies that A 
Long Lunch 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781848543973>
 (John Murray) is an autobiography, but it clearly is, and all the better for 
being hilarious. Fascinating, the degree to which his time spent reporting 
Northern Ireland in the 1970s shaped Hoggart's valiant view of life. And 
Michael Frayn'sMy Father's Fortune: A Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/sep/04/michael-frayn-memoir-andrew-motion>
 (Faber) retrieves a complicated suburban childhood in Surrey in the 1940s. 
Everything about it rings familiar, funny and true.

Robert Harris 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2011/sep/23/life-writing-robert-harris>
 Alexandra Styron, Reading My Father: A Memoir 
I was fascinated by Alexandra Styron's memoir of William Styron, Reading My 
Father (Scribner) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781416591795/reading-my-father-a-memoir>
: an intimate and unsparing account of what it was like to be the youngest 
daughter not only of an illustrious novelist – difficult enough in itself, I 
would have thought – but of a profound depressive, who also seems to have been 
friends with just about everyone famous in America. Two novels published this 
year have particularly lingered in my mind: David Lodge's portrait of HG Wells, 
A Man of Parts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781846554964/a-man-of-parts>
 (Harvill Secker), succeeded in fusing the best bits of fiction and biography 
to bring the man and his erotic adventures to life; and Justin Cartwright's
Other People's Money  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781408803882/other-peoples-money>
(Bloomsbury) created a believable, fictional private bank on the brink of 
destruction. Finally, Max Hastings once again demonstrated his pre-eminence as 
a chronicler of the second world war withAll Hell Let Loose  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780007338092/all-hell-let-loose-the-world-at-war>
(Harper), a masterly one-volume account of that epic conflict – a book which 
the rulers of Europe would do well to read at the end of this melancholy year.

Eric Hobsbawm
 Owen Jones, Chavs: The Demonization of the Working Class 
Among the 2011 books that came my way I particularly welcomed Owen Jones's 
Chavs (Verso), a passionate and well-documented denunciation of the upper-class 
contempt for the proles that has recently become so visible in the British 
class system. Unaccountably neglected, Göran Therborn'sThe World: A Beginners 
Guide (Polity), a survey of the present state, problems and outlook of the 
globe by a Swedish master sociologist, is one of the rare books that lives up 
to its title. It is lucid, intelligent about the future and admirably 
researched. The book I have enjoyed most is Karl Miller'sTretower to Clyro 
(Quercus), a collection of characteristically pawky essays by one of the great 
literary editors of our time, combined with a wonderful account of explorations 
à trois of the Celtic parts of Great Britain.

Alan Hollinghurst <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/alanhollinghurst>
 Susie Harries, Nikolaus Pevsner: The Life 
Two books this year gave me the almost dreamlike pleasure of finding out 
things that I'd long wanted to know.Susie Harries's Nikolaus Pevsner (Chatto) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/sep/09/nikolaus-pevsner-life-harries-review>
 may justly be subtitled "The Life": it shows a complete mastery of the many 
different areas, cultural, political and artistic, in which this complex and 
essential figure moved and made his mark. The book's very fitting scale and 
tirelessness are more than matched by its wit, subtlety and human 
understanding. InDuncan Fallowell's How to Disappear (Ditto) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780956795236/how-to-disappear-a-memoir-for-misfits>
 travel and its chance encounters provide the pretext for pursuit of much more 
marginal figures: in "Who was Alastair Graham?" he explores the post-Oxford 
life of Evelyn Waugh's Oxford boyfriend in a way that throws light into dim 
corners of British social history. In "The Curious Case of Bapsy Pavry", an 
Indian lady who became the Marchioness of Winchester and lived out a long 
widowhood in a Firbankian fantasy of social aspiration is chased down with a 
tenderly marvelling mordancy that is a keynote of Fallowell's brilliant and 
haunting book.

Michael Holroyd <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/michael-holroyd>
 Alan Hollinghurst, The Stranger's Child 
Alan Hollinghurst's novel The Stranger's Child 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/17/strangers-child-alan-hollinghurst-review>
 tracks the cultural, sexual, biographical and social changes that took place 
in 20th-century Britain. He has a versatile wit and enjoys playing with figures 
from the past as well as with his readers, teasing them and misleading them 
until, drawn into the story, they almost become additional characters in it. 
This is a modern version of the novel EM Forster would have wished to write.

A most ingenious and original solution to the moral and aesthetic problems 
thrown up by the cult of biographical fiction is given in John Spurling'sA Book 
of Liszts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/17/book-liszt-john-spurling-review> 
(Seagull Books) – a brilliant set of supple variations encircling the life and 
career of the great virtuoso Franz Liszt. Those who believe that such 
speculative and experimental hybrids mark the end of more traditional biography 
should read Fiona MacCarthy's wonderful The Last Pre-Raphaelite: Edward 
Burne-Jones and the Victorian Imagination  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2011/aug/25/last-pre-raphaelite-maccarthy-review>
(Faber). This is a perfect coming together of biographer and subject.

Nick Hornby <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/nickhornby>
 Claire Tomalin, Charles Dickens: A Life 
Everyone else will pick Claire Tomalin's superb Charles Dickens, so I won't. 
But I've read three terrific novels this year, all of them funny, all of them 
sad. Joe Dunthorne'sWild Abandon  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jul/29/wild-abandon-joe-dunthorne-review>
(Hamish Hamilton), like Kevin Wilson'sThe Family Fang 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk:80/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447202387>
 (Picador), is about what happens to children when parents become consumed by 
their beliefs. InWild Abandon it's communal living that causes all the trouble, 
inThe Family Fang it's performance art; both books are populated by flawed, 
occasionally exasperating, lovable and, above all, thoroughly imagined 
characters. James Hynes'sNext (Reagan Arthur) is, mystifyingly, still without a 
publisher in the UK, but don't let that put you off. It's dark, comic, real 
and, in the end, terrifying, and there are many, many men in their late 40s and 
50s who would wince with recognition at Hynes's Kevin Quinn.

Hampton Sides's Hellhound on His Trail (Allen Lane) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/jun/06/hellbound-trail-hampton-sides>, a 
gripping account of the hunt for James Earl Ray, reminds us once again that a 
lot of Americans in the 1960s were living through a nightmare, not through a 
long, dreamy summer of love.

Hari Kunzru <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/harikunzru>
 Teju Cole, Open City 
As ever a lot of my reading has been books that haven't been released this 
year – many titles in the wonderfulNew York Review Books classics series 
<http://www.nybooks.com/books/imprints/classics/>, whose multicoloured spines 
now take up a good two feet of bookshelf in my apartment. Teju Cole'sOpen City 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/aug/17/open-city-teju-cole-review> 
(Faber), a Sebaldesque wander through New York, and Hisham Matar'sAnatomy of a 
Disappearance  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/feb/26/anatomy-disappearance-hisham-matar-review>
(Viking) both stood out in fiction, as did David Foster Wallace's unfinishedThe 
Pale King 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/16/pale-king-david-foster-wallace-review>
 (Hamish Hamilton). I also enjoyed McKenzie Wark's tour through the legacy of 
Situationism,The Beach Beneath the Street 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/aug/18/situationist-international-mckenzie-wark-review>
 (Verso), and Manuel DeLanda's attempt at a unified description of everything in
Philosophy and Simulation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/02/setevn-poole-nonfiction-roundup-review>
 (Continuum). Sonia Faleiro'sBeautiful Thing: Inside the Secret World of Bombay 
Dance Bars  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jul/29/beautiful-thing-sonia-faleiro-review>
(Canongate) also did what every good piece of reportage ought to – took me to a 
place I couldn't have gone by myself.

Hanif Kureishi <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/hanifkureishi>
 Hanan Al-Shaykh, One Thousand and One Nights 
Hanan Al-Shaykh's vivid "reimagining" of the One Thousand and One Nights  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408826041>
(Bloomsbury) is a treat and a trap for story lovers. Like a contemporary 
Shahrazad, Al-Shaykh has rendered 19 little masterpieces into a wondrously 
warm, ribald and hilarious concoction, reminding us of how bang up to date 
these stories can be.

If we might forget how central these tales are to our culture, Marina Warner's 
wondrousStranger Magic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/nov/11/stranger-magic-marina-warner-review>
 (Chatto & Windus) is a scholarly excursion around some of the stories, her 
mind as rich and fascinating as the stories themselves, taking us on a magic 
carpet from Borges and Goethe, to Edward Said and the movies.

In his magisterial What is Madness? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/sep/29/what-madness-darian-leader-review> 
(Hamish Hamilton), Darian Leader explains that the "irrational" delusions and 
hallucinations of the mad are their attempts at sense: a good story is a good 
symptom, and can make a life possible. As Virginia Woolf said: "The whole world 
is a work of art."

John Lanchester <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/john-lanchester>
 Nicola Shulman, Graven with Diamonds 
Non-fiction: I loved two very different books of criticism, Nicola Shulman's 
beautifully lucid study of Thomas Wyatt,Graven with Diamonds 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/24/thomas-wyatt-nicola-shulman-review>
 (Short Books), and Owen Hatherley's furiously pro-ModernistA Guide to the New 
Ruins of Britain (Verso) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/oct/23/ruins-britain-owen-hatherley-review>
.Daniel Kahneman's Thinking, Fast and Slow  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781846140556/thinking-fast-and-slow>
(Allen Lane) seems to me a genuinely important book. Fiction: A four-way tie 
betweenJonathan Franzen's Freedom 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780007269754/freedom> 
(Fourth Estate), Jennifer Egan'sA Visit from the Goon Squad, Tom Rachman's The 
Imperfectionists 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781849160292/the-imperfectionists>
 (Quercus), andChad Harbach's The Art of Fielding 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780007418695/the-art-of-fielding>
 (Fourth Estate, January). Guilty pleasure: George RR Martin's fantasy sequence 
A Song of Fire and Ice. I'm now on volume five, A Dance with Dragons 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780002247399/a-dance-with-dragons-book-of-a-song-of-ice-and-fire>
 (HarperVoyager), and fear the withdrawal symptoms when it's finished.

Mark Lawson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/marklawson>
 Jeffrey Eugenides, The Marriage Plot 
Belatedly and deservedly, this was the year of Julian Barnes: winner of the 
Man Booker <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booker-prize> and the David Cohen 
prizes 
<http://www.booktrust.org.uk/Prizes-and-awards/David-Cohen-Prize-for-Literature>
and shortlisted for theCosta <http://www.costabookawards.com/> – as close as a 
Leicester City fan will get to doing the triple. Although ideally, for literary 
posterity, Barnes's mastery of the short form inThe Sense of an Ending 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jul/26/sense-ending-julian-barnes-review1>
 would have seen a Nadal-Federer showdown in the Booker finals with Alan 
Hollinghurst's mastery of the long form inThe Stranger's Child 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/17/strangers-child-alan-hollinghurst-review>
. In a UK-US prize, they could also have slugged it out with The Marriage Plot  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/12/marriage-plot-jeffrey-eugenides-review>
(Fourth Estate), with which Jeffrey Eugenides again showed the benefits of 
taking almost a decade between books. Two great veterans of the suspense form 
made us glad that there's no gold watch or golden handshake for novelists: PD 
James withDeath Comes to Pemberley 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/nov/11/critical-eye-books-reviews-roundup>
 (Faber) and Umberto Eco'sThe Prague Cemetery 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/nov/04/prague-cemetery-umberto-eco-review>
(Harvill Secker). David Lodge wrote a fine novel in the form of a literary 
biography – anatomising HG Wells inA Man of Parts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/10/man-parts-david-lodge-review> – 
and Jeanette Winterson an extraordinary tragic-comic literary autobiography:Why 
Be Happy When You Could Be Normal? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/nov/04/why-be-happy-jeanette-winterson-review>
 (Jonathan Cape).

David Lodge <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/davidlodge>
 Jennifer Egan, A Visit From the Goon Squad 
Jennifer Egan's A Visit from the Goon Squad  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/02/jennifer-egan-goon-squad-review> 
revived memories of the days, decades ago, when American fiction seemed so much 
more vital and innovative than our own. It is unusual in structure, presenting 
a number of stories, most of them about people in the music business, which 
seem to be freestanding but prove to have surprising connections with each 
other, and the style effortlessly hits its targets again and again. Raymond 
Tallis'sAping Mankind: Neuromania, Darwinitis, and the Misrepresentation of 
Humanity 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/aug/07/aping-mankind-raymond-tallis-review>
(Acumen) is a trenchant, lucid and witty attack on the reductive materialism of 
many scientific accounts of consciousness – not from a religious point of view, 
but that of an atheist humanist with a distinguished record in medicine and 
neuroscience. The book that gave me most pleasure, however, was one I bought in 
2010 and didn't get round to reading until this year. Philip Larkin'sLetters to 
Monica 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/aug/04/letters-monica-philip-larkin-review>
, edited by Anthony Thwaite (Faber), make a remarkable human document that is, 
by turns, bad-tempered, self-lacerating, tender, sad and irresistibly funny.

Robert Macfarlane
 Philip Connors, Fire Season: Field Notes from a Wilderness Lookout 
Two books of fire and one of water: Philip Connors's Fire Season (Picador) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/scienceandnature/9780230758018/fire-season-field-notes-from-a-wilderness-lookout>
, about his seasons spent as a fire-watcher in the Gila Wilderness; Jocelyn 
Brooke's cracklingly bizarreThe Military Orchid 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780141187136/the-military-orchid-and-other-novels>
, a memoir-satire-nature-quest about orchids and home-made fireworks, first 
published in 1948, and just reissued in a beautiful edition by Little Toller 
Press; and Susie Parr'sThe Story of Swimming (Dewi Lewis) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/sportandleisure/9781905928071/the-story-of-swimming>
, a superbly illustrated cultural history of bathing – dipping, watering, wild 
swimming – in Britain. I also greatly admired Matthew Hollis's biography of 
Edward Thomas,Now All Roads Lead to France (Faber) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780571245987/now-all-roads-lead-to-france-the-last-years-of-edward-thomas>
, and was fascinated by much of the work gathered in Harriet Tarlo's anthology 
of experimental landscape poetry,The Ground Aslant (Shearsman).

Hilary Mantel <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/hilary-mantel>
 Thomas Penn, Winter King: The Dawn of Tudor England 
Two history books written with flair and dash, both gripping and enjoyable, 
both filling gaps in the imagination. Thomas Penn'sWinter King 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/16/winter-king-thomas-penn-review> is 
a lively and alarming study of the strange and ferocious Henry VII, the first 
Tudor king. Helen Castor'sShe-Wolves  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/nov/06/she-wolves-helen-castor-review>
(Faber) is subtitledThe Women Who Ruled England before Elizabeth, and includes 
a fascinating study of Margaret of Anjou, who rages through Shakespeare's 
history plays, dauntless and ferociously energetic, battling on behalf of her 
fragile husband Henry VI. Penn shows us how an instinctive Machiavellian with a 
feeble claim to kingship transformed himself into a despot and founded a 
dynasty. Castor shows how her heroines fought and flourished, despite the 
affront to the moral order represented by women on the battlefield and women on 
the throne.

Pankaj Mishra <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/pankajmishra>
 Aravind Adiga, Last Man in Tower 
In 15th-century Benares, the iconoclastic Indian poet Kabi inadvertently began 
one of the world's oldest literary collaborative projects. The poems attributed 
to him have been enriched by the renderings of Ezra Pound and Czesław Miłosz as 
well as those of Rajasthan's bard singers. A stylishly contemporary 
contribution to this work-in-progress isSongs of Kabir 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/poetry/9781590173794/songs-of-kabir>
, the translations by the poet and essayist Arvind Krishna Mehrotra (NYRB 
Classics).Yu Hua's China in Ten Words 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780307379351/china-in-ten-words>
(Pantheon) offers something very rare: a boldly ironic, even caustic, 
perspective on Chinese society by a literary novelist still resident in China 
and privy to its innermost everyday tensions. Liberalism: A Counter-History  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/philosophy/9781844676934/liberalism-a-counter-history>
by Domenico Losurdo (Verso) stimulatingly uncovers the contradictions of an 
ideology that is much too self-righteously invoked. I also enjoyed Aravind 
Adiga's novelLast Man in Tower 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781848875166/last-man-in-tower>
 (Atlantic) and Gyan Prakash's essayMumbai Fables (Princeton) – both books set 
in Mumbai and exceptionally alert to the exuberance and malignity of the city's 
gangsterish capitalism.

Lorrie Moore <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/lorrie-moore>
 Ta Obreht, Tea Obreht, The Tiger's Wife 
I read two books that won prizes in the UK this year, Tea Obreht's The Tiger's 
Wife 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780297859017/the-tigers-wife>
 (Phoenix) and Julian Barnes'sThe Sense of an Ending, and found them 
exquisitely written and deeply engaging. Obreht's novel is written so 
authoritatively if obliquely, one of its themes being what it is to have once 
been on the right side of history and then find oneself later on the wrong, but 
the writing, sentence by sentence, is what really impresses. The same is true of
The Sense of an Ending, with which in some ways it shares a theme.

Blake Morrison <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/blakemorrison>
 Christopher Hitchens, Arguably 
In his polemic Reality Hunger (Penguin), David Shields argues for the 
pleasures of the "lyric essay" – part-autobiographical, part-narrative, 
part-intellectual inquiry. Three collections of essays this year help his case. 
First, Caryl Phillips's Colour Me English (Harvill Secker) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846553059>
, which reflects on race, migration, Islamophobia and (in one scary essay) 
mountaineering, with telling passages on his upbringing in Leeds in the 1960s 
and arrival in New York round 9/11. Second,Tretower to Clyro, in which Karl 
Miller celebrates country themes (from lambs to foxes) and country writers 
(from John McGahern to Ted Hughes); there's the bonus of a long preface by 
Andrew O'Hagan, describing journeys to the Celtic fringes that he and Miller 
took with Seamus Heaney. Third,Arguably by Christopher Hitchens (Atlantic) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780857892553/arguably-selected-prose>
, a selection from one of the great polemical journalists of our age and the 
ideal complement to his memoir of last yearHitch 22 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/businessandfinance/9781843549222/hitch-a-memoir>
 (Atlantic).

The most chilling full-length work of non-fiction I read this year was Richard 
Lloyd Parry'sPeople Who Eat Darkness 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780224079174/people-who-eat-darkness-the-fate-of-lucie-blackman>
, about the murder of Lucie Blackman in Tokyo.

Patrick Ness <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/patrickness>
 Ali Smith, There But For The 
By far the best novel I read this year – and I read the entire Booker longlist 
out of increasingly perplexed curiosity – was Ali Smith'sThere but for the
. It's smart, warm, experimental, and surprisingly moving; I'm 
dismayed it hasn't received more recognition. Jennifer Egan'sA Visit From the 
Goon Squad, on the other hand, has taken numerous awards, but deserves every 
one. It's the first book in a long time that made me jealous. And for adults, 
for teenagers, for anyone at all,Mal Peet's Life: An Exploded Diagram 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781844281008/life-an-exploded-diagram>
 (Walker Books) must be sought out. Concerning the pursuit of virginity loss in 
1960s Norfolk against the background of the Cuban missile crisis, it's fresh, 
vital and with an ending that still stuns, 11 months after I read it.

David Nicholls <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/david-nicholls>
 Jennifer Egan, A Visit From the Goon Squad 
Jennifer Egan's A Visit from the Goon Squad managed to be both inventive and 
hugely entertaining, and I also enjoyed Edward St Aubyn'sAt Last, the final 
instalment of the consistently excellent Patrick Melrose series. Read them all, 
now. Stewart Lee'sHow I Escaped My Certain Fate 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780571254811/how-i-escaped-my-certain-fate>
 (Faber) restored at least a little of my faith in stand-up comedy, and two 
current reads are late additions to the list of favourites; Claire Tomalin's 
admirably brisk and entertainingDickens biography and Craig Taylor's Londoners 
(Granta)an epic portrait in eighty voices that shows the city to be just as … 
well … Dickensian as it has ever been.

Jeremy Paxman <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/jeremy-paxman>
 Jamil Ahmad, The Wandering Falcon 
The most memorable fiction I read this year was Jamil Ahmad's The Wandering 
Falcon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/25/wandering-falcon-jamil-ahmad-review>
 (Hamish Hamilton), a series of loosely connected stories set on the frontiers 
of Pakistan, Iran and Afghanistan. The author was nearly 80 before his book was 
published, having spent his working life among the tribes of Balochistan, whose 
stories he obviously absorbed over the years. In this captivating book you can 
feel them blow off the page like dry desert air.

Steven Pinker <http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/steven-pinker>
 Matthew White, Atrocitology: Humanity's 100 Deadliest Achievements 
Roy F Baumeister and John Tierney, Willpower 
<http://www.penguin.co.uk/nf/Book/BookDisplay/0,,9780141961644,00.html> (Allen 
Lane). The counterculture was wrong: your problem is not that you're uptight 
and repressed and should let it all hang out, but that you're profligate and 
impulsive and need to bulk up your self-control. Baumeister's ingenious 
experiments, enlivened with Tierney's vignettes from history and technology, 
show you how. Joshua S Goldstein,Winning the War on War 
<http://winningthewaronwar.com/> (Dutton); John Mueller, War and Ideas 
<http://www.routledge.com/books/details/9780415781770/> (Routledge); Andrew 
Mack,Human Security Report 2009/2010 
<http://www.hsrgroup.org/human-security-reports/20092010/overview.aspx> (OUP 
USA). Believe it or not, war is going out of style, according to these updates 
from some of the sources I used in my own recent book. Matthew White,
Atrocitology 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857861221>
 (Canongate). A serious book, written with a light touch, on the hundred worst 
things humans have done to each other (that we know of). Erica Chenoweth and 
Maria J Stephan, Why Civil Resistance Works 
<http://echenoweth.faculty.wesleyan.edu/wcrw/> (Columbia). Gandhi was right, 
not just morally but empirically: nonviolent resistance is three times more 
effective than violence.

Craig Raine
 Alice Oswald, Memorial 
In Alice Oswald's Homer (Memorial 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/02/memorial-alice-oswald-review>, 
Faber), the nameless are named. Oswald has excised the main Homeric narrative – 
Achilles, Patroclus, Agamemnon, Helen, Paris. True, Hector gets a mention, but 
only to say that he, too, died like the little people, the bit-players who bite 
the dust. Homer's brief lives: "Euphorbus died / Leaving his silver hairclip on 
the battlefield." Oswald shares with Christopher Logue fearless anachronism – 
Oswald's Hector, "Like a man rushing in leaving his motorbike running" – but
Memorial, though good, isn't a patch on Logue's Homer. A better editor would 
have dissuaded her from monotonously repeating her epic similes. Towards the 
end, there are 10 unrepeated similes. So the final, 11th simile, which closes 
the poem, is the more forceful for being repeated – like a closing, extended 
chord. And it is brilliant in its own right: a shooting star as a "whip of 
stars".Memorial has 15 or so perfect touches that show Oswald to be a 
considerable poet: for example "flower-lit cliffs", "the darkness hit him with 
a dull clang", the sea "just lifted and flattened lifted and flattened", "fire 
with its loose hair flying rushes through a city".

Kamila Shamsie <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/kamilashamsie>
 Michael Ondaatje, The Cat's Table 
It's impossible to explain through any discussion of plot and character the 
hypnotic brilliance ofMichael Ondaatje's The Cat's Table 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780224093613/the-cats-table>
 (Jonathan Cape). The joy of boyhood and the darkness at its edges are conveyed 
in scenes of extraordinary imagination – boys lashed to a deck in a storm, a 
dog biting down on the throat of a man, a girl skating across the deck of a 
ship in the early morning, a prisoner in chains walking its length at night. It 
is entirely … well, Ondaatje-esque.

Helen Simpson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/helen-simpson>
 Yiyun Li, Gold Boy, Emerald Girl 
Among the best collections of short stories I've read this year is Olive 
Kitteridge by Elizabeth Strout 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780743467728/olive-kitteridge-a-novel-in-stories>
 (Pocket Books), where the form is used to explore character in a way I haven't 
seen done before, examining the heroine from story to story via different 
viewpoints and time perspectives. Yiyun Li'sGold Boy, Emerald Girl 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/sep/11/gold-boy-emerald-girl-yiyun-li> 
(Fourth Estate) tells sad, graceful stories of love and savage loneliness, 
beginning with the haunting almost-novella-length "Kindness". The title story 
of Margaret Drabble'sA Day in the Life of a Smiling Woman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/30/margaret-drabble-smiling-woman-review>
 (Penguin Classic) is worth the cover price alone. After several novels Sarah 
Hall has this year publishedThe Beautiful Indifference 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/short-stories/9780571230174/the-beautiful-indifference>
 (Faber), seven skilfully adrenalised stories, precise and sensual, in which 
the scent of violence is a constant. And from half a century ago comes Vasily 
Grossman'sThe Road (Quercus), whose title story can be read as a 4,000-word 
distillation of his epic novelLife and Fate 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780099506164/life-and-fate> 
(Vintage), written the year following the confiscation of that novel's 
typescript by the Soviet authorities.

Ahdaf Soueif <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/ahdafsoueif>

I'm delighted to see Selma Dabbagh's book Out of It  
<http://www.selmadabbagh.com/out_of_it_novel.html>published (Bloomsbury). 
Driven, fast-paced, edgy, this is Dabbagh's first novel – although she's 
written excellent short stories. A narrative of Gaza, it brings a very welcome 
new voice and a new consciousness to the Palestinian story.

Amjad Naser's Haythu la Tasqut al-Amtar, or Where the Rain doesn't Fall (Dar 
al-Adab, Beirut), is one of the best books I've read in a long time. Naser is 
an inspired poet and this work takes the precision and economy of his language 
into prose narrative for the first time. Gentle, sad, hopeful – a poet writing 
prose at his mature best. Watch out for the English translation. I'm reading 
Chris Harman's A People's History of the World  
<http://www.versobooks.com/books/315-a-peoples-history-of-the-world>(Verso). 
It's really helpful to zoom out from time to time when you're living massive 
events at very close quarters.

For bilingual readers I cannot end without mentioning Tamim al-Barghouti and 
Amin Haddad's poems born of the Egyptian revolution – even though they are as 
yet uncollected. These were the poems that were read and sung in Tahrir Square 
and the other public spaces of Egypt. They still keep us going.

Colm Tóibín
 Joan Didion, Blue Nights 
Three books by literary stylists which dealt with grief and loss raised 
fascinating questions about style and tone and storytelling under fierce 
pressure. I found all three books affecting and disturbing. One was Joan 
Didion'sBlue Nights 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/nov/11/blue-nights-joan-didion-review> 
(Fourth Estate), which is even more raw and filled with loss than her previous 
memoir; the second is Francisco Goldman'sSay Her Name 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/aug/05/say-name-francisco-goldman-review> 
(Grove Press), a masterpiece of storytelling and scene-setting; the third is 
Gjertrud Schnackenberg'sHeavenly Questions 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/07/heavenly-questions-gjertrud-schnackenberg-poetry-review>
 (Bloodaxe), poems with her customary eloquence and gravity now filled with 
shock and hurt, certainly the most beautiful work she has made. In the 
meantime, Jeffrey Eugenides and Alan Hollinghurst produced two supremely 
confident novels; their ambiguous versions of destiny and desire inThe Marriage 
Plot  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/12/marriage-plot-jeffrey-eugenides-review>
andThe Stranger's Child 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/17/strangers-child-alan-hollinghurst-review>
 made me laugh at certain moments and sit up and shiver at others.

Rose Tremain <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/rosetremain>
 Andrew Miller, Pure 
Two historical novels achieve quiet distinction this year: Andrew Miller's Pure
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/24/pure-andrew-miller-review> 
(Sceptre) and Barry Unsworth'sThe Quality of Mercy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/sep/16/quality-mercy-barry-unsworth-review>
 (Hutchinson). While Miller's prose is poetic and impressionistic, Unsworth's 
is formal and dense, yet both novels unfold highly dramatic stories in a 
measured and unfussy way.Pure gives to a young engineer, Jean-Baptiste Baratte, 
the gruesome task of digging up and carting away the mountains of the dead who 
lie in the Cemetery of Les Innocents in Paris in 1785, polluting its 
surrounding air and water. Over Baratte's terrible enterprise lies the shadow 
of the coming revolution, thus giving to Miller's vivid images of 
"purification" a fine historical ambiguity. Unsworth's novel, picking up the 
story of the 18th century slave-ship mutiny told in Sacred Hunger, has Erasmus 
Kemp, son of the disgraced ship owner, trying to bring the mutineers to trial 
in England, but finding himself thwarted not only by one slippery fugitive, but 
also by his own conscience, made suddenly manifest to him by his love for the 
reforming sister of a liberal lawyer. Both books are notable for their subtle 
meditations on kindness and compassion.

Jeanette Winterson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/jeanettewinterson>
 Carol Ann Duffy, The Bees 
Carol Ann Duffy, The Bees 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/nov/04/bees-carol-ann-duffy-review> 
(Picador). Take one line, "What will you do with the gift of your left life?" 
Beautiful and moving poetry for the real world.

Ali Smith, There but for the 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/01/ali-smith-there-but-for-the-review>
. What would you do if an uninvited guest locked himself in the bathroom and 
refused to come out? She writes so well, distinctive, a bit crazy, compelling 
in the way that language should be, with surprises everywhere.

Darian Leader, What Is Madness?  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/sep/29/what-madness-darian-leader-review>
Our madness-measure is always changing. This is a thought-provoking book about 
how we diagnose and differentiate our many kinds of insanities. In spite of the 
Freud/Lacan obsession with the phallus as a central psychic symbol (oy vey), 
this is a book posing necessary questions and offering genuine insights.

Leo Hollis, The Stones of London: A History in Twelve Buildings 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Stones-London-History-Buildings-ebook/dp/B004WJRU1W> 
(Weidenfeld & Nicolson). A clever tour through London's long life using her 
built architecture and the stories found there. From Westminster Abbey through 
Regent Street and Wembley Stadium to the Gherkin. Absorbing and enjoyable.
• Compiled by Ginny Hooker.

• To order books mentioned, with free UK p&p, call Guardian book service on 
0330 333 6846 or go to guardian.co.uk/bookshop

• What have you enjoyed reading in the past 12 months? Send us your 
recommendations (including details of the publisher) in no more than 150 words, 
by email to readers.books@guardian.co.uk or write to us at Readers' Books of 
the Year, Review, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, to 
arrive no later than Sunday 11 December. We would most like to hear about 
recent titles. Please include a postal address and telephone number or email 
address. We will publish a selection of your choices in the paper and on the 
website –or join the books of the year debate here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2011/nov/25/your-books-of-2011>
 