
A burst of 13 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Google Reader and other customer tragedies >> Hal's (Im)Perfect Vision 
<http://hal2020.com/2013/03/30/google-reader-and-other-customer-tragedies/>

Hal Berenson: 

From a business standpoint why should Google have kept Reader alive? One 
reason really, that "Google Account" is super-valuable. It is a means for 
getting someone to use other services. Moreover, it is the ultimate means of 
performing tracking. As long as I'm logged in to a Google Account while using 
Google services, including search, they can track my behavior. And because it 
is first party none of the attempts to block that tracking apply. TPLs? They 
don't apply to First Party cookies. Safari and other browsers' outright blocks 
on Third Party cookie? No effect on First Party tracking. Identities are 
important, andGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> seems to 
have forgotten that.

Very thoughtful post about the management cost of having many services. Be 
sure to read his postscript too.

2 Letters from Steve >> David Gelphman's Blog 
<http://davidgelphman.wordpress.com/2013/03/29/2-letters-from-steve/>

During the 12+ years I worked at Apple I never met with Steve Jobs for work 
purposes. Of course like allApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>
 employees I saw Steve in Caffé Macs or walking with Jony Ive around the 
courtyard inside the Infinite Loop campus. And of course there were Comm 
meetings that he would run. But I didn't have any direct contact. Until…

 
In March 2010, just a couple of weeks before the iPad was due to be released 
publicly, I had a reason to contact Steve. A friend of mine was dying of liver 
disease and I was going to San Francisco to hopefully see and communicate with 
her while it was still possible. She was a friend from my Adobe days and was 
very much into technology. I thought it would be a treat for her to see an 
iPad. And I had one. But until the product was officially released I could not 
show it to anyone without permission from Apple management.

Lots of elements in this story are intriguing: rules, who gets to bypass 
rules, speed of response among others.

Blackberry Q10 hands-on >> Wireless Worker 
<http://wirelessworker.net/blog/2013/2/blackberry-q10-hands-on>

Ben Smith was at MWC and tried out a prototype of the QWERTY BB10 product, 
which he liked. However:

Blackberry staff said they expected many customers to switch to full-touch 
quickly - they're clearly very confident in the firm's new soft keyboard. It 
was suggested that - for many - the Q10 may be a transition step. That may be 
the case, but for those (myself included) who prefer a hardware keyboard for 
messaging this looks promising.

Very slightly larger keys - will that make people more accurate?

Huge construction firm uses iPads and Apple TV to save millions >> CITEworld 
<http://www.citeworld.com/tablets/21639/balfour-beatty-dfw-airport-ipads>

With architectural and planning documents that would otherwise run to 60,000 
pages...

The system is centered on a PC in a work trailer with a wired connection to 
the Internet. Managers use that computer to make major changes to plans using a 
PDF-editing program from Bluebeam, or to upload new files. This data is synced 
back to Egnyte's cloud over the fast wired connection. Then, workers in the 
field can use the iPads and a Wi-Fi connection to get the latest, most 
up-to-date versions of relevant plans from Egnyte's cloud. They can also mark 
up plans and take photos of the work site.

Along with the iPads, Pistor set up two digital plan tables on the site. 
Normal plan tables consist of a big angled slab where workers gather around to 
consult architectural plans on paper. These digital plan tables include a pair 
of 55in monitors connected to a PC that's wired to the local network, as well 
as an Apple TV box. Workers can walk up to the table, connect their iPads 
wirelessly through the Apple TV to the monitor, and discuss what they're 
looking at on the big monitors.

The "Cite" in "Citeworld" is "Consumer IT in the enterprise".

A PC and Tablet 'brick' for the price of one >> WSJ.com 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323415304578370331945503470.html?mod=WSJ_Tech_Europe_INTL_LSMODULE>

Katherine Boehret: 

As the [Asus] Transformer's [AIO] name suggests, it also transforms into 
another device: Pull up on the PC screen to separate it from its stand and it 
becomes a tablet you can move around the house. It has a handle and a kickstand 
for propping up on flat surfaces. Like the desktop version, the tablet runs two 
systems: Windows 8 Remote and Jelly Bean 4.1.

Though this concept sounds smart, it's laughable in practice. The screen 
measures a whopping 18.4in diagonally and weighs an arm-straining 5.3lb. 
Apple's iPad screen measures 9.7in and weighs 1.4lb; Samsung's Galaxy Tab 2 has 
a 7in screen and weighs 0.8lb. At home, carrying this around and using it on my 
lap elicited fits of laughter from my husband. When I flipped the tablet into 
vertical mode, it looked like I was reading from a giant, stone tablet. And in 
Android mode, the tablet's battery only lasted five hours.

Start Up Tech - All For A Little Over £500 >> Emer Coleman 
<http://www.emercoleman.com/2/post/2013/03/start-up-tech-all-for-a-little-over-500.html>

Formerly of the London Datastore, and Government Data Service, now setting up 
on her own:

The first thing my mother asked when I told her I was setting up my own company
DSRPTN <http://disruptionltd.com/> was "but who will do your filing for you?" I 
had to tell her that I could not remember the last time that I actually filed 
anything physically. She was also concerned about where my office would be 
located because it's difficult to grasp that setting up your own business can 
be a very easy process and all you really need is a few bits of good kit.

Fascinating choices, especially of carrier.

Taking a stand on open source and patents >> Google Open Source blog 
<http://google-opensource.blogspot.co.uk/2013/03/taking-stand-on-open-source-and-patents.html>

Today, we're taking another step towards that goal [of an open internet] by 
announcing theOpen Patent Non-Assertion (OPN) Pledge 
<http://www.google.com/patents/opnpledge/>: we pledge not to sue any user, 
distributor or developer of open-source software on specified patents, unless 
first attacked.

We've begun by identifying 10 patents 
<http://www.google.com/patents/opnpledge/patents/> relating to MapReduce 
<http://research.google.com/archive/mapreduce.html>, a computing model for 
processing large data sets first developed at Google—open-source versions of 
which are now widely used. Over time, we intend to expand the set of Google's 
patents covered by the pledge to other technologies.



With 18,000 or so patents to choose from.. how about the next ones are 
Motorola's Wi-Fi and H.264 patents?

Password denied: when will Apple get serious about security? >> The Verge 
<http://www.theverge.com/2013/3/29/4158594/password-denied-when-will-apple-get-serious-about-security>

When Ars Technica investigated security issues in iCloud 
<http://arstechnica.com/apple/2012/03/how-safe-is-icloud-data-ars-investigates/>
 last year, it found that "your data isat least as safe as it is when stored on 
any remote server, if not more so," but that its weaknesses lay in Apple's lack 
of disclosure of its security processes (evenArs' assessment depends on a fair 
amount of guesswork), itsprioritization of ease-of-use 
<http://arstechnica.com/apple/2012/04/apple-holds-the-master-key-when-it-comes-to-icloud-security-privacy/>
 over full security, and its retention of encryption keys to iCloud data on its 
own servers. Apple's defense has traditionally been that its security processes 
are "industry-standard." But in the still-young consumer cloud, Apple is one of 
the leading companies helping to define that standard.

Good article pointing out how one email/password combination is the key to a 
huge number of services. But that's also the case for Google (email, documents, 
phone services, Play),Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> (email, cloud, store, Xbox). 
Everyone is vulnerable in some way.

Three eras of currency >> Chris Dixon 
<http://nonchalantrepreneur.com/post/46485623457/three-eras-of-currency>

Three eras of currency
Commodity based, e.g. Gold
Politically based, e.g. Dollar
Math based, e.g. Bitcoin

Note the "e.g."

Bitcoin may be the global economy's last safe haven >> Businessweek 
<http://mobile.businessweek.com/articles/2013-03-28/bitcoin-may-be-the-global-economys-last-safe-haven>

Paul Ford: 

I'm increasingly convinced there's one thing that Bitcoins do that's genuinely 
interesting. They decentralize trust. Trust is hard to earn; verifying 
transactions is a brutal problem, which is why PayPal locks down your account 
when there's too much money flowing into it. Creating trust is traditionally 
the work of federal governments and branding agencies. Trust is also an easy 
thing to squander. Just close a beloved service, à la Google Reader. Or allow 
your banks to fail, causing an entire country to suddenly realize that the 
value of their deposits, the fundamental integrity of their financial selves, 
was arbitrary all along.

Along comes Bitcoin, a currency in which every transaction is stored by the 
entire network and every coin has its own story. There's nothing to trust but 
math. Suddenly an idea that sounded terrible — a totally decentralized currency 
without a central authority, where semi-anonymous parties exchange meaningless 
tokens — becomes almost comforting, a source of power and authority.

That's where Bitcoin thrives: where people would prefer to throw in their lot 
with anonymous strangers instead of the world economy. It's gold-bug thinking 
reinvented for an age of fluid transparency and instantaneous transactions. And 
as such it's an excellent indicator of anxiety. Where you see Bitcoins in 
action you find a weird and heady mix of speculative angst, a fear of being 
left behind, and people who appear to have lost faith in institutions, who feel 
most left behind.

Frustrated with iCloud, Apple's developer community speaks up >> Hacker News 
<https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=5454491>

And boy, are they frustrated: 

from having studied this for many, many hours over many moons, is that what 
Apple is trying to do is fundamentally hard, if not entirely unfeasible. 
They're trying to replace a smart server with one that's dumb as a doorstop. 
More specifically, they're trying to emulate a CRUD web service with a file 
sync engine.

Conflict resolution is left up to individual clients, since the server doesn't 
do any "thinking". Likewise, there is no canonical, authoritative state of the 
store, since the server doesn't "think", only the clients do. Apple was hoping 
that by shoving a bunch of diffs of your database onto the server, that clients 
can reliably reconstruct a sane database by playing them back - except that 
multiple clients are updating the diffs simultaneously and there is no 
server-side conflict resolution.

Oh, and if stuff fails, there are no regular snapshot states to fall back to, 
because iCloud is a file store, not a database engine. Your whole store is now 
corrupt. Enjoy.

Bitcoin infographic >> Visual.ly <http://visual.ly/bitcoin-infographic>

Infographic: how a Bitcoin transaction works. View at your own risk.

Donglegate: why the tech community hates feminists >> Wired.com 
<http://www.wired.com/opinion/2013/03/richards-affair-and-misogyny-in-tech/>

However, just because these points of view are equally visible both online and 
offline doesn't mean they're equally valid. Factual evidence simplydoes not 
support 
<http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/intelligence-report/browse-all-issues/2012/spring/myths-of-the-manosphere-lying-about-women>
 the idea that men are being oppressed and that women have the upper hand 
socially, legally, or economically.

Yet the myth of equality persists, since the technology industry considers 
itself a meritocracy where the "good" ones — for example, talented engineers 
and programmers — will rise to the top regardless of nationality, background, 
race, or gender. When considering the dismal numbers of women (as well as 
African-American and Latino men) in tech, the meritocratic presumption is that 
these minorities aren't good at or interested in technology; otherwise, there 
would be more of them.

If we admit there are structural barriers to entry, and a culture that 
actively discourages and women and men of color from participating, then it 
logically follows that technology is not a meritocracy. And this threatens many 
dearly held beliefs of technology workers: It suggests those at the top aren't 
there because they're the best, but because of hard workand privilege.

From which many other conclusions logically flow.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>

To suggest a link, either add it below or tag it with @gdntech on the free 
Delicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service.
 