
A quick burst of 10 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology 
team

A weekend at work with an iPad >> The 23x blog 
<http://blog.23x.net/766/a-weekend-at-work-with-an-ipad.html>


Jared Earle: "Could I recommend that other photographers ditch the laptop for 
an iPad? I think so, as long as they have a workstation at home for the 
post-event editing. The iPad cannot replace a computer, but it can lighten the 
load while photographing al fresco, and that means more space for bigger lenses 
in the camera bag."

Pincus Faceoff With Zuckerberg Shows Fearsome Prelude to Zynga's IPO >> 
Bloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-12-11/pincus-faceoff-with-zuckerberg-shows-fearsome-prelude-to-zynga-s-ipo-tech.html>


A profile of Zynga chief Mark Pincus

No Copyright Intended >> Waxy.org 
<http://waxy.org/2011/12/no_copyright_intended/>


"How pervasive is it? There are about 489,000 YouTube videos that say "no 
copyright intended" or some variation, and about 664,000 videos have a 
"copyright disclaimer" citing the fair use provision in Section 107 of the 
Copyright Act."

Amazon Kindle Fire Faces Critics and Remedies Are Promised >> NYTimes.com 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/12/technology/personaltech/amazons-fire-some-say-may-become-the-edsel-of-tablets.html?_r=1&pagewanted=all>


"A few of their many complaints: there is no external volume control. The off 
switch is easy to hit by accident. Web pages take a long time to load. There is 
no privacy on the device; a spouse or child who picks it up will instantly know 
everything you have been doing. The touch screen is frequently hesitant and 
sometimes downright balky"

Is Apple using patents to hurt open standards? >> Ars Technica 
<http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2011/12/is-apple-is-using-patents-to-hurt-open-standards.ars>


"Haavard identifies three separate occasions, twice in 2009, and again in 
2011, where Apple has disclosed patents and not offered royalty-free licensing. 
In the first 2009 patent claim, Apple said that it had a patent covering W3C's 
"widget" specification. A PAG [Patent Action Group] was formed, and determined 
that Apple's patent was not relevant. In the second 2009 claim, Apple claimed 
to have two patents covering W3C's widget security specification. A PAG was 
again formed. It decided that one patent was not relevant, and the other didn't 
apply. With both 2009 claims, Apple waited until the last minute to disclose 
its patents." But how many PAGs are in progress, or have been convened? That's 
what is unclear, and slides past whether this is bad behaviour, or quite normal.

Asus puts delay rumor to rest, confirms Transformer Prime is on schedule >> 
SlashGear 
<http://www.slashgear.com/asus-puts-delay-rumor-to-rest-confirms-transformer-prime-is-on-schedule-10201473/>


"Apparently online retailer NCIX sold out of the Prime and after canceling 
multiple orders a few rumors came out that their response was ASUS had delayed 
the hotly anticipated tablet due to WiFi issues. Here at SlashGear we've 
already had extensive time with the Prime and you can see our in-depth review 
here. At no point did our unit experience any WiFi issues. After reaching out 
to our sources from ASUS here is what they had to say in response:" ...that 
it's on schedule. Suggestions that it had been delayed because of Wi-Fi issues 
are being squelched.

Indonesian government threatens to ban BlackBerry services if it can't spy on 
users >> Engadget 
<http://www.engadget.com/2011/12/11/indonesian-government-threatens-to-ban-blackberry-services-if-it/>


We feel that we've heard this story before in a slightly different context. 
What if the Egyptian or Syrian government were to demand it? Would that be 
different?

Tech Company War Propaganda Posters >> Laughing Squid 
<http://laughingsquid.com/tech-company-war-propaganda-posters/>


Splendid execution. Notice: no Microsoft.

HP tosses WebOS out of frying pan into the open-source fire >> CNET News 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-30685_3-57340499-264/hp-tosses-webos-out-of-frying-pan-into-the-open-source-fire/>


Really smart analysis by Stephen Shankland. Lists all those open-sourced OSs 
and projects you'd forgotten about. Why had you forgotten about them? One guess.

Why developers need a Mac >> Tim Anderson's ITWriting 
<http://www.itwriting.com/blog/5164-why-developers-need-a-mac.html>


Tim Anderson is a very experienced Windows user: "Fourth, and this is the most 
difficult point to make, it is valuable to spend some time on a Mac to avoid 
bad assumptions about usability. One example that comes to mind is version 
control. On Windows there is no problem using Git, or Subversion, or any number 
of systems including Microsoft's Team Foundation Server installed either 
locally or on its own server. There is some setup involved though. On a Mac 
with the latest Xcode, you will find a checkbox in the new project wizard. "It 
is built-in. There is nothing more to do other than check [a] box. And yes, I 
know it is pretty easy to use Subversion or Git on Windows - though I would 
never describe a Team Foundation setup as trivial - but I am talking about the 
usability of a single checkbox. If you are thinking about the design of your 
own UI then spending some time on a Mac is though-provoking and likely to be 
beneficial."

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on delicious 
<http://delicious.com/guardianista>
 