
A quick burst of 9 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

GALAXY Note Reaches 5 Million Sales >> SAMSUNG TOMORROW Global Blog 
<http://global.samsungtomorrow.com/?p=12717>

Not on its global or UK press sites, but on one of its blogs: 

Samsung Electronics announced today (March 28th) that GALAXY Note, released in 
October last year, has surpassed 5 million sales in just 5 months. Thanks to 
the fast selling GALAXY Note, Samsung Electronics has gained about two thirds 
of the South Korean mobile phone market share, making Samsung the leading 
mobile phone provider in Korea in addition to China, France, Spain and others.

 Strictly speaking, analysts say that its 5in size means they'll classify it 
as a tablet. Note too that these are "sales" to the retail channel - what 
others call "shipments". However, it still means that the same two companies 
dominate in the smartphone and tablet markets. This is one of them. For an 
example of those struggling further down the tablet market, read on…

Judge: Asus Transformer isn't infringing on Hasbro's trademark... and Asus 
reveals embarrassing sales stats >> TechCrunch 
<http://techcrunch.com/2012/03/27/judge-asus-transformer-isnt-infringing-on-hasbros-trademark-and-asus-reveals-embarrassing-sales-stats/>

The Transformer Prime lives on. And: 

As a little kicker on the story, court filings have revealed that the device 
has produced pre-order numbers that are, shall we say, less than legendary… 
pre-orders for this poster child for Android 4 tablets (and it does look great) 
total a whopping 2,000 units as of a month ago… That and 80,000 going to 
retailers worldwide make the device seem rather minor even in comparison to 
other Android products like the Nook Color and Kindle Fire.

 (Thanks @pauljreynolds for the link.)

Yahoo-Geddon: leaders debate layoffs and more today >> AllThingsD 
<http://allthingsd.com/20120328/yahoo-geddon-leaders-to-debate-layoffs-asset-sales-search-deals-and-more-today-as-a-major-restructuring-looms/>

Kara Swisher says Yahoo is having a big think about: 

How and where the company will make large-scale cuts in staff, which I have 
previously reported were coming and will perhaps be numbering in the thousands; 
which businesses to sell off and which to keep, including its ad tech unit; the 
correct structure for the reconfigured entity; and who will be left to run it 
all when it is all settled. Also up for debate is the best course of a 
two-pronged effort -- being led primarily by CFO Tim Morse and members of his 
corporate strategy team -- to renegotiate its search and advertising 
partnership deal with Microsoft, while also engaging in active discussions with 
Google about it taking over Yahoo's search business.

 No explanation of why it might switch back to Google from Microsoft's Bing. 
But it would be a huge blow to Microsoft if it does.

Apple TV isn't coming until 2013, says Asian research group CLSA >> Business 
Insider 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/apple-tv-isnt-coming-until-2013-says-asian-research-group-clsa-2012-3>

Most analysts say Apple will release an Apple TV this year. Not Asian research 
group CLSA, which said in a note this morning that it thinks it comes out in 
2013.

 Bored yet with the game of "when will Apple release a TV?" Plenty more where 
that came from.

Readers' Choice Awards 2012: Smartphones and Mobile Carriers >> PCMag.com 
<http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2402202,00.asp>

When we asked our readers how satisfied they were with their smartphones 
overall, Apple and Microsoft customers both rated their phones an impressive 
8.7 on our 0 (extremely dissatisfied) to 10 (extremely satisfied) scale. 
Android, on the other hand, only received a 7.9, the same rating it received in 
2011. Apple's score improved from 8.4 last year; Windows Phone, which earned an 
Honorable Mention in 2011, improved 0.6 points. That's up from an 8.1, which is 
a big jump in satisfaction.

 Statistics alert: this is a self-selecting sample, we don't know what the 
sample size is, whether sample sizes are comparable across the different 
platforms, and whether there was any gaming of results. Other than that... 
(Thanks @pauljreynolds for the link)

Suddenly Microsoft is the hippest tech company around >> The Atlantic Wire 
<http://www.theatlanticwire.com/technology/2012/03/suddenly-microsoft-hippest-tech-company-around/50402/>

Which brings us to the other aspect of Microsoft's renaissance: good timing. 
The once-hipper than Microsoft foes, Google and Apple haven't looked so good 
these days. Google, the once beloved search company, has users uneasy with its
Google+ integration 
<http://www.theatlanticwire.com/technology/2012/03/even-googlers-are-losing-faith-google/50247/>
, privacy issues and anti-trust concerns. Even Googlersaren't too sure 
<http://www.theatlanticwire.com/technology/2012/03/yahooization-google/48338/> 
of Google's mission, these days. Apple still produces insane-popular gadgets, 
but no longer wows reviewers like it once did. The new iPad is still the best 
tablet out there, but it's not a must-have. Plus, it too has gotten itself into 
its ownprivacy messes 
<http://www.theatlanticwire.com/technology/2012/02/theres-easy-fix-apples-latest-iphone-privacy-problem/48732/>
. It also had the misfortune of acting as the face of the last few months of
Foxconn scandal <http://www.theatlanticwire.com/topics/foxconn/>. Though the 
Foxconn protesters that threatened mass suicide back in January made 
Microsoft's XBox, thanks to Mike Daisey and Apple's financial successes, Apple 
not Microsoft absorbed most of the bad PR.

 (Thanks @rquick for the link.)

Xbox Live TV: Why Microsoft, not Apple, will dominate television streaming >> 
Slate Magazine 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/technology/2012/03/xbox_live_tv_why_microsoft_not_apple_will_dominate_television_streaming_.html>

Over the last few months, Microsoft has turned its video-game console into 
your TV's best friend. Late last year, the company revamped the Xbox's 
interface, adding a wonderful voice-search feature through the Kinect 
motion-gaming add-on. Microsoft also added dozens of entertainment services to 
its Xbox Live online plan, including Netflix, Hulu, ESPN, and on-demand video 
from cable and satellite services around the world. This week, the company is
adding access 
<http://majornelson.com/2012/03/27/comcast-xfinity-tv-hbo-go-mlb-tv-now-available-on-xbox-live/>
 to Comcast's Xfinity on-demand service, as well as apps for HBO and MLB.TV.

 Microsoft is, finally, making everything happen; it's had this plan since 
about 2001. (Thanks @pauljreynolds for the link.)

Google+: The Charge Of The Like Brigade >> TechCrunch 
<http://techcrunch.com/2012/03/26/google-the-charge-of-the-like-brigade/>

Devin Coldewey: 

Google never said "What you're doing is broken. Use our thing instead." They 
always said "Did you know you we can do that too, for free?" Did they say Excel 
was broken when they let you make spreadsheets in Docs? Did they break down 
email to its bare bones and remake it for Gmail? Of course not. Google was 
about ubiquity, diversity, and a few memorable little quirks or improvements 
that set them out from the crowd. To attempt to build something new, a la 
Apple, with the assurance that company likes to make ("This is the best way, 
which is why we made it the only way") is not a Google strength. They just 
aren't good at making new things. Never have been. Making existing things 
easier, faster, more accessible -- sure. But inventing them? Not so much. So 
the idea that they were going to invent a new way to share should have rung 
alarm bells to begin with. Sharing was never broken; Google merely found that 
they were losing a battle they had not even prepared for. Their declaration of 
war was a declaration of defeat.

 Subtle point. 

Flat-panel TV sales flatten in US >> AllThingsD 
<http://allthingsd.com/20120327/flat-panel-tv-sales-flatten-in-u-s/?mod=tweet>

Market research firm IHS iSuppli said Tuesday that U.S.-bound shipments of 
flat-panel TVs will drop 5% in 2012, slipping to 37.1m units from 39.1m units 
in 2011. And that decline will likely continue for the next few years. By 2013, 
IHS figures shipments will drop to just below 35m and by 2015, they'll be 
hovering around 34.2m.

 This is the environment that smart TV is being launched into: an unpromising 
one where the market is saturated, and the people who are buying are the "late 
adopters" of flat TV - and so are unlikely to take advantage of "smart" 
features.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>. To suggest a link, either add it below or 
tag it with @gdntech on the freeDelicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service;
 