
A quick burst of 12 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology 
team

Inside Apple's go-slow approach to mobile payments >> WSJ.com 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702304830704577493261395358658.html>

Holding back in mobile payments was a deliberate strategy, the result of deep 
discussion last year. SomeApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> 
engineers argued for a more-aggressive approach that would integrate payments 
more directly.

 But Apple executives chose the go-slow approach for now. An Apple spokeswoman 
declined to comment on the decision-making process.

Apple's head of world-wide marketing, Phil Schiller, in an interview last 
month, said that digital-wallet mobile-payment services are "all fighting over 
their piece of the pie, and we aren't doing that."...Last year, Apple engineers 
and executives considered some aggressive approaches to exploit that advantage 
when in-house debate over the market began in earnest.Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> unveiled its Android payment 
system around the same time.

 A small group began investigating whether the company should create a new 
service that would embed various payment methods into the iPhone or build a 
payment network of its own, according to people familiar with the matter

. Apple's head of iPhone software, Scott Forstall, was interested in the idea, 
say people familiar with the matter, and engineers on his team began to 
brainstorm a comprehensive "wallet app."

 The blockage: effect on NFC on battery life, and retailers' slow takeup in 
the US. Basically, it has it all ready - but is waiting for the market to 
arrive. (Subscription required.)

Google adds 'Do Not Track' to Chrome >> PCWorld 
<http://www.pcworld.com/article/262318/google_adds_do_not_track_to_chrome.html>

Google has added a Do Not Track privacy option to Chrome's developer channel, 
though it's late to the party compared to other browsers.

When Do Not Track is enabled in a browser, it signals to Websites and to 
advertisers that the userdoesn't want to be followed 
<http://www.pcworld.com/businesscenter/article/231231/ftcs_brill_new_online_privacy_tools_needed.html?tk=rel_news>
 around the web for ad targeting purposes. Ad networks and sites aren't 
required to comply, butseveral of them do <http://donottrack.us/implementations>
, and the U.S. government is now pressuring more companies to play along,
including Google 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203960804577239774264364692.html>
.

Apple Maps: The FAQ >> counternotions 
<http://counternotions.com/2012/09/21/applemaps/>

As they say, every turn-by-turn direction starts with the first step.

LG Display holds 70% of iPad panel shipments >> Digitimes 
<http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20120919PD220.html>

LG Display is now responsible for 70% of iPad panel shipments while Samsung 
Electronics, Sharp and Chimei Innolux (CMI) have all been seeing decreasing 
shipments, according to industry sources.

 Samsung originally accounted for a large portion of iPad panel shipments and 
was shipping over one million iPad panels in July. However, as of August the 
company had dropped to roughly 700,000 in iPad panel shipments and that number 
may decrease even more, added the sources.

 The decrease is a significant drop from Samsung's monthly average of 2.5m 
iPad panel shipments during the first half of 2012, said the sources. The 
sources did not specify specific reasons for the drop in shipments but market 
observers suspect it has to do with disputes between Apple and Samsung.

When the patent lawyer met the genie >> SMBC 
<http://www.smbc-comics.com/?id=2740>

Splork?

Apple accused of ripping off famous Swiss clock design >> CNET News 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-13579_3-57517054-37/apple-accused-of-ripping-off-famous-swiss-clock-design/>

In a report in Swiss newspaper Tages-Anzeiger (by way of Macrumors), the Swiss 
Federal Railway service, or SBB, has taken offense to the app's design, to 
which it says it owns the trademark.

 The 1944 design by then-SBB employee Hans Hilfiker (which you can see here) 
is used in station clocks throughout the railway system, which is well-known 
for its timeliness. It's also licensed to Mondaine, a Swiss watch manufacturer.

 An SBB spokesman told Tages-Anzeiger that he was pleased Apple was using the 
design, but noted that the company was not authorized to do so. The report 
suggests a legal complaint is being drafted as a result.

 Someone forgot that if there's one thing the Swiss take seriously, it's their 
clocks.

Wal-Mart says it will stop selling Amazon's Kindle >> NYTimes.com 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/21/business/wal-mart-stores-dropping-amazon-kindle-tablets-and-e-readers.html?ref=technology>

Wal-Mart Stores, the nation's largest retailer, said Thursday it was dropping 
Amazon's Kindle tablets and e-readers, a sign of how seriously it views Amazon 
as a competitor in the consumer goods market.

 Target said in May that it would stop selling Kindles, though other stores, 
including Best Buy, Staples and Office Depot, said Thursday they would continue 
to carry the devices.

What does Twitter know about me? My .zip file with 50Mb of data Â« Anne Helmond 
<http://www.annehelmond.nl/2012/04/17/what-does-twitter-know-about-me-my-zip-file-with-50mb-of-data/>

Three weeks ago I read a tweet from @web_martin 
<https://twitter.com/#!/web_martin/status/184575028002697216> who had requested 
all his data from Twitter under European law and received a .zip file with his 
data from Twitter. He linked to the Privacy International blog which has 
written downstep by step 
<https://www.privacyinternational.org/blog/what-does-twitter-know-about-its-users-nologs>
 how to request your own data.

 You, too, can play if you live in the EU - though Twitter CEO Dick Costolo 
has indicated that Twitter will allow you to download all your tweets by the 
end of this year. We'll see.

Asus to unveil the Padfone 2 in October >> Liliputing 
<http://liliputing.com/2012/09/asus-to-unveil-the-padfone-2-in-october.html>

The Asus Padfone hasn't exactly taken the world by storm since Asus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/asus> first introduced the smartphone 
that can transform into a tablet, notebook, or desktop with liberal use of 
docking stations. In fact, the Padfone has yet to officially go on sale in the 
US.

 But Asus is getting ready to launch the Padfone 2.

 On 16 October, it seems.

German court says Samsung and Motorola don't infringe Apple's touch event 
model patent >> FOSS Patents 
<http://www.fosspatents.com/2012/09/german-court-says-samsung-and-motorola.html>

Unlike the multitouch patents that Apple asserted at the recent California 
trial, each one of which is specific to a particular gesture, this is a fairly 
broad patent that covers the way the operating system reports touch events to 
applications or purposely ignores them. If Apple's proposed interpretation of 
this patent had been adopted by the court, numerous applications that rely on 
the attacked operating system functionality would no longer run in a reliable, 
stable fashion after a workaround. This would have caused logistical 
complications with the need to rewrite, recompile and reinstall many apps.

 Now it won't.

New iPhone, old abuses: Have working conditions at Foxconn in China improved? 
>> SACOM <http://sacom.hk/archives/960>

Now, in September 2012, our researchers revisited Foxconn's plants in 
Zhengzhou, HenanProvince, China, whose sole product is the iPhone. Most of the 
60 interviewees who SACOM talked to are new workers recruited by the 
government. The high turnover rate and the government's need to recruit workers 
and take other special steps to smooth production implicitly suggest that job 
satisfaction is not high. More than that, SACOM's new investigation finds that 
Foxconn workers in Zhengzhou are still facing deplorably harsh working 
conditions. It is disappointing that no matter how advanced the technology 
introduced by Apple is, the old problems in working conditions remain at its 
major supplier Foxconn.

Seen at Hackney Wick station: for the benefit of iOS6 users... 
<https://twitter.com/binny_uk/status/248824180395614208/photo/1/large>

When the transport system is making fun at your expense...

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>. To suggest a link, either add it below or 
tag it with @gdntech on the freeDelicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service;
 