
A quick burst of 8 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Oracle sues to smash patent troll Lodsys >> Mobile Technology News 
<http://gigaom.com/mobile/oracle-sues-to-smash-patent-troll-lodsys/>

Oracle, it seems, is not one for irony. Right after an epic court fight with 
Google in which it was accused of abusing its intellectual property, the 
software maker is now trying to dissolve another company's patents.

This time, though, Larry Ellison's company gets to be the good guy. In a 
lawsuit filed in Wisconsin federal court, Oracle is asking the court to 
invalidate four patents belonging to a patent troll that has been terrorizing 
corporations and small software developers across the country.



Oracle's claim against Lodsys is to say "we don't infringe your patents and 
neither do our customers." Clearly, it's trying to draw it into a court fight, 
perhaps to bankrupt it. Apple is also trying to do the same, because Lodsys's 
approach is bad for app developers. (Thanks @modelportfolio2003 for the link.)

Corning sees flexible glass in consumer electronics by 2013 >> Businessweek 
<http://www.businessweek.com/news/2012-06-04/corning-sees-flexible-glass-in-consumer-electronics-by-2013>

Corning sent out samples of the glass to makers of phones, tablets and 
televisions today. The glass, which can be wrapped around a device or 
structure, can be manufactured in a roll, similar to how newsprint is produced, 
and will support thinner displays, Corning Chief Financial Officer James Flaws 
said.

"We're hopeful that by 2013, just a short 7 months away, it'll be available in 
consumer products," Flaws said in an interview today in New York. "There's a 
revolution coming in new types of displays -- displays will be more 
conformable."

Sounds fun.

Don't mean to be alarmist, but the TV business may be starting to collapse >> 
Business Insider <http://www.businessinsider.com/tv-business-collapse-2012-6>

Henry Blodget <https://www.theguardian.com/media/henry-blodget>, in alarmist 
mode:

We still consume some TV content, but we consume it when and where we want it, 
and we consume it deliberately: In other words, we don't settle down in front 
of the TV and watch "what's on." And, again with the exception of live sports, 
we've gotten so used to watching shows and series without ads that ads now seem 
extraordinarily intrusive and annoying. Our kids see TV ads so rarely that 
they're actually curious about and confused by them: "What is that? A 
commercial?"

More true of the US business than others.

Oracle v Google: No perks for Java >> The Economist 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/babbage/2012/06/oracle-v-google>

What Judge William Alsup decided about APIs:

"So long as the specific code used to implement a method is different," the 
judge wrote, "anyone is free under the Copyright Act to write his or her own 
code to carry out exactly the same function or specification of any methods 
used [to achieve work-alike functionality]," adding that "where there is only 
one way to express an idea or function, then everyone is free to do so and no 
one can monopolise that expression."

House members hear why ITU can't be trusted with Internet regulation >> Ars 
Technica 
<http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/05/house-members-hear-why-itu-cant-be-trusted-with-internet-regulation/>

On Thursday morning, Vint Cerf, the most famous member of the "fathers of the 
Internet" club (whose secret greeting is the TCP 3-Way handshake) testified 
before the House of Representatives Energy and Commerce Committee. He's leading 
the charge of tech luminaries and leaders of industry that are calling for the 
Internet to be kept just the way it is, Ryan Gosling memes and all.

Nearly all Western countries and tech companies are opposed to the pending 
plan that is set to be heard at the December 2012 World Conference on 
International Telecommunications in Dubai (or if you prefer, its catchier 
title: WCIT-12), where all 193 member nations are set to convene.


Microsoft Update and The Nightmare Scenario - F-Secure Weblog : News from the 
Lab <http://www.f-secure.com/weblog/archives/00002377.html>

About 900 million Windows computers get their updates from Microsoft Update. 
In addition to the DNS root servers, this update system has always been 
considered one of the weak points of the net. Antivirus people have nightmares 
about a variant of malware spoofing the update mechanism and replicating via it.

Turns out, it looks like this has now been done. And not by just any malware, 
but by Flame.

ASUS' 'Rear' Tweet Puts Sexism Front And Center 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/06/04/asus-rear-tweet_n_1567696.html>

ASUS' post, which smacks of sexism, shows a photo, taken from behind, of a 
shapely woman displaying ASUS' Transformer AIO tablet to a crowd of men and 
encourages followers to check out the woman's "pretty nice" looking "rear".

Asus <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/asus> later deleted the tweet, 
and said: "We apologise for the inappropriate comment on Twitter earlier. We 
will take steps to ensure this doesn't happen again." Sounds like someone got 
fired.

Trouble with the robot? >> asymco 
<http://www.asymco.com/2012/06/04/trouble-with-the-robot/>

Horace Dediu, based on latest ComScore data:

It's perhaps too early to suggest that we're seeing a slowdown in the US for 
Android. Perhaps there will be a return to growth in the fall. The concern has 
to be that rather than seeing the net adds growing-as they have for two years 
with only two contiguous months of decline-Android net adds have been falling 
for four months.

First reaction: it's because buyers were waiting for high-profile phones such 
as the Samsung Galaxy S3 and HTC One series. But ComScore looks at the 
installed base, not overall sales. Dediu says the number of people switching 
from featurephones to Android phones is falling. Is it likely those 
featurephone owners have waited until now to go for top-end Android phones? 
You'd expect they would have bought one a year or two ago. Other notable 
points: RIM installed base is really dropping fast; Windows Mobile/Phone 
installed base seems to have bottomed out, and has been positive for the past 
two months after falling for five.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>. To suggest a link, either add it below or 
tag it with @gdntech on the freeDelicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service.
 