
A burst of 8 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Oink's data privacy breach: download the data of any user with their own 
export tool >> Critina Cordova 
<http://www.cristinajcordova.com/2012/03/oinks-export-tool-data-privacy-breach-download-the-data-of-any-user-5/>

When Oink shut down yesterday, I used their export tool so that I could do 
something useful with the information I gave them. In requesting my data, which 
I did simply by filling out a form with only my username, I received the email 
below. In looking at the link, it seemed that my publicly available username 
(cristina) called for the download.

It had, and she could then change to Kevin Rose's username and download *his* 
data. (Oink later fixed it.) Rose and the Oink team are going to Google. (Not 
to be confused with the UK's OiNK.)

Rumor: Nexus tablet is a "done deal", to retail for as low as $149 >> Android 
and Me 
<http://androidandme.com/2012/03/opinions/rumor-nexus-tablet-is-a-done-deal-to-retail-for-as-low-as-149/>

The ASUS MeMo 370T 
<http://androidandme.com/2012/01/devices/asus-memo-370t-could-be-a-kindle-killer-tegra-3-for-250/>
 that was revealed at CES has been scrapped after Google contracted with ASUS 
to produce their "Nexus tablet". Earlier reports said the device would retail 
for $249-199, but we are now told the target price is $149-199. The quad-core 
Tegra 3 version that was previously leaked is no more. Other than the 7in 
display, no additional information has been provided on the specs.

At the time, AndroidAndMe said the Memo 370T "could be a Kindle killer". 

Mountain Lion now protects your contacts >> Dustin Curtis 
<http://dcurt.is/mountain-lion-contacts>

Before Mountain Lion Developer Preview 2, Mac apps could access your contacts 
at any time, without asking for permission. You wouldn't even know it was 
happening. This policy is the same as the one on iOS, which recentlygot a lot 
of attention <http://dcurt.is/stealing-your-address-book>. Today's release of 
DP 2 removes that ability by default.

What's the position on Windows 8, Developer or Consumer betas?

Viviane Reding responds to Reporters Without Borders' criticism of "right to 
be forgotten" >> Reporters Without Borders 
<http://en.rsf.org/european-union-viviane-reding-responds-to-16-03-2012,42138.html>

The right to be forgotten is not an absolute right. The proposed Regulation, 
which the European Commission adopted on 25 January 2012, provides for very 
broad exemptions to ensure that freedom of expression can be fully taken into 
account. This will allow, for instance, news websites to continue to operate on 
the basis of the same principles.

And so it moves on.

The Towson Hack: The mystery of vanishing iTunes credit >> Macworld 
<https://www.macworld.com/article/1161794/the_towson_hack_the_mystery_of_disappearing_itunes_credit.html>

September 2011, but possibly still going on: 

Many customers whose store credit was stolen noted that the purchases centered 
on a handful of apps from specific developers. One of those developers was "gao 
jing," the name behind apps like Expert Guide for Black Ops, Cheats Guide for 
Black Ops, Weapons Guide for Black Ops, and Game Guide for New Vegas. Notably, 
none of those apps remain in the App Store as of this writing; however, Apple 
declined to comment on the reason for their removal from the store. Other 
customers noted that the purchased apps on their accounts were all from other 
developers, including "Hongbin Suo," "lane ma," "Yang Yun," "KAMAGAMES," and 
"Lakoo." Many of the purchased apps, or the companies behind them, appeared to 
be Chinese in origin.

Text advertising blindness: the new banner blindness? >> International Journal 
of Usability Studies 
<http://www.upassoc.org/upa_publications/jus/2011may/owens1.html>

From May 2011: 

Practitioners should realize the following about text advertisements:

Users demonstrate text advertisement "blindness" when viewing web pages. This 
means that information displayed in areas of the page dedicated to text ads 
(e.g., top of the page, right side) is generally ignored or viewed last.
Users are less likely to find information on a web page if it is located on 
the right side of the page than on the top of the page if both areas resemble 
text ads. This is especially true when they are searching for specific 
information.

When conducting an informational, or semantic, search, users have equal amount 
of difficulty finding information that is embedded in an ad either at the top 
or on the right side of the page.

There's more, equally interesting. 

40% of US government Web sites fail security test >> Network World 
<http://m.networkworld.com/news/2012/031512-dnssec-survey-2012-257326.html>

Approximately 40% of federal government agencies are out of compliance with a 
regulation that requires them to deploy an extra layer of authentication on 
their Web sites to prevent hackers from hijacking Web traffic and redirecting 
it to bogus sites.

It's been more than two years since federal agencies were required to support 
DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC) on their Web sites. However, two recent 
studies indicate that around 40% of federal Web sites have not yet deployed 
this Internet security standard.

Faintly depressing.

Microsoft said to plan debut of new Xbox in 2013 at earliest >> Bloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-03-15/microsoft-says-it-won-t-be-discussing-new-xbox-at-e3-conference.html>

Microsoft will release the next version of its Xbox console in 2013 at the 
earliest, as the company squeezes at least one more year of sales out of its 
current model, said two people with knowledge of the matter.

The company may show the successor to its Xbox 360 in June 2013 at the E3 
conference and put it on sale that same year, said the people, who declined to 
be named because the plans are confidential. David Dennis, a company spokesman, 
said earlier today that Microsoft won't discuss new Xbox hardware at this 
year's E3, quelling speculation that the device would be unveiled at the 2012 
show.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/guardiantech>

To suggest links, tag articles on Pinboard.in with "guardiantech".

(Update: fixed errors in markup.)
 