
A quick burst of 7 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Marissa Mayer: "I Really Hope More Women Enter The Field" >> Buzzfeed 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/hillaryreinsberg/googles-marissa-mayer-i-really-hope-more-women>

From the long-off days of May 2012: Mayer is asked about why there aren't more 
women in computing. First question:

There's a lot of finger pointing to try and explain why there aren't many 
women in tech or computer science fields. Some people blame high schools, 
others say universities aren't discouraging, and others say it's the Silicon 
Valley attitude that keeps women out of tech. Who or what do you "blame"?

 Now read on

3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins >> Robinson Meyer - 
The Atlantic 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/07/3-charts-that-show-how-wikipedia-is-running-out-of-admins/259829/>

Volunteer editing of Wikipedia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wikipedia> is on a long decline. The 
number of editors peaked in 2007 and has been falling since. Lots of people 
know this.

 But while attending Wikimania Friday in Washington, DC -- the conference for 
the entire Wikimedia movement -- I saw one chart that seemed more dire.

Nexus 7 a good rival for the iPad, in a compact size >> Chicago Sun-Times 
<http://www.suntimes.com/technology/ihnatko/13801436-452/nexus-7-a-good-rival-for-the-ipad-in-a-compact-size.html>

Andy Ihnatko reviews the Nexus 7.

(992) Answer to Stalking: What's it like to be a stalker? >> Quora 
<http://www.quora.com/Stalking/Whats-it-like-to-be-a-stalker/answers/1371342>

A stalker - yes, a real one - replies: 

Here's the thing. I don't like most people. They are boring. They only care 
about boring things. But sometimes you meet someone, and there is that spark. A 
connection.

The Dark Knight Rises: This Is Why We Can't Have Nice Things >> Rotten Tomatoes
 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_dark_knight_rises/news/1925558/the_dark_knight_rises_/>

Editor Matt Atchity: 

As expected, we saw a mountain of comments come in about [the first negative] 
review [of Dark Knight Rises], and we're policing them to make sure they're in 
line with our TOS. Broadly speaking, threats and hate speech will get your 
commenting privileges revoked.

 But Marshall has the right to not like the movie, and people have the right 
to express their disagreement with him (although if you haven't seen the movie, 
your arguments may be on shaky ground). And we have the right to pull your 
comment down and ban you if we think you're acting inappropriately.

But if I could ask everyone for one thing, it's this: don't be a dick. Even if 
you think someone else is being a dick. Just take a deep breath, step away from 
the computer, and maybe go for a walk. Have a smoke if you need one. There are 
plenty of other things to get angry about, like war, famine, poverty and crime. 
But not movie reviews.

 Upshot: they're going to shift towards a Facebook-based commenting system.

Asustek tablet PC shipments to surpass 2.5 million units in 3Q12 >> Digitimes 
<http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20120716PD212.html>

Due to Google's Nexus 7 originally being created to test the water, Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> was rather conservative about 
placing its initial orders and only ordered about 600,000 units for June. 
However, since demand for the device is stronger than expected, ODMs have 
already started picking up their production volumes.

 Asustek only shipped 1.2m tablet PCs in the first half, but with the company 
expected to achieve shipments of 2.5m units in the third quarter, Asustek's 
internal goal of shipping 6m units for the whole year may still be reached.

Will Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> want to get into the 
7in space too, or will it be like the netbook - a market it doesn't want to 
compete in?

Here's a list of what Windows Phone lacks. What's the overlap with the iPhone? 
<http://mobile.slashdot.org/story/12/07/17/0024240/it-costs-450-in-marketing-to-make-someone-buy-a-49-nokia-lumia>

Ignore the post at the top (which kicks it off) about the marketing cost of a 
Lumia v the upfront cost, and consider the list that appears a couple of lines 
down suggesting 121 (count 'em!) reasons why Nokia's Lumia 900 has "failed". 
One of them is "generally force[s] users to use IE, Bing and SkyDrive", so as 
lists go.. The question is, though, how many of these could you find for the 
iPhone? (And Android phones?)

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>. To suggest a link, either add it below or 
tag it with @gdntech on the freeDelicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service;
 