
A burst of 10 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Windows keeps getting better >> Windows Blog 
<http://blogs.windows.com/windows/b/bloggingwindows/archive/2013/05/14/windows-keeps-getting-better.aspx>

Today at the JP Morgan Technology, Media & Telecom Conference in Boston, Tami 
Reller shared with the audience that the update previously referred to as 
"Windows Blue" will be called Windows 8.1 and will be a free update to Windows 
8 for consumers through the Windows Store.

During her remarks today, Tami reiterated our goal of delivering continual 
updates to create a richer experience for Windows customers. Windows 8.1 is 
part of that and continues the journey we first began with Windows 8 last fall. 
Windows 8.1 will help us to deliver the next generation of PCs and tablets with 
our OEM partners and to deliver the experiences customers — both consumers and 
businesses alike —need and will just expect moving forward.

No word on whether WinRT will get a similar update.

Jaron Lanier: The Internet destroyed the middle class >> Salon.com 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/05/12/jaron_lanier_the_internet_destroyed_the_middle_class/>

This week sees the publication of "Who Owns the Future?," which digs into 
technology, economics and culture in unconventional ways. (How is a pirated 
music file like a 21st century mortgage?) Lanier argues that there is little 
essential difference between Facebook and a digital trading company, or Amazon 
and an enormous bank. ("Stanford sometimes seems like one of the Silicon Valley 
companies.")

Much of the book looks at the way Internet technology threatens to destroy the 
middle class by first eroding employment and job security, along with various 
"levees" that give the economic middle stability.

"Here's a current example of the challenge we face," he writes in the book's 
prelude: "At the height of its power, the photography company Kodak employed 
more than 14,000 people and was worth $28 billion. They even invented the first 
digital camera. But today Kodak is bankrupt, and the new face of digital 
photography has become Instagram. When Instagram was sold to Facebook for a 
billion dollars in 2012, it employed only 13 people. Where did all those jobs 
disappear? And what happened to the wealth that all those middle-class jobs 
created?"

Clickjack attack – the hidden threat right in front of you >> Troy Hunt 
<http://www.troyhunt.com/2013/05/clickjack-attack-hidden-threat-right-in.html>

A good primer on how to bust frames - used for clickjacking - given the 
growing arms race between framers and busters.

Acer, Asustek see large sequential decreases in April revenues >> Digitimes 
<http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20130512PM200.html>

Acer <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> has reported April 
consolidated revenues of NT$25.772 billion (US$868 million) down on month by 
31.02%, while Asustek Computer saw revenues of NT$32.594 billion, down 22.11%, 
according to the companies.

Acer has seen falling year-on-year sales for four consecutive months; Asus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/asus>, for only one of four.

Microsoft: Don't expect a Windows 8 iTunes app soon >> CNN 
<http://money.cnn.com/2013/05/07/technology/windows-8-itunes/>

Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> believes nearly 
all major apps that can be found in Apple's iTunes store will also be available 
on Windows 8 by the fall, but it expects one glaring hole to remain.

"You shouldn't expect an iTunes app on Windows 8 any time soon," said Tami 
Reller, chief financial officer of Microsoft's (MSFT, Fortune 500) Windows 
division. "ITunes is in high demand. The welcome mat has been laid out. It's 
not for lack of trying."

Only available in Desktop mode. Don't hold your breath for the Metro (or RT) 
version.

Microsoft YouTube app is a rule breaker; it strips ads, downloads video >> 
ReadWrite 
<http://readwrite.com/2013/05/09/microsoft-youtube-app-rule-breaker-strips-ads-downloads-video>

Microsoft appears to be sticking a finger in Google's eye with the launch of 
its new YouTube app for Windows Phone. The app, ReadWrite has confirmed, strips 
out YouTube ads when it plays back videos and allows users to easily download 
video by way of a prominent "download" button.

Both behaviors violate the cardinal rules YouTube imposes on developers who 
use its service. To get around those restrictions, it appears that Microsoft 
reverse-engineered some portion of the software used to access YouTube's basic 
functions, which are generally known as application programming interfaces, or 
APIs. If so, that could mean Microsoft can do just about whatever it wants with 
its YouTube app.

Wonder how long this will be allowed, given that Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has somehow not got around to 
writing a Windows Phone version of the YouTube app in the past two and a half 
years?

How greedy is Adobe's Creative Cloud subscription? Not very >> CNET News 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-1001_3-57583370-92/how-greedy-is-adobes-creative-cloud-subscription-not-very/>

Stephen Shankland: 

Plenty of people are outraged that Adobe is moving to subscription plans and 
scrapping perpetual licenses. But should they be?

To shed some light on the situation, CNET broke out the spreadsheet software, 
dug into pricing information from Adobe and retail outlets, and put together 
some actual comparisons to see whether that wrath is deserved.

The answer, as with all things complicated, is that it depends. But at least 
in some reasonable situations - not just power users but also middle-end 
customers who upgrade to Adobe's latest releases - the Creative Cloud isn't a 
bad deal at all.

"Jane you ignorant slut" >> Hal's (Im)Perfect Vision 
<http://hal2020.com/2012/10/23/jane-you-ignorant-slut/>

Former Microsoft GM Hal Berenson, in October 2012: 

Let's start with what is definitely not a goal for Windows 8, broad-based 
Enterprise adoption. By that I mean, the rollout of Windows 8 to traditional 
desktop and notebook computing. Keep in mind that back when Windows 8 was being 
planned Windows 7 had just shipped. Because of the time, cost, and complexity 
of enterprise-wide operating system rollouts most enterprises would either 
still be rolling out Windows 7 or have just completed their rollout around the 
time Windows 8 shipped.  Indeed Windows 7 just recently passed Windows XP as 
the most popular version of the operating system in use. No enterprise would 
have the appetite to immediately start the cycle over again so quickly, and so 
(I believe) the prevailing wisdom inside Microsoft was that they would skip 
Windows 8. In other words, before Microsoft had decided on the details of a new 
app model, the Windows Store, the Start Screen, or removing the Start button 
they knew there was no point in targeting enterprise desktops as Windows 8 
upgrade targets.

He explains the headline (don't worry, it's not rude). As ever, Berenson gives 
you something extra to think about: the real metric Microsoft wants Windows 8 
to be measured by. Read on.

@Skynewsbreak Twitter Account Hacked >> Sky News Press Office 
<http://skynews.skypressoffice.co.uk/press-releases/items/2013-05/3169/skynewsbreak-twitter-account-hacked>

Earlier today the @skynewsbreak twitter feed was hacked and a single message 
sent.

Action was swiftly taken and we are working with Twitter and our in house 
security to ensure this cannot happen again.

Perhaps a hacker could break into Dick Costolo's Twitter account so that 
two-factor authentication suddenly goes to the top of the to-do list there.

Nvidia's new gaming handheld is out in June for $350 >> Kotaku 
<http://kotaku.com/nvidias-new-gaming-handheld-is-out-in-june-for-350-505504545>

Announced in January as Project Shield, Nvidia's intriguing new handheld now 
has a price, a June release window, and the promise of Double Fine's Broken 
Age. Who's ready to spend $350 on a dedicated Android gaming device?

Filed under "questions which answer themselves and involve very small numbers".

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>

To suggest a link, either add it below or tag it with @gdntech on the free 
Delicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service.
 