
A burst of 12 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

BlackBerry maker RIM's shares plunge on profit warning >> Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/9001c124-71ee-11e0-9adf-00144feabdc0.html?ftcamp=rss#axzz1Kt2Q3THM>
"RIM's stock fell $6.17, or 11 per cent, to $50.43 in late trading on 
Thursday, after earlier closing at $56.59 on Nasdaq.
 "Underscoring its problems, RIM said BlackBerry shipments would be at the 
lower end of the range of 13.5m-14.5m units it had projected last month and the 
mix of devices it sells would shift towards cheaper models. "In a tense call 
with analysts after the profit warning was announced, Jim Basillie, RIM's 
co-chief executive, insisted the company's current problems were transitory 
rather than the start of a longer-term decline. "We all wish we could have got 
the new products out quicker," he said, "but that just hasn't happened." Not a 
call they'd have wanted to make just as BlackBerry World - the fiesta for 
developers and clients - is kicking off in Florida.

We thought 'sold out' sounded better than 'awaiting delivery' >> AllThingsD 
<http://digitaldaily.allthingsd.com/20110428/we-thought-sold-out-sounded-better-than-awaiting-delivery/>
More tricks to play with sales channels, this time from Asus: "J.P. Morgan's 
Mark Moskowitz's informal survey of Best Buy and Target outletts... found that 
most hadn't received any Transformer tablets yet. "All stores we spoke to had 
not even received the Transformer tablet," Moskowitz says. "The general read 
was that supply would not reach most stores until mid-May. As a result, we ask 
how the Asus tablet can be sold out when it did not arrive in the first place."

How the iPhone knows where you are >> Macworld 
<http://www.macworld.com/article/159528/2011/04/how_iphone_location_works.html>
Read this and you will, finally, understand this whole saga.

The unedifying arrogance of PC journalists >> Ian Betteridge 
<http://www.technovia.co.uk/2011/04/the-unedifying-arrogance-of-pc-journalists.html>
"he reason that Barry [Collins] – and plenty of other tech journalists – call 
Apple arrogant is mainly because Apple doesn't jump when the journalists tell 
them. Apple, in fact, has a very bad reputation amongst tech journalists for 
being one of the least responsive companies out there. And that reputation is, 
I can tell you from years of experience, entirely justified."

Biggest Threat to Apple: Google Chrome OS >> TheStreet 
<http://www.thestreet.com/_yahoo/story/11095372/1/biggest-threat-to-apple-google-chrome-os.html>
"Starting some time around July or August, Google's partners Samsung and Acer 
will launch laptops and perhaps also a desktop or two, based on Chrome OS. I am 
guessing laptops will start at $299 and "naked" desktops at $149. Given the 
superb performance of these Chrome OS PCs, with boot-up times (from cold) of 
less than even Apple's MacBook Air, some consumers and enterprises will pick 
Chrome OS PCs over the much more expensive Apple PCs."
 A good example of how price can blind you to why people buy computers. Would 
someone who buys a ChromeOS computer really have been in the market for an 
Apple device? Far more likely they'd have been looking at cheap PCs.
 Don't forget either that the first generation of netbooks running Linux had 
huge returns because people couldn't make them work: they expected (and later 
got) Windows. Expect something similar for ChromeOS.

Microsoft net income vs Apple net income from 1980 >> Wolfram|Alpha 
<http://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=microsoft+net+income+vs+apple+net+income+from+1980>
Interesting to compare, using the smart statistical search engine. Note how 
Apple's profit falls well below zero in 1996-8.

The Great White iPhone: How Apple Spun A Tech Fail Into A PR Win >> Fast 
Company 
<http://www.fastcompany.com/1750352/the-great-white-iphone-how-apple-spun-a-tech-fail-into-a-pr-win>
Worth it for the illustration alone, but interesting analysis: "It didn't 
arrive when the iPhone 4 went on sale in mid-2010 because Apple couldn't get 
its hardware working properly--the white coloring, combined with the iPhone 4's 
unusual glass frame meant the phone's proximity sensor and camera unit didn't 
function as they needed to. In other words, it was a big technological failure, 
from one of the world's biggest companies on one of its market-defining 
products."

Apple's Not Spying on You; You're Spying for Apple >> Gottabemobile 
<http://www.gottabemobile.com/2011/04/26/apples-not-spying-on-you-youre-spying-for-apple/>
"Apple asks for diagnostic and usage information about your iPhone, which is 
fair enough to do. However, I don't believe tracking tower and hotspot 
locations counts. That information is external to the device, not part of it. 
If Apple wanted to collect data on my iPhone's location, I would consider that 
a fair part of that agreement. But instead they're using my iPhone to collect 
tower and hotspot locations, and that's not right. I only signed up to give 
info about my device, not those belonging to other people. "The lack of 
transparency on that point is a serious problem, far more legitimate than the 
paranoia circulating. To be clear, I don't think there's anything wrong with 
reporting tower and hotspot locations back to Apple. I just think this falls 
outside the range of "diagnostic and usage information about your iPhone". It's 
about property that belongs to others. Therefore, it requires separate, 
specific permission, as well as a detailed explanation of the risk involved.

With iPhone's secrets, Apple loses track of reality >> ZDNet UK 
<http://www.zdnet.co.uk/blogs/mixed-signals-10000051/with-iphones-secrets-apple-loses-track-of-reality-10022323/>
Rupert Goodwins: "Steve Jobs normally talks to the press about as often as the 
Earth gets visited by Halley's Comet. And, like the comet, it's usually a 
portent of doom.  "There have been three sightings in living memory: the iPhone 
4's Antennagate, the as-yet-unexplained rant against Android and tablets in 
last October's earnings call, and yesterday's response to the discovery of iOS 
4's unexpectedly good memory for location. Let's call it Trackergate. "Leaving 
aside the Android rant — perhaps Eric Schmidt ran over the family cat — the two 
other responses show strong similarities, and make a fascinating insight into 
how a company reacts when it's backed into a corner and can't ignore the flack."
 Suffice it to say, Goodwins ain't buying it.

Notion Ink Adam review >> Engadget 
<http://www.engadget.com/2011/04/27/notion-ink-adam-review/>
"Notion Ink truly did come up with a number of fantastic ideas for the Adam 
tablet. They do show. But so little of their light shines through the muck of 
buggy software and touchy hardware that we're afraid even the best of them will 
be completely dismissed and ignored... "Features like USB host functionality, a 
desktop-class web browser, a sunlight-readable screen and a multitask-friendly 
interface aren't just value-add bullet points that justify a higher price -- 
they're the difference between a tablet that can augment an existing computer, 
and one that can replace it altogether and thrust users into a new paradigm. 
We're sad to see the Adam couldn't make it happen, but there's still an 
opportunity for other manufacturers to take up the torch."

Free anti-virus for Mac named Best Anti-Malware solution at SC Awards >> Naked 
Security 
<http://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2011/04/28/free-anti-virus-for-mac-best-anti-malware-solution/>
Beating the Windows products. We've no idea what the criteria for winning 
actually were.

First Day PlayBook sales: is 50,000 too big a number? >> AllThingsD 
<http://digitaldaily.allthingsd.com/20110422/first-day-playbook-sales-50000-is-an-awfully-big-number/>
"Jeffries analyst Peter Misek figures RIM sold about 45,000 PlayBooks Tuesday, 
with pre-orders accounting for about 25,000 of the total. RBC* analyst Mike 
Abramsky's first day sales estimate is in the same range, but a bit higher: 
50,000, including pre-sales. "'The launch appears to have been stronger than 
the launch of Motorola's Xoom Tablet, or the Samsung Galaxy Tab, although it's 
too early to judge sustainability,' said RBC analyst Mike Abramsky in a note to 
clients, adding that, as of Wednesday, checks of 180 stores across 10 cities in 
the United States and Canada show rising PlayBook stockouts. "But some analysts 
I've spoken with feel those estimates are overly bullish, given the device's 
limited availability. 50,000 sold seems an awfully big number when even the 
Broadway Staples store in downtown New York City had just 10 PlayBooks on hand 
at launch and a clerk at the Bay Area Best Buy I called described inventory as 
'a handful.'"

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on delicious 
<http://delicious.com/guardianista>

To suggest links, tag articles on delicious.com with "guardiantech"
 