
Police investigating the death of the Russian oligarch Boris Berezovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boris-berezovsky> have said there is no 
evidence to suggest anyone else was involved.

The 67-year-old businessman was found dead at his Berkshire home on Saturday 
by a bodyguard. Specialist officers in chemical, biological, radiological and 
nuclear substances have examined the property and given the mansion the 
all-clear.

"It would be wrong to speculate on the cause of death until the postmortem has 
been carried out. We do not have any evidence at this stage to suggest 
third-party involvement," said Detective Chief Inspector Kevin Brown.

There were unconfirmed claims that the former power-broker of Russian politics 
had killed himself at the property in Ascot.

In an interview with Forbes Russia magazine on the eve of his death, 
Berezovsky said he had lost "meaning" from his life and wanted to return to 
Russia. He said he had "underestimated how important"Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> was to him, and he felt 
uncomfortable as an immigrant in Britain.

Berezovsky is believed to have written to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, recently to float the idea 
of going back to his homeland. If he did, he said, he had no interest in 
engaging in politics and would focus on science.

His death comes only months after he lost a high-profile and personally 
disastrous court case against his fellow Russian oligarchRoman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>. He had accused the 
Chelsea football club owner of blackmail, breach of trust and breach of 
contract in relation to a Russian oil company.

After the claims were dismissed, he was ordered by the high court to pay £35m 
of Abramovich's legal costs. His financial difficulties were exacerbated after 
his former mistress, Elena Gorbunova, 43, claimed Berezovsky owed her £5m in 
compensation over the sale of their £25m residence in Surrey.

Berezovsky is said by friends to have become deeply depressed last year, not 
just because he lost to Abramovich, but because the damning judgment at the end 
of the case had so badly damaged his reputation.

The businessman thought highly of the British legal system – explaining in an 
interview with the Guardian six years ago that it had been one of the reasons 
he settled in the UK – and is said to have been distraught that the judge, Mrs 
Justice Gloster, described him as "dishonest", "unreliable" and "deluded".

One close friend said Berezovsky had taken antidepressants last year and had 
checked into the Priory clinic for a brief period about four months ago while 
being treated for depression, adding: "He was very, very low. He talked about 
suicide. He would say to me: 'It's all over, it's all finished, there's no 
point in anything – the best thing that could happen to me is that I have a 
heart attack.'

"But I still don't believe he had the courage to take his own life – he loved 
life too much."

Following the loss of his fortune, Berezovsky was said to have been concerned 
about his ability to support his children. He had six children by three women: 
his two ex-wives and Gorbunova. While two of his children are in their 40s, two 
are in their 20s and his youngest are aged 12 and 10. The businessmen had been 
mired in a series of legal disputes, and is said to have been worn down by his 
long battles with the Russian state, during which there were reports that he 
had faced a number of assassination plots.

Berezovsky, a Kremlin insider in the days of Boris Yeltsin, left Russia in 
2000 after a quarrel with Vladimir Putin and has been the subject of an 
extradition order by Russia. He had appeared on Moscow's most wanted list since 
2001 on charges of fraud, money-laundering and attempted interference in the 
Russian political process. A Russian court sentenced Berezovsky in absentia for 
embezzling $2bn from two major state companies. Moscow repeatedly requested his 
extradition, but British authorities did not comply.

He had forged close contacts with a number of influential British figures 
around the time of the 1996 Russian election, in which Yeltsin defeated a 
communist challenger, and was permitted to settle in the UK. In time, he 
changed his name to Platon Elenin, Platon being the name of a character in a 
Russian film based loosely upon his life. He was subsequently given a British 
passport in this name.

In 2007, Berezovsky said he had been told to leave by British police for his 
own safety after the British security services claimed they had evidence of an 
assassination plot against him.

In the meantime, he led a lavish lifestyle, with properties in London, the 
home counties and the south of France, a private plane and a 1927 Rolls-Royce.

All that was wiped out by the disastrous defeat in the Abramovich case. Last 
week, he was reported to have been selling a £50,000 Andy Warhol portrait of 
Lenin.

One Russian lawyer, Alexander Dobrovinsky, said Berezovsky "was in a dreadful, 
horrendous state; covered in debt, almost broke".

According to Putin's official spokesman, Berezovsky wrote a personal letter to 
the Russian president two months ago, asking for forgiveness. "Boris Berezovsky 
passed a letter personally written by him. He admitted that he made lots of 
mistakes and asked Vladimir Putin to forgive him," said Dmitry Peskov. "He 
asked Putin for a chance to come back to Russia."

Peskov said nothing about Putin's reaction to Berezovsky's letter, adding: "I 
can say that in any case information about somebody's death – whoever the 
person was – cannot bring positive emotions." In the UK, however, friends of 
Berezovsky cast doubt on this claim.

In Russia, Berezovsky's death was greeted with surprise, with former 
associates and observers offering opinions on his legacy and the possible 
causes of his unexpected demise.

The opposition politician Boris Nemtsov, who was a rival of Berezovsky in the 
late 1990s and knew him well, said: "His life at the end was terrible … he lost 
money, he lost to Abramovich and he lost his wife … he not only suffered 
financially but also personally.

"His minuses for the country were more than his pluses, but he wasn't too much 
of a devil – although he often wanted to look like a devil."

The prominent opposition activist Sergei Parkhomenko, talking to the liberal 
radio station Ekho Moskvy about Berezovsky's differences with Putin, said: "We 
were talking once and we turned to the strange topic of health and illness. He 
told me: 'My health is yet another weapon. Who dies first, loses. And I never 
lose.'"

Parkhomenko added: "He didn't seem like a potential suicide."

Mark Feigin, a lawyer, who worked as a civil servant in the 1990s and met 
Berezovsky several times, said: "He was not a little person in politics and had 
unbelievable energy … things you couldn't do, Berezovsky could do.

"Over the last few months he had been experiencing a full exhaustion of his 
internal reserves. Maybe this caught up with him."

Andrei Sidelnikov, a Russian emigrant, told gazeta.ru he had known Berezovsky 
for 11 years. He said: "Such a person could never commit suicide. He was an 
exceptionally joyous person and, despite his various reverses in life, always 
remained as such. My personal opinion is that his death has either natural 
causes, or [is the work of] the Russian secret service. Everybody knows that 
Boris was Putin's enemy number one."

RIA Novosti, a state-run news agency, cited a source close to Berezovsky, 
saying he had died of a heart attack, and had recently undergone treatment for 
health problems in Israel.
 