
What is it with former London mayors and Hitler? Ken Livingstone got himself 
suspended from the Labour party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/ken-livingstone-suspended-from-labour-after-hitler-remarks>
 for his references to Adolf.

Now Boris Johnson has talked himself into controversy by likening the European 
Union’s supposed intention to create a superstate to Hitler’s political 
ambitions. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/14/boris-johnson-the-eu-wants-a-superstate-just-as-hitler-did/>


The reaction to Johnson’s ahistorical claim was utterly predictable. It set 
the EU referendum news agenda for a day... but it proved to be of dubious value 
to the Brexit campaign.

Throughout Sunday, the airwaves hummed to the sound of fury by Johnson’s 
opponents and evident frustration by his supporters as they struggled to defend 
him on TV and radio news bulletins and current affairs programmes.

German readers say Johnson's EU-Hitler comments are just 'British hysteria'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/boris-johnson-silly-things-said-by-a-silly-man-germans-on-eu-hitler-comparison>
National newspaper editors joined the fray on Monday. But there was a 
noticeable lack of enthusiasm. The Daily Telegraph ran only a short news piece 
on “the row” generatedby Johnson’s interview with its Sunday title. And Johnson 
made no mention of it in his regular column. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/15/of-course-our-city-fat-cats-love-the-eu--its-why-they-earn-so-mu/>

Two titles favouring Leave - the Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> and the Sun - sought to claim 
there was logic to the Johnson argument. Those advocating Remain poured scorn 
on it, and on Boris himself.

The Times, the Rupert Murdoch title engaged in the delicate process of 
switching from Euroscepticism to Europhilia,savaged the man who affects to lead 
the Brexiteers. 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/sound-and-fury-m6g8jv7tq>

“The tang of his own shoe leather is perhaps not an unfamiliar taste for Boris 
Johnson”, it began, adding:

“Life is too short to waste much of it seeking to place the utterances of Mr 
Johnson anywhere on a sliding scale between calculation and gaffe.”

It thought the hyperbolic Nazi reference was “nonsense”. But the Times saw it 
in the context of an increasingly degraded debate, concluding: “Leave Hitler 
out of it.”

The Mail overcame its obvious embarrassment by offering muted support to 
Johnson. It conceded that “invoking the ghosts of Hitler and the Nazis in any 
political argumentis a profoundly dangerous strategy.” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3592131/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-EU-imperialism-lessons-history.html>

But it went on to defend Johnson for playing “a risky card” and argued that 
“beyond all the sound and fury” there was a point to his claim that the EU “is 
acting like the totalitarian regimes of the past and trampling on the rights 
and wishes of ordinary citizens.”

It concluded with a rhetorical question: “Is this really a cynical, hysterical 
argument, or simply the voice of logic and common sense?”

The Sun gave unequivocal backing to Johnson 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/sun_says/6500866/Sun-Says.html> for 
making “the reasonable point that various people had tried and failed to unify 
the ­countries of Europe — including ­Napoleon and Hitler.”

It said his Remain camp critics “exploded in fake outrage” and “confected 
fury.” Saying that dictators in the past have called for “ever closer union” in
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> “is both truthful and a 
point worth making.”

The Daily Express gave Johnson’s statement a double-page headline, “Boris: EU 
wants a superstate, just like Hitler 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/670421/Brexit-Boris-Johnson-London-Mayor-David-Cameron-Nigel-Farage-Yvette-Cooper-EU>
”, but refrained from comment.

Its leading article on the EU debate - “the devastating impact that mass 
migration has had on this country” - hammered away at its familiar anti-migrant 
theme.

The Guardian’s leading article explored the referendum debate’s “descent 
beyond hyperbole into hysteria” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/15/the-guardian-view-on-the-referendum-debate-from-hype-to-hysteria>
 and pointed to each side’s accusations that the other one is “peddling bogus 
statistics and ramping up baseless fear.”

Turning to Johnson, it saw his “ugly and provocative allusion to the Third 
Reich as a metaphor for European integration” as “a move from theDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> playbook - maximising 
controversy in order to dominate the conversation and drown out reasonable 
debate.”

It also took the opportunity to forge a split between Johnson and his fellow 
Brexiteers:

“Mr Johnson is not famed for consistency or integrity, but there are other 
senior Conservatives... the likes ofMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> and Michael Howard... who 
combine sincere Euroscepticism with a conscientious view of public life as 
entailing responsibilities.

They should be alarmed by the direction the campaign they endorse is taking. A 
question they, and other moderate Eurosceptics, should face, is how much poison 
they are prepared to see tipped into the well of reasonable public debate in 
pursuit of a goal - Britain outside the EU.”

The Daily Mirror, having persuaded Cameron to contribute an “historic guest 
column”urging readers to vote Remain 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/david-cameron-writes-mirror-dont-7978638>
, gave it, rather than Johnson’s Hitler analogy, front page billing.

But the paper didn’t miss the opportunity to deride Johnson with a spread 
headlined “Reich Charlie” 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/boris-johnson-branded-cut-rate-7979292> 
over a picture of Boris with his hand stretched out as if giving a Nazi-style 
salute.

And its political columnist, Kevin Maguire, laid into the “increasingly 
unhinged” Johnson 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/voice-mirror-unhinged-boris-overstepped-7978846>
, calling him “Britain’s Donald Trump” who “spouts poison about Germans with 
the wild prejudice of a Hooray gulping once too often from the port bottle at a 
Bullingdon reunion.”
 