
Laura Mvula – The Dreaming Room

The best moments of Laura Mvula’s 2013 debut Sing to the Moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/28/laura-mvula-sing-moon-review> 
seemed to suggest the arrival of a unique talent – certainly more so than its 
advance billing as a Radio 2-friendly retro soul album. But its follow-up 
really bears that promise out. There hasn’t been another album released in the 
last 12 months that’s even remotely likeThe Dreaming Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/laura-mvula-dreaming-room-cd-review>
: it exists in a world entirely of its own. The album’s serpentine tunes thread 
their way through 36 minutes of strange, heady musical juxtapositions: 
explosive vocal harmonies, baroque classical ornamentation, off-centre funk, 
leftfield hip-hop, psychedelic R&B. The music is richly, seductively melodic 
without really using choruses or hooks; the songs seem to slowly unfurl before 
you; the lyrics – and Mvula’s delivery of them – are both poignant and painful. 
It sounds like pop music floating free from the standard rules of pop music, 
heading into uncharted territory.Alexis Petridis

Anonhi – Hopelessness

If PJ Harvey can scoop an award twice, including one for her baroque protest 
albumLet England Shake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/10/pj-harvey-let-england-shake-review>
, then there’s room for another second-time winner and for another album that 
takes aim at the world. Anonhi’s Hopelessness eviscerates with bittersweet 
sharpness, constituting surely the most ambitious songs of 2016’s shortlist – 
tackling war, climate change, murky politics and violence. They have an 
emotional range that spans lacerating anger and heart-clutching despair, 
underpinned by futuristic and expansive soundscapes from producersHudson Mohawke
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/14/hudson-mohawke-kanye-west-producer>
 andOneohtrix Point Never 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/26/oneohtrix-point-never-garden-of-delete-review>
. The opening track, Drone Bomb Me – a longing ballad from the perspective of a 
civilian beckoning a fatal drone strike – cuts deep. Climate change banger (a 
new musical genre?) 4 Degrees is another engulfing listen that sounds as if it 
is swooping over epic landscapes, with Anonhi’s stark falsetto contrasting 
perfectly with Mohawke’s signature majestic horns. Hopelessness is the only 
strictly electronic album this year but it’s also the only album brave enough 
to take on the bigger picture. That’s something to be hopeful for. Kate 
Hutchinson

David Bowie – Blackstar

If the Mercury prize is supposed to recognise albums that capture a moment or 
prove somehow ahead of the game, it’s no wonder Blackstar is the runaway 
favourite with bookmakers. Bowie’s best album in more than three decades 
freefalls through the music that inspired him across his career – from glam to 
jazz to Kendrick Lamar’sTo Pimp a Butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/19/kendrick-lamar-to-pimp-a-butterfly-review>
 – and emerges as something genuinely strange, off-kilter, otherworldly and 
postmodern. The lyrics wrongfooted everyone until two days after the album’s 
release, when Bowie died and it became clear that he had tdrawn on his 
incurable cancer and impending death in his final work of art. Blackstar is 
effectively a loving goodbye to the world, and songs such as Lazarus (“Look at 
me, I’m in heaven”) and the sublimeDollar Days 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qqW-kvU5cLg> offer insights into illness, 
mortality and afterlife that were designed to be listened to once the reasons 
for their offering had been made clear. What a way to go.Dave Simpson

Skepta – Konnichiwa

There are two grime records on this year’s Mercury shortlist: Kano’s Made in 
the Manor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/10/kano-made-in-the-manor-review-grime-mainstay-finds-a-reflective-maturity>
, which speaks to the genre’s garage genes, and Skepta’sKonnichiwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/skepta-konnichiwa-review-boy-better-know-album-of-the-week>
, an album that embodies its zeitgeisty present. Over the past two years, the 
north London rapper has managed to contribute to British culture in a way that 
feels truly contemporary – and made the forecast of an exclusively 
retromania-fuelled pop future seem just like a bad dream in the process. The 
real basis for that achievement is an aesthetic one. Skepta is funny, clever 
and spirited on Konnichiwa, but more importantly he’s stylish – something 
evidenced by everything from his minimal, slightly vicious production to the 
talk of binning his naff designer clobber. This is not a case of style over 
substance: these days, style is substance. Now more than ever, music is a 
multi-channel enterprise, and as Drake and Kanye West have made clear, your 
aesthetic aura is an important facet of your latest release. That means 
Konnichiwa isn’t just the most arresting album on the shortlist – it’s also the 
most relevant, by a very long way.Rachel Aroesti

The 1975 – I Like It When You Sleep, For You Are So Beautiful Yet So Unaware 
of It

Rock history is replete with second albums that dwell on the disaffection and 
disillusion that comes with being made prosperous, famous and adored. And most 
of those albums tend to be intensely dislikeable affairs, because those of us 
who are not prosperous, famous and adored tend to find it hard to see the 
downside to that situation. The 1975’s second album could easily have fallen 
into that trap, but didn’t, because singerMatty Healy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/15/the-1975-matt-healy-no-ones-asking-you-to-inspire-revolution-interview>
 portrayed himself not as the person alienated by everyone else’s shallowness, 
but just as shallow as everyone else, which gave the album a sense of humour: 
it’s a crisis caused by self-knowledge rather than self-importance. On the 
bleakly beautiful, none-more-80s ballad A Change of Heart, he paints himself as 
part of a couple equally incapable of empathy: it’sLess Than Zero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/29/winter-reads-bret-easton-ellis> 
set to music, with the year’s best couplet: “You said I’m full of diseases, 
your eyes were full of regret / And then you took a picture of your salad and 
you put it on the internet.” Healy’s isn’t a world of inchoate rage on the 
estates, but one you recognise from the teenagers you talk to: confused 
autodidacts trying to trace a pattern in the world (and, boy, can he write a 
lyric, with the band supplying tunes to match). If you want an album that 
captures the magpie nature of modern music – skipping between styles, borrowing 
from the Police, Yazoo, M83, nu soul, pop house, Bowie and scores more with 
alacrity – then this is the one that sounds like playlist culture brought to 
life.Michael Hann

Radiohead – A Moon Shaped Pool

Radiohead have now clocked up five Mercury nominations, more than any other 
artist. They also, rather famously, have failed to win the award in any of 
their previous four appearances on the shortlist, making them the Leonardo 
DiCaprio of credible guitar music. In fairness, you can make at least a 
semi-credible case for three of those losses: OK Computer was defeated byRoni 
Size/Reprazent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/16/roni.sixe.reprazent.final.album>
, crowning drum and bass’s ascendancy at the time; Amnesiac lost out to PJ 
Harvey’s sumptuous Stories from the City, Stories from the Sea (Thom Yorke’s 
appearance on that album acting as a consolation prize of sorts); andHail to 
the Thief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/jun/06/popandrock.artsfeatures> came up 
against the might of Dizzee Rascal’sBoy in Da Corner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/jul/18/popandrock.artsfeatures>. All 
fair enough, but then in 2008In Rainbows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/oct/11/radiohead.popandrock> lost to 
Elbow’s milquetoastThe Seldom Seen Kid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/mar/14/popandrock.shopping>, and 
suddenly their failure to win the award started to look like a bit of a slight. 
Now is a decent time for the Mercurys to correct that.A Moon Shaped Pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/08/radiohead-a-moon-shaped-pool-review>
 is Radiohead’s best album in more than a decade. It’s a dizzying blend of past 
and present, of organic textures and glitchy futurism. It’s polemical, elegiac, 
beautiful and frequently furious. You can hum along to at least seven of the 
tracks on it, rather than the usual none. It has True Love bloody Waits on it. 
In short, it’s the sound of a band at the peak of their powers. It would be a 
worthy winner. Gwilym Mumford
 