
BP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> chief executive Bob Dudley will 
face shareholders on Thursday amid investor anger over his £13.8m pay package, 
after the oil company posted its worst-ever annual loss.

The Institute of Directors made a rare intervention on executive pay ahead of 
the AGM,urging BP shareholders to think twice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/institute-of-directors-bp-chief-executive-bob-dudley-pay-award>
 before backing Dudley’s pay award.

Simon Walker, the IOD director general, said the enormous remuneration deal 
for 2015 sent “the wrong message” to investors and other boards, given the
£4.5bn annual loss and the decision to axe 7,000 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/02/bp-annual-loss-biggest-for-20-years-axes-thousands-of-jobs-deepwater>
.


Institute of Directors weighs in on BP chief executive's pay award
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/institute-of-directors-bp-chief-executive-bob-dudley-pay-award>
His comments came on the eve of what is likely to be a stormy BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> meeting in London, with the oil 
company facing criticism over a range of issues including controversial new 
drilling plans in waters off Australia.

“It is rare that the IoD intervenes on the subject of an individual chief 
executive’s pay.We are concerned, however, that Mr Dudley’s £14m pay package 
will seem unjustified to many shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/institute-of-directors-bp-chief-executive-bob-dudley-pay-award>
, considering the performance of the company over the past 12 months,” said 
Walker.

Like other oil companies BP was hit hard by a collapse in oil prices last 
year, but the company argued that Dudley had done a good job in difficult 
circumstances.

A BP spokesman said: “Despite the very challenging environment, BP’s safety 
and operating performance was excellent throughout 2015 and management also 
responded early and decisively to the steep fall in the oil price.”


He added that BP’s performance had surpassed the board’s expectations on 
almost all of the measures that determine remuneration – and that the oil 
company’s investors had agreed to the pay deal.

“These clear measures derive directly from BP’s remuneration policy, which was 
approved by shareholders at the 2014 AGM with over 96% of the vote.”

Aberdeen Asset Management is expected to be among a pack of major investors 
voting against Dudley’s pay after it stated that BP’s remuneration awards were 
“overly complex”.


But it said it was “supportive of management’s strategy” and was “sure the 
company will take note of shareholders feedback”.

Shareholder group Sharesoc has branded the pay deal “simply too high” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/11/vote-against-bp-chief-bob-dudley-pay-shareholder-group-says>
, while Royal London Asset Management, Glass Lewis and Institutional 
Shareholder Services have also expressed their opposition.


However, any vote against his pay deal is only advisory and will not lead to 
the package being blocked.

The pay deal will raise Dudley’s salary from £1.27m in 2014 to £1.3 million 
for 2015, while his annual cash bonus will also rise from £702,733 in 2014 to 
£976,799 for last year. The bulk of Dudley’s remuneration package is mnade up 
of pension and share options.

Pressure to reject the pay deal comes after some shareholders also expressed 
anger over his pay ahead of BP’s AGM in 2015, when his remuneration received a 
5% hike.

BP said in January that it would have to axe a further 3,000 jobs worldwide in 
its downstream business – including refining, marketing and distribution – by 
the end of 2017, on top of the 4,000 cuts announced last year under a swingeing 
overhaul to slash costs.

The group’s remuneration policy is voted on every three years, with the next 
vote taking place at the AGM in 2017.

 