
Various Hollywood figures, including Brad Pitt, Aaron Sorkin and Seth Rogen, 
have publicly criticised the media for publishing stories based on information 
hacked fromSony Pictures <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sony-pictures>.

The hack by the group Guardians of Peace revealed email conversations between 
Sony executives and actors, discussing the likes of Pitt’s wife Angelina Jolie, 
who wasdescribed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/10/sony-hack-eamils-angelina-jolie-scott-rudin-amy-pascal-david-fincher>
 as a “minimally talented spoiled brat” by producer Scott Rudin. Speaking at 
the premiere of Jolie’s film Unbroken,Pitt said 
<http://news.yahoo.com/brad-pitt-jokes-over-angelina-jolies-chicken-pox-054142719.html>
:

I don’t see a difference in News Corp hacking phone calls and hacking e-mails. 
I don’t think we should be able to participate. I think someone’s conversation, 
whether in e-mail or in person, should be private. We shouldn’t be 
participating and these sites that are disseminating them should stop. They 
won’t. And we should stop reading them. We won’t. It’s more of an indictment on 
us, I think.

Seth Rogen meanwhile, whose North Korea-baiting film The Interview was cited 
as a catalyst for the hacks by Guardians of Peace, saidin an interview 
<https://soundcloud.com/howardstern/sethrogenjamesfranco_sonypictures> that 
“everyone is doing exactly what these criminals want... It’s stolen information 
that media outlets are directly profiting from.”

Aaron Sorkin, whose screenplay for an upcoming Steve Jobs biopic was at the 
heart of one set of hacked emails, haspenned a New York Times opinion piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/dec/15/aaron-sorkin-sony-hack-news-outlets>
 where he asserts that the media is “giving material aid to criminals... the 
minor insults that were revealed are such small potatoes compared to the fact 
thatthey were revealed. Not by the hackers, but by American journalists helping 
them.

“I understand that news outlets routinely use stolen information. That’s how 
we got the Pentagon Papers, to use an oft-used argument. But there is nothing 
in these documents remotely rising to the level of public interest of the 
information found in the Pentagon Papers.”
 Seth Rogen, centre, in The Interview. Photograph: Columbia Pictures/Allstar 
Their criticisms come as Sony’s law firm Boies, Schiller & Flexner has ordered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/15/sony-orders-news-outlets-stop-reporting-stolen-data-legal-action>
 news organisations to “destroy the stolen information”, and cease publication 
of any portion of it.


The studio’s CEO Michael Lynton also reassured employees 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/sony-pictures-ceo-at-town-hall-meeting-this-will-not-take-us-down-1201379958/>
 in a company meeting that the hack “will not take us down – you should not be 
worried about the future of this studio.”

Guardians of Peace have threatened to release another batch of files as a 
“Christmas gift”, leading to pre-emptive manoeuvres by Sony staff. Co-chair Amy 
Pascal, whose correspondence has frequently been featured in the hacked emails, 
has contacted the likes of producer Harvey Weinstein to apologise if any 
disparaging remarks are leaked,according to Variety 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/sony-hack-amy-pascal-apologizes-to-harvey-weinstein-lining-up-studio-supporters-1201379785/>
.
 