
Brazil is poised to implement the most socially regressive austerity package 
in the world, a seniorUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> official has warned.

Despite violent street protests against budget cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/brazil-rio-de-janeiro-police-pepper-spray-protest-olympics>
, PresidentMichel Temer <https://www.theguardian.com/world/michel-temer> – who 
came to power after engineering the impeachment of his former running mate,
Dilma Rousseff <https://www.theguardian.com/world/dilma-rousseff> – is pushing 
through a 20-year social spending freeze that will be locked into the 
constitution.

Ahead of a final senate vote on the measures next Tuesday, the UN special 
rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, Philip Alston, took the unusual 
step of decrying the plan as an attack on the poor – and a violation of 
Brazil’s obligations under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights.

“This is a radical measure, lacking in all nuance and compassion,” he said in 
a statement on Friday. “It is completely inappropriate to freeze only social 
expenditure and to tie the hands of all future governments for another two 
decades. If this amendment is adopted it will placeBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> in a socially retrogressive category 
all of its own.”

The constitutional amendment, which is known as PEC55, solidifies fears that 
Temer’s rightwing government will jerk Brazil back towards its historical 
position as one of the most unequal countries on the planet.

Brazil turns right as old elite wastes no time erasing Workers' party influence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/brazil-rightwing-government-michel-temer>
That reputation had somewhat softened after 13 years of Workers’ party rule, 
which saw increased spending on healthcare and education, and modest income 
distribution measures.

But since Temer conspired to eject Rousseff from the presidency, he has 
switched priorities towards creditors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/brazil-rightwing-government-michel-temer>
 in an effort to restore investor confidence and improve Brazil’s battered 
financial ratings.

As a result the state will shrink rapidly and a greater share of tax revenues 
will go to bond holders.

PEC55 goes far further than austerity policies in other nations, according to 
Pedro Paulo Zahluth Bastos, associate professor in economics at the University 
of Campinas.

Bastos notes that only Singapore and Georgia hard-wired cuts into their 
constitutions – and even then not so deeply or for such a duration.

Given how inflation is benchmarked, he estimates education spending per child 
will fall by almost a third, and health outlays per patient will decrease by 
almost 10%. While social spending declines as a share of GDP, he says the 
demands will increase because of an ageing society and the forecast addition of 
20 million people to the population.

Yet interest payments will remain generous: all future gains in taxation will 
be destined to the payment of public debt. And Brazil will remain one of the 
only countries in the world without a dividend tax or an income tax for company 
owners.

Brazil is in crisis. And once again, the poorest will bear the burden | 
Mariana Prandini Assis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/brazil-20-years-austerity-michel-temer>
“Nothing like this has been executed in any other place in the world,” Bastos 
said. “This is the most contractionist state and at the same time the most 
beneficial program for the holders of public debt in the history of humanity.”

There has been little public debate considering the importance of a measure 
that will affect the country until 2037. Polls suggest less than half of the 
population have heard of PEC55.

None of them voted for it because Temer was elected vice-president in 2014 on 
Rousseff’s coattails and a promise of no austerity.

Adding to frustrations, the government remains mired in a corruption scandal 
with dozens of senior politicians implicated in the ongoing Lava Jato (Car 
Wash) investigation into bribery and kickbacks at the state run oil company 
Petrobras.

Three ministers have resigned from the cabinet of Temer, who is also accused. 
To public fury, the head of the upper house, Renan Calheiros,refused to comply 
with a supreme court judge’s ruling that he step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/08/brazils-top-court-overturns-ban-on-senate-head-renan-calheiros>
 to answer charges earlier this week, and has subsequently struck a deal with 
other justices that enables him to cling to power.

Social tensions are already evident. Police used teargas and rubber bullets 
when more than 10,000 protesters rallied outside Congress during an earlier 
stage of voting on the bill.

Local government budget cuts and salary delays have also prompted violent 
demonstrations on other cities. The latest erupted in central Rio de Janeiro on 
Monday, when office workers and shoppers got caught up in clashes between riot 
police and striking firemen, police and other state employees.

“We are losing jobs and incomes so we have a right to protest, but the 
government responds with violence,” said Pedro Oliveira, as teargas swirled 
through the city streets.

Jorge Darze, the president of the Doctor’s Union of Rio de Janeiro, said he 
was worried both by the cuts to an already underfunded health system and the 
breakdown of dialogue between social organisations and the authorities.

“The situation is very serious,” he warned. “It is very difficult to discuss, 
because the legislative militarises its entrance and the public prosecutors 
office has turned its back. This austerity package is far from solving the 
economic crisis, and I think it will worsen the social crisis.”

 