
For the next four weeks, the Guardian is taking command of the streaming 
station Beats 1 onApple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music> with the show Breaking 
Good, where special guests from the forefront of music will play tunes by 
artists they think are getting it really,really right now.

In the first episode, the Guardian’s Kate Hutchinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kate-hutchinson> is joined by two 
heavyweights from British dance culture,Andrew Weatherall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/25/andrew-weatherall-interview-dj-disco-maverick>
 andDavid Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/02/david-holmes-it-was-a-modern-day-wrecking-crew>
.

Weatherall is the man who produced Primal Scream’s seminal album Screamadelica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/31/primal-scream-screamadelica-live>
 and helped kickstart the UK’s acid house movement with hisBoy’s Own collective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/sep/01/boys-own-fanzine-acid-house>, 
laying some of the groundwork for modern clubbing culture. A true DJ’s DJ, 
Weatherall is as respected for his sets of techno bangers as for his penchant 
for playing rockabilly, post-punk and slo-mo house.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fbreaking-good-guardian-beats-1-radio-new-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b8df52fe837c23a693b9b892a34652e65f03cfb%2F0_0_671_367%2F671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20good%3A%20the%20Guardian%20takes%20over%20Beats%201%20Radio%20with%20new%20music%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fbreaking-good-guardian-beats-1-radio-new-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20good%3A%20the%20Guardian%20takes%20over%20Beats%201%20Radio%20with%20new%20music%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fbreaking-good-guardian-beats-1-radio-new-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b8df52fe837c23a693b9b892a34652e65f03cfb%2F0_0_671_367%2F671.jpg>
 Andy Weatherall and David Holmes. Photograph: The Guardian 
Holmes is an electronic music producer, superstar remixer and award-winning 
film composer. He has twisted up tracks by everyone from U2 to Ice Cube and 
soundtracked the Oceans 11 trilogy andSteve McQueen’s Hunger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/mar/06/hunger-reel-history-bobby-sands-hunger-strike>
.

Most recently, he wrote and directed his first short film, the critically 
acclaimedI Am Here <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MFQ1U-W2LDw>, and has 
worked with studio artists such as John Lennon’s drummer Jim Keltner, Wayne 
Kramer (MC5) and Tommy Morgan (the Beach Boys, Elvis).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMiNKRdGExBw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMiNKRdGExBw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMiNKRdGExBw&media=>
Weatherall and Holmes have recently released lauded new albums – Weatherall, 
thepost-punk and dub-tinged Convenanza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/feb/24/hear-andrew-weatherall-new-album-convenanza-stream>
, named after his festival of the same name; Holmes, Guilty of Love by his 
smouldering project Unloved, inspired by the sounds of 60s girl groups and 
classic film scores.

They’ll be playing the artists that they think are smashing it in 2016, from 
London duo Cat’s Eyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/27/cats-eyes-horrors-duo-vatican> 
to Under the Skin soundtrack svengaliMicachu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/02/micachu-shapes-review-renaissance-woman-mica-levi>
, among a sprinkling of their own remixes and tracks by British newcomer Gaika 
and classical composer turned techno wizard Anne Meredith. Plus our roving 
reporter Ben Beaumont-Thomas will be zooming in on breaking music trends from 
around the world.


 * Breaking Good starts Saturday 5 March at 7pm GMT on Beats 1 on Apple Music 
<http://www.apple.com/uk/music/radio/?itscg=1001&at=1000lGN&ct=UK-google&cid=wwa-uk-kwg-features>
, with shows at the same time every Saturday for the rest of March. All shows 
will be available to hear on demand.  