
If you want to know what's happening in the world, then Memorandum 
<http://www.memeorandum.com/> will tell you – at least in a couple of areas. 
It's an automated news clipping service, known in the trade as a "news 
aggregator". It provides headlines and short texts updated every few minutes, 
with links to the original sites, much like Google News.

Memeorandum is based on the idea of "memes" or ideas that spread across the 
web (along with a pun on memorandum). Someone publishes an interesting story, 
other people find it, discuss it, and link to it. That's how the web works. 
Small stories come and go quickly, while big ones generate lots of comment and 
dominate the page for hours.

The developer, Gabe Rivera, says it's all done in software. He provides a list 
of publications as "seeds," but the software still finds stories on sites he's 
never heard of. It's just a question of following links, and then trying to 
assess the contents. The algorithms are, obviously, secret.

Google also follows links and assesses content, but Memeorandum is 
embarrassingly better than Google News. Google reckons that the more coverage a 
story gets, the more important it is. Unfortunately, broad coverage takes a 
long time to develop, soGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> 
News can run hours or even a day behind Memeorandum. This is fine for casual 
consumers, but if you're a news junkie – or a journalist – it's hopeless.

There are, however, two major problems with Memeorandum: it doesn't cover many 
topics, and it doesn't cover much of the world.

So far, Memeorandum covers news and politics on the main page, with separate 
sites for technology news (Techmeme <http://www.techmeme.com/>), celebrity 
gossip (WeSmirch <http://www.wesmirch.com/>) and baseball (Ballbug 
<http://www.ballbug.com/>). Another dozen topics would be useful, but 
Memeorandum has only a couple of staff and not much money.

Also, the sites mainly cover the US, and Techmeme inevitably ends up focused 
on California: it's where the action is. But if you're interested in news from 
Europe or Japan, for example, it's the wrong place to go.

Fortunately, a lot of news nowadays is of global interest, whether it's 
Britney Spears appearing on The X Factor, terrorists murdering people in 
Mumbai, or Microsoft trying to do a deal with Yahoo. (I'm not sure I can make a 
case for "Tampa Bay Rays plan extra rest for pitchers after long season".)

Another complaint is that the Memeorandum sites now give far too much coverage 
to mainstream sources such as the New York Times, Washington Post, CNN, the BBC 
and the Guardian. Memeorandum used to discover and promote unknown bloggers, 
critics claim. Perhaps the balance has shifted, but so has the web.We're all 
blogging now <https://www.theguardian.com/tone/blog>.

Tech.memeorandum was launched in September 2005, so the biggest mystery of all 
is why a rich global corporation has not made Gabe an offer he can't refuse and 
globalised his system. He's had offers, but he values his freedom and says: "I 
don't want to be accountable to organisations that appear clueless about the 
future of news."
 