
American Psycho author Bret Easton Ellis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/breteastonellis> has said he will always be 
defined by his iconic, psychopathic antihero Patrick Bateman, and revealed that 
his character would be “embarrassed” by Donald Trump today after revering him 
in the novel.

Ellis’s iconic book about 1980s consumerist culture and masculinity was 
published in 1991; it was dropped the previous year by publisher Simon & 
Schuster due to concerns about the content and eventually published by Vintage 
Books (now Penguin Random House). It was hugely divisive due to Bateman’s 
detatched dabblings in rape, torture, cannibalism, murder and necrophilia; in 
the Guardian, Joan Smith called it “nasty, brutish and long” andthe New York 
Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/12/16/books/snuff-this-book-will-bret-easton-ellis-get-away-with-murder.html?pagewanted=all>
 deemed it “the most loathsome offering of the season”.

Irvine Welsh – American Psycho is a modern classic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/10/american-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh>
Marking the 25th anniversary of the book in an interview with Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/news/american-psycho-at-25-bret-easton-ellis-on-patrick-batemans-legacy-20160331?page=8>
, Ellis revealed he found the book’s most violent scenes “depressing and gross 
to write, but at the same time, exciting”, and said his initial editor wanted 
to remove most of it. “He thought it was disgusting and that I was going to be 
ashamed of it five years down the road. Now I honestly don’t remember a lot of 
what I put in there.”

In the novel, Bateman is a huge fan of the now-presidential candidate Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, at one point attending 
a U2 concert because he is told Trump likes them. He recommends Trump’s how-to 
bookThe Art of the Deal 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2016/03/an-ethicist-reads-the-art-of-the-deal/475605/>
 to a detective investigating the disappearance of someone Bateman murdered. 
But Ellis said in the interview that if Bateman was voting today, he “may be 
disappointed by how Trump is coming off and who he’s connecting with”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbret-easton-ellis-american-psycho-25-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3293011586f32af488e512f25ee80f4adae0948e%2F0_0_3248_1949%2F3248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bret%20Easton%20Ellis%20still%20stuck%20with%20American%20Psycho%20after%2025%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbret-easton-ellis-american-psycho-25-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bret%20Easton%20Ellis%20still%20stuck%20with%20American%20Psycho%20after%2025%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbret-easton-ellis-american-psycho-25-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3293011586f32af488e512f25ee80f4adae0948e%2F0_0_3248_1949%2F3248.jpg>
 In an interview with Rolling Stone, Ellis says: ‘Trump today isn’t the Trump 
of 1987… Now he seems to be giving a voice to white, angry, blue-collar voters. 
I think, in a way, Patrick Bateman may be disappointed by how Trump is coming 
off.’ Photograph: ddp USA/REX/Shutterstock 
“Trump today isn’t the Trump of 1987. He’s not the Trump of Art of the Deal,” 
Ellis said. “He seemed much more elitist in 87, 88. Now he seems to be giving a 
voice to white, angry, blue-collar voters ... To the guys that I was talking to 
in the Eighties when I was researchingAmerican Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/american-psycho>, Donald Trump was an 
aspirational figure. That’s why the jokes are throughout the book. It wasn’t 
like I pulled that out of my hat; that was happening. And so I just thought it 
was funny that ‘OK, well, Patrick Bateman’s gonna be obsessed with Donald 
Trump. He’s gonna want to aspire to be Donald Trump.’ And I don’t know if he 
would think that today.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbret-easton-ellis-american-psycho-25-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b2b80547bbb45a80d10ce1d9a84132ed7946b00%2F0_0_3232_2139%2F3232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bret%20Easton%20Ellis%20still%20stuck%20with%20American%20Psycho%20after%2025%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbret-easton-ellis-american-psycho-25-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bret%20Easton%20Ellis%20still%20stuck%20with%20American%20Psycho%20after%2025%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbret-easton-ellis-american-psycho-25-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b2b80547bbb45a80d10ce1d9a84132ed7946b00%2F0_0_3232_2139%2F3232.jpg>
 Christian Bale as Patrick Bateman in the film adaptation of American Psycho. 
Photograph: Moviestore Collection / Rex Feat 
In an interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/26/bret-easton-ellis-pain-misogyny-drugs>
 in 2010, Ellis claimed it never occurred to him that American Psycho would 
cause offence: “No, not at all. That was shocking.” That same year, Ellis 
revealed that he had previously lied about the inspiration behind Bateman being 
a combination of his own father, Robert Ellis, and American bankers. “Patrick 
Bateman was about me,” he said,in an interview with Australian magazine Three 
Thousand 
<http://thethousands.com.au/melbourne/read/interview-with-bret-easton-ellis-part-5/>
. “I didn’t want to own up to the responsibility of being Patrick Bateman, so I 
laid it on my father; I laid it on Wall Street.”

Bret Easton Ellis: 'So you're a misogynist, a racist – so what? Does it make 
your art less interesting?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/26/bret-easton-ellis-pain-misogyny-drugs>
Bateman appeared in other books by Ellis: a small, pre-Psycho appearance in 
The Rules of Attraction (1987), a cameo inGlamorama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1999/jan/03/fiction.breteastonellis> (1998) 
andLunar Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/oct/01/fiction.breteastonellis> (2005), 
a novel Ellis said started as a homage to Stephen King but became an 
autobiographical analysis of the fame that came with creating Bateman. “I will 
always be defined by Patrick Bateman. I don’t think there’s ever another 
character I will create that will have that kind of impact,” he told Rolling 
Stone. “I thought it was fun to grapple with that idea, but I really don’t know 
if there’s any way I would reference it now.”

American Psycho review – Matt Smith helps murderous yuppie make a killing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/american-psycho-musical-review> 
Ellis said he had no problem with American Psycho being adapted into the film 
in 2000 starring Christian Bale, or the musical version in 2013, withex-Doctor 
Who actor Matt Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/07/doctor-who-matt-smith-american-psycho-musical>
 playing Bateman in London, and nowBenjamin Walker for the show’s new run on 
Broadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/11/bret-easton-ellis-broadway-american-psycho-online-troll>
. “I don’t really see what the drawback is,” Ellis said. “Every now and then 
you see things like, ‘Dear God, this is a musical. How did Bret Ellis let this 
happen?’ Well, Bret Ellis didn’t really let anything happen. Ultimately, I 
don’t have a problem with it.”

Much of the book’s significance lies in the shocking twist that Bateman’s 
violent behaviour may have never happened at all, and are just the imaginings 
of a unreliable narrator. Ellis revealed to Rolling Stone that he still has not 
decided if Bateman does what he says he did in the book. “When I was writing 
the book, I couldn’t make a decision. That was what was so interesting to me 
about it. You can read the book either way.”

Due to the nature of its content, American Psycho is still sold shrink-wrapped 
in Australia and New Zealand, a practice Bret Easton Ellis has called“adorable” 
and “cute” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UD1gb4NXszA>. Last year, a 
bookstore in Adelaide was visited by local police after itdisplayed the book 
unwrapped on a shelf. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/20/american-psycho-pulled-police-australia>
 