
Conservative cabinet ministers campaigning for Britain to leave the EU are 
putting Northern Ireland’s political progress at risk, Labour’sAlan Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanjohnson> will warn.

Johnson, a former home secretary, will single out Theresa Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresa-villiers>, the Northern Ireland 
secretary, who is pushing for Brexit, saying she ought to understand that the 
EU has been a steadfast source of political and financial support for the peace 
process.

During a trip to Northern Ireland on Thursday to campaign for the UK to remain 
in the EU, Johnson will say: “Northern Ireland’s ability to access the single 
market, coupled with the success of the Good Friday agreement, has brought 
about economic development forNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> as well as enhanced economic 
cooperation between north and south in Ireland.

“A withdrawal from the European Union could risk reversing that trend and 
undermining the economic and political progress made. By siding with the leave 
faction within the Conservative party, the Northern Ireland secretary Theresa 
Villiers is putting that progress at risk.”

Remain campaigners point to comments from the Irish ambassador, who told a 
parliamentary committee that the EU had helped improve relations between the UK 
and Ireland.

They claim Brexit would cost Northern Ireland about £100m of funding from the 
Peace programme, as well as money from the European regional development fund.

Villiers said it was “highly irresponsible to suggest that people in Northern 
Ireland will abandon their commitment to peaceful and democratic politics 
because of this referendum”.

She said: “There is steadfast support in Northern Ireland for the political 
settlement established by the Good Friday agreement and, as the Irish 
ambassador has made clear, a vote to leave will not affect the peace process.

“The peace process was delivered by the hard work of Northern Ireland’s 
leaders and successive UK and Irish governments, supported by the US. There is 
strong commitment in both the UK and Ireland to continue to work together for a 
peaceful and prosperous Northern Ireland, and leaving the EU will not change 
that.”

Villiers added: “With the money we would save from leaving, we could afford to 
fund the programmes the EU has supported in Northern Ireland and have money 
left over for other important priorities like the NHS.”

Remain campaigners in both Conservatives and Labour have repeatedly warned 
about the possibility of Scotland holding a second independence referendum if 
the UK votes to leave the EU, but there has been less scrutiny of the possible 
ramifications for Northern Ireland.

This year Enda Kenny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny>, Ireland’s 
outgoing taoiseach, said Northern Ireland wouldface a “serious difficulty” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/25/northern-ireland-irish-republic-eu-referendum-enda-kenny>
 if the UK voted to leave the EU.

At a Downing Street press conference, Kenny suggested that the success of the 
Northern Ireland peace process was in part linked to the UK’s and the Irish 
Republic’s membership of the EU.

“The guns are silent. This has taken a great deal of work from so many people 
over so many years,” he said, when asked whether a UK exit would damage the 
peace process.

“It is important to say that the road out of inequality, the path out of that 
unfairness, is employment and opportunity. That is why we have shared trade 
missions to a number of locations, there is a great deal of cooperation with 
respect of issues of economics in Europe.

“We should not put anything like that at risk. From our perspective it would 
be a serious difficulty for Northern Ireland. I don’t want to see that happen. 
We work on the positive end of this – future benefits and potential coming from 
a strong Britain being part of a strong Europe and Ireland associated with that 
north and south.”

Some Sinn Féin politicians have recently called for a border poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/11/sinn-fein-irish-reunification-vote-brexit-eu-referendum>
 on Irish reunification if there is a Brexit vote.

Martin McGuinness <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness>, 
the deputy first minister of Northern Ireland and former IRA chief of staff, 
said that if Britain voted to leave the EU there would be a “democratic 
imperative” to allow people on the island ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> to vote on reunification.

A border poll is unlikely to be granted by London even if the UK leaves the 
EU, and successive opinion polls in Northern Ireland have shown a substantial 
majority in the region favour remaining within the UK.

The largest unionist force in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, the Democratic Unionist 
party, is backing the campaign to leave the EU. However, the Ulster Unionist 
party’s ruling executive voted to support David Cameron’s campaign to remain in 
the EU.
 