
Three striking trends stand out from the annual state-of-the-nation report 
Monitoring Poverty and Social Exclusion, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/study-finds-7m-britons-in-poverty-despite-being-from-working-families>
commissioned by theJoseph Rowntree Foundation <https://www.jrf.org.uk/> (JRF). 
First, the inexorable rise of in-work poverty. A total of 7.4 million people 
are in poverty, despite being in a working family – a figure that has risen by 
one million over the last decade. This is despite record employment and the 
growth of full-time work. One in every eight workers in the UK is now living in 
poverty and 55% of people in poverty are in working households – a record high.

Study finds 7m Britons in poverty despite being from working families
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/study-finds-7m-britons-in-poverty-despite-being-from-working-families>
Second, the number of people living in private rented housing who are living 
below the poverty line has doubled in a decade, to 4.5 million households.

The third trend is an indication of how today’s “just managing” families can 
so easily become tomorrow’s poor: 69% of those in the bottom fifth have no 
savings whatsoever. Again, this increase over the past decade has been stark, 
up from 57%.

So how did we get here?

It began at a time of crisis. People were thrown into uncertainty by the 2008 
global financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/aug/07/credit-crunch-boom-bust-timeline>
, followed by recession, and austerity in the aftermath, with cuts to public 
services and the social security safety net. Insecure and low-paid work 
increasingly became a feature of the modern labour market. People and places in 
poverty were handed a raw deal, tearing away at the resilience that might have 
once held communities together.

It has created a toxic atmosphere for which the political establishment is now 
paying the price. Too many people did not feel the benefit of the boom years. 
The fantastic growth and revitalisation of our cities was rightly celebrated, 
but too many former industrial heartlands and outlier townssaw little of this 
rising prosperity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/sleaford-byelection-brexit-richmond>
. Places such as York, Leeds and Harrogate, close to where JRF is based, have 
enjoyed opportunities and potential. They were the islands voting to remain in 
a sea voting to leave.

In the 10 years I have led JRF, I’ve seen governments of all persuasions fail 
to address the seismic shifts in the labour and housing markets. The colours 
may have changed, but the approaches did not. Insecurity and mistrust thrived. 
The cost of failing to recognise and act on these changes and concerns has been 
dramatic, with abacklash at the ballot box 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> from people who felt they 
had little else to lose. The cruel irony is the uncertainty and insecurity from 
the financial crisis risks being repeated a decade later.

It would be all too easy to be gloomy and fatalistic. A comprehensive response 
is required from governments across the UK, business and local leaders to 
provide short-term stability and support people with the foundations to enjoy a 
decent, productive and secure life.

This must start by supporting the millions of people who are evidently not 
managing.Cuts to the work allowance  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-rejects-calls-to-reverse-3bn-annual-cut-to-work-allowance>
under universal credit must be reversed. Likewise, thefreeze on working-age 
benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/29/george-osborne-working-age-benefits-frozen>
 are increasingly out of date, particularly as inflation is predicted to rise 
above 2% and real wages will falter.

Longer-term, stable and affordable housing needs to be a cornerstone of policy 
for reducing poverty. By investing an extra £1.1bn a year in the affordable 
housing budget, the government could go a long way to meeting its target of 
buildingone million new homes by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/21/1m-more-homes-in-england-by-2020-government>
. Around 40,000 of these homes would be available at “living rent” level, 
making them affordable to people earning the “national living wage”. The 
remainder would be available for rent-to-buy and shared ownership, depending on 
local need.

Business must also play a leading role by taking on more apprentices, offering 
secure contracts and providing routes to better pay and job progression. 
Utility and financial services can reduce and end thepoverty premium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/10/poverty-premium-costs-poor-energy-phone-tariffs-councils>
: the higher costs faced by poorer households for everyday goods and services .

And we must ensure growth reaches all corners of the country. Having control 
over adults skills budgets, for example, will enable the incoming metro mayors 
to connect unemployed people to training and jobs, and allow them to progress 
in work, helping them truly share the benefits of rising employment and 
prosperity. There are also new opportunities for mayors to build more 
affordable homes through land assembly powers, as well as using procurement and 
planning powers to create apprenticeships and job placements.

Governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have powers and capability 
to reduce poverty and enable everyone to play their full role as citizens.

With energy focused on the process of leaving the EU, there’s a danger the 
concerns of people at home are ignored. This analysis should act as a warning 
for politicians who often talk about representing the concerns of those “just 
about managing” – or as is too often the case now, not managing at all.
 