
The actor Bridget Turner, who has died aged 75, was particularly associated 
with the plays ofAlan Ayckbourn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanayckbourn> and had a normal, suburban 
quality about her that she transformed into comic gold. The producerMichael 
Codron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/mar/30/michael-codron-aldwych-theatre> 
recalled with special affection in his memoirs one scene in Ayckbourn’sSeason’s 
Greetings <http://seasonsgreetings.alanayckbourn.net/> in which she played a 
tipsy aunt grabbing the very wrong end of a stick to assume that all train 
drivers were gay.

Because of her apparent neutrality, she was always surprising. In one season 
with theRoyal Shakespeare Company <http://www.rsc.org.uk/> in 
Stratford-upon-Avon in 1996, she played a lubricious Gypsy woman in Tennessee 
Williams’s Camino Real (with Leslie Phillips,Susannah York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/16/susannah-york-obituary> and Peter 
Egan) and the sinister Rat Wife in Ibsen’s Little Eyolf (with Joanne Pearce and 
Robert Glenister, one sexy, the other an old crone. She was totally 
unrecognisable in each play.

It felt as if she started each role on a blank page and that she could go 
almost anywhere: Chekhov and Shakespeare, musical comedy, even Arnold Wesker and
Edward Bond <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/jan/03/theatre>; she was an 
ecstatic Beatie Bryant in the first major Royal Court revival of Roots in 1967, 
and a village peasant in The Fool, Bond’s disturbing play about the country poet
John Clare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jul/09/john-clare-poetry>, in 
1975.

Turner was small and dark-haired, compact, possessing great timing, a voice of 
bell-like clarity and an open-faced integrity – an ideal team player in any 
company. Although she made several films and many TV appearances – inThe 
Forsyte Saga <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0260615/> in 1967 (as Old Jolyon’s 
maid, Plunket), opposite Alan Dobie in Tolstoy’s Resurrection (1971) and as Mrs 
Reynolds in Pride and Prejudice (1996) – she neither sought nor achieved 
household name status. She might have done: John Cleese in a recent interview 
said that the role of Sybil in Fawlty Towers had first been offered to her, but 
she turned it down.

She was born in Cleethorpes, North East Lincolnshire, the daughter of Eric 
Turner, a fish trader on Grimsby docks, and his wife, Phyllis (nee Blanchard). 
She attended Wintringham grammar school, Grimsby, and went on to train at Rada 
in London. In 1959 she was in a schools touring production in Wales of 
Goldoni’s The Servant of Two Masters, then gained a foothold in rep at 
Pitlochry, and at the Belgrade in Coventry in 1962, where she forged a lasting 
friendship withIan McKellen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ian-mckellen>, 
who was also starting out. In a hectic season at the Belgrade she played Nina 
to McKellen’s Konstantin in The Seagull, Hero to his Benedick in Much Ado About 
Nothing, and Avril Hadfield in David Turner’s Semi-Detached with Leonard 
Rossiter in the leading part. When that play transferred to the West End and 
then Broadway (in 1963), she stayed in the cast, although Laurence Olivier 
replaced Rossiter.

Turner played main roles – Pegeen Mike in The Playboy of the Western World, 
Juliet oppositeTom Courtenay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-courtenay> – 
with the 69 Theatre Company in Manchester, the forerunner of the Royal 
Exchange. She also appeared in two musical comedies by the actor Trevor 
Peacock; one of them, Erb, about early railway trade unionists, played briefly 
in the West End in 1970.

But it was in the Ayckbourn hits of the early 1970s, produced by Codron, that 
she made her mark: as a semi-defeated, long-suffering hausfrau inTime and Time 
Again <http://timeandtimeagain.alanayckbourn.net/> (Comedy, 1972); as a hapless 
mis-interpreter of a head-in-oven suicide attempt inAbsurd Person Singular 
<http://absurdpersonsingular.alanayckbourn.net/> (Criterion, 1973); and as 
Ruth, a myopic, strait-laced businesswoman, in the great trilogy ofThe Norman 
Conquests <http://thenormanconquests.alanayckbourn.net/>, alongside Courtenay 
and Michael Gambon (Globe, 1974).

When McKellen, at Trevor Nunn’s invitation, led a small-scale RSC tour around 
the regions in 1978, she signed up as Olga in Three Sisters and Maria in 
Twelfth Night. And when Ayckbourn, at Peter Hall’s invitation, formed a company 
within the National Theatre 10 years later, she appeared in the West End 
transfer of A Small Family Business (1987) and in Ayckbourn’s production of 
’Tis Pity She’s a Whore. The RSC association was renewed at the Swan theatre, 
not only in Williams and Ibsen revivals, but also in a superb 1999 Adrian Noble 
production of TS Eliot’s The Family Reunion, in which she played one of the 
chattering aunts in a grey, ghost-like production featuringMargaret Tyzack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/jun/27/margaret-tyzack-obituary> 
and Greg Hicks as the modern Orestes.

Her last job was in David Tennant’s Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>, a series on which, 
several decades earlier, her husband, the television director Frank Cox, had 
picked up his first job; they married in 1977.

She filled her life with friends, walking, making dried flower pictures and, 
especially, classical music.

Frank survives her.

• Bridget Joanna Turner, actor, born 22 February 1939; died 27 December 2014 
 