
A prestigious Brisbane <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane> 
school’s “misconceived” responses to proposed damning findings over a sex abuse 
scandal include questioning testimony over “the minor difference between the 
words ‘dick’ and ‘penis’”, according to counsel assisting the royal commission.

David Lloyd, the barrister who acted in hearings into abuse at Brisbane 
Grammar and St Paul’s School 
<http://www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/case-study/72ff8f10-03ac-483e-b0a3-68ddd586464d/case-study-34,-november-2015,-brisbane>
, has urged the commission to find that senior staff at both schools did not 
protect students by failing to act on repeated complaints against paedophiles 
Kevin Lynch and Gregory Knight.

The saga of serial abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/04/brisbane-grammar-counsellor-ritually-abused-students-royal-commission-told>
 by Lynch and Knight in the 1970s and 1980s as they moved with impunity between 
schools also prompted Lloyd to recommend findings critical of powerful church 
and political figures.

They include that the former archbishop and governor general Peter 
Hollingworth helped promote a St Paul’s principal to a role overseeing Anglican 
schools’ child protection policies, despite knowing a victim had accused the 
headmaster of failing to act on complaints against Lynch.

Former South Australian education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-education> minister 
Donald Hopgood was also held partly responsible for Knight’s trail of abuse 
because he overruled the paedophile’s dismissal over suspected abuse at a 
school in the state. Knight subsequently left anyway.

It was likely that if Hopgood or his department had notified teacher 
registration authorities of the “true reasons” for Knight’s departure, he would 
not have been hired by St Paul’s and then a Northern Territory school, “where 
he went on to sexually abuse boys”, Lloyd submitted.

Among the child protection failures by the late Grammar principal Max Howell 
was his lack of response to a 1979 complaint by a country doctor, who told the 
commission his son had said Lynch “fiddled with my dick”.


Grammar, in a response challenging many of Lloyd’s recommended findings, 
attempted to raise uncertainties about the doctor’s account by pointing to his 
2002 statutory declaration that his son had said Lynch “fiddled with my penis”.

Lloyd in response said that “many of [Grammar’s] submissions are misconceived”.

Queensland may allow child sex abuse victims to revive previously settled 
claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/queensland-may-allow-child-sex-abuse-victims-to-revive-previously-settled-claims>
He cited as an example the school’s attempt to dispute the doctor’s 
credibility as a witness on the basis of “the minor difference between the 
words ‘dick’ and ‘penis’ [that] was explained”.

Lloyd said there was “no basis to assert unreliability because a witness 
concedes that he cannot remember the actual words used in a conversation 20 
years earlier”.

He noted Grammar’s response acknowledged “that the actions of Mr Lynch were 
capable of constituting a criminal offence inQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> at the relevant times”.

Lloyd did concede to Grammar after it complained that he wrongly characterised 
the Grammar school board chairman, Howard Stack, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/06/brisbane-grammar-insurer-threatened-not-to-cover-sexual-abuse-payouts-inquiry-told>
 as giving evidence the school “did not act fairly” towards former students in 
compensation claims over Lynch’s abuse by failing to accept the school’s legal 
liability.

“Counsel assisting accepts that Mr Stack’s evidence was that he understood 
that, ‘from the boy’s point of view’ the school had not acted fairly,” Lloyd 
said.

“Having regard to what the school knew or ought to have known about the 
absence of any systems to supervise or monitor Mr Lynch, and the extent of Mr 
Lynch’s wrongdoing, it is submitted that it is open to find that the only way 
the school could have acted fairly, irrespective of the view of its insurer, 
was to admit liability.”

Lloyd urged the commission to make the same finding on Grammar’s unfair 
treatment of former students’ compensation claims, but without reference to it 
being Stack’s evidence.

Counsel for Hollingworth in response said the serious allegations against him 
could not meet “the appropriate standard of proof” to satisfy the commission in 
its findings.

His barrister said Hollingworth was relying on the former St Paul’s principal 
Gilbert Case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/13/counsellor-discussing-student-penis-size-did-not-alarm-principal-inquiry-hears>
 “to provide accurate information in relation to revelations concerning Mr 
Lynch’s misconduct” before the school counsellor took his life when facing 
abuse charges.

Counsellor discussing student penis size did not alarm principal, inquiry hears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/13/counsellor-discussing-student-penis-size-did-not-alarm-principal-inquiry-hears>
“The evidence indicates that Mr Case did not provide accurate information to 
Dr Hollingworth,” the barrister said.

Counsel for Hopgood argued there was no evidence “confirming the causal link 
between the actions of Hopgood and the [SA education] department”, and Knight’s 
employment in Queensland and the NT.

There was no evidence Knight’s registration as a teacher in SA “was even 
considered by Mr Case” in hiring him at St Paul’s or by his later employers in 
the NT.

Lloyd in response appeared to stand by his recommended findings against 
Hollingworth and Hopgood, declining to address their defences.
 