
Britain must speak out forcefully to safeguard women’s rights in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> as fears grow that the fragile 
gains made during 13 years of US-led military intervention may be rolled back 
following the withdrawal of foreign troops.

Women’s rights advocates are urging the British government to use the major 
conference on Afghanistan it is co-hosting on 3-4 December to send a clear 
message that women’s rights must be sacrosanct.

They see it as a test of the government’s commitment to honouring promises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/12/uk-lead-on-sexual-violence-in-conflict>
 it made in June on ending sexual violence in conflicts and getting more women 
involved in peacebuilding.

“It’s really important to call on the British government to prove what they 
said, and turn this rhetoric into reality. There have been so many promises 
made in this last year … so let’s see something meaningful in the conference 
communique that really safeguards women,” said Kate Hughes, chairwoman of the
Gender Action for Peace and Security <http://www.gaps-uk.org/> (GAPS-UK) 
campaign group on Afghanistan and a campaigner at Amnesty UK.

The London conference, which is being held before the official end of the 
international combat mission, comes as Afghanistan’s new power-sharing 
administration, led by the president, Ashraf Ghani, grapples with a renascent 
insurgency and a crippling shortage of funds. Taliban militants are regaining 
ground as analysts warn there is a risk that international donors may cut back 
funding once foreign troops leave.



With no prospect of a military victory, Ghani – who was inaugurated in 
September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/29/afghan-president-ashraf-ghani-inaugurated>
 after disputed elections – may have to push for peace negotiations with the 
Taliban and, in this context, any signs that the international community is 
backtracking on its commitment to women’s rights could have serious 
consequences, say activists.



Rowan Harvey, a women’s rights advocacy adviser at ActionAid UK 
<http://www.actionaid.org.uk/>, said Britain had to show full, unflinching 
support for women’s rights.

“We’ve made so many promises to Afghan women. We now have to recommit to 
realise those promises and say when that will happen. It’s good to hear the UK 
government say women’s rights will be a top priority for the conference … We 
have to act now.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> cannot 
do it on air,” she said.

Heather Barr, a senior researcher for Human Rights Watch 
<http://www.hrw.org/asia/afghanistan>, added: “Any sign of disengagement by the 
international community on women’s rights is going to be seized on as an 
indication that it doesn’t really matter … It will have incremental effects 
immediately and it will have bigger … visible impacts before long, because 
there are people waiting to roll back laws to protect women.”

There had been concern about women’s rights being sidelined at the conference, 
but Britain’s Department for International Development (DfID) has indicated 
that women will be actively involved throughout the two days.

A DfID spokeswoman said: “There is no question that the rights of Afghan women 
and girls are a top priority for the UK and next month’s London conference on 
Afghanistan. We are working hard to ensure that Afghan women actively 
participate in the conference, and improving the lives of women and girls will 
be firmly on the agenda.”


Rights groups urged the British government to show Ghani that the 
international community was serious about honouring commitments made under the 
2012Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework 
<http://www.mofa.go.jp/region/middle_e/afghanistan/tokyo_conference_2012/tokyo_declaration_en2.html>
 (TMAF), such as ensuring human rights for all citizens, especially women and 
children, and implementing the Elimination of Violence Against Women (EVAW) law 
and the National Action Plan for Women.

The conference is meant to review progress against the provisions of the TMAF, 
but there have been reports that new Afghan administration may want to change 
the terms – a prospect that women’s rights activists say could seriously 
undermine commitments to ensure women’s security and political participation.

They are also concerned about the prospect of women being excluded from any 
possible negotiations with the Taliban.





“Women have been all too aware that if you have a peace negotiation process 
where the door shuts and there’s a bunch of people in the room and half are 
from the Afghan government and half are from the Taliban, there’s no one in 
that room who cares about women’s rights,” said Barr.

Although women’s participation in the political process has increased, they 
are stillunderrepresented in decision-making 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/groups/stockport/stand-afghan-women-end-violence> 
forums. Only nine of the 70 members of the High Peace Council are women. While 
they make up about 28% of parliamentarians, there is evidence that traditional 
attitudes towards women persist.

Some Afghan lawmakers have threatened to repeal the 2009 EVAW 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/02/04/afghanistan-reject-new-law-protecting-abusers-women>
. There have been other signs of a reactionary resurgence, including the 
drafting of alaw that would have reintroduced stoning as a punishment for 
adultery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/26/minister-afghanistan-president-proposal-stoning-karzai>
 , and the passage of a lawlowering the proportion of provincial council seats 
reserved for women 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/other/afghan-women-suffer-setback-parliament-lowers-quota-female-lawmakers-f6C10672363>
.

“There’s been a parade of attempted rollbacks … in the late days of the 
[former president Hamid] Karzai administration. The people in parliament who 
tried to do that are still in parliament. The people in the courts who came up 
with bad decisions are still in courts. We’re waiting and watching very closely 
to see if Ashraf Ghani is going to get rid of some of the people in his own 
government who are enemies of women’s rights,” said Barr.

DfID says significant gains have been made 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uks-work-in-afghanistan/the-uks-work-in-afghanistan>
 over the past 13 years: nearly six million children now attend school, 
compared to one million in 2001, and nearly 40% of them are girls; maternal 
mortality has halved since 2001, and life expectancy has increased. The UK has 
pledged to provide development assistance of £178m a year up to 2017.

However, campaigners are concerned that international funding may begin to dry 
up in the wake of the military drawdown, partly as a result of competing global 
crises, donor fatigue, and disappointment over corruption.

“International funding is definitely something on everybody’s radar,” said 
Hannah Bond, director of GAPS-UK. “With the drawdown of troops … it is really 
important that women’s rights remain at the core of what is being done 
internally and also through donor support.”

In addition to its other activities, the conference will also receive reports 
from a summit on empowering women in Afghanistanbeing held in Oslo on 23 
November with participation from Afghan women’s groups, civil society groups 
and officials from Norway and the US.

 