
With moves towards voting reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/feb/03/electoral-reform-democracy-brown>
 this week,Gordon Brown has heralded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/feb/02/vote-to-give-politics-back-brown>
 a "new progressive politics" – a change that will modernise our constitutional 
settlement as we approach the 800th anniversary of the signing of the Magna 
Carta. The significance of the change is immense. We may finally be able to 
return representatives to parliament who command more than 50% support of the 
electorate. That could have a major impact not just on the composition of 
parliament, but the trust we place in our MPs.

Brown correctly identifies the lack of trust in politicians and the outrage 
caused by theexpenses scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses>. He says he wants people to 
know it is "their parliament, not ours". So, if this is so right, why does it 
feel so wrong? Because of its timing and the way it was announced, it doesn't 
add up to a new politics at all. It smacks of the usual scheming and 
calculation – just what political reform should be designed to end.

At most, there are four months before Brown will go to the Queen and ask the 
people of this country to elect a new government. Labour hovers around 10 
points behind theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> in the polls. The context 
tells us all we need to know. While voting reform may not be the top issue on 
the doorstep at the next election, the public's attitude to politicians and 
politics in general will be a key concern. So we can be forgiven for thinking 
this is a piece of positioning, designed to wrong-foot the opposition parties 
and stake a claim on the moral high ground.

At the cabinet on Tuesday, Gordon apparently told his colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/02/brown-promises-law-voting-reform>
 that these proposals are part of a commitment to reform stretching back to the 
first days of the Labour administration, taking in devolution, freedom of 
information and Lords reform. I know that in Scotland devolution has done much 
to reinvigorate politics. But it was done early, and it was built on a base of 
popular support and a large civil society campaign – and that is crucial. 
Taking the big decisions about the way we do politics by popular demand 
signifies that it matters, and that it is based on principle. But here we have 
a proposal near the end of a parliament, dependent on MPs' support and a 
referendum most likely in the autumn of 2011 – and only if the legislative 
timetable allows.

Announcing these proposals, Brown told his audience that changing the voting 
system amounts to handing power back to the people. If Gordon wants to put 
power in people's hands, then they have to believe this is not part of the 
political game. We, the people, have to be part of the decision itself. In this 
respect, he and every other politician might take a look atwww.power2010.org.uk 
<http://www.power2010.org.uk/>

Over the past few months many thousands of people have signed up and stated 
their priority for political reform in the UK. Following a groundbreaking 
deliberative public event, nearly 30,000 have already expressed their 
preference for a range of options from the right to recall MPs to rolling back 
the database state and, yes, voting reform – currently top in the online vote. 
The results, due in 20 days, will be put by the public to every candidate in 
every constituency at the general election. Power2010 will commit the next 
government to changing politics from the word "go". Not as an afterthought, but 
as the basis on which we conduct politics for the next five years and long 
beyond. Instead we've been offered new wine in very old bottles.
 