
The veteran British journalist and author Alan Shadrake was released on bail 
in Singapore today afterhis arrest on suspicion of criminal defamation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/18/singapore-british-arrest-alan-shadrake>
 in relation to his book on the city-state's death penalty.

Shadrake, 75, was detained on Sunday after a complaint from the government's 
media development authority. He posted S$10,000 (Â£4,766) bail, and police are 
holding his passport, according to his lawyer, M Ravi.

Shadrake told reporters outside the police complex after he was freed: "I'm 
feeling pretty shaken at the moment..

"I've been awake almost the entire time since they dragged me out of bed at 
6am Sunday morning. I've had a few hours sleep on a very hard floor. I've been 
sitting at a desk being interrogated all day long explaining all the chapters 
of the book: going into the history of the book, my research, why I did the 
book."

Shadrake was in Singapore to promote Once a Jolly Hangman: Singapore Justice 
in the Dock, which contains accounts of high-profile cases inSingapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore> involving the use of the death 
penalty and includes interviews with a former executioner, Darshan Singh. In 
publicity material for the book, Margaret John, from Amnesty International 
Canada, described it as "a timely contribution to growing criticism of 
Singapore's shameful use of the death penalty".

The attorney general's office is also seeking contempt of court charges 
against Shadrake because, it alleges, statements in the book may impugn the 
impartiality, integrity and independence of the judiciary. A judge will hear 
the contempt of court charges at the country's high court on 30 July.

Criminal defamation carries a sentence of up to two years in jail, a fine, or 
both.

The media authority said yesterday it had not banned the sale of the book in 
Singapore. The book was initially published in Malaysia by a Malaysian 
publishing company.

Singapore imposes the death penalty for crimes such as murder, and a mandatory 
death sentence for drug trafficking.
 