
It is only a few years since the success of reality TV had people fearing for 
the future of scripted entertainment.

If broadcasters could top the ratings with a bunch of wannabes prepared to go 
on screen for free (they would be richly remunerated, went the theory, by the 
tabloids in due course) then what need for big budget comedy and drama?

But the winners of the Broadcasting Press Guild Awards tell a different story.

At the height of reality TV mania, Rupert Murdoch even launched a dedicated 
channel. The Fox Reality Channel featured more reality shows than you could 
shake a remote control at, although rather fewer that you might remember – My 
Bare Lady, Househusbands of Hollywood and surely the ultimate in reality TV, 
Gimme My Reality Show! in which reality TV stars competed for their ultimate 
dream prize – their very own reality TV show.

But the future of reality TV has turned out rather differently, as seen in the 
annual awards of the Broadcasting Press Guild, of which I am chairman, and 
which are announced at a ceremony in London on Thursday.

Rarely has the comedy and drama output of UK television been in such rude 
health, and I speak as someone who helped whittle down the longlists of 30 or 
so programmes in each category to a shortlist on which our members (made up of 
people who write about TV and radio) could vote.

Like last year, when it was won by BBC2's sitcom Rev 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/mar/30/rev-broadcasting-press-guild-awards>
, this year's awards were also dominated by a single production – the BBC's 
lavish adaptation of Ford Madox Ford's Parade's End, which picked up awards for 
its stars, Benedict Cumberbatch and Rebecca Hall, for screenwriter Sir Tom 
Stoppard and for best drama series.

Quality drama series have been all over our screens in 2012, from one-offs 
such as Victoria Wood's Loving Miss Hatto for BBC1 to the same channel's Last 
Tango in Halifax, and Sherlock, plus theThe Hollow Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-hollow-crown> season of 
Shakespeare plays on BBC2.

There was no shortage of acclaimed new comedy either, from Channel 4's Fresh 
Meat to BBC2's Olympics spoof Twenty Twelve, due to pick up the best 
entertainment/comedy prize at the Awards.

Rarely has the competition between the main channels been so intense, with the 
resurgence of drama on BBC2, another winner with The Hollow Crown: Richard II.

ITV missed out on a nomination this year but will surely be a contender next 
time round with the David Tennant and Olivia Colman crime drama Broadchurch 
already a big hit two episodes into its eight-part run.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> also returned to the 
drama series fray after a period in which it restricted itself to one-offs. But 
it has enjoyed only mixed success, with no shortage of plaudits for Dennis 
Kelly's unsettling conspiracy thriller Utopia but not much of an audience.

Then there is BSkyB, which has pledged to increase its spending on homegrown 
content by 50% to £600m by next year. It remains to be seen, however, just how 
much this will come under pressure from Sky's hugely inflated rights deal for 
live Premier League football, the bedrock of its subscriber base.

All that is to come. Coming back to reality, Big Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/big-brother> will return to Channel 5 
later this year, having helped Richard Desmond's channel to a rare year-on-year 
increase in its audience share in 2012, but it is not the beast it once was, 
and neither did it usher in a new reality some had once feared (with apologies 
to fans of Gimme My Reality Show!).

It is a sign of the times that even Anthony McPartlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin> and Declan Donnelly, who 
have spent much of the last 10 years of their career riding high on ITV's 
Britain's Got Talent and I'm A Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here!, are turning 
their attention elsewhere.

"We love I'm a Celebrity, Britain's Got Talent, Saturday Night Takeway, but 
they're all live shows,"McPartlin said in an interview earlier this year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2013/feb/19/ant-dec-american-dream?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

"The difference between doing a live show and a sitcom is that a sitcom can 
live on. If you do it well, it can leave a legacy, whereas most of our live 
work never gets repeated because it's final, it's done, you start again."

Gimme my reality show indeed. But gimme my Parade's End as well. And 2012. And 
whatever it is that Ant and Dec are working on. Well, probably.

John Plunkett is the Broadcasting Press Guild chairman. The awards are 
sponsored by Discovery Channel. For full details of the winners visit thewebsite
 <http://www.broadcastingpressguild.org>.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@guardian.co.uk or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 