
If Gordon Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> won't 
listen to reason on electoral reform, perhaps he might listen to his own 
self-interest. IfDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> wins the forthcoming 
general election, the Tories will likely be in power for at least two terms, 
locking the prime minister out of power for the rest of his political life. 
Brown's only chance of remaining in office could be through a principled 
collaboration with the Liberal Democrats. The bottom line for any realignment 
has to be fair voting for Westminster.

Labour is in disarray, with a collapsed base and no coherent leadership. It 
desperately needs a new purpose in life. If the progressive forces in politics 
– the Liberal Democrats and Labour – remain divided, we could see a rerun of 
the 1980s, when successive Conservative governments destroyed British 
manufacturing and wrecked the welfare state on little more than 42% of the 
vote. But there could be an even more profound consequence of a Tory victory: 
the breakup of the UK state.

This week the Scottish National party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/snp> published its legislative plans for 
a referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/sep/01/scotland-devolution> on 
independence. The bill is unlikely to be passed in this parliament since there 
is a unionist majority in Holyrood. However, the Nationalists will make the 
independence referendum the top line of their manifesto for the next Scottish 
elections in 2011. With a Conservative government entrenched in Westminster, 
and with public spending being slashed north of the border under the Tories' 
austerity programme, the SNP will have a golden opportunity finally to persuade 
the Scots that it is no longer in their interests to remain under London 
domination.

The SNP leader, Alex Salmond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>
, will stand as the champion of Scottish social democracy, defending Scottish 
jobs and services against a ruthless Conservative administration which has no 
legitimacy in Scotland and which Labour is powerless to oppose. The Tories are 
still profoundly unpopular north of the border, regarded still by many as the 
"English" party, the party of Margaret Thatcher. They have only one MP in the 
whole of Scotland. The Scots haven't forgotten the Conservative recessions of 
the 1980s, which have been etched into the folk memory of the former industrial 
communities of west central Scotland that the SNP needs to win to stay in 
power. Many Scottish voters may be attracted to the SNP argument that Scotland 
is again being sacrificed in order that a privileged financial elite in London 
can continue to pay itself multimillion-pound bonuses.

Yet if Brown could only see it, Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> offers a model of a different future 
in which the sclerotic UK constitution is reformed and politics revived. Over 
the last decade, the Scottish parliament has shown that fair voting really 
works. The Scottish parliament is elected on an additional member system which 
ensures that parties' representation in the chamber is in proportion to their 
share of the vote. It has thrown open the windows of parliamentary democracy, 
and allowed new voices to be heard, such as the Greens, the greys and the red 
Scottish socialists.

However, much more important is the way it has altered the dynamic of 
governance, forcing parties to abandon tribalism and come together in de facto 
alliances that reflect popular opinion. The Liberal Democrats and the SNP have 
no formal coalition, but the arithmetic in the chamber and the challenge of 
proportional politics have forced them to move in a broadly social democratic 
direction – opposingTrident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/may/06/trident-faslane-nuclear-submarines> 
in the Clyde, rejecting nuclear power in favour of renewable energy, 
eliminating the market from health provision, abolishing prescription charges, 
curbing council house sales. The SNP minority government has been forced to 
sideline separatism and demonstrate that it can actually run a competent 
devolved administration.

Even Labour in Scotland has been forced to adapt and endorse policies, such as 
the abolition of prescription charges, that it had been opposing south of the 
border. This week Labour achieved a notable victory in defeating the SNP 
administration over its handling of the release of theLockerbie bomber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>. Unlike the charade 
in Westminster, where governments with artificially inflated majorities can do 
what they like, in Holyrood, governments have to fight for every vote. It has 
transformed the character of democracy and reconnected government with the 
people.

All the arguments about proportional politics leading to unstable coalitions, 
backstage dealings, unrepresentative and weak governance have been shown to be 
false by the Scottish experience. On the contrary, politics has been made more 
transparent as parties seek to win votes that are not precooked by the party 
whips. Instead of spending its time provoking spats with Westminster, the SNP 
minority administration has been forced to concentrate on listening to the 
voters. Suddenly, every MSP matters. Arguments have to be won, not just 
crushed. The first minister of Scotland can't rule remotely from his sofa 
because he has to be in parliament winning debates. This is what democracy 
should be like.

So there you have it: Gordon Brown could save his job, defend the UK and go 
down in history, not as an electoral loser, but as the architect of the 
greatest renewal in British democracy since theReform Acts 
<http://www.victorianweb.org/history/hist2.html>. All he needs to do is put a 
referendum on electoral reform in the Queen's speech and the voters will do the 
rest.
 