
Bryan Talbot has written and drawn comics and graphic novels for more than 30 
years and is currently working on his Grandville series of anthropomorphic 
steampunk detective thrillers. Dotter of Her Father's Eyes is Mary Talbot's 
first graphic novel. Among her eight academic books are Language and Gender and 
Media Discourse: Representation and Interaction. Dotter of Her Father's Eyes, 
their first collaboration recently published by Jonathan Cape, is a combination 
of personal memoir and biography. It contrasts two girls' coming-of-age 
narratives: the author's own, as the daughter of eminent Joycean scholar, James 
Atherton, and that of Lucia, daughter of James Joyce himself.

"The genre of the graphic memoir, either autobiographical or historical or 
biographical, has been around in one form or another throughout the history of 
comics. It has considerably expanded over the last 10 years, however, and it's 
now a substantial and popular presence in the wide spectrum of graphic novels. 
Like the word to describe the medium – "comics" – the marketing term "graphic 
novel" for comics-in-book-form is a misnomer, but it seems we're now stuck with 
it. Graphic novels dealing with a personal story are the subject of this 
selection. As a genre, these are placed in the nonsensical category 
"non-fiction graphic novels," which underlines the inadequacy of the term.

The medium is an ideal vehicle for autobiography, with its distinctive 
utilisation of words and pictures to convey sometimes complex emotions and 
information in a direct and personal manner. Comics have many superficial 
similarities to film – the use of long shots, close-up, zooms and pans, for 
example – but, filtered through the perception and artistry of their authors, 
they are much closer to prose in the way they transmit a personal vision."

Binky Brown Meets the Holy Virgin Mary 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781934781555>
 byJustin Green <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/justin-green>

First published in 1972, this was the first major graphic memoir in 
underground comics, the comics of the counterculture of the 60s and 70s, the 
existence of which led directly to the graphic novel form as we know it today. 
Highly influential on artists such asArt Spiegelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/art-spiegelman>, Robert Crumb and Harvey 
Pekar, Green's book charts a life made surreal by obsessive-compulsive 
behaviour in an almost hallucinogenic blend of adolescent angst, Catholicism 
and sexual fantasy. It's a fascinating look into another world, alternately 
disturbing, nostalgic, dreamlike and sometimes downright hilarious.

Maus 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141014081>
 byArt Spiegelman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/art-spiegelman>

Maus is both the biography of Spiegelman's father, Vladek, and an 
autobiographical account of Art's troubled relationship with him as he gets the 
old man to recount his experiences during the second world war in Poland and 
his harrowing time as a prisoner in Auschwitz. As well as documenting his 
father's terrifying experiences under the fascist regime, Spiegelman paints a 
vivid portrait of his holocaust survivor father, an irascible, stingy and, 
surprisingly, bigoted curmudgeon, sending the clear message "suffering does not 
ennoble, it merely causes suffering". Maus is a chilling and thought-provoking 
read and was rightly a bestseller, remaining the only graphic novel to win a 
Pulitzer prize.

The Spiral Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/art/9781852862220/the-spiral-cage> 
byAl Davison <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/al-davison>

Davison was born in 1960 with spina bifida, his parents continually told by 
doctors that he had a short time to live and would never walk. At once 
poignant, shocking, funny and uplifting, the book, the first British 
autobiographical graphic novel, tells his astonishing life story. It's a work 
of brutal honesty, laugh-out-loud humour, astounding images, experimental page 
layouts and single-minded determination as the author battles to forge his own 
destiny against frightening odds. Since chronicling his life in The Spiral 
Cage, Davison has worked in the comic industry for more than 20 years, holds 
black belts in both kung-fu and karate and is an art and storytelling teacher, 
theatrical choreographer, set designer and film-maker. So much for his doctors' 
prognoses.

Palestine 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224069823>
 byJoe Sacco <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/joe-sacco>

Sacco was trained as a journalist and singlehandedly created the genre of 
reportage in graphic novel form. Immersing himself in a situation, his in-depth 
reports use the medium of comics to its full potential. Like his Safe Area 
Gorazde or recent Footnotes in Gaza, Palestine follows his experiences as he 
investigates events and interviews residents, explaining the history, politics 
and dynamics of the place as he goes along. The palpable sense of place and the 
feeling that we're in the presence of the people who relate their experiences 
to him (and therefore to us) is a testament to his storytelling skills, his 
work being far more intimate than that of a filmed documentary. Sacco is a 
master of this medium.

Billy, Me and You 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780956559944>
 byNicola Streeten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/nicola-streeten>

The death of a child has to be the worst thing imaginable that could happen to 
parents. It's an extraordinary subject for a graphic memoir. Streeten kept a 
diary after the sudden death of her two-year-old son, Billy. She has used it as 
the basis for her debut graphic novel, so it provides insight into surviving 
what for most of us hardly even bears thinking about. It is a surprise then to 
find it provokes laughter as well as tears. The combination of journal format 
and naïve artwork somehow helps to make reading about grief and loss not only 
bearable but entertaining.

Persepolis: The Story of a Childhood 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224080392>
 byMarjane Satrape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/marjane-satrapi>

Originally published in French, this is a candid and compelling tale of 
growing up in Iran in which Satrape very effectively humanises her homeland for 
a "western" audience. This first volume of her autobiography spans the 
turbulent period when the Shah was deposed, when the revolution so long awaited 
by her Marxist family delivered intensified oppression at the hands of Islamic 
fundamentalists instead of the liberation they had anticipated. Drawn in 
simple, stark black and white, her own and her family's experience of the daily 
reality of public repression is conveyed with telling details of familiar 
ordinariness; the risk of alcohol in the house, the need to conceal a heavy 
metal poster, fear of being spotted wearing forbidden trainers.

To the Heart of the Storm by Will Eisner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/will-eisner>

The term "graphic novel" was coined in the 60s, but only applied as a 
marketing category for the first time to Eisner's A Contract with God in 1978. 
To the Heart of the Storm is his autobiographical account of American life in 
the 30s and 40s. The storm of the title is the war in Europe, to which he is 
travelling as a drafted soldier at the beginning and end of the book. But the 
train windows he gazes through frame his memories of childhood and adolescence 
and the history of his struggling Jewish immigrant family. This is a beautiful 
book with the vivid characterisation you expect from Eisner.

Ethel and Ernest: A True Story 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224046626>
 byRaymond Briggs <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/raymond-briggs>

Briggs's loving tribute to his London working-class parents stretches from 
their first meeting, as a milkman and a lady's maid, in 1928 to their deaths in 
1971. Both moving and funny, Ethel and Ernest is the personal story of a couple 
in a rapidly changing world that they often struggled to come to grips with. 
The Great Depression and the second world war were major events impacting on 
their lives, but so were the arrival in the home of radio, television and the 
washing machine. Winner of the British Book award's best illustrated book of 
the year, Briggs's Ethel and Ernest is as beautifully rendered in colour as his 
children's books such as The Snowman.

Fun Home: A Family Tragicomic 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224080514>
 byAlison Bechdel <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/alison-bechdel>

Bechdel has been known for her comic strip Dykes to Look Out For since the 
80s. Fun Home, her first graphic novel, is articulate, rich with literary 
allusion and encompasses a range of interrelated themes: a daughter trying to 
understand her father, his repressed homosexuality and sudden death; her own 
coming-out as a lesbian in rural Pennsylvania; her obsessive-compulsive 
behaviour as a child. Described in the New York Times as a "slim yet Proustian 
graphic memoir", Fun Home has a highly rewarding recursive narrative that 
progresses in repeated retellings of incidents in the light of fresh 
information. The book has won a clutch of awards, including the Stonewall Book 
award.

Dragonslippers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/society/9780007216888/dragonslippers-this-is-what-an-abusive-relationship-looks-like>
 byRosalind B Penfold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/rosalind-b-penfold>

Subtitled "This is what an abusive relationship looks like", Dragonslippers is 
a visceral account of domestic violence. For this memoir, Penfold draws on 
sketch diaries she kept throughout her 10 years of marriage to an abusive 
husband. Using a naïve drawing style, she recounts the gradual emergence of 
cruelty, its stifling effect upon her sense of self-worth, and her struggle to 
escape the stranglehold of a destructive abuser-victim relationship. It's hard 
to think of a more effective medium for communicating this kind of painful 
experience. Anyone who's concerned about the prevention of violence against 
women should read it.
 