
Burberry’s chief executive, Christopher Bailey, has had a 75% pay cut after 
profits fell at the luxury fashion house.

Bailey received almost £1.9m in salary, pension and other benefits last year, 
down from a total of £7.5m the year before.

After receiving £5.7m in cash bonus and share awards for 2014, he got no such 
payments last year, the company’s annual report showed. His pay was made up of 
£1.1m in salary, £330,000 pension contributions and £464,000 in benefits.

His first payment from a controversial share award was also deferred by a year 
to take account of Burberry’s weakening financial performance. The company, 
famed for its £1,400 trench coats, has been affected by belt-tightening among 
the Chinese shoppers who account for about 40% of its sales.

Sir John Peace, Burberry’s non-executive chairman, said: “Our overall approach 
to incentive structures for all staff, including senior management, is based on 
performance. When the business does not perform as well, this has an impact on 
what we pay our staff.”

Bailey was awarded a million shares for free in 2013 before he became chief 
executive. The payment date for the first chunk of those shares was scheduled 
for next month butBurberry <https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> 
said he had asked the remuneration committee to wait a year in light of the 
difficult trading conditions.


Vote against Sorrell pay award, urge pension fund advisors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/06/vot-wppe-against-sorrell-pay-award-urge-pension-fund-advisors>
“Ahead of the new vesting date in July 2017, the committee and Christopher 
Bailey will again assess the extent to which vesting would be appropriate,” the 
company said.

Bailey, who is also Burberry’s creative director, has been one of the 
best-paid bosses in the FTSE 100 since his promotion in 2014. Shareholders 
angry about his share awardsvoted down Burberry’s remuneration report in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/11/burberry-shareholders-revolt-christian-bailey-pay-package>
 though the deal went through because the vote was not binding.

Last year’s AGM was more peaceful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/16/burberry-christopher-bailey-investors-approve-pay>
 and Bailey’s pay was voted through easily. But after a seriesof bruising 
annual meetings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/28/ftse-companies-prepare-for-executive-pay-showdowns>
 at which pay reports have been rejected or severely criticised, Burberry 
appears to have acted to take account of shareholder views to ward off 
potential trouble.

Burberry’s business boomed as newly affluent Chinese shoppers bought its 
raincoats, scarves and other clothes earlier this decade. But a slowdown in the 
world’s second-biggest economy has hit the company’s performance.

Profits fell 10% to £421m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/18/burberry-cut-jobs-product-range-save-100m-a-year-profit-fall>
 last year and the company is cutting jobs and reducing its product range to 
save money. Once an investor favourite, the shares have dropped by a third in 
the past year.

Burberry’s other executive directors, finance director Carol Fairweather and 
chief operating officer John Smith, also received no bonus or share awards. 
Fairweather’s pay fell by £1m to £683,000 and Smith’s almost halved from £1.52m 
to £813,000.

Bailey helped turn Burberry from a dull heritage brand into a luxury 
powerhouse worn by Alexa Chung and Emma Watson andmodelled by the sons of David 
and Victoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/30/sheer-nepotism-brooklyn-beckham-burberry-shoot-angers-photographers>
. Burberry said Bailey and other directors would receive no salary increase 
this year and that it would delay deciding on executive share plan awards by 
four months to November to see how efficiency measures were progressing.
 