
A buyer who said he came from Argentina has spent more than €600,000 
(£465,000) on Nazi memorabilia, including one of Adolf Hitler’s jackets, at a 
controversial auction in Germany, according to reports.

The mystery buyer spent €275,000 (£210,000) on the jacket and €3,000 (£2,320) 
on a set of Hermann Göring’s silk underwear in his purchases of more than 50 
items,reported German newspaper Bild 
<http://www.bild.de/bild-plus/news/inland/adolf-hitler/jacke-fuer-275000-euro-ersteigert-46381786,var=a,view=conversionToLogin.bild.html>
.

Using the number 888, the man reportedly dominated the auction in Munich, 
outbidding others on most items. Bild sent an undercover reporter to the event, 
which was formally closed to the press after a public outcry.

The number evokes the neo-Nazi code 88, which stands for the banned greeting 
“Heil Hitler”.

Jewish group protests at 'scandalous' Nazi memorabilia auction in Germany
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/17/jewish-group-protests-at-scandalous-nazi-memorabilia-auction-in-germany>
Last week, the Central Council of Jews in Germany appealed to the auction 
house, Hermann Historica, to cancel the event, saying it was“scandalous and 
disgusting” to make money from Nazi relics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/17/jewish-group-protests-at-scandalous-nazi-memorabilia-auction-in-germany>
.

Bild reported that the auction room was filled with “young couples, elderly 
men, and muscular guys with shaved heads and tribal tattoos”.


The top bidder also bought the brass container that held the hydrogen cyanide 
that Göring, chief of the air force and founder of the Gestapo secret police, 
used to kill himself hours before his scheduled execution in 1946 in Nuremberg.


Device used in Nazi coding machine found for sale on eBay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/29/nazi-coding-machine-lorenz-teleprinter-ebay>
When the Bild reporter asked the top bidder who he was, the man reportedly 
replied in Spanish-accented English that he came from Argentina and had bought 
the items for a museum, but declined to give his name.

The items, sold in the auction titled “Hitler and the Nazi grandees – a look 
into the abyss of evil”, were formerly owned by late US army medic John K 
Lattimer, who was general medical officer during the Nuremberg trials.

German law prohibits the open display and distribution of Nazi objects, 
slogans and symbols, but not their purchase or ownership, for example by 
researchers and collectors.
 