
David Cameron's long-serving deputy whip, John Randall, and his youngest 
minister,Chloe Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chloe-smith>, have 
resigned ahead of a reshuffle in which the prime minister is expected to 
promote a number of women.

Downing Street's surprise announcements sparked speculation that Cameron will 
shake up junior roles within his team as early as Monday. They follow the 
resignation of transport minister Simon Burns, who wants to stand as deputy 
Commons speaker, with rising stars such as Sajid Javid, Esther McVey and Nicky 
Morgan tipped for bigger jobs.

Randall, who has served in the Tory whips' office for 13 years, said he 
informed the prime minister last year that he wanted to return to the 
backbenches. He is best known for his role in the resignation of his boss, 
Andrew Mitchell, the former chief whip, over the "plebgate" scandal just over a 
year ago.

Randall passed on information about Mitchell's alleged behaviour after one of 
his constituents claimed to have witnessed the former minister swearing at 
police officers and calling them "plebs". Mitchell always strongly denied the 
accusations and the constituent turned out to be a serving officer, who was 
later arrested as part of a wider investigation into an alleged conspiracy.

In his resignation letter, Randall assured the prime minister that he would 
continue to do "whatever I can for you personally as well as for the party, the 
government and of course the country".

"I know that it is customary to write at these times that it has been a great 
privilege and honour to serve as a member of the government, but it really has 
been that and a lot more," he wrote. "I have served 13 years in the whips' 
office both in opposition and more recently in government and I have served 
under and with some fantastic colleagues, notably Patrick [McLoughlin] and Sir 
George [Young], who have made the job extremely worthwhile and even fun."

Cameron's reply to Randall was glowing, describing him as a "rock" for the 
whips' office and the parliamentary party. "It sounds dramatic, but I had 
rather hoped this day would never come," Cameron wrote. "I could not have 
wished for a more loyal, discreet, patient, trustworthy and committed colleague 
over the last eight years since I became leader of the party, but you have been 
all these and much more."

Smith, a Cabinet Office minister, is stepping down to concentrate on her 
constituency work and engaging young people in politics. The 31-year-old MP, 
who has previously served as a whip and a Treasury minister, has recently been 
overseeing the controversial lobbying bill, which has been criticised by 
charities and campaign groups as posing a potential threat to freedom of 
speech. She was moved from the Treasury in the last reshuffle shortly after a 
difficult interview on BBC Newsnight about the chancellor's deferral of fuel 
duty.

Smith, the MP for Norwich North, told the Guardian that her choice to step 
down was "to do with priorities and what's most important".

"Essentially, it's entirely my own decision and something I see as very 
positive," she said. "Anyone who has known me and my work has known that my 
constituency comes first. It's the case that I've spent three of my four years 
in parliament serving as a minister. I'm very proud of that and achieving 
various things, like helping to save Â£10bn pounds of Whitehall waste. But for 
now I want to focus on the things that really matter to me."

In her resignation letter to Cameron, she said: "As you know, I was only 27 
when I was lucky enough to be elected as an MP, and of my four years in 
parliament so far, I have spent three as a minister. I would welcome the 
opportunity to develop other ways of giving public service, both inside and 
outside parliament, while continuing to work hard for my constituents."

The prime minister's reply said Smith has served "ably" and made a "positive 
impact". "I know this will not have been an easy decision for you to make, and 
one you will have given a huge amount of thought to," he said.

"After serving the government so ably for over three years, you will certainly 
be missed, but I completely understand and respect your decision."

The Tory reshuffle could happen at the same time as Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> shakes up the Labour 
frontbench. He is thought to be considering moving the shadow health secretary, 
Andy Burnham, and the shadow work and pensions secretary, Liam Byrne, with 
shadow Treasury minister Rachel Reeves tipped for promotion.
 