
It’s an unlikely situation when the retirement of a sport’s biggest name 
coincides with the emergence of a new era of prosperity. But following Cadel 
Evans’ final race earlier this year, that is exactly the scenario facing road 
cycling in Australia.

When 10 Australians roll up to the individual time trial starting gate in 
Utrecht this Saturday for the opening stage of the Tour de France, the former 
race winner’s absence will not be as conspicuous as it once might have been.

Orica-GreenEDGE are undoubted favourites for the team time trial, while their 
promising young talent Michael Matthews could challenge for the sprinter’s 
crown. Team Sky’s Tasmanian Richie Porte will be a key lieutenant for Chris 
Froome during his attempt at a second yellow jersey, and compatriot Michael 
Rogers will do likewise for rivalAlberto Contador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador>.

Although the Antipodeans may lack a general classification contender in Evans’ 
absence, several countrymen have a real opportunity to shine on the long ride 
to Paris. This state of affairs offers an apt metaphor for the broader health 
of competitive cycling in Australia.

Despite Evans’ departure, the peloton retains a strong contingent of respected 
riders hailing from down under. The nation’s youth ranks are also full of 
cyclists on a fast track to success: Campbell Flakemore and Macey Stewart both 
won U23 titles at the World Road Championships in Spain last year, while 
20-year-old prodigy Caleb Ewan is enjoying a successful debut professional 
season. Behind the scenes, governing organisation Cycling Australia is 
rebuilding after teetering precariouslyon the brink of financial ruin 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/09/16/us-cycling-australia-idUSKBN0HB04I20140916>
, and their domestic National Road Series signed a newtelevision rights deal 
<http://cyclingtips.com.au/2014/12/why-the-australian-commercial-networks-interest-in-cycling-is-a-good-thing/>
 with Nine and Fox Sports at the beginning of 2015.

Yet whilst this individual and collective potential is evident, much hard-work 
remains for the sport to flourish on and off the road. Like the Australians in 
Holland this weekend, simply getting to the start line is a considerable 
achievement; a long and gruelling journey nevertheless remains.

Leading the charge for cycling in this country is multi-millionaire Gerry Ryan 
and his World Tour outfit Orica-GreenEDGE. Australia’s sole team representative 
at the highest level of global cycling,GreenEDGE’s rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jul/03/tour-de-france-2014-the-rise-of-orica-greenedge>
 has been swift. Founded in 2011, the Matt White-led squad have demonstrated 
their Grand Tour credentials on numerous occasions. After a strong Giro 
d’Italia performance for the second consecutive year - collecting two stage 
victories and holding the pink jersey for four days - GreenEDGE will be eager 
to continue their form in France.

Matthews, one of the team’s stage winners in Italy, will also be looking to 
repeat his heroics this month. Despite only taking up the sport in his 
mid-teenage years, the 24-year-old from Canberra has developed into an 
excellent sprinter with world class potential. While the green jersey may be an 
optimistic goal in his debut at Le Tour, Matthews will be disappointed with 
anything less than a stage win.

GreenEDGE’s young gun is at the forefront of a group of exciting riders ready 
to make their mark. Team-mate Ewan recentlywon four stages and the general 
classification 
<http://velonews.competitor.com/2015/06/news/caleb-ewan-hangs-on-to-win-2015-tour-de-korea_373769>
 at the Tour de Korea, while the likes of Flakemore, Stewart,Robert Power 
<http://cyclingtips.com.au/2014/05/interview-with-robert-power-a-star-on-the-rise/>
 and Georgia Baker are shining stars at youth-level.

Although Matthews and Ewan both eschewed the domestic pathway by virtue of the 
Australian Institute of Sport’s European program, multiple riders have used the 
National Road Series to secure a professional contract. Avanti Racing is a 
veritable World Tour production line – at last count seven of their graduates 
had spent time with a pro-team – and many other riders have taken advantage of 
the series to progress their careers.

However, as long-time observers of Australian cycling are quick to observe, 
storm clouds are never far from the horizon. Peak national body Cycling 
Australiaalmost entered insolvency 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/cycling/cycling-australias-uphill-battle-to-get-back-on-track-20150214-13et6l.html>
 in 2014 after an ambitious expansion program failed to generate revenue. This 
led to broad-ranging budget cuts, with negative consequences for their female 
cycling program and the National Road Series. While the appointment of 
respected sports administrator Malcolm Speed and former Olympic rower Nick 
Green as chairman and chief executive respectively has been well received, not 
least by theAustralian Sports Commission 
<http://www.ausport.gov.au/news/ais_news/story_605995_cycling_australia_and_asc_welcome_new_board>
, they have a considerable task ahead.

The state of the domestic competition itself, meanwhile, remains a point of 
contention. On one hand the standard of racing in the National Road Series has 
consistently improved, such that the traditionally dominant teams of Avanti and 
Drapac Pro Cycling are no longer guaranteed victory after victory (even if the 
latter now predominantly ply their trade overseas). Yet criticism of the 
series’ administration is abundant, and those flames were fanned last month 
when Cycling Australiaannounced 
<http://cyclingtips.com.au/2015/06/why-cycling-australia-removed-two-events-from-the-nrs-and-is-reviewing-the-series/>
 the postponement/cancellation of two upcoming races pending a broader review.

Whether the competition should be a development-focused pathway to Europe or 
represent a more ambitious endeavour to provide high-quality domestic racing is 
hazy: the two are not necessarily antithetical, but the National Road Series 
would do well to define its core objectives with more clarity.

On and off the road, Evans’ retirement marked the end of an era. With interest 
in the sport growing 
<http://www.roymorgan.com/findings/6237-cycling-participation-picks-up-speed-201505172306>
, both competitively and as a means of transport, the stage is set for cycling 
to consolidate its position as an important feature in the diverse Australian 
sporting landscape.

Like the route faced by all riders rolling out from Utrecht on Saturday, many 
mountains must be crested before cycling in this country can wheel victoriously 
along a metaphorical Champs-Élysées. There will be countless cobbled sections 
on the road to success, and the occasional puncture to overcome. Yet despite 
these caveats, the future of Australian cycling is bright indeed, even with the 
nation’s most decorated rider now watching from the roadside.

Disclosure: Kieran Pender occasionally provides freelance media management 
services toCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> Australia.
 