
The governors of California and New York acted on Monday to raise their 
states’ minimum wages to $15 an hour – the highest in the nation – asHillary 
Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and Bernie 
Sanders again seized on wage disparity and the plight of the working poor as a 
defining issue in the presidential race.

Clinton joined Governor Andrew Cuomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> of New York as he signed the 
law that will gradually boost that state’s pay rate and she predicted the 
movement would “sweep our country”.

What does California's new minimum wage buy? A long commute and a room
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/02/california-15-dollars-minimum-wage-rent-commutes>
In a statement, Sanders said his campaign was about building on the steps in 
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> and New York “so 
that everyone in this country can enjoy the dignity and basic economic security 
that comes from a living wage”.

In Los Angeles, Governor Jerry Brown signed a bill into law that will lift the 
statewide minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/28/california-minimum-wage-fight-for-fifteen-jerry-brown>
 to $15 an hour by 2022.

The efforts in New York and California mark the most ambitious moves yet to 
close the national divide between rich and poor. Experts say other states may 
follow, given Congress’s reluctance to act despite entreatiesfrom Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/01/federal-minimum-wage-labor-department-new-york-california>
.

“This is about economic justice. It’s about people. It’s about creating a 
little, tiny amount of balance in a system that every day becomes more 
unbalanced,” Brown said before signing the bill at the Ronald Reagan state 
building.

Republicans and business groups warn that the move could cost thousands of 
jobs, while a legislative analysis puts the cost to California taxpayers at 
$3.6bn a year in higher pay for government employees.

A $15 base wage will have “devastating impacts on small businesses in 
California”, Tom Scott, executive director of the state branch of the National 
Federation of Independent Business, said in a statement. “Ignoring the voices 
and concerns of the vast majority of job creators in this state is deeply 
concerning and illustrates why many feel Sacramento is broken.”

Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats>, who control the 
legislature, approved the increase on Thursday, days after the agreement was 
announced. The measure passed with no Republican support.

The bill will bump the state’s $10 hourly minimum by 50 cents next year and to 
$11 in 2018. Hourly $1 raises will then come every January until 2022, unless 
the governor imposes a delay during an economic recession. Businesses with 25 
or fewer employees have an extra year to comply.

Wages will rise with inflation each year thereafter.

New York’s state budget includes gradually raising the $9 minimum wage to $15, 
starting inNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City in 
three years and phasing in at a lower level elsewhere. An eventual statewide 
increase to $15 would be tied to economic indicators such as inflation.
 