
“I read the other day about these bio-hackers who are injecting their eyeballs 
with some bioluminescent fluid that gives them night vision – it’s crazy.”


Dan Bunting, lead multiplayer designer at Treyarch, is talking about the news 
stories that have influenced Black Ops 3 during the game’s three-year 
development cycle. Set 50 years in the future, with a new Cold War as its 
backdrop, the latest CoD battlefield is a very different place. Widescale Drone 
warfare has been neutralised through the development of powerful air defence 
systems, so the emphasis is back on ground infantry once again.

But the soldiers themselves have changed. The invention of direct neural 
interfacing between the human brain and computer technology has led to a new 
era of bio-augmentation and cybernetic enhancement. In Black Ops 3, the player 
is part of an experimental unit fitted with bionic limbs and a wealth of other 
future-tech improvements that blend mind and machine. According to Treyarch a 
lot of this is closer to science than fiction.

“You make an estimate of where you think technology will be in the 2060s, then 
a few months later you hear that the foundations of that technology are 
happening today,” says campaign director and senior executive producer Jason 
Blundell. “We take ideas from medical research and scientific advancements, 
from wearable computing, bio-augmentation and robotics. We talk to specialists 
in certain fields and discuss their theories. But look at some of the stuff 
that [Google-owned engineering firm] Boston Dynamics is already doing with its 
robots – they have prototypes that are running at 50mph ...”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-biggest-shooter-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430134960814%2Fff8d1d57-5bda-4b0f-8df8-22d72f4ed105-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Black%20Ops%203%20%E2%80%93%20reimagining%20the%20biggest%20shooter%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-biggest-shooter-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Black%20Ops%203%20%E2%80%93%20reimagining%20the%20biggest%20shooter%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-biggest-shooter-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430134960814%2Fff8d1d57-5bda-4b0f-8df8-22d72f4ed105-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A street battle during the Ramses mission in Black Ops 3, showing off the 
ever-present dropcraft and mini-drones, as well as major firepower 
installations that players will be able to hack and control Photograph: 
Activision 
During a press visit to the Treyarch studio in Santa Monica, the team shows 
off a demo of one Black Ops 3 campaign mission, which takes place at Cairo’s 
Ramses station. It’s pretty recognisableCall of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty> fare, a chaotic maelstrom 
of swarming ground troops, explosive air support and yelling NPCs. However, the 
high-tech stuff soon arrives. A dropship deposits a self-building “mobile wall” 
into the street to cordon off the area. Later, the player’s squad is attacked 
by a duo of giant robotic balls covered in spikes that zoom in and splatter 
their way through the forces (these devastating gadgets – weirdly reminiscent 
of the alien weaponry in the Battleships movie – are called Robotic 
Anti-Personnel Sentry Droids, and are available as a scorestreak in the 
multiplayer). Then, a cloud of mini-drones immolate a soldier. The scene ends 
with one allied operative using a tablet to select a whole area of the 
battlefield before seemingly causing it to blow apart through 
cybernetically-enhanced telekinesis.

In gameplay terms, the most obvious impact of this technological leap into 
bio-augmentation is the new movement system. Player soldiers wear upgradeable 
cyber-suits that allow them to double jump onto rooftops, run along walls and 
powerslide along the floor, chaining moves together to traverse the environment 
in a smooth, streamlined dance. Objects can be mantled without loss of speed or 
firing potential and soldiers can sprintforever: “There is no marathon perk, 
there is no lightweight perk, it just works that way,” says studio design 
director David Vonderhaar. “This is really important. It’s the glue that holds 
everything else together. You can continue to stay guns-up. The aim is to wind 
the combat loop as tight as possible.”

Of course, comparisons with both Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare and rival 
sci-fi shooter Titanfall are inevitable. The latter made a big deal of its 
enhanced boost jumps and vertical sprinting, and given the fact that developer 
Respawn Entertainment emerged from Call of Duty creator Infinity Ward in the 
most controversial of circumstances, criticisms and conspiracy theories are 
going to cloud this aspect of the game.

And they won’t finish there. The new “specialists” feature in Black Ops 3 
allows players to take part in multiplayer bouts as one of nine elite spec-ops 
warriors, each with their own powerful special weapons and abilities. These are 
only available when an onscreen meter powers up, and they are intended as a 
mid-point between regular combat and the scorestreaks that tend only to be 
accessible to more skilled players. It all sounds extremely similar to the 
Titan system in Respawn’s game, where a timer counts down to the point at which 
players get to call in their giant mech.

Naturally, Treyarch doesn’t broach this directly – but it does address 
questions about how familiar the system seems. “It’s not to be confused with 
the [Advanced Warfare] exo jump; mechanically, it works extremely differently,” 
says Vonderhaar. “Ours has nothing to do with verticality – our maps have a 
height limit of two storeys and staying in the combat frame [i.e. being able to 
always see the opponent] are keys to our design strategy. But we did want to 
remove the obstacles that slow the player down. Ladders in [multiplayer] suck. 
They’re not fun to get on and climb up.”

Then studio head Mark Lamia chimes in with a comment seemingly laser targeted 
at any Titanfall references. “To be fair, wedid make Spider-Man,” he says, 
referring to the company’s acclaimed, parkour-influenced super hero tie-in from 
2002. “We had some amazing movement systems in that game. We showed Black Ops 3 
to the Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater developers and said ‘you guys should get this’. 
And they did.”

At the demo event, we get to play three new multiplayer maps. Combine is set 
in a labyrinthine farming research facility in the Egyptian Sahara, with an 
open courtyard providing a frenetic kill zone in the centre. Stronghold is a 
Swiss chateau which mixes tight interiors with open areas that offer long sight 
lines. Hunted is the biggest map in the game, a picturesque mansion complete 
with a waterfall, pool and underwater tunnel.

It’s the latter that proves most interesting. Treyarch has apparently been 
trying to add swimming to its CoD games for years, but has finally mastered the 
feature. Now you can dive into the water, move about freely in the aquatic 
environment, and even use your gun. A pre-demo video shows players shooting out 
of the water at passersby moving along the water’s edge.

Elsewhere, the movement system does handle very differently to Advanced 
Warfare. The controls are more subtle, so that it feels less like a turbo boost 
into the air, and more like a controlled ascent. Wall runs are easy to set up 
via an angled sprint toward a vertical surface and a deft tap on the jump 
button. When connected with a wall, you can then leap on to another surface, 
and even jump out, pull back on the analogue stick and reverse the movement, so 
you’re suddenly going backwards. It’s a great evasive move, and it suggests 
that head-to-head encounters are going to be less about who has the fastest 
trigger finger.

Jump out again, then press the “crouch” button and you hit the ground in a 
power slide, which can be directed around corners. It’s complex yet accessible 
and within minutes players are chaining moves together, turning the environment 
into a pro-skater playground. We’re having a lot of fun.

But we’re also aware that this is not unique and it’s not, in itself, 
innovative: rocket jumps and special ability pick-ups have been part of 
first-person shooter design since the beginning. Before CoD, before Titanfall, 
id Software littered its levels with limited availability weapons and armour; 
Crysis brought us cyber suits and timed abilities. This has always been a genre 
that has supported the evolution and sub-division of feature-sets. But Treyarch 
is going to have to be on the defensive. And it will need to reassure gamers 
who prefer the traditional CoD experience that its flights of spatial fancy 
won’t be too disruptive. “We don’t force anything on players,” says Bunting. 
“If they don’t want to use thrust jump or wall-running they don’t have to. Most 
encounters will still be boots-on-the floor.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-biggest-shooter-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430135168023%2F787a33b4-90a8-46f1-ac6d-7d3c5c7ca189-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Black%20Ops%203%20%E2%80%93%20reimagining%20the%20biggest%20shooter%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-biggest-shooter-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Black%20Ops%203%20%E2%80%93%20reimagining%20the%20biggest%20shooter%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-biggest-shooter-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430135168023%2F787a33b4-90a8-46f1-ac6d-7d3c5c7ca189-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A soldier heads into action sporting one of the new guns – all of which can be 
personalised in detail thanks to a new “paint job” feature, replacing the old 
emblem design system Photograph: Activision 
Really though, perhaps the biggest change to Call of Duty is happening away 
from multiplayer, and away from movement controls. It is the campaign mission 
design. Not only will this mode be playable in co-op with up to three friends, 
but Treyarch says that the game will abandon the corridor approach and provide 
much larger, more explorable environments. “We’re allowing you to go off the 
rails,” says Blundell. “You will really be able to explore the space, to decide 
how you engage the area and to move through it.”

Apparently, the areas are so open that players simply won’t be able to see 
everything in one playthrough – if they choose an approach, there will be 
sections they won’t see. Also, in classic RPG style, players will be able to 
upgrade their characters with a range of special abilities as they gain XP. 
These aren’t the static pre-set soldiers of traditional CoD, these are 
personalised avatars who progress. According to Treyarch there are around 40 
“cyber core” abilities, like drone hacking for example, that players earn as 
they go and can use when they like. And as players gain new abilities they get 
to show these off in the dedicated safe house area visited between missions, 
where soldiers are customised and where participants can personalise their 
bunks with medals and achievement markers.

Blundell says this concept of freeform character customisation has forced 
changes to the narrative structure. Black Ops 2 brought in branching story 
elements with several different endings. Black Ops 3 gains longevity in a 
different way. “Due to the type of game it is, and the type of story we wanted 
to tell, rather than having a branching storyline, we’ve gone for a design 
that’s more like peeling back layers of an onion – that’s the most tactical way 
I can describe it,” explains Blundell. “This is definitely a story that needs 
multiple replays; there are different perspectives, things that you learn as 
you play, so you may want to go back later to re-experience certain moments in 
a fresh way.”


Call of Duty: Black Ops 3 introduces co-op campaign and cyber-soldiers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/26/call-of-duty-black-ops-3-co-op-campaign-movement-announcement>
Treyarch also reckons that this move to open environments and customisable 
player-characters has demanded major changes to the artificial intelligence 
system too. “As the spaces get bigger, the AI needs to be able to make 
intelligent decisions in that space,” says Blundell. “So we’ve created a new 
animation system and a goal-orientated AI that supports over 20 different types 
of archetypes – bipedal robots, humans, rolling balls of death – they decide 
how they engage you and how they move through space. For the first time they 
also communicate together and move into formations based on where you are and 
your abilities.”

Once again, it’s nothing new for the genre, but it’s certainly new for Call of 
Duty. True, this is still a game about shooting people in the face, and the 
setup remains a macho fantasy of specialist warriors going in and clearing up 
when science and military-industrial complexes drop the fucking ball, dude. But 
the Black Ops series has always toyed with the fundaments of the series, and 
this is an interesting step toward something slightly more complicated. The 
role-playing elements, the reactive AI and the slick traversal systems 
represent a climb out of CoD’s self-imposed ghetto of immediate, gutsy action 
and twitch-core simplicity.

So while non-believers will wince and hurl accusations, long-term fans will be 
intrigued. Call of Duty, always the totem of unapologetic blast-em-up action, 
is also sometimes a subversive presence – witness the legendary nuclear death 
scene in Modern Warfare or the stomach-churning No Russian mission in Modern 
Warfare 2. Treyarch is promising a gritty messed-up story with Black Ops 3, and 
it says it has big plans for the Zombie mode (which is set to have its own 
dedicated XP progression system) but it’s the systemic changes that could prove 
most interesting and disruptive to this vast money-making edifice.

“In game development, if you feel totally comfortable you’re not doing it 
right,” says Bunting. “This is our first time on the new console technology, 
we’ve had a three-year cycle, so we took bigger risks from the outset. We 
wanted to go for something new and fresh.”

I guess we’re about to find out what new and fresh looks like when there’s a 
billion dollars riding on the result.


 * Keith Stuart attended a press trip to Los Angeles with other journalists 
from Europe. Activision met the transport and accommodation costs.
 