
The relatives of people killed by James Holmes at a 2012 screening of The Dark 
Knight Rises have called for a boycott of Cinemark following news that 
attorneys for the cinema chain are demanding they pay $700,000 (£526,000) in 
legal fees.

The request comes after jurors in May ruled in Cinemark’s favour over 28 
victims and their families, who argued that the chain – the third-largest in 
the US – should have done more to prevent the attack that killed 12 people and 
left more than 70 injured. They sued in state court, saying security lapses 
allowed for the 20 July 2012 attack at a midnight premiere of the new Batman 
film.

Cinemark’s lawyers told a judge they need the money to cover the costs of 
preserving evidence, retrieving and copying records, travel and other expenses, 
according to court documents filed this month. The request was not immediately 
ruled upon, yet Colorado courts allow the winning side of a court case to 
recover legal fees.


An appeal by the victims is said to be pending; some family members of those 
who were killed or injured in the shooting are now calling for a boycott of the 
chain, which recently posted quarterly revenue of $704.9m (£530m).

“Please boycott Cinemark,” tweeted Sandy Phillips 
<https://twitter.com/MamaRedfield/status/748652649164087296?lang=en-gb>, whose 
daughter Jessica Ghawi was among those killed. “Don’t add to their $194m profit 
while they come after Aurora victims who have lost everything.”

The hashtag #BoycottCinemark 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BoycottCinemark?src=hash> began trending in the US 
on Thursday night with California’s lieutenant governor, Gavin Newsom, among 
those registering distaste at the chain’s actions.
Gavin Newsom (@GavinNewsom) 
Shameful! #BoycottCinemark 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BoycottCinemark?src=hash> ----> @Cinemark 
<https://twitter.com/Cinemark> attorneys want Aurora shooting victims to cover 
$700k in legal feeshttps://t.co/GcPuVlrinz <https://t.co/GcPuVlrinz>
 <https://twitter.com/GavinNewsom/status/748715162052337664> July 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GavinNewsom/status/748715162052337664> 
Among those the cinema is requesting repayment from are the families of two 
men who saved others in the cinema.


A judge last week dismissed a similar lawsuit in federal court, saying 
Cinemark’s lack of security was not a substantial factor in the deaths.


In both lawsuits, victims cited a lack of guards and no alarm on an emergency 
exit door that would have sounded when James Holmes slipped into the crowded 
cinema and started shooting.


Cinemark argued it could not have foreseen the attack, and nothing could have 
stopped Holmes, currently serving multiple life sentences after jurors could 
not unanimously agree on whether he deserved the death sentence.
 