
It is the future and everything has gone really wrong. The looming threat of 
nuclear annihilation is over thanks to the development of super reliable air 
defences but this has only led to an endless state of paranoid cold war. Armed 
factions gather around the world’s dwindling resources, mega corporations 
obsess over new ways to push their expensive technologies and government 
agencies seek ever more inventive ways to assassinate privacy. It’s a big old 
mess.

The third Call of Duty: Black Ops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/13/call-of-duty-black-ops-3-five-things-weve-learned-about-the-campaign>
 campaign, then, is another globe-trotting conspiracy thriller filled with 
secret bases, covert government programmes and wise-cracking solders just 
trying to keep their shit together as the galaxy collapses around them. You 
enter the maelstrom as fresh-faced rookie, fighting for the Winslow Accord, 
which sounds like a Terrence Rattigan play, but is actually a gathering of 
countries looking to ring fence themselves from swarthy foreigners. An Egyptian 
minister has been kidnapped by the evil Nile River Coalition, and you need to 
get him back.

During the mission, however, the player character – who can be either a man or 
a woman – is fatally wounded, then transformed into a cyborg. From here, you 
are led into a conspiracy-fuelled pot boiler centred on the corporate HQ of 
robotics firm Coalescence, which blew up under mysterious circumstances a 
decade previously, taking out most of Singapore in the process.

Soldiers quote Nietszche and say things like, 'they may not be a priority but 
they’re still people, dammit'

Got all that? No? It doesn’t matter. Black Ops III, like every Call of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty> before it, is a throbbing 
mass of blockbuster movie cliches, masquerading as a cogent plot line. Soldiers 
quote Nietszche and say things like, “they may not be a priority but they’re 
still people, dammit” without batting an accurately modelled eyelid and the 
story jerks noisily around the world like a heavily armed gap year student. 
Everywhere you go, from the Zurich public transport system to an abandoned 
drilling platform is either collapsing or on fire, sometimes thrillingly both 
at once. En route, you spend a lot of time in flashbacks or surreal 
virtual-reality encounters, which like the Shangri-La missions in Far Cry 4, 
are visually arresting but end up simply dislocating you from the narrative 
tension and sense of presence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-campaign-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446804058092%2Fd8224e26-acbc-40db-a94c-3cbad5cdad57-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Black%20Ops%203%20campaign%20verdict%20%E2%80%93%20is%20Call%20of%20Duty%20devouring%20itself%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-campaign-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Black%20Ops%203%20campaign%20verdict%20%E2%80%93%20is%20Call%20of%20Duty%20devouring%20itself%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-campaign-verdict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446804058092%2Fd8224e26-acbc-40db-a94c-3cbad5cdad57-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tanks for everything – key levels predictably end with bullet sponge 
encounters against vast robotic vehicles Photograph: Activision 
Through 12 hours of these exhaustingly cacophonous missions, the confusing 
story of CIA shenanigans leads us inexorably toward … well, toward the ending 
of the original Black Ops – only here the guiding force is advanced computer 
technology rather than psychotropic drugs and ham-fisted brain washing. There 
is even a 60s pop song playing at a key moment, used in exactly the same way as 
Sympathy for the Devil was in Black Ops 1.

But is it fun? Sort of – thanks largely to two interesting additions. 
Throughout the campaign players are able to spend tokens – or ‘fabrication 
kits’ – on a range of cybernetic enhancements, split into three categories: 
Control (hacking and hijacking stuff), Martial (movement and melee), Chaos 
(blowing shit up). If you prefer taking a defensive approach to each 
environment you can unlock abilities that led you short circuit robots and 
weapons and if you just want to kill more stuff, Chaos offers the ability to 
immolate robots and send out swarms of buzzing mini-drones to confuse and 
frighten soldiers. You can also equip special Tactical Rigs in your load-out 
giving you wall-running and extra defensive capabilities.

This sense of personalisation, as modest as it is, adds a degree of tactical 
depth to the bullet vortex that is the standard CoD level. This is greatly 
enhanced when you select to play Campaign co-operatively with up to three 
friends. Here, you’re able to mix and match roles and abilities in the classic 
RPG style, putting your more subtle and skilful players in overwatch positions, 
while run-and-gun fanatics just max out their assault rifles with cool 
attachments and sprint into the death pit.

The problem is, the level design is not quite as open and arena-like as many 
had hoped. There are certainly several vast areas, which really reward group 
thinking, such as a mass battle on the streets of Cairo and a big brawl on the 
steps of a crumbling skyscraper. But there is still a lot of funnelling and 
corridor blasting as you’re led through the ghost train of climactic plot 
points. It all feels a little limited and old-fashioned compared to, say, the 
freeform group play of Destiny or the promised technical complexity of Tom 
Clancy’s: The Division.

It's like trying to watch every Tom Cruise sci-fi movie ever made while being 
punched in the face by the universe

The enemies too, are rather disappointing. The futuristic setting has 
naturally meant the arrival of giant robot soldiers, but they all look and act 
the same, trudging toward you, occasionally strafing, sometime sprinting a bit, 
but always lifeless and mournful, like Marvin the Paranoid Android with guns. 
Then you have the bullet sponge tanks patrolling key areas, and a few buzzing 
drones and you just think ... umDestiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/11/destiny-bungie-halo-game-review>
.

Grafted on to the side are the old familiar fall-backs: the on-rails vehicle 
sequences where someone shouting “you take the turret” means spending the next 
ten minutes aimlessly spraying the screen with machine gun fire, while a lot of 
things explode; then the flight combat bits where you aimless spray the screen 
with missiles until you’re allowed to get out of the goddamn plane. Black Ops 
III wants to explore and subvert genre conventions, and manages to produce some 
arresting sequences in the process, but ultimately, force feeding a lot of 
ideas from Apocalypse Now and Inception into CoD’s factory line meat grinder is 
perhaps not the way to evolve this franchise’s storytelling potential.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvIg5dAeudvQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvIg5dAeudvQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvIg5dAeudvQ&media=>
Playing Black Ops III campaign is like trying to simultaneously watch every 
Tom Cruise sci-fi movie ever made while being punched in the face by the 
universe. It is not just loud and brash, it is actively trolling the concept of 
nuance; it is a menacing stranger with an egg icon, leaving cap-locked insults 
in subtlety’s twitter feed. And that’s fine, honestly – if we hadn’t already 
played about a hundred Call of Duty campaigns that tried to do similar things – 
just with less gadgets.

Co-op is certainly a smart addition, and there is much fun to be had roaming 
these strange and beautifully presented tableaus of death, honour and 
subterfuge. But Treyarch is trapped within the confines of this billion dollar 
prison and its desire to add tactical depth, and narrative ingenuity, to the 
recipe is now continually coming up against the same barriers as the player 
when you attempt to run out of the sneakily limited action box: “you are 
leaving the mission area, you have ten seconds to return”.

Of course, Call of Duty has much more to offer – and we’ll get to that in our 
review. There’s the online multiplayer of course, and the zombie mode, as well 
as a new Nightmares offering which lets you play through the campaign missions 
with undead enemies and other surprises.

But the main story, which used to be the first port of call for a lot of 
players, now feels just part of the package. That moment in Call of Duty 4 with 
the mushroom cloud; the sheer controversy-baiting madness of the ‘No Russian’ 
scene in Modern Warfare 2; the way Black Ops segued beautifully into its zombie 
campaign ... those moments people actually talked about seem a long way away.

“So much chaos, so much death,” says a lead character at one point. But they 
don’t seem exasperated, they seem resigned. It is the sound of Call of Duty 
devouring itself.
 