
Carla Bruni-Sarkozy, the first lady of France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, has been appointed by Gordon Brown 
to spearhead a government initiative aimed at injecting more style and glamour 
into British national life, the Guardian has learned.

Moving rapidly to capitalise on the national explosion of Carlamania, which 
saw Bruni-Sarkozy heralded as a new Princess Diana during the French state 
visit to the UK last week, Brown will formally announce the latest addition to 
his "government of all the talents" in a speech tomorrow at the Institut 
Fran√ßais in South Kensington, London.

For too long, he will say, Britain has suffered an inferiority complex with 
regard to mainland European countries such as France and Italy, whose citizens 
are seen as effortlessly stylish and sophisticated.

"I want a Britain, now and in the future, where good taste and sophistication 
are the birthright of the many, not the privilege of an elite, whether in 
fashion, in food and drink, or in cultural pursuits," Brown will say. To launch 
the scheme, the Italian-born Bruni-Sarkozy, 40, will relocate to London for 
three months, starting in June, according to one Brown aide. She is expected to 
commute back to Paris via Eurostar for French state engagements involving her 
husband, President Nicolas Sarkozy.

"At first, when it became clear she was going to upstage [Sarkozy] during the 
state visit, we got a bit worried about it all looking a bit frivolous," the 
aide said. "But it was during the banquet at the Guildhall that the prime 
minister had his eureka moment. Yes, she charmed him. But the key point is that 
he is committed to putting that charm in the service of a better Britain."

Bruni-Sarkozy will focus initially on improving the UK's dress sense and 
cuisine. The aide joked that she would steer clear, for the moment, of the 
other popular British assumption about the French and Italians - that they have 
more exciting sex lives.

She is understood already to have spoken to the chief executive of Marks & 
Spencer, Stuart Rose, to discuss the launch of an affordable range of 
high-street designs inspired by the demure tailored grey suits that won her so 
much acclaim during last week's visit. They were created for Dior by the 
British designer John Galliano, who has signed up as a supporter of Brown's 
plan. The M&S versions will be roomier, and may incorporate several more 
practical features, such as zip-up pockets and mobile phone holders.

Bruni-Sarkozy has also expressed an interest in meeting Jamie Oliver to 
develop plans to introduce a more "continental" approach to eating and 
drinking, which could see British parents encouraged to serve small volumes of 
red wine with meals to children as young as seven or eight.

To coincide with the prime minister's announcement, the thinktank Demos will 
release a report this week arguing that the answer to a wide swath of social 
and economic problems facing Britain may lie in adopting a more French approach.

"The missing ingredient in the UK's approach to a range of pressing policy 
challenges is straightforward: it is savoir-faire," the report's authors said 
in a press release.

The study concludes that numerous national problems - including the decline of 
Britain's railway infrastructure, the collapse of Northern Rock, and the 
scourge of binge drinking - could all have been more successfully addressed had 
politicians and bureaucrats demonstrated "a certain je ne sais quoi".

The elation that greeted Bruni-Sarkozy in the UK last week, including 
rapturous newspaper and television coverage, frequently threatened to sideline 
the president, who unleased a tirade against one French journalist who asked 
him if she was stealing his limelight. But Bruni-Sarkozy herself enjoyed the 
state visit enormously, an Elysee spokesman said yesterday.

"The riotous scenes that greeted her wherever she went made her feel right at 
home, just as if she were in France," he said.

French diplomats in London expressed delight at the apparent rekindling of the 
often chilly relationship between the two nations. "This week has been so 
wonderful - such a change from the usual British media coverage of France and 
the French, which is based on a handful of ill-founded stereotypes," said 
Jean-Claude Forestier, assistant attache for cultural affairs at the French 
embassy in London. "It has been crazy here, with all the international media 
enquiries about Carla.

We have been working absolutely round the clock, from 9am to 3pm, just to 
keep up."
 