
Treyarch, the LA-based studio behind Call of Duty: Black Ops, first revealed 
its plans for the third game in the series back in April. At the time, the 
setup looked like an intriguing extension of the tech-focused Advanced Warfare, 
with its exoskeletons, directed energy weapons and jet pack manoeuvres. 
However, Treyarch was promising an even more fluid experience, complete with 
wall running, underwater fights, and the ability to string together moves into 
Tony Hawk-like environmental combos.

The studio also introduced the idea of Specialist classes, a selection of nine 
super-powered combat archetypes offering online players access to a range of 
devastating attacks as well as interesting defensive options. These effects can 
be earned during a match and then triggered at key moments – just like the 
eponymous mech suits in Titanfall.

But how does it all work in practise? Treyarch has just completed a 
PlayStation 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> beta test 
featuring four maps: Combine, Evac, Hunted and Stronghold. Participants also 
got to test the new chained movement mechanics and eight of the specialist 
classes.

Here’s what I learned as a professional Call of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty> player.

The key weapons have already emerged

One of the most important elements of any Call of Duty beta is to find out 
which weapons are the most effective. There are 18 Primary options in Black Ops 
3 but I and many other professional players quickly settled on the Razorback 
submachine gun and the M8A7 assault rifle as our go-to choices.

The Razorback is the perfect SMG, with very little recoil, a clean iron sight 
so you can easily see enemies while aiming, and a steady fire rate. I quickly 
paired it with the Quickdraw, Stock, Long Barrel and Fast Mags attachments.

The M8A7 is a four-burst assault rifle that will be familiar to Black Ops 2 
players as it’s very similar to that game’s M8A1. It’s incredibly accurate at 
range, and boasts one of the fastest time-to-kill rates in the game if you land 
all four shots on your opponent.

The wall runs and water routes are worth mastering

The key lesson from the four Beta maps was that Black Ops 3 seems to have 
reverted to a traditional three-lane system, where each layout essentially has 
three main channels to run through. This is in contrast to last year’s Advanced 
Warfare, which used a more freeform approach.

The consequence is that players have to continually decide whether to go left, 
straight or right, meaning there are a lot more head-to-head gunfights. It’s 
all about choosing the correct moment to flank, as well as using the wall run 
shortcuts that are built into all the maps. These could easily have been a 
pointless gimmick, but their implementation is smooth, and the controls are 
intuitive so that vertical running feels really natural within the flow of the 
game. Playing Team Domination on the Evac map for example, you can run on the 
outside of the main building all the way to behind the C domination flag, which 
could help you pick up some extra kills for your side before taking the 
objective.

Another new map feature is swimming – and with it, underwater combat. It’s 
another subtle but successful addition, which truly comes into effect on Hunted 
where you’re able to use the water to escape enemies when you’re losing a gun 
battle, or as an alternate route into the main building to take control of the 
hardpoint.


Specialists may become critical for big scorestreaks

It’s already clear that Specialists will greatly effect how players perform, 
providing game-changing moments that can easily turn a match.

After experimenting with all of the available options, it looks like two have 
emerged as favourites for skilled players. Those who prioritise scorestreaks 
are using Nomad’s Rejack ability, which provides a death-defying injection of 
nanoparticle serum: if an opponent manages to kill you, you can bring yourself 
back from the dead and continue your current streak. It’s perhaps going to 
prove a controversial option, but you won’t worry about that if you’re one kill 
away from unlocking the mothership.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFznfvL-D3OY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFznfvL-D3OY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFznfvL-D3OY&media=>
The second Specialist I’d recommend for higher skilled and accurate players, 
especially those using an assault rifle, is Prophet’s Tempest. This charge shot 
weapon fires an arc of electricity, lethally shocking targets and chaining to 
nearby enemies. Although very difficult to use, it’s clearly one of the most 
devastating specialist options in the game, helping to rack up many additional 
kills.

There are already definite load-out necessities

Black Ops 3 uses the now familiar “pick ten” system, allowing players to opt 
for any combination of 10 weapons, items and perks. Throughout the beta, I 
tended to add as many gun attachments as possible by using the Primary 
Gunfighter wildcard. It means you can only use two perks, but having a more 
powerful weapon is worth it. I also used Overclock in my Perk One slot so I 
could get my devastating Specialist ability quicker. Elsewhere, Fast Hands 
already looks to be one of the game’s few compulsory perks.

The scorestreak system is back to its best

It’s early days, but it already looks like scorestreaks (the special attacks 
and items unlocked through gaining kills and objectives during a match) are a 
strong element in Black Ops 3. For players looking to assist their teammates, 
the non-lethal setup of UAV, Counter UAV and H.A.T.R is one of the strongest 
scorestreak combinations in the game, as it constantly reveals all enemy 
locations on the minimap. It’s very similar to the Blackbird and VSAT from 
previous titles.

For a more lethal approach, a combination of Hellstorm, Lightning Strike and 
Wraith proved devastating for me during the beta, especially on smaller maps, 
such as Combine. However, a piece of equipment called the Blackhat can be used 
to hijack enemy scorestreaks like the Wraith and H.A.T.R, redirecting their 
firepower against the user. An important lesson is to be very watchful of 
opponents using that one.
 