
It’s just a month until Activision unleashes the latest title in its 
blockbustingCall of Duty <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty> 
series. And while we’ve seen plenty of information on how Black Ops 3 is 
tweaking the multiplayer experience, there’s been much less focus on the 
single-player campaign mode.

Set 40 years after the events of Black Ops 2, the world is now divided into a 
patchwork of international alliances, all investigating advanced cybernetic and 
bio-augmentation technologies. The narrative follows a group of robotically 
enhanced super soldiers, investigating the disappearance of a CIA operative in 
Singapore, as well as a huge data leak of military secrets.

Call of Duty: Black Ops 3 – reimagining the biggest shooter in the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/28/call-of-duty-black-ops-3-biggest-shooter-in-world>
During a reveal event in April, developer Treyarch announced that the campaign 
would be a four-player co-op mode with large, open environments – it even 
promised a more complex story in which multiple playthroughs may be required to 
get the full picture.

But how does this play out in practice? Recently, we got to play a demo of the 
Campaign mode – here’s what we discovered.


Co-op is the key focus

It turns out, co-operative play isn’t just an option – playing with up to 
three friends, or with others online, will be the core campaign experience. 
It’s the first time co-op has featured in Call of Duty sinceWorld at War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/nov/20/call-of-duty-world-at-war>, 
and this time each player will be bringing in their own individual rank 
progression and class customisations as well as the game’s new features: 
tactical rigs (which provide physical boosts like longer jumps and sprinting 
times) and cybercores (which provide special skills).

The latter are pretty interesting. There are three different categories: 
Cybercore Chaos is all about destruction, with options such as Immolation, 
which uses enemy explosives like grenades and enables you to destroy robots; 
Cybercore Martial is more about the player – Active Camo, for example allows 
you to become invisible for a short amount of time; finally Cybercore Control 
is all about hacking, allowing you to, say, take control of an enemy robot or 
aircraft. The latter means you’ll be able to undertake aerial raids whenever 
you want, not just when the scripted mission demands it.

Call of Duty: Black Ops 3 introduces co-op campaign and cyber-soldiers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/26/call-of-duty-black-ops-3-co-op-campaign-movement-announcement>
Furthmore, each player’s configurations will be based on the decisions they 
have made throughout their campaign experience: the more you play, the more 
cybercores, weapon attachments and other pieces of equipment you’re able to 
unlock and utilise. What we’ll hopefully see then are parties of players with 
very different experiences and abilities, having to use those disparate skills 
together – almost like an RPG guild.

To emphasis this sense of cooperation, more experienced players will be able 
to lend advanced weapons to their friends, allowing them to compete in missions 
that they aren’t yet equipped for. Once the level is over, the gun is returned. 
It’s an interesting attempt to encourage social play beyond simply turning up 
at the start of a mission with a bunch of strangers and no intention of working 
together.

The DNI (Direct Neural Interface) is a major new feature

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-five-things-weve-learned-about-the-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444731554416%2Fd47803c0-9199-4101-af98-3a50d32c2a3d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Black%20Ops%203%20%E2%80%93%20five%20things%20we've%20learned%20about%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-five-things-weve-learned-about-the-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Black%20Ops%203%20%E2%80%93%20five%20things%20we%27ve%20learned%20about%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fcall-of-duty-black-ops-3-five-things-weve-learned-about-the-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444731554416%2Fd47803c0-9199-4101-af98-3a50d32c2a3d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Players will be able to share information on the battlefield, working out 
together where enemies are positioned. In theory, this will allow a more 
co-operative tactical approach, using snipers and medics to provide back up. 
Photograph: Activision 
Black Ops 3 is set in 2065 and there have been a major advances in robotic and 
bionic technology since the Black Ops 2 timeline – as we saw in the “Ember” 
trailer. Direct neural interfacing, part of a new Tactical Mode accessed via 
the d-pad, let’s you tap into the visual stream from any of your team mates. In 
other words, you can see what they see. The idea is, it’ll allow you to 
identify enemy types and dangerous locations on the map; it will also show, via 
an augmented reality HUD, where your grenade will land at the current throwing 
angle.

What we found from the demo is that it could well open a whole new level of 
tactics. If you want all your teammates to see the location of every enemy in 
the area, you can place one of your team on a high vantage point – they can 
then move safely through the area or at least figure out the best way to engage 
every situation. It’s also possible to find out which enemies can see you, 
based on the colour layered over the area you’re in. This could prove 
especially useful on higher difficulties as you’ll know key areas to avoid 
altogether.

Again, the idea is to get players thinking together, rather than simply making 
separate run-n-gun forays into each mission. The problem is, that’s kind of how 
a lot of people play Call of Duty – this isn’t Ghost Recon, after all. Treyarch 
seems to be aiming for a big culture change in CoD play – it’ll be interesting 
to see if the level design and co-operative tools are really sophisticated 
enough to bring this level of strategic planing into play.

The Safe House is a fun extra – with hidden features

Before players enter each mission, they access the Safe House, an area in 
which they can customise their character, set class loadouts, learn more about 
the upcoming objectives as well as show off achievements to friends.

Within the Safe House every player has their own “Bunkroom” which contains a 
wardrobe for character customisation, a little like GTA Online, and a Medal 
Case, which holds awards you’ve earned after completing tasks in the campaign. 
You also have a trunk to stores collectible, which you can use to personalise 
your Bunkroom. Any of your co-op friends can work into your room and view your 
customised layout. It’s another little RPG feature, which doesn’t add huge 
amounts to the actual gameplay experience, but just enhances that sense of 
playing alongside other people, and actually having an existence within the 
game’s universe.

Each safe house also contains a computer terminal, or PDV, like the computer 
found in Black Ops 1, giving access to background information (in fact, it 
houses 100 times more files that its predecessor). There’s background info on 
the events between Black Ops 1 and Black Ops 3, as well as hidden Easter egg’s 
and a few surprise game modes. There was an arcade-style zombie mini-game in 
Black Ops 1, so could potentially expect something very similar to that...

There’s a whole new difficulty setting

Forget Veteran, in Realistic mode, players will only have a single point of 
health, meaning the slightest damage will bring you down, whether that’s being 
caught on the edge of a grenade blast or taking a pistol round that’s been 
fired through a wall. Of course, the whole notion of ‘realism’ is rather 
stretched in a game set forty years in the future and featuring bio-augmented 
super soldiers battling intelligent robot tanks, but this is going to be a 
major challenge for fans. What next? Call of Duty permadeath?

You can skip to the end of the Campaign mode if you like
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk2GMPVXLGbk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk2GMPVXLGbk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk2GMPVXLGbk&media=>
Traditionally video games only allow you to unlock new missions as you 
complete previous ones. In Black Ops 3, the whole campaign is open from the 
beginning – if you like, you can head straight for the finale. Treyarch claims 
to have taken inspiration from the way that services like Netflix make every 
episode of a new drama series available at once – viewers can decide if they 
want to skip ahead.

Could this be the first Call of Duty addition to be inspired by a stand-up 
comedy act <https://youtu.be/O4AmIKhfr40>? Whatever, it’s an intriguing 
decision, which – if nothing else – kind of accentuates this emphasis on player 
choice, freedom and customisation. Of course, it also means that less patient 
friends are going to be plying you with spoilers – another reason to choose 
co-op partners more carefully.
 