
In 2015, astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson gave an interview 
<https://mic.com/articles/115842/neil-de-grasse-tyson-talks-planets-preventing-war-and-being-the-sexiest-man-alive#.3KCO1I0EL>
 in which he argued that the world’s first trillionaire will be somebody who 
successfully mines asteroids. These celestial rocks are loaded with the sort of 
rare metals essential for the manufacturing of computers and smartphones – 
metals that are becoming increasingly scarce on Earth. There are already 
companies such asPlanetary Resources <http://www.planetaryresources.com/> and 
Deep Space Industries <https://deepspaceindustries.com/> developing 
technologies to facilitate the industry. It’s going to happen.

And its this prospect that provides the background to Call of Duty: Infinite 
Warfare, 2016’s instalment in the long-running shooter series. It’s the near 
future and humankind has expanded out into space, operating mining colonies 
throughout the solar system. To keep these in check, a new agency, UNSA, has 
been formed, uniting the armed forces of all the major countries involved. 
However, a fanatical organisation known as the Settlement Defence Front 
(SetDef) has formed out in space, looking to place a stranglehold on resources 
by taking over outposts throughout the system. “Wherever there is war over 
resources,” saysCall of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty> design director, Jacob 
Minkoff, “there is extremism”.

In a demo shown during E3, Minkoff and story director, Taylor Kurosaki, reveal 
the beginning of the game: a seemingly unwise Fleet Week parade in Geneva, 
organised by UNSA countries and involving the organisation’s entire military 
force. Naturally, a surprise attack by SetDef takes out pretty much the whole 
thing, leaving player-character Nick Reyes and his spec-ops squad, Scar Team 
One, legging it through the burning streets, trying to help civilians. As 
SetDef forces arrive to mop up, Reyes needs to blast through the wreckage to 
reach the UNSA HQ, an imposing tower on the other side of town. SetDef 
dropships crash to earth, spewing out battle droids. We see Reyes using one of 
the new gadgets, a robotic spider grenade called a seeker bot, that scuttles 
around until it finds an enemy, then explodes.

From here it’s vintage CoD campaign stuff – a hectic rush through wrecked 
buildings as explosions fill the sky and military personal shout into comms 
equipment demanding air support and suppression fire. At one point you get to 
hack an enemy dropship and initiate its self-destruct mode, then you’re on your 
wrist computer marking targets for a missile attack. Once at the tower, the 
orders are to leap into a Jackal fighter craft and zoom off into orbit, where 
you must immediately engage in a mass spaceship battle. It is breathless stuff.

Modern warfare sucks – the crisis in first-person shooter games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/04/modern-warfare-sucks-crisis-first-person-shooter-games-call-duty>
So then you’re dodging missiles and taking out enemy fighters; Reyes needs to 
get in close to a vast enemy destroyer and start pounding its gun turrets with 
50mm cannon fire. It certainly looks fast-paced, exciting and visually 
accomplished, but with no hands-on available, it’s difficult to gauge the feel 
of the fighting. According to Mintoff, flight handling has been designed to 
resemble ground controls, so the ship has RCS thrusters so that you can strafe, 
while hitting sprint operates boost, the jump button is up and crouch is down. 
Targeting and firing missiles uses the same left and right trigger combo as 
shooting guns.

Later in the mission, we’re told, there will be dogfighting sequences, which 
seem to involve open-space environments rather than on-rails attack sequences. 
You then land aboard the Retribution spacecraft, where Reyes discovers that the 
captain has been killed and he’s now in command.

This is effectively the game’s hub world, from where the player can decide 
which missions to take on, in which order. Some are mandatory story missions 
sent down from Strategy Command, but there are also optional missions, shown on 
the solar system ops map. These involve fighting on asteroids and outposts, or 
attacking enemy destroyers and stealing intel, technologies and weapons – 
apparently, there are certain weapons that will only be available if you take 
on these supplementary tasks, and these will make subsequent story missions 
easier to complete.

During the Sony press conference, Activision revealed one of these ship attack 
sequences, which involves rocking up in Jackal, popping the canopy, fighting 
along the outer hull (using a handy grapple hook to grasp and drag in enemy 
solders, before sending them spiralling into space) and then boarding the 
craft. “We’ve done a huge amount of technology advancement in this engine,” 
says Minkoff. “We’ve never had a streaming system where you can go from Earth 
up into a space dogfight, then into an enemy ship before returning to your hub, 
walking to the bridge and selecting the next mission. This seamless experience 
is huge for us, it really increases the scope of the warfare.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcall-of-duty-infinite-warfare-were-going-for-a-classic-feel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b0c5b229985eaf4c4775cbd5587908ddfb26799%2F302_244_3192_1916%2F3192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Infinite%20Warfare%20%E2%80%93%20'we're%20going%20for%20a%20classic%20feel'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcall-of-duty-infinite-warfare-were-going-for-a-classic-feel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Infinite%20Warfare%20%E2%80%93%20%27we%27re%20going%20for%20a%20classic%20feel%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcall-of-duty-infinite-warfare-were-going-for-a-classic-feel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b0c5b229985eaf4c4775cbd5587908ddfb26799%2F302_244_3192_1916%2F3192.jpg>
 Dogfights and attacks on massive destroyer craft will be key features of the 
game’s space sections Photograph: Activision 
Infinity Ward is saying that this is a game about leadership; while previous 
titles have always had you following a commanding officer, now it’s the player 
in charge of a ship and a crew, which provides the game’s ensemble cast. Amid 
the roster of military game archetypes (the father figure, the hot head, the 
resentful dude who feels you’re too inexperienced for command), there’s also 
Eth.3n, a newly unveiled mechanised soldier with an array of enhanced abilities 
– the one concession to the cyber-augmented warriors of Advanced Warfare and 
Black-Ops 3.

This is all campaign stuff of course – Activision is holding off any 
multiplayer details until its Call of Duty XP event in September. For now, this 
looks to be CoD as we know it: military bombast, an array of recognisable 
weapons (assault rifles, shotguns, snipers), and highly choreographed 
set-pieces, interspersed with intriguing space battles that may or may not work 
in a similar way to the fighter squadron modes in Battlefront. The studio is 
certainly desperate for players to know that the boots-on-the-ground basics of 
the series have been retained.

“We’re going for the feel of classic war, of being part of a large fighting 
force with many different soldiers and ships in the air,” says Minkoff. “Even 
though we’re going to space, even though this is a futuristic setting, we want 
to have a classic war feel.”


“But we’re also taking a lot of risks, we’re doing things differently. The 
seamlessness, the non-linearity of missions, going to space, new flight AI, new 
zero-g AI – teaching our engine that up isn’t up anymore is a big challenge. We 
wanted to create something that feels different, but at the same time has the 
core Call of Duty experience.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcall-of-duty-infinite-warfare-were-going-for-a-classic-feel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ff6078954785d7cc3c0fc5ece0ec3bf022fcbf8%2F502_0_3128_1878%2F3128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Infinite%20Warfare%20%E2%80%93%20'we're%20going%20for%20a%20classic%20feel'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcall-of-duty-infinite-warfare-were-going-for-a-classic-feel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Call%20of%20Duty%3A%20Infinite%20Warfare%20%E2%80%93%20%27we%27re%20going%20for%20a%20classic%20feel%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcall-of-duty-infinite-warfare-were-going-for-a-classic-feel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ff6078954785d7cc3c0fc5ece0ec3bf022fcbf8%2F502_0_3128_1878%2F3128.jpg>
 Infinity Ward has been keen to stress that the new game as plenty of “boots on 
the ground” combat as well as sci-fi space battles Photograph: Activision 
Battlefield 1 is clearly winning the early hype war with its fan-pleasing 
return to the first world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/20/battlefield-1-military-shooter-ea-dice>
. Thousands of shooter veterans have spent the last five years lamenting the 
fact that both these titles have moved ever further into the future and away 
from the frenetic, gritty action that they used to depict. With Infinite 
Warfare, Infinity Ward wants to have its cake and blow it up: it is promising a 
classic experience, but also one that innovates and goes further into space 
combat than even the unloved Call of Duty: Ghosts.

During the E3 presentation, Minkoff comments that he’s never seen a game that 
combines infantry combat, space dogfights and starship management – there could 
well be a reason for that beyond the possibility that no one’s thought of it 
before. In the Triple A gaming sector, just as in the summer season of popcorn 
blockbusters, people have specific requirements – they want more of what they 
know. Infinite Warfare is a strange venture – a leap into the unknown that 
carries with it the very familiar baggage of 16 previous games.

Infinite Warfare is graphically impressive and crammed with stuff that either 
explodes or fires missiles. Or collapses into the street in flames. In the end 
though, it will all come down to how the game feels, and whether there’s still 
raw excitement to be mined out there in space, as well as all the asteroids.

Call of Duty: Infinite Warfare is released on PC, PS4 and Xbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one> on 4 November. Keith Stuart 
travelled to E3 on a press trip with Activision. The company covered his travel 
and accommodation costs.
 