
The crown jewel of Britain’s technology sector might be heading to Japan via a 
£24bn takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
 but it seemed to be business as usual in ARM Holdings’ home city of Cambridge, 
bathed in summer sunlight. The Science Park was buzzing with young executives, 
the river punts overflowing with tourists and the college buildings as 
beautiful as ever.

Scratch the surface of “Silicon Fen”, however, and there is significant unease 
– and not only about the planned purchase ofARM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> by SoftBank.

Cambridge has been suffering enormous growth tensions for some time and has 
been served up with a Brexit vote it did not want, as well as absorbing another 
huge corporate asset grab.

“This [the ARM deal] is a symptom of the country being financially broke and 
all our means of wealth are being plundered by the rest of the world,” said 
Peter Dawe, one of the area’s former technology titans, who sold his own early 
internet business Unipalm in 1995 for £150m.

“At least SoftBank is one of the better people to buy [ARM] because they don’t 
already have a department they want to absorb it into. If it was Apple or 
another Silicon [Valley] manufacturer, they would just be buying the 
intellectual property and let the management and engineers wither on the vine.”

Hermann Hauser, another big name in the local technology firmament and a 
founder of ARM’s predecessor Acorn, was also disconsolate: “ARM is the proudest 
achievement of my life. The proposed sale to SoftBank is a sad day for me and 
for technology in Britain,” he tweeted.

He believed the takeover meant the “determination of what comes next for 
technology will not be decided in Britain any more but in Japan”.

However, Mike Lynch, who made £500m from selling his Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> business to Hewlett 
Packard five years ago, was more upbeat. “Yes, we have sold the family silver,” 
he said, “but it’s an amazing achievement to get what is effectively half the 
value of Intel” – one of the biggest global technology companies. “It 
reinforces the fact that you can do it here, in Cambridge.”

Unsurprisingly, Simon Segars, the chief executive of ARM, agreed with Lynch, 
saying the SoftBank acquisition was entirely positive because it will 
“accelerate our growth”.

It is certainly good personally for the chief technology officer, Mike Muller, 
whose stake is valued at £21m, and Segars, who joined ARM in 1991 as its 16th 
employee and whose shares are now worth £11m.

The Sussex University-educated electrical engineer, who once described ARM as 
“the least glamorous company in the FTSE”, said there was no question of ARM 
leaving its Cambridge home, where it is in the midst of a major new office 
construction project.

Segars said: “We are not going anywhere. We are the product of Cambridge 
roots, where our headquarters is, but it will remain a global company.”

SoftBank, whose operations cover telecoms, the internet and robot technology, 
has promised to double the UK workforce from 1,600 and keep that East Anglian 
base. Segars says these commitments will be nailed down in legal documents but 
he has no reason to believe these agreements would be broken – even if Brexit 
makes it harder to employ skilled European staff.

ARM is the third world-beating technology company in the past five years to be 
born in Cambridge and transfer to foreign parentage. The same fate befell 
Autonomy and CSR, while the smaller but hi-tech Domino Printing was sold last 
year toJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> too.

ARM is particularly significant because it is at the heart of the much-vaunted 
“internet of things”. Its self-designed microchips are used in 95% of 
smartphones, including iPhones, but also in TVs, drones and smart cars.

The controversial deal with SoftBank has certainly been an early test for the 
new Conservative government, which promised to block foreign takeovers if they 
harmed the public interest. This one was waved through, withChancellor Philip 
Hammond quick to present the deal as a positive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/18/philip-hammond-softbank-takeover-arm-holdings-overseas-investors>
. It showed “that Britain has lost none of its allure to international 
investors,” he argued. “Britain is open for business – and open to foreign 
investment.”

But these are difficult days for Silicon Fen, whose leaders have complained 
that growth is being stifled by poor transport connections and insufficient 
housing. The chamber of commerce, university and local councils last year 
produced a “Case for Cambridge”, explaining “why urgent government action is 
needed if the city is to continue to thrive”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcambridge-university-silicon-fen-shaken-by-winds-of-change-arm-softbank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94f373fd4b9668f9ed53ab9a691029210f7b6546%2F430_0_3009_1806%2F3009.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cambridge%E2%80%99s%20Silicon%20Fen%20shaken%20by%20the%20winds%20of%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcambridge-university-silicon-fen-shaken-by-winds-of-change-arm-softbank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cambridge%E2%80%99s%20Silicon%20Fen%20shaken%20by%20the%20winds%20of%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcambridge-university-silicon-fen-shaken-by-winds-of-change-arm-softbank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94f373fd4b9668f9ed53ab9a691029210f7b6546%2F430_0_3009_1806%2F3009.jpg>
 Cambridge Science Park. 
Employers boast there are 4,500 knowledge-intensive companies registered 
within 25 miles of Cambridge. This is producing annual employment growth of 
7.4% – faster than China, they say. They want more than 35,000 houses to be 
built and investment poured into roads and rail to keep Cambridge up to speed 
with rival tech centres such as San Francisco and Boston.

Silicon Fen, named in honour of the Californian valley that spawned Apple, 
Google and others, has grown in the middle of what is still largely a farming 
region.

Once a sleepy market town with a major academic institution at its heart, 
Cambridge is now about computer technology and biosciences as well. Much of 
this new industry has been spun from the still world-leading university, which 
has produced 90 Nobel prizewinners in little more than a century.

The city is also home to a raft of internationally renowned science centres 
such as the MRC Laboratory for Molecular Biology, the Babraham Institute for 
immunology and the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute for genomic research. Pharma 
giant AstraZeneca is building a huge new £330m headquarters next to 
Addenbrooke’s hospital on the Cambridge Biomedical Campus.

Overall, the city grandees believe that around 45,000 new jobs can be created 
and the government has offered a City Deal to put in place the transport 
infrastructure to cope. But moves to cut down trees and make fast busways have 
caused tension in the close-knit communities that make up the city.

Residents’ associations have accused the assembly that oversees the City Deal 
of prioritising the transport needs of employers over those of inhabitants.

Social justice groups say a huge rise in house prices is keeping key workers 
such as teachers and nurses out of the city. Those forced to live in nearby 
villages must join the queues of 87,000 cars a day commuting into the centre. 
And while the city council has a target of 40% of new housing being made 
“affordable”, the local paper has highlighted examples where developers have 
beaten this figure down to single-digit levels.

The fast economic growth of Cambridge has made it, in the eyes of its 
supporters, part of a “golden triangle” of success with Oxford and London. But 
some of the key problems – inequality, unaffordable housing and congested roads 
– are also replicated in all three cities.

The Cambridge Cluster has been built on attracting the best brains from around 
the world, and the Brexit vote has sent shockwaves through a city that voted 
overwhelmingly in favour of Remain.

Peter Williamson, honorary professor of international management at the 
university’s Judge Business School, said technology companies by necessity look 
worldwide and there were already signs that EU-funded research projects are 
nervous about including UK scientists.

“I don’t see anything positive and quite a lot negative about Brexit for the 
Cambridge Cluster. ARM never really had a UK customer base and always needed 
partners from overseas,” he said.

“ARM succeeded because it was born global.”

He also quibbled with the government’s idea that the deal somehow represented 
inward investment, and said any inability of SoftBank to attract new 
international staff to ARM could test its resolve to scale up in Britain.

Dawe – a Brexiter – sees it differently. “There may be short-term pain for 
university departments who have been subjugated by Brussels on research 
funding. But if we continue to look globally and have the right local 
management, Silicon Fen can grow faster and in a way that does not make local 
living conditions worse.”

But no doubt most Silicon Fenners would have agreed more with the sentiments 
of Hauser, who tweeted on referendum night: “An innumerate clown has wrecked a 
country‪#Brexit <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Brexit?src=hash>”.

ARM’S HISTORY

ARM was founded in November 1990 as Advanced Risc Machines. It was a joint 
venture between Cambridge-based Acorn Computers, US giant Apple and its Silicon 
Valley sister, VLSI Technology.

Based in a converted barn in Cambridge, the ARM team created microprocessor 
chips that were used in Apple’s Newton device, the first handheld computer, 
which was a commercial flop.

But Newton showed small portable computers had potential. ARM chips went on to 
be utilised in a wide variety of smartphones, including Apple’s iPhone, and are 
now said to be used in about 95% of smartphones worldwide. From an estimated 9 
million units in 1997, ARM’s partners shipped 15 billion chips last year. ARM 
now has nearly 4,000 employees working in 35 offices, from East Anglia to 
Silicon Valley to Shenzhen in China.
 