
5.10pm GMT 

Afternoon summary

• David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has 
committed Britain to a long-term effort to "completely overcome" al-Qaida 
terrorism in north Africa. In a statement to the Commons about the implications 
of the terrorist attack in Algeria, he said a "strong security response" would 
have to be combined with "an intelligent political response" and that a 
solution would take years. (See 4.15pm and 4.53pm.)

• A Guardian/ICM poll suggests that the public are opposed to the government's 
decision to cap rises in benefit payments at 1% 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/21/labour-tories-five-points-poll>.

ICM asked voters to choose between two views of the chancellor's headline 
proposal for a 1% cap on benefit rises. Just 36% agreed with the coalition's 
argument that "squeezing benefits is fair, seeing as wages for workers are also 
being squeezed", whereas 58% inclined to the case made by the opposition that 
squeezing benefits and tax credits "is unfair, seeing as it will hurt the 
vulnerable, including many who people who do work hard for low pay".

No 10 has long been convinced that the "striving" majority of the public 
resents the "shirking" minority who rely onwelfare 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/welfare>, and will thus be concerned that 
by a substantial 22-point margin voters reject its argument in favour of this 
latest social security cut.

• Michael Gove, the education secretary, has rejected calls for an inquiry 
into claims that one of his advisers was responsible for a nasty unattributable 
briefing against the former children's minister Tim Loughton 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/coffeehouse/2013/01/loughton-vs-dfe/>. Stephen 
Twigg, the shadow education secretary, raised the issued in the Commons.

Last week the former children's minister said that the children and families 
agenda is a declining priority for this government. The response from a senior 
official in his department was to describe him as lazy and incompetent.

The code of conduct for special advisers and civil servants precludes them 
from making such personal attacks. Will he investigate to determine whether a 
breach of the code has occurred, and if one has occurred will he take all 
necessary disciplinary action?

Gove replied:

I'm grateful to him for making that point, it gives me an opportunity to 
affirm the importance of child protection and ensuring that this government 
takes all the steps it needs to ensure that no child is placed at risk and that 
all steps are taken. I do think that the first part of the question is about 
child protection and I regard that as the most important part of the question. 
I think that that's the reason why we've taken such steps in order to ensure 
that child protection is and remains a top priority.

It is of course the case that leaks are a part of political life, and I tend 
to regard them all with equanimity.

That's all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.

4.53pm GMT 

It's over.

In a blog at Coffee House, James Forsyth describes Cameron's statement as the 
most interventionist speech he has given since 2005. 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/coffeehouse/2013/01/david-cameron-redoubles-his-commitment-to-interventionism/>

Most striking, though, was Cameron’s rejection of the idea of containing the 
terrorist threat. In response to a question from the Tory MP Julian Lewis 
pushing the merits of containment as a strategy, Cameron argued that this 
country’s aim was ‘not containment but trying overtime to completely overcome 
them’.

I'll post a summary shortly.

4.49pm GMT 

Cameron says Muslim men and women are the biggest victims of al-Qaida violence.

4.48pm GMT 

Andrew Bridgen, a Conservative, asks if Cameron is surprised that the BBC have 
described the attackers as "militants" and not as "terrorists".

Cameron says he agrees. These people should be described as terrorists, he 
says.

4.47pm GMT 

Cameron says that regimes like Gaddafi's encourage many young people to turn 
to extremism.

4.46pm GMT 

Karen Lumley, a Conservative, says her husband used to work as an oil engineer 
inAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>. What is the government 
doing to get BP to improve its security.

Cameron says he has had several conversations with Bob Dudley, the BP group 
chief executive, about this over the last few days.

4.44pm GMT 

Cameron says that companies like BP are responsible for their own security. He 
commends them for the work they've done, but they need to redouble their 
efforts.

4.40pm GMT 

Sir Bob Russell, a Lib Dem MP, asks if it is in Britain's interests to cut the 
size of the armed forces.

Cameron says the key thing is not to look at the overall number of soldiers, 
but to look at their capabilities.

It is frustrating when people just want to keep what we have and add to it, he 
says. To govern is to take choices.

4.36pm GMT 

Philip Hollobone, a Conservative, says more money for developmental assistance 
in north Africa should come from some of the very rich Islamic states.

Cameron says some Islamic states are increasing their aid spending. The 
government will encourage this.

4.35pm GMT 

Labour's Jon Ashworth asks Cameron if he can give more details about the 
agreement he hopes to get at the G8.

Cameron says he hopes the G8 will agree a common analysis. And he hopes they 
can talk about how they "partner up" with countries, without duplicating each 
other.

4.33pm GMT 

Labour's Kevin Brennan asks if the Algerians will be able to obtain 
intelligence from the terrorists taken prisoner.

Cameron says he has no information about that

4.31pm GMT 

Labour's Chi Onwurah says she knows from her own engineering career that 
engineers are often asked to work abroad. Will the government ensure that 
engineers get proper information about safety?

Cameron says he agrees with her point.

4.28pm GMT 

Sir Edward Garnier asks why the French needed to borrow two British C-17 
transport planes.

Cameron says the French don't have C-17s. Britain has eight, he says. They are 
based at Brize Norton in his constituency.

4.27pm GMT 

Cameron says the government should be listening to the settled communities in 
the UK whose nationals could be causing concern.

4.25pm GMT 

Simon Hughes, the Lib Dem deputy leader, says the government should beef up 
its surveillance capacity. Cameron says that's a good point.

4.24pm GMT 

Labour's Ronnie Campbell asks who is financing the terrorist groups.

Cameron says that's a good point. In north Africa, al-Qaida hostages have been 
financed by money from hostage taking. The G8 will look at this issue.

4.23pm GMT 

Julian Brazier, a Conservative, says this underlines the importance of being 
able to deport extremists.

Cameron says there has been a problem with some foreign nationals in the UK.

4.21pm GMT 

Labour's Paul Flynn says he's alarmed by the idea of "perpetual war".

4.20pm GMT 

Cameron says the government will be publishing a paper about its defence 
engagement strategy soon.

4.20pm GMT 

Labour's Gisela Stuart asks if the Syrian opposition count as an al-Qaida 
franchise.

Cameron says there are extremist elements in the Syrian opposition. But it 
would not be fair to characterise the whole Syrian opposition like that.

4.19pm GMT 

Back in the Commons John Baron, a Conservative, says al-Qaida was defeated in 
Afghanistan early on. But the West then got drawn into a nation building 
exercise. Does Cameron agree Britain needs a flexible response?

Cameron says going into Afghanistan was right. But there was a need for a 
poltical settlement too. That applies in north Africa too.

4.15pm GMT 

Cameron's statement on Algeria - Summary

I've now seen the full text of Cameron's opening statement. 
<http://www.number10.gov.uk/news/algeria-hostage-crisis-statement/>

Here are the main points.

• Cameron said that the West was in the midst of a "generational struggle" 
against Islamist terrorism in north Africa and that Britain would have to be 
"patient and resolute" in the battle against these forces.

We must be patient and resolute.

Together with our partners in the region, we are in the midst of a 
generational struggle against an ideology which is an extreme distortion of the 
Islamic faith, and which holds that mass murder and terror are not only 
acceptable but necessary.

We must tackle this poisonous thinking at home and abroad and resist the 
ideologues' attempt to divide the world into a clash of civilisations. 

The underlying conflicts and grievances that are exploited by terrorists are 
in many cases long-standing and deep.

And, of course, the building blocks of democracy the rule of law and the 
independence of the judiciary, the rights of minorities, free media and 
association, and a proper place in society for the army which are a big part of 
the solution all take a long time to put in place.

But this patient, intelligent but tough approach is the best way to defeat 
terrorism and to ensure our own security.

We must pursue it with an iron resolve.

• He said Britain would help the Algerians fight the terrorist group 
responsible for the attack.

We will contribute British intelligence and counter-terrorism assets to an 
international effort to find and dismantle the network that planned and ordered 
the brutal assault at In Amenas.

Britain would also help the governments in Nigeria, Libya and Mali establish 
security and fight terrorism, he said.

• He said the fight against terrorism would involve "an intelligent political 
response".

Al Qaeda franchises thrive where there are weak political institutions, 
political instability and the failure to address long-standing political 
grievances.

So we must match a strong security response with a political approach that 
addresses these issues.

• He said he would use his chairmanship of the G8 to put the battle against 
terrorism at the top of its agenda.

• He said the threat from terrorism in north Africa was growing.

In North Africa, as in Somalia, terrorist activity has been fed by hostage 
ransoms and wider criminality.

To date, the threat it poses has been to these North African states themselves 
and, of course, to Western interests in those states.

But as it escalates it is also becoming a magnet for jihadists from other 
countries who share this poisonous ideology.

Indeed there are already reports of non-Algerian nationals involved in this 
attack.

Four years ago three quarters of terrorist plots against the UK emerged from 
the Afghanistan/Pakistan region. Today less than half of plots come from that 
region, he said.

• He said Algerian forces were still clearing the gas plant where the attack 
took place.

The Algerian Prime Minister told me on Saturday afternoon that the Algerian 
military had completed their offensive and that the terrorist incident was 
over. 

Since then Algerian forces have undertaken a further operation to clear the 
site of potential explosives and booby traps.

This is still being completed and it will allow our Embassy-led team to access 
the site.

• He said 37 foreign hostages were killed.

There is still some uncertainty around the precise facts, but we believe that 
in total there were some 800 employees working at the In Amenas site at the 
time of the attack, about 135 of whom were foreign nationals

At least 12 were killed with at least a further 20 unaccounted for and feared 
dead.

The Algerian Prime Minister has said today 37 foreign hostages were killed.

The number of terrorists was over 30. Most were killed during the incident but 
a small number are in Algerian custody.

• He said a team of British, American and Norwegian experts was helping the 
Algerians identify bodies.

Updated at 4.17pm GMT

4.01pm GMT 

Andrew Mitchell, the former chief whip, says it is important to address the 
root causes of conflict.

Cameron says addressing the root causes of conflict was one of the "excellent 
things" Mitchell did as international development secretary.

3.57pm GMT 

Labour's Peter Hain says he is glad focused on the political response as well 
as on the military response. But diplomatic capacity in the region has been 
cut, by Labour as well as by the coalition, he says.

Cameron says the Foreign Office got a reasonably generous settlement from the 
Treasury. It has been opening new embassies.

He says Britain should coordinate with countries like France. It does not make 
sense for them to double up in the same places.

3.53pm GMT 

Cameron is responding to Miliband.

He says energy companies have increased their security at their plants.

He says British troops will not play a combat role in Mali.

He says Miliband is right to says we are dealing with distinct organisations. 
Some are more connected to al-Qaida than others.

He says Britain should be helping to build the capacity of the African Union.

He says Britain is helping governments remove weapons from circulation.Re

Regimes like Gaddafi's did not make the world safe. Libyan semtex is still 
posing a threat in Northern Ireland, Cameron says.

3.48pm GMT 
 Ed Miliband Photograph: BBC Parliament 
Ed Miliband is responding now.

He says the whole country has been shocked. This was cold-blooded, 
premeditated murder.

The task is to understand the nature of the new threat, he says.

And the international community must apply the lessons of the past.

He says the Algerian government had difficult decisions to take.

Can any lessons be learnt about the security of energy installations in the 
region?

Can Cameron confirm he does not envisage British troops playing a combat role 
in Mali?

Miliband says dealing with the threat in the future will be pain-staking.

Does Cameron agree that Britain is dealing with a number of different threats, 
not a single coordinate group?

What role does Cameron anticipate for the African Union?

What can Britain do to prevent the spread of arms?

3.42pm GMT 

Cameron is still speaking.

First, the government must be clear that the attack demands a security 
response. Britain will contribute intelligence and counter-terorrism assets to 
help governments in north Africa fight terrorism.

He says Britain supports the French intervention taking place at the request 
of the Malian government.

Second, the tough security response must be matched by an intelligent 
political response.

Al-Qaida franchises thrive where there are political grievances.

Third, Britain must be patient. Britain and its allies are involved in a 
long-term ideological struggle. The grievances exploited by terrorists are 
long-standing an deep. Building up civil society takes a long time. But it is 
the best way to defeat terrorism.

Cameron says Britain must pursue this "with an iron resolve".

He says he will put this at the top of the G8 agenda.

This is the work our generation faces, he says. This generation must show the 
same resolve that previous generations showed.

3.39pm GMT 

David Cameron is speaking now. He says the terrorist attack was "despicable".

Three British national were killed. Another three are believed to have been 
killed, as well as a Columbian national resident in the UK.

On Saturday afternoon the Algerian prime minister said the operation was over. 
Since then another operation has taken place to clear the site of booby traps. 
That work is still going on.

Some 800 people worked at the site, including 135 foreigners. Some 40 were 
taken hostage, and 12 were killed. Another 20 are unaccounted for.

Cameron says bodies are being identified. But this could take some time.

He says he wants to recognise all the Algerians have done. MPs will understand 
the challenges they faced. It would have been a demanding task for any country.

This attack illustrates the threat to Britain from terrorism in north Africa.

At one stage the main terrorist threat came from Afghanistan.

But now al-Qaida franchises have grown in Yemen, Somalia and parts of north 
Africa.

The national security assessment reflects this.

In north Africa terrorist activity has been fuelled by criminality.

As it escalates, it is becoming a magnet for jihadists.

This threat demands an international response.

3.25pm GMT 

David Cameron's statement on Algeria

David Cameron is about to make a statement about the Algerian hostage crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algerian-hostage-crisis>.

Before he starts, here's a short reading list.

• Nick Robinson on his blog says the language used by Cameron in his statement 
about Algeria on Friday echoed the language used by Tony Blair in relation to 
Afghanistan and Iraq. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-21076268>

• Jason Burke in the Guardian says the threat posed by Islamist terrorism is 
not as great as it was. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jan/20/algerian-hostage-crisis-dark-days>

• Isabel Hardman at Coffee House wonders whether Cameron will sound less 
critical of the Algerian decision to launch a swift attack against the hostage 
takers than he did on Friday. 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/coffeehouse/2013/01/britains-role-in-the-decades-long-response-to-terrorism-in-north-africa/>

3.17pm GMT 

Universal credit claimants who are working part time may find themselves 
getting text messages from the Jobcentre telling them how much extra they would 
receive if they worked longer hours. Under the new system part-time workers 
will be expected to look for more work, just as the unemployed are under an 
obligation to look for work, and at a seminar today Mark Hoban, the employment 
minister, andLord Freud, the welfare minister, said they were asking experts to 
explore new ways of getting people to take on extra work.

This is from Freud.

Under universal credit we will expect claimants to do all they can to improve 
their life prospects and reduce benefit dependency, such as carrying out job 
searches to find better paid work or increasing the hours they work.

Today we are calling on employment experts to work with us to develop and 
pilot innovative ways for claimants to meet their commitments in return for 
their benefit. Text messaging and access to an online 'better off' calculator 
are just some of the ideas so far.

There are more details in the Department for Work and Pensions news release. 
<http://www.dwp.gov.uk/newsroom/press-releases/2013/jan-2013/dwp008-13.shtml>

2.56pm GMT 

The welfare benefits uprating bill, the one imposing a 1% cap on benefit 
increases for the next three years, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2013/jan/08/mps-vote-benefits-cap-live-blog>
 is back in the Commons this afternoon, where MPs will deal with all its 
remaining stages before winding up at 10pm. The bill will then go to the Lords.

I won't be covering the debate, but George Eaton at the Staggers has produced 
a useful guide to the way Labour MPs, rebel Lib Dem MPs and Green, SNP and 
Plaid Cyrmu MPs are trying to amend it. 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/01/how-mps-are-trying-protect-poor-osbornes-welfare-cuts>

And Isabel Hardman at Coffee House has a post about an amendment tabled by the 
Labour MP John Healey saying the bill should be subject to annual review. 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/coffeehouse/2013/01/former-housing-minister-calls-for-review-of-benefit-rises-bill/>

Updated at 2.56pm GMT

2.45pm GMT 
 Michael Gove Photograph: BBC Parliament 
It's education questions in the Commons and we've just had to first reference 
to Tim Loughton's comments about Michael Gove, his former ministerial boss. 
Loughton said Gove would appear at Department for Education parties like Mr 
Grace from Are You Being Served? 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/thetorydiary/2013/01/loughton-wants-to-watch-the-world-burn-and-goves-aides-burn-the-forest-down.html>
 Asking about work experience, Labour'sGordon Marsden asked Gove what he was 
doing to make sure young people were being served.

Gove said that Marsden should not be disparaging about job opportunities in 
retail.

2.36pm GMT 

Here's an afternoon reading list.

• Gavin Kelly at the New Statesman says the coalition impasse over childcare 
reflects a dispute about the main function of welfare. 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/01/progressives-or-regressives-lib-dems-must-choose-childcare-policy>

Often it takes the deadline of an impending announcement to really expose 
underlying tensions about the future direction of policy. The coalition’s 
recent sorry saga on childcare policy – breathless briefings about a major 
expansion in tax-relief meant to herald the coalition’s renewed vitality, 
followed by an awkward silence and then the inevitable stories about who is to 
blame for the lack of progress - is a case in point. Never mind what this tells 
us about the coalition’s aptitude for media management, it also reflects 
something important about underlying attitudes towards the nature of the tax 
and benefit system. 

There have, of course, always been different objectives in our welfare system 
with different parties placing varying amounts of weight on them: social 
insurance or poverty reduction; targeting individuals or households. But when 
it comes to the question of how to support families with children through the 
tax and benefit system the current government seems to be in more of a muddle 
than most. Which in some respects is odd given that there is actually a fair 
amount of agreement within it.

• Iain Dale on his blog says talk of a leadership challenge to David Cameron 
is "self indulgent political wankery". 
<http://www.iaindale.com/posts/2013/01/20/if-the-tories-ditch-dave-they-re-finished-for-2015>

• Michael Meacher on his blog says the Atos debate raises the question of 
whether the Commons is fit for purpose. 
<http://www.michaelmeacher.info/weblog/2013/01/is-parliament-fit-for-purpose/>

• Leo Barasi at Liberal Conspiracy says he has doubts about the validity of 
the latest YouGov polling on Europe (see 12.31pm). 
<http://liberalconspiracy.org/2013/01/21/is-opposition-to-eu-membership-collapsing-or-is-it-just-bad-polling/>

• Phil at A Very Public Sociologist says the Sun's latest story about a 
supposed welfare sponger is full of inaccuracies. 
<http://averypublicsociologist.blogspot.co.uk/2013/01/natalija-belova-and-suns-benefit-lies.html>

1.39pm GMT 

We've just released the details of the latest Guardian/ICM poll. Here's an 
extract from Tom Clark's story about it. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/21/labour-tories-five-points-poll>

At the end of a fortnight in which international affairs have moved centre 
stage,David Cameron <http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/davidcameron> has 
clawed back ground fromLabour <http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/labour>, 
according to a Guardian/ICM poll. It shows Labour's poll lead has been squeezed 
to five points, after three straight months in which the gapin the polling 
series 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2009/oct/21/icm-poll-data-labour-conservatives>
 has been a solid eight points.

The political start to 2013 was dominated by debate in the build-up to the 
prime minister's scheduled speech on Britain's relations with Europe, before 
the flaring up of the Algerian hostage crisis saw this postponed as attention 
shifted towards terrorism and relations with the Muslim world.

Compared with the last Guardian/ICM survey – just before Christmas – Labour 
has slipped back two points, to stand at 38%, while the Tories have inched up 
one to 33% and theLiberal Democrats 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/liberaldemocrats> have edged up two to 15%. 
The anti-European Ukip has slipped back one to 6%, after the record showing of 
7% recorded by ICM inboth November and December 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/nov/19/ukip-benefiting-disillusionment-politics-poll>
. The combined vote share of the other assorted minor parties now stands at 7%, 
down one over the month.

1.06pm GMT 

Lunchtime summary

• William Hague has said that Britain cannot prevent terrorism in Africa but 
it can look to the model of the rebuilding of Somalia as an example of how to 
help failed states 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/21/william-hague-uk-terrorism-africa>
.

• Downing Street has announced that David Cameron will deliver his 
long-awaited Europe speech in central London on Wednesday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/21/david-cameron-europe-speech-london>
.

• The police have said they reopening their investigation into the disgraced 
former MP Denis MacShane's expenses 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/21/denis-macshane-expenses-investigation-reopened>
.

• Chris Grayling, the justice secretary, has said he wants to cut the amount 
of legal aid funding used to pay for expensive QCs. (See 9.37am.)

12.48pm GMT 

Downing Street have not told us where David Cameron will be delivering his 
Europe speech on Wednesday, other than it was will be in central London and not 
on the continent, as originally planned.

On Twitter, people are helpfully suggesting possible venues.
Joey Jones (@joeyjonessky) 
pm's speech could be in former smith sq cchq, now euro-furbished seat of 
commission and eu parly in london? that'd tick all the wrong boxes!
 <https://twitter.com/joeyjonessky/status/293331192558784513> January 21, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/joeyjonessky/status/293331192558784513> Gerri Peev 
(@GerriPeev) 
If PM sticks to SW1 for speech, he could deliver it in Petty France 
#whereshoulddavedoit <https://twitter.com/search/%23whereshoulddavedoit>
 <https://twitter.com/GerriPeev/status/293336275702927360> January 21, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/GerriPeev/status/293336275702927360> Tim Shipman (Mail) 
(@ShippersUnbound) 
Will Cam emulate the last major european decision (not to enter euro) by 
Charlie Whelan outside the Red Lion#whereshoulddavedoit 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23whereshoulddavedoit>
 <https://twitter.com/ShippersUnbound/status/293336824074616832> January 21, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/ShippersUnbound/status/293336824074616832> Sonia 
Purnell (@soniapurnell) 
@shippersunbound <https://twitter.com/shippersunbound> Waterloo station? 
#whereshoulddavedoit <https://twitter.com/search/%23whereshoulddavedoit>
 <https://twitter.com/soniapurnell/status/293336910615691266> January 21, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/soniapurnell/status/293336910615691266> Martin McGrath 
(@martinmcgrath) 
@shippersunbound <https://twitter.com/shippersunbound> Barking, obviously 
#whereshoulddavedoit <https://twitter.com/search/%23whereshoulddavedoit> @
mehdirhasan <https://twitter.com/mehdirhasan>
 <https://twitter.com/martinmcgrath/status/293336351099723776> January 21, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/martinmcgrath/status/293336351099723776> 
12.31pm GMT 

The latest YouGov polling on Europe is fascinating. As Peter Kellner explains 
here, <http://yougov.co.uk/news/2013/01/21/eu-vote-stay-40-leave-34/> there has 
been a marked shift in support for Britain remaining in the EU since November.

In less than two months, a 21-point lead for leaving the EU has been replaced 
by a six-point lead for remaining a member.

Kellner, whose analysis is well worth reading in full, thinks this is good 
news for David Cameron (who is ahead ofEd Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> on the Europe issue, even 
though Labour is ahead of the Conservatives on Europe when the question is put 
in party terms not leader terms) and bad news for Ukip, whose poll ratings have 
been falling back since the new year.

As always with sharp movements in public attitudes, we shall not know for some 
time whether we are seeing a blip or a trend. Britain and the EU has been the 
top domestic political news story for the past fortnight. Maybe, when it 
recedes from the headlines, views about the EU will revert to their normal 
‘peacetime’ default position in which the centre of gravity lies somewhere 
between scepticism and hostility.

On the other hand, if a referendum IS held at some point in the next few 
years, then Europe will become a headline issue once again; and our latest 
results confirm the pattern of the past four decades – that when Europe lurks 
at the backs of peoples’ minds, we would rather keep our distance; but when the 
talk turns to a decision to withdraw, we start to contemplate the prospects of 
life outside the EU and fear that this might not be so attractive after all.

12.14pm GMT 
 Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA 
Here are the main points from the Number 10 lobby briefing.

• David Cameron will give his long-awaited and once-delayed Europe speech on 
Wednesday morning. The prime minister's spokeman would not say whether he would 
take questions from the media afterwards. He will infuriate the media if he 
refuses to do a Q&A, but the speech will be before PMQs, and so we may end up 
with Cameron just taking a handful of questions before scuttling away to finish 
his PMQs preparation. Asked why Cameron was giving the speech in London, when 
he had originally intended to give it abroad, the spokesman said: "That's what 
best fits the prime minister's schedule this week."

• Cameron has rejected the public administration committee's call for his 
independent adviser on ministers' interests to have the power to initiate his 
own investigations. The committee said the adviser should have this power in a 
report published in March last year and MPs have backed the proposal in a 
Commons motion passed without opposition. Intoday's report on Sir Jeremy 
Heywood's investigation into the Andrew Mitchell affair, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/21/mps-criticise-cameron-heywood-plebgate>
 the committee again says that the adviser should be able to start an inquiry 
without having to wait to be asked by the prime minister. But the spokesman 
said Cameron was opposed to this.

The prime minister can ask [the independent adviser] to undertake inquiries 
... and we believe that that is the right position.

Ten months after the committee published a report on this, the government has 
still not issued a formal response. Asked why it was taking so long, the 
spokesman just said the government would reply "in due course". Departments are 
supposed to reply to select committee recommendations within two months.

• Cameron believes Heywood did "a good job" investigating the Mitchell affair. 
Today's public administration committee report is strongly critical of 
Heywood's conduct. But, asked if Cameron thinks Heywood did a good job, the 
spokesman said: "Yes".

The prime minister's view is that [the Heywood's review] was the right review 
at the right time. He fully supports that conclusions that it reached.

The spokesman also said that Cameron did not accept that Downing Street needed 
a better way of investigating allegations of ministerial misconduct.

• Britain will work with international partners to bring the terrorists 
responsible for the attack in Algeria to justice, the spokesman said. He said 
this was what Cameron meant when he said on Friday that Britain would hunt the 
terrorists down. The spokesman would not comment on media reports saying some 
of the hostage-takers may have been British. He also said that Britain was 
still committed to not sending combat troops to Mali. The British were best 
able to help by providing logistical and intelligence support, he said. Cameron 
will say more on this when he makes a statement in the Commons at 3.30pm,

11.45am GMT 

The police have decided to re-open their investigation into allegations that 
the former Labour MP Denis MacShane committed expenses fraud, the BBC is 
reporting. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-21119031#TWEET539987>

11.43am GMT 

I'm just back from the lobby briefing.

David Cameron will be giving his Europe speech on Wednesday morning, in 
central London, we learnt.

Otherwise the lobby was taken up with lengthy and rather unproductive 
exchanges about Europe, Algeria and the public administration committee. I'll 
post a summary shortly.

10.52am GMT 

You can read all today's Guardian politics stories here. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/all> And all the politics stories filed 
yesterday, including some in today's paper, arehere. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/20/all>

As for the rest of the papers, the PoliticsHome list of top 10 must reads is 
here, <http://www.politicshome.com/uk/todays_must_reads.html> the 
ConservativeHome round-up of today's political stories is here 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/frontpage/2013/01/newslinks-for-monday-21st-january-2013.html>
 and the New Statesman list of top 10 comment articles is here. 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/staggers/2013/01/morning-call-pick-papers-17>

And here are some stories and articles I found particularly interesting.

• Sir David Nicholson, the head of the NHS Commissioning Board, has told the 
Independent that hospitals are “very bad places” in which to care for old 
people. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/nhs-chief-hospitals-are-bad-for-old-peoples-health-8459198.html>

Sir David likened the current plight of elderly patients in hospitals to the 
“national scandals” resulting from the treatment of mental health patients in 
large asylums in the 1960s and 1970s, and committed the NHS to massive 
expansion of community care.

“If you think about the average general hospital now, something like 40 per 
cent of the patients will have some form of dementia,” he said. “They are very 
bad places for old, frail people. We need to find alternatives.”

• Keir Starmer, the director of public prosecutions, tells the Financial Times 
in an interview (subscription) that the CPS is going to prosecute more 
middle-class tax evasion. 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/cb82a142-62ff-11e2-8497-00144feab49a.html#axzz2IbVNbHBZ>

Middle-class professionals are to be targeted in a new crackdown on tax 
evasion promised by the chief prosecutor of England and Wales.

The Crown Prosecution Service will dramatically ramp up the number of tax 
evasion cases it takes on – with a view to prosecution – over the next two 
years, Keir Starmer, the director of public prosecutions, told the Financial 
Times. The CPS will increase fivefold the number of tax files it handles, to 
1,500 a year by 2014-15.

This compares with 200 tax convictions the CPS secured in 2010 – its current 
conviction rate for tax cases stands at 86 per cent.

Tax consultants who push dishonest avoidance schemes – and the professionals 
who invest in them – are central targets in the strategy.

“There have been some cases involving lawyers, some involving tax consultants, 
and plumbers,” Mr Starmer said in an interview. “Within the ramped-up volume, 
it’s intended that we will select cases to send a clear message as to the 
breadth of our coverage.”

• Boris Johnson in the Daily Telegraph says the snow has made him question 
global warming. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/columnists/borisjohnson/9814618/Its-snowing-and-it-really-feels-like-the-start-of-a-mini-ice-age.html>

No one contests that when the planet palpably cooled from 1645 to 1715 — the 
Maunder minimum, which saw the freezing of the Thames — there was a diminution 
of solar activity. The same point is made about the so-called Dalton minimum, 
from 1790 to 1830. And it is the view of Piers Corbyn that we are now seeing 
exactly the same phenomenon today.

Lower solar activity means – broadly speaking – that there is less agitation 
of the warm currents of air from the tropical to the temperate zones, so that a 
place like Britain can expect to be colder and damper in summer, and colder and 
snowier in winter. “There is every indication that we are at the beginning of a 
mini ice age,” he says. “The general decline in solar activity is lower than 
Nasa’s lowest prediction of five years ago. That could be very bad news for our 
climate. We are in for a prolonged cold period. Indeed, we could have 30 years 
of general cooling.”

Now I am not for a second saying that I am convinced Piers is right; and to 
all those scientists and environmentalists who will go wild with indignation on 
the publication of this article, I say, relax. I certainly support reducing CO2 
by retrofitting homes and offices – not least since that reduces fuel bills. I 
want cleaner vehicles.

I am speaking only as a layman who observes that there is plenty of snow in 
our winters these days, and who wonders whether it might be time for government 
to start taking seriously the possibility — however remote — that Corbyn is 
right.

• Owen Jones in the Independent says Britain needs a Ukip of the left. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/british-politics-urgently-needs-a-new-force--a-movement-on-the-left-to-counter-capitalisms-crisis-8459099.html>

What is missing in British politics is a broad network that unites progressive 
opponents of the Coalition. That means those in Labour who want a proper 
alternative to Tory austerity, Greens, independent lefties, but also those who 
would not otherwise identify as political, but who are furious and frustrated. 
In the past two years of traipsing around the country, speaking to students, 
workers, unemployed and disabled people, I’ve met thousands who want to do 
something with their anger. Until now, I have struggled with an answer.

• Claire Perry, the prime minister’s adviser on internet protection for 
children, tells the Daily Mail that parents should consider insisting on 
viewing their children’s text and internet messages. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2265583/Snoop-childs-texts-Its-bizarre-parents-treat-youngsters-internet-mobile-exchanges-private-says-PMs-childhood-guru.html?ito=feeds-newsxml>

[Perry] told the Daily Mail she was concerned about a broader, growing ‘clash 
between family values and technology’.

‘In a way we have all been complicit. We can’t say it’s all government’s 
responsibility, or industry’s or parents’ – we have got to work together,’ she 
said.

‘When you and I were growing up the idea your parents would allow you to 
communicate daily with strangers, that you would have letters or phone calls 
coming into your home, would have been bizarre.

‘Yet we have now given our kids the space to be private with their phones and 
internet connections.

‘This whole issue of peer-to-peer contact is very difficult. You can’t filter 
it using technology. Parents are not monitoring it and we don’t feel we should. 
I said to my daughter, “perhaps I should read your texts” and she looked at me 
like I was insane. I thought, “well actually I am paying for it”.’

• David Maddox in the Scotsman says the Scotland Office minister David Mundell 
has said that all the Unionist parties will offer Scotland more devolved powers.
 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/politics/top-stories/scottish-independence-unionist-parties-will-beat-snp-with-devo-message-says-tory-1-2748692>

I'm off to the Number 10 lobby briefing now. I'll post again after 11.30am.

10.34am GMT 

Christine Tacon, chair of UK Farming plc, has been appointed as the new 
groceries code adjudicator,the Department for Business has announced. 
<http://news.bis.gov.uk/Press-Releases/Christine-Tacon-appointed-as-Groceries-Code-Adjudicator-68658.aspx>

9.37am GMT 
 Chris Grayling, the justice secretary. Photograph: David 
Gadd/Allstar/Sportsphoto Ltd 
Yesterday Chris Grayling, the justice secretary, said in an article in the 
Sunday Times (paywall) 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/comment/regulars/thinktank/article1197476.ece>
that too much legal aid money was being spent on expensive barristers.

This is not a debate about whether someone facing criminal charges should be 
able to mount a defence and for it to be paid for by legal aid if they cannot 
pay for it themselves. Of course it should. That will always remain the case. 
As unpalatable as we might find the crime, the right of someone to defend 
themselves from the accusation of it must never be undermined.

The question is whether access to that defence is being given in a way that 
provides the right balance between the needs of justice and the needs of the 
public purse. And whether all too often we are paying for a legal Rolls-Royce 
and not something that can do the job equally well. The truth is we cannot 
afford to pay for that Rolls-Royce any more.

So we are beginning work on how to find a better balance between cost and the 
needs of justice. That might mean making more use of the best and brightest 
among our younger barristers and solicitors, and less use of those legal 
Rolls-Royces; or paying for a single lawyer, and not a team, in court.

On the Today programme this morning he outlined his thinking in more detail.

If you look at the daily rate for a senior QC it can be, sort of, between 
£1,300 and £2,000 for somebody who might be, literally, a month earlier in 
their career, somebody who's going to become a QC in a month's time, it's just 
over half that amount.

The question is, can we really afford, we're spending £1bn a year on criminal 
legal aid, can we really afford to often to use people who are paid such an 
additional higher rate compared with somebody's who's nearly as experienced, 
who's a seriously competent barrister, who will become a QC one day if they 
choose to do so. The reason I'm starting this discussion, and I'll be talking 
to the Bar Council and others, is that in some cases we're now spending 
£500,000 or more on legal fees.

I've taken the quote from PoliticsHome. <http://www.politicshome.com>

Updated at 9.57am GMT

9.11am GMT 

William Hague, the foreign secretary, was talking about north Africa on the 
Today programme at 8.10am. Here are the main points.

• Hague said British intervention in the region could be modelled on what the 
government has done in Somalia. Last year the Foreign Office hosted an 
international conference on Somalia, 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/london-conference-on-somalia-full-coverage--2>
 and Hague believes Britain's support has helped the country make"tangible 
progress". 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/foreign-secretary-discusses-progress-in-somalia-with-foreign-minister>

• He rejected claims that western intervention in Libya had exacerbated the 
situation in Mali. "If the Libyan conflict had gone on for longer, there would 
have been an even greater flow of weapons and an even greater opportunity for 
extremists to take hold in Libya," he said. "While the Libyan situation may 
well have contributed to what has happened in Mali, I think the action that the 
Western world took in Libya, if anything, mitigated that."

Updated at 9.39am GMT

8.51am GMT 

We’re getting a statement from David Cameron on the Algeria hostage crisis at 
3.30pm today.Yesterday he said that the fight against al-Qaida-related 
terrorism in north Africa could go on for “years, even decades”. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jan/20/david-cameron-algerian-hostage-crisis>
 We should find out more about what he actually means, although,as Jason Burke 
points out in a good article in today’s Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jan/20/algerian-hostage-crisis-dark-days>
, the idea that north Africa is now the new Afghanistan should be treated with 
some caution.

The Arab spring has certainly opened new opportunities for violence in new 
areas, reinforcing the obvious point that a phenomenon that has roots in 
social, political, cultural and religious factors going back decades, if not 
centuries, in the Islamic world and, crucially, in the Islamic world’s 
relationship with the west, will be with us for a long time to come.

But, spectacular as the hostage crisis has been, it does not mean we have 
returned to the dark days of before. It is because militant attacks have been 
so infrequent – or at least distant – that this recent episode has had such an 
impact. Bin Laden is dead, al-Qaida’s ability to cause harm greatly reduced, 
and the local dynamics that now characterise the impossibly fragmented world of 
contemporary extremism make militant groups resilient but render complex 
9/11-type attacks almost impossible to organise. Extremism remains a threat, 
and an evolving one, but the danger is not “existential”.

On the Today programme a few minutes ago William Hague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/williamhague>, the foreign secretary, 
suggested Britain’s intervention in Somalia would be a model for the approach 
that would be tried in north Africa. I’ll post a full summary shortly.

There's more coverage of the news coming out about the full casualty toll from 
the hostage crisison our Middle East live blog. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middle-east-live/2013/jan/21/algeria-hostage-death-toll-rises-live-updates>

Here’s the agenda for the day.

2.30pm: Michael Gove, the education secretary, takes questions in the Commons. 
Perhaps he will get asked whether he thinks his former ministerial colleague is 
a “lazy incompetent narcissist obsessed only with self-promotion”,as a 
Department for Education source told Coffee House last week. 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/coffeehouse/2013/01/loughton-vs-dfe/>

3.15pm: Sir Nicholas Macpherson, the Treasury permanent secretary, gives 
evidence to the Commons public accounts committee.

3.30pm: David Cameron makes a statement in the Commons on the Algerian hostage 
crisis.

As usual, I'll also be covering all the breaking political news as well as 
looking at the papers and bringing you the best politics from the web. I'll 
post a lunchtime summary at around 1pm and another after the Cameron statement.

If you want to follow me on Twitter, I'm at @AndrewSparrow. 
<https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow>

Updated at 9.39am GMT
 