
A campaign group representing non-British EU nationals in the UK has called on 
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> to give urgent 
assurance to those who settled in the country before the referendum that they 
will have the right to remain permanently.

The3million <http://www.the3million.org.uk/> has teamed up with 10 
organisations representing the estimated 1.3 million British people living in 
Europe, ranging fromBremain in Spain <http://www.bremaininspain.com/> to ECREU 
in France <http://www.ecreu.com/>.


In a letter to the prime minister signed by the 11 groups, the3million asked 
May to “the take the first step and unilaterally guarantee the right of EU 
citizens currently living lawfully in the UK to remain in the UK after Brexit”.


It said this was the “necessary first step” to prevent them from being used as 
pawns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/liam-fox-refuses-to-guarantee-right-of-eu-citizens-to-remain-in-uk>
 in withdrawal negotiations.


“We are not bargaining chips, we are people,” said the letter to be handed in 
to Downing Street on Monday. “In the Christmas spirit, we call on you to make a 
public statement guaranteeing those rights now.”

The3million and the groups in Europe want negotiations on their future settled 
before article 50 is triggered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, to ensure that they do not get caught in thecross hairs of the political 
negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/uk-will-have-under-18-months-to-negotiate-deal-says-eus-brexit-broker>
 among the 28 EU countries.


The right to reside, continue to draw index-linked pensions and access 
healthcare are among the focal points for the groups.


But May has previously said she will only provide guarantees to EU nationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/27/theresa-may-eu-citizens-rights-britons-abroad>
 in the UK when the rights of British people living in Europe are reciprocally 
assured.


The groups that signed the letter are grassroots bodies that have emerged 
since 23 June.


They represent British people in Gibraltar, Spain, Germany, France, Finland 
and Belgium. There is also one EU-wide organisation.


The3million warned the government of the practical challenges facing the Home 
Office, which has beendeluged by applications for permanent residence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/30/eu-citizens-in-uk-home-office-residency-applications-right-to-remain-before-brexit-talks>
.


The 85-page application form has been described as complicated and onerous, 
with EU citizens expected to show their movements in and out of the UK for all 
the years they have been in the country.


It was designed for non-EU nationals who did not have automatic rights to 
settle in the UK and has been criticised as unfit for purpose in relation to EU 
citizens.


With a backlog of 100,000 applications, the group warned that up to 1 million 
EU citizens living in the UKcould be at risk of deportation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-eu-citizens-living-britain-risk-deportation-3-million-campaign-european-union>
 if the Home Office does not come up with a simple way of recognising their 
status.

Individuals who have applied for permanent residency have said they feel “sad” 
and “betrayed” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/01/eu-citizens-in-britain-post-brexit-vote-feel-betrayed-not-at-home-sad>
, and complained about being given incorrect advice by Home Office officials.

One woman, a full-time mother who did not have the required five years of bank 
statements in her name, was told by a Home Office adviser to ask her children’s 
school to come to her aid.

“I was then told in no uncertain terms that I need to go back home and get a 
statement from my kids’ school to say I am there every day at 
drop-off/pick-up,” she said.
 