 Des res indeed. But the church finds Rose Castle too costly. Photograph: 
Graham Uney/Alamy 
Pressure is growing on the Church of England's estate commissioners 
<http://www.churchofengland.org/about-us/structure/churchcommissioners.aspx>, 
led by the former Independent editorAndreas Whittam-Smith 
<http://www.thinkinganglicans.org.uk/archives/004976.html>, to drop plans to 
sell off one of the most beautiful houses in Cumbria.

As things stand, the partly 13th century pile of Rose Castle  
<http://www.visitcumbria.com/car/rose-castle.htm>near Dalston, is set to be 
offered for sale after the departure of the Bishop of Carlisle and his 
associated offices to Keswick.

The commissioners' assets committee meets next week and up to now had been 
expected to make a decision in principle to sell the Grade 1 listed building 
after talks with EnglishHeritage <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage>
. The CofE has been much-vexed by the question of what to do with many similar 
vast mansions which would probably have left Jesus aghast, but have gradually 
accumulated all the attractions which come with centuries of history.
 Carlisle castle. You meddle with heritage at your peril in Cumbria. 
Photograph: D&H Photographers 
The Archbishop of York makes good practical use of his one, Bishopthorpe 
Palace, <http://www.archbishopofyork.org/pages/about-bishopthorpe-palace-.html> 
whose assets include a rowing boat to use in the cellar when the adjacent river 
Ouse floods. Carlisle is a smaller diocese with many demands on its resources, 
and the commissioners say that Rose Castle needs repairs estimated at some £1.7 
million on top of an annual maintenance budget of £150,000.

Local opinion, however, is very pro-castle, and one of Carlisle's former 
bishops,Rt Rev Graham Dow <http://bound-together.org.uk/dow.html>, produced a 
report suggesting that church use could continue viably if the two towers were 
converted into large homes for sale or rent, supplemented by three smaller 
flats. A bonus of this would be the storage of church archives in a safe and, 
for researchers, very agreeable place, while the grounds have potential for 
public opening.

There's oodles of enjoyable history - Wordsworth and Coleridge found the 
castle 'all but perfect - cottage comfort and ancestral dignity', and its 
occupants included the delightful-sounding Bishop Rainbow who spent 20 happy 
years there between 1664 and 1684. And even with the home conversions, there'd 
still be room for a cafe.

The campaigning group Friends of Rose Castle <http://friendsofrosecastle.org/> 
is co-ordinating heavyweight appeals for a rethink by the commissioners, or at 
the least, a delay while more thought is given to the castle's future. Life is 
never dull for Whittam-Smith, a clergyman's son who has only just emerged from 
the hornets' nest task ofadjudicating 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/sep/13/independent-editor-johann-hari-plagiarism>
 on the alleged plagiarism row over suspended Indie columnist Johann Hari.
 