
Queensland’s Crime and Corruption Commission has launched an investigation 
into a Guardian journalist’s sources surrounding disclosures about a costly 
defamation settlement involving the former premierCampbell Newman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/campbell-newman>.

Guardian Australia revealed in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/16/campbell-newman-defamation-case-taxpayers-cover-525000-payout>
 that taxpayers had paid out more than $500,000 to settle a defamation suit 
over comments by Newman and the former attorney general Jarrod Bleijie about 
bikies’ lawyers.

The suit was brought by solicitors Chris and Daniel Hannay and led to a 
$525,000 payout. Both Bleijie and Newman declined to publicly apologise, which 
could have reduced the amount taxpayers were required to pay.

Futile and costly bikie laws have not addressed ‘organised’ crime but then, 
they didn’t need to | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/14/futile-and-costly-bikie-laws-have-not-addressed-organised-but-then-they-didnt-need-to>
It has now emerged that Bleijie asked the commission to launch an 
investigation into the disclosure of information. He told state parliament on 
Tuesday the commission had agreed to investigate.

A letter from the commission’s director, Kylee Rumble, to Bleijie said: “I 
write to advise that the CCC has finalised its assessment of your complaint and 
has determined to undertake an investigation into the alleged leak of 
confidential information.”

The disclosures about Newman and Bleijie’s settlement have drawn intense 
public debate. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk,has flagged a 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/queensland-solicitor-general-disqualified-from-advising-on-campbell-newman-case>
 of indemnity guidelines following the revelations.


A spokesman for the Crime and Corruption Commission said: “The Crime and 
Corruption Commission can confirm that it has completed its assessment of 
complaints received in relation to the alleged leaking of confidential 
information relating to a settlement of a defamation case against the former 
premier and former attorney general.

“Upon completion of this assessment, the CCC has commenced an investigation 
into the matter that was raised in parliament today by the shadow minister for 
employment, industrial relations, skills and training and fair trading.

While the matter remains under investigation, the CCC will make no further 
comment.
 