
Will Ferrell and his Anchorman director Adam McKay are to launch a new 
production offshoot aimed at boosting female-fronted projects for film and TV,
according to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/will-ferrell-launches-female-focused-679716>
.

Gloria Sanchez Productions, will be spun off from the Gary Sanchez 
Productions, a company Ferrell created in 2007 with McKay that is named after a 
fictional character. Headed by production executive Jessica Elbaum, the new 
division will work with established and emerging female talent.

In a statement, Ferrell and McKay said: "When Jessica came to us with this 
idea, we thought it was fantastic. She has worked with some of the great female 
voices in comedy and has proven herself as a gifted producer who has a keen eye 
for material. We called Gary, and he loved the idea as well, and asked that we 
name it after his favourite step-granddaughter, Gloria Sanchez."

The Emmy and Tony-nominated producer has worked at Gary Sanchez since its 
inception. The production company brought comedy films such asAnchorman 2: The 
Legend Continues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/22/anchorman-2-legend-continues-mark-kermode-review>
,The Campaign <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/27/campaign-review>, 
Step Brothers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/aug/29/comedy> and The 
Other Guys <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/16/the-other-guys-review> 
to cinemas. It also oversaw the comedyBachelorette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/15/bachelorette-review> in 2012, and 
will bring theMelissa McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/melissa-mccarthy?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 film Tammy to multiplexes this year.

Ferrell's move comes at a good time for female-led comedy in Hollywood. Two of 
the biggest comedy hits of the past few years at the box office,Bridesmaids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/23/bridesmaids-review> and The Heat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/01/the-heat-review>, featured female 
protagonists, and actors such as McCarthy andKristen Wiig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-wiig> have been popular with 
audiences.

Nevertheless, a 2013 study by Robert Redford's Sundance Institute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/23/women-independent-film-sundance-survey>
 and Women in Film Los Angeles found only 4.4% of the top-grossing Hollywood 
films were directed by women over the previous decade.

• Will Ferrell: 'Playing super-sleazy is the most fun for me' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/17/will-ferrell-anchorman-elf-interview>
• Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues – review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/16/anchorman-2-the-legend-continues-review>
 