
The message from my editor read: “Weiner returns to TV”. Bold move, I thought. 
After all, the guy may have recently been the subject ofa highly praised 
documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/24/anthony-weiner-review-huma-abedin-documentary>
, but seeing as it was abouthis compulsive sexual indiscretions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/21/anthony-weiner-sexually-explicit-messages-teen-daily-mail>
 it hardly showed him in a good light. It took a moment, but then my tiny brain 
clocked the fact that this was not former US congressman Anthony Weiner we were 
talking about but Matthew, the creator ofMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>. Oh yeah, I 
thought, him.

I remark on this mainly to show how terrible my memory is, but also because 
it’s a reminder that a year is a long time in showbiz.Matthew Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/01/matthew-weiner-mad-men-was-my-mistress-im-tired-of-keeping-secrets>
’s long-running fable of existentially traumatised ad men finished only last 
year, but it does seem a long time ago. We live in a Game of Thrones world now. 
But the truth is that GoT is the exception to a new rule: that there may be an 
unprecedented amount of scripted drama on “TV” but mainstream ubiquity is rare. 
Daredevil, UnReal, The Leftovers, The Americans, Happy Valley (one for us Brits 
there), Fargo, Better Call Saul and so on – each have great critical notices, 
and each their own niche audience. None dominate ratings or discussion. TV may 
be in a golden age, but the watercooler is dead.

Matthew Weiner: Mad Men was my mistress – I'm tired of keeping secrets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/01/matthew-weiner-mad-men-was-my-mistress-im-tired-of-keeping-secrets>
So when Deadline announced 
<http://deadline.com/2016/10/matthew-weiner-series-amazon-weinstein-company-mad-men-creator-1201843020/>
 that Weiner had agreed to make an “anthology show” with locations “across the 
world”, the news about the creator was less interesting than the platform he’d 
signed a deal with: Amazon. The online behemoth that does everything from sell 
groceries to renting server space is in the content game in a big way. Head 
honchoJeff Bezos said in the summer  
<http://www.businessinsider.com/amazon-doubles-investment-in-video-to-fight-netflix-2016-7>
that he expected to double investment in content for its Amazon Prime platform 
in the second half of this year compared to the same period in 2015. 
Conservative estimates suggest that this would mean a budget of about $1.5bn. 
And not all of that would be going to Jeremy Clarkson’s salary(the former Top 
Gear team’s new show The Grand Tour starts on Amazon next month) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/16/jeremy-clarkson-amazon-the-grand-tour-launch-18-november>
. While the spend is big, Amazon Prime’s reputation still trails behind its 
competitors.

The platform’s best-known original show is surely Transparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/transparent>, the dramedy which 
follows the complicated lives of the Pfefferman clan. It has been roundly 
praised both for its blend of pathos and humour, and for breaking new ground by 
making its lead character a transgender woman. The show has won two Golden 
Globe awards over its three seasons. There has also been a Globe forMozart in 
the Jungle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/23/mozart-in-the-jungle-amazon-show-review>
, the Gael García Bernal-starring comedy about a classical conductor. Then 
there’s counterfactual history dramaThe Man in the High Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/20/the-man-in-the-high-castle-amazon-prime-nazis-philip-k-dick>
, which got people talking about its premise of a United States under Nazi 
rule, but then succumbed to lukewarm reviews. Beyond that, even most Amazon 
subscribers would find it difficult to name many more shows (ever heard of 
Goliath? Or Alpha House?) while some high-profile commissions, like the Woody 
Allen project, Crisis in Six Scenes,have gone down in flames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/05/woody-allen-tv-sitcom-crisis-in-six-scenes>
.

In the new era of abundance, Amazon is looking for more than just Jeffrey 
Tambor and the Top Gear refugees. This is understandable when you compare their 
roster with that of Netflix, which seems to generate a word-of-mouth sensation 
every quarter; fromMaking a Murderer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/making-a-murderer> to Stranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
 and, now,Black Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/25/reflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality>
. That will be why they’ve turned to Weiner (M) and his production partners the 
Weinstein Company. But will it prove a success?

I watched Mad Men every week across its seven-season run, but I wouldn’t 
describe myself as a mega fan. I felt it strayed beyond credulity a number of 
times (the British takeover that turned into ignominious retreat within a 
season springs to mind). It also seemed to circle around in a holding pattern 
for the latter seasons and in the end failed to resolve most of the character’s 
dilemmas. That said, it still had a great cast, offered reliably punchy 
dialogue, wonderful design and, above all else,Roger Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/09/the-10-best-mad-men-characters>
.

Weiner made his name as one of David Chase’s most trusted consiglieres on The 
Sopranos, but he hasn’t authored much by himself beyond Mad Men. He has a novel 
coming out in 2017, a “dark contemporary fable” (according to Deadline) called
Heather, the Totality 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/09/14/matt-weiner-novel-heather-totality>. I 
also got to see his first feature film,You Are Here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/09/you-are-here-toronto-2013-review-matthew-weiner>
, a sort of existentialist take on the Owen Wilson and Zach Galafianakis 
brocom, starring Owen Wilson and Zach Galafianakis. I quite enjoyed it, it was 
about whether pursuing your own path made you happy and what happiness is 
anyway. As far as I’m aware it never got released in cinemas.

If this sounds like I’m trying to take the guy down a peg or two, I’m not. 
He’s obviously a highly talented individual. But in terms of productivity and 
name recognition, he’s not JJ Abrams. And in a TV world where genre and 
intellectual property dominate, betting on a showrunner rather than a 
pre-understood concept is risky. The most likely outcome is that it will find a 
small loyal audience that would have got it cancelled had it aired on network 
TV 10 years ago. But while Amazon might need to strengthen their roster of 
“originals”, they’re also one of very few organisations that can afford to take 
a punt like this.

The Bezos behemoth will hope it helps to persuade a few punters to plump for 
Amazon Prime over Netflix. And if it does, then great. But if those same 
punters sign up because of the free shipping, it’s all the same to them.
 