
Merry Chrimbo guzzlers.

For my last Monday puzzle of the year I’ve chosen a treat from the the German 
Mathematical Society’sonline puzzle advent calendar 
<https://www.mathe-im-advent.de/>. 

Every year more than 100,000 German schoolchildren, one group aged 10-12, and 
the other aged 12-14, are each set a question daily from December 1 to 24. The 
following question, from 2014, is for the older group. About 80 per cent got it 
right. So, dear reader,bist du schlauer als ein 13-Jähriger?

Below are the first four prototypes of a machine designed by elves designed to 
sort presents by weight. Each machine sorts four presents at a time. The four 
presents are placed in the top, and then fall through the slides. Where two 
presents meet at a crossing, the lighter present goes to the left, and the 
heavier one goes to the right. This is repeated until all four presents are at 
the bottom.

Four elves, Fredi (39kg), Oswald (34kg), Iphis (28kg), and Esmeralda (21kg) 
are selected to simulate the presents in test runs. Which one of the four 
machines sorts the elves correctly for every possible order in which the elves 
can step into the four slides?

Please submit your response here. To see how everyone else got on and to have 
the answer fully explained, please come back at 5pm.

Please don’t give away the answer in the comments, since that spoils it for 
everyone else. Better subjects for discussion include Christmas puzzles, 
sorting algorithms and German names for elves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcan-you-solve-it-are-you-more-sorted-than-a-german-elf-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e053d19d26ad5fdb78374ffd961eb5a85bec96f%2F0_0_1843_2409%2F1843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20solve%20it%3F%20Are%20you%20more%20sorted%20than%20a%20German%20elf%20at%20Christmas%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcan-you-solve-it-are-you-more-sorted-than-a-german-elf-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20solve%20it%3F%20Are%20you%20more%20sorted%20than%20a%20German%20elf%20at%20Christmas%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcan-you-solve-it-are-you-more-sorted-than-a-german-elf-at-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e053d19d26ad5fdb78374ffd961eb5a85bec96f%2F0_0_1843_2409%2F1843.jpg>
I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out 
for great puzzles, so if you would like to suggest oneemail me 
<mailto:bellospuzzle@gmail.com>.

My new book Can You Solve My Problems? A Casebook of Ingenious, Perplexing and 
Totally Satisfying Puzzlesis available from the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/can-you-solve-my-problems.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 andother retailers <http://amzn.to/2fFUeCA>. My children’s book Football 
School: Where Football Explains The World <http://amzn.to/2h1Xj2o> was recently 
shortlisted for the Blue Peter Book Award 2017.
 