
ITV’s remarkable post-recession turnaround may have made it a stock market 
star, but a lack of stardust on-screen is threatening to overshadow the revival 
as the broadcaster struggles to arrest a ratings slump.

ITV chief executive Adam Crozier moved to reassure shareholders last week  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/14/itv-ratings-ad-revenues-rise-the-x-factor>
that reversing a 6% drop in audience share on its main channel in the first 
quarter, and 3% across its network of channels, would be a major priority.

It is becoming an all too familiar refrain. Last year he promised a similar 
improvement, citing a schedule of winners including the return of hit 
Broadchurch, which did reasonably well but still failed to stop ITV falling to 
its worst January ratings on record.

By the time Crozier addresses investors at next year’s annual meeting, ITV 
will havesaid goodbye to mega-hit Downton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/26/downton-abbey-to-end-after-season-six>
, its most popular drama, andseen big rating Champions League football depart 
for BT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/09/bt-sport-champions-league-exclusive-tv-rights>
.

“This time last year they stood up and said audience share was weak and that 
they would fix it, and they didn’t,” says Sarah Simon, media analyst at 
Berenberg. “They have relied heavily on banker shows, stuff made by [Simon 
Cowell’s] Syco [X Factor, Britain’s Got Talent] and other stuff, likeDownton 
Abbey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>, has got a bit 
long in the tooth. And despite their big name hirings the breakfast slot hasn’t 
improved.”

While BGT continues to go from strength to strength, The X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> has been hit by viewer 
fatigue – this year’s new-look show will be its 12th season – and the lifespan 
of the format is once again under scrutiny after last week’s move by Fox to 
call time on American Idol after 15 seasons.

ITV has not managed to plug the ratings hole, with a number of shows including 
Get Your Act Together, Planet’s Got Talent and Harry Hill’s take on Stars in 
Their Eyes failing to ignite the prime time weekend schedule.

The broadcaster’s problems have been exacerbated by a run of poorly rating 
factual shows, including former Countryfile presenter Julia Bradbury’s Wonder 
of Britain.

And its new midweek line-up, which includes Amanda Holden’s Give a Pet a Home 
and puppet show Newzoids, has had a lukewarm reception.

Little wonder ITV director of television Peter Fincham has met with Jeremy 
Clarkson and his former Top Gear colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/08/top-gear-jeremy-clarkson-james-may-richard-hammond-itv-bbc>
. The show was BBC2’s biggest hit, consistently attracting more than 5 million 
viewers. A rebranded version would come with a legion of fans both home and 
abroad.

“The fall in viewing share is a reflection that everyone is raising their 
game,” says Dawn Airey, a former top executive at ITV, Sky and Channel 5, who 
now runs Yahoo’s European operation. “The truth is Sky is far stronger, BT is 
getting its act together. If ITV is down it means someone else has picked up 
share. TV is a great place at the moment full of unbelieveable choice, 
platforms like Netflix are growing like Topsy.”

ITV says that there is no ratings crisis, arguing the Rugby World Cup this 
autumn will draw sizeable audiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/29/x-factor-rugby-world-cup-itv-rights>
 attractive to advertisers, albeit not on the scale football would bring.

And there are a slew of high-profile dramas – a genre Crozier has made a top 
priority – on the way including a Jekyll and Hyde adaptation starring Richard E 
Grant, a 13-part Beowulf, based on the Old English epic of monsters and heroes, 
which may draw Game of Thrones fans, and a new Thunderbirds Are Go!.

In financial terms ITV is in rude health. Its production operation ITV Studios 
continues to perform strongly, it has just acquired The Voice maker Talpa, and 
TV ad revenues are up.

In March, Crozier was able to announce a £250m special dividend on the back of 
a pre-tax profit of £712m last year, so does it really matter that the ratings 
are in bad shape?

Berenberg’s Simon says that the US market offers a cautionary tale to UK TV 
broadcasters. The combination there of falling TV audiences with the emergence 
of tools such as programmatic advertising – computerised systems that make it 
much easier for an advertiser to buy ad space across digital media – and an 
explosion in video consumption made for a perfect storm for traditional 
broadcasters.

“Is there a problem? I think there is a recipe for a problem,” she says. “The 
shift of ad budgets from television to online video is still pretty nascent in 
the UK. Audience share weakness renders ITV vulnerable to advertisers saying 
they will test out their budgets elsewhere. That is what drove the change in 
the US. ITV needs to deliver great ratings to make it less tempting for 
advertisers to move their budgets.”

The broadcaster has been growing viewing on online TV service ITV Player, with 
the number of shows viewed rising 44% year-on-year in the first quarter to 
225m. But the ad revenues from the service are small. ITV’s broadcast and 
online division made £530m in revenues in the first quarter, with £435m coming 
from traditional TV ads. This means just £95m came from areas including pay-TV 
channel revenues from ITV Encore, online ads on ITV Player and sponsorship.

Simon says that the 5.6% year-on-year growth rate in those revenues in the 
first quarter was the slowest since 2012.

ITV may be facing the pressure of transitioning its business to cope with 
changing new age media consumption habits, but the answer to its problems 
couldn’t be more old school.

“I don’t think that ITV is going through a blue patch,” says Airey. “All it 
needs is one or two breakthrough hits and it will be back on track”. Easier 
said than done.
 