
Arthur C Clarke, Robert Heinlein and Isaac Asimov are often considered the 
“big three” of 20th-century science fiction. Yet only Clarke’s genius has 
really been translated effectively on the big screen, via his screenplay with 
Stanley Kubrick for 2001: A Space Odyssey.Heinlein would have detested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jul/23/blastingbugsismorecomplicatedthanyouthink>
 Paul Verhoeven’s wonderfully bombastic Starship Troopers, which brazenly 
subverted the original novel’s rather fascistic leanings, and poor Asimov has 
seen his complex ideas about the development of positronic brains shoehorned 
into the overly sentimental Robin Williams vehicleBicentennial Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=28Djjt5OApI> and the rather ropey Will Smith 
action entry I, Robot.

Hollywood, it seems, prefers the pulpier concepts imagined by the great Philip 
K Dick. And who can blame film-makers whenRutger Hauer’s “tears in rain” death 
speech <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOW4QiOD-oc> from Blade Runner sheds 
more light on the essential humanity of artificial life forms in less than 20 
seconds than anything in Asimov’s entire canon? (Dick, for the record, did not 
write the monologue, and we are talking here strictly in terms of cinematic 
impact rather than big ideas.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNOW4QiOD-oc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNOW4QiOD-oc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNOW4QiOD-oc&media=>
The other problem with robots, as opposed to the replicants of Blade Runner or 
Terminators <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-terminator> from the film 
series imagined by James Cameron, is that they are often poorly realised on the 
big screen.I, Robot’s Sonny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/aug/06/willsmith> resembled a mid-00s 
iMac, while pre-CGI offerings often looked like they had been assembled by the 
presenting team of Blue Peter using cardboard boxes and sticky-back plastic.

Michael Bay’s Transformers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jul/27/actionandadventure.sciencefictionandfantasy>
 films don’t really count for the purposes of this article: they’re based on 
fun toys that were designed to appeal to small children rather than get us 
thinking about the nature of consciousness, sentience and essential humanity. 
Steven Spielberg did his best to shed light on the matter with 2001’sA.I. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/sep/21/1>, but the film descended 
horribly into a final act of syrupy bathos.
 Haley Joel Osment as child-robot David and Jude Law in A.I. Artificial 
Intelligence. Photograph: Moviestore Collection/Rex 
Can Automata, a new science fiction film from the Spanish director Gabe 
Ibáñez, finally deliver an intelligent robot movie? The film, the first trailer 
for which has just hit the web, at least seems to be making an effort to avoid 
overloading filmgoers with saccharine sentimentality or batter our brains into 
quivering blancmange with a blitzkrieg of pixels and steel. With a decent cast 
includingAntonio Banderas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/antonio-banderas>, 
Robert Forster and Javier Bardem, it might just be worth taking a look at while 
fans of futuristic visions wait for November’s Interstellar.

Set in 2044, Automata centres on artificial life forms who seem to have been 
given rules to live by that closely resemble Asimov’sThree Laws of Robotics 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three_Laws_of_Robotics>. A thuggish attack on a 
defenceless machine also recalls episodes from the author’s novelette version 
of Bicentennial Man. But the style and setting of the film – from the flashes 
of Blade Runner-like cityscapes to the desert vistas where Banderas and his 
machine companions/captives find themselves on the run – are impressive. 
There’s also something equally disarming and disconcerting about the design of 
the machine faces, and the involvement of Bardem (as the voice of the blue 
robot) would appear to be a good sign, if he’s not just doing someone at the 
production end a favour.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzHg8lKk3vJo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzHg8lKk3vJo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzHg8lKk3vJo&media=>
Of course, the movie may just be a cheap melange of dystopian influences, with 
a little ofDistrict 9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/03/district-9-review>’s third world 
ghetto charm and a splash of Mad Max’s dusty outback glamour thrown in for good 
measure. Automata doesn’t seem to have a UK release date at this point, and is 
only set for a limited release in October in the US. But the distributors don’t 
always call these things right. If the movie picks up strong reviews at the 
upcomingSan Sebastian film festival <http://www.sansebastianfestival.com/in/>, 
we might just get to see it in more cinemas worldwide. Let’s hope so, because 
the idea of the Spanish bringing Asimovian sci-fi back to the big screen – when 
Hollywood appears to have forgotten all about intelligent robot movies - is a 
refreshingly appealing one.
 