
China has a knack for world-changing policy shifts, whether it’s devaluing its 
currency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/11/china-devalues-yuan-against-us-dollar-explainer>
, launching anational carbon cap-and-trade system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/china-national-cap-and-trade-deal>
 or, most recently,changing its decades-old restriction on how many children 
its citizens can have 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/29/china-abandons-one-child-policy>.

The country’s decision to ease its one-child decree has raised some serious 
questions about sustainability. Right now, China consumes abouthalf the cement, 
steel, aluminum and pork <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-33802777> 
produced in the world. If it allows its citizens to have more children – and 
presumably use more resources – what will that mean for humanity’s collective 
wellbeing and its pressing quest for sustainability?

The number of people in the world isn’t the only driver 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/content/171/3977/1212> of humanity’s total impact, 
but it’s the most influential. While debates haveraged for decades 
<http://www.nytimes.com/video/us/100000003712862/the-population-bomb.html> over 
how many people the planet can support comfortably, it’s reasonable to assume 
that we’re going to have to keep coming to terms with increasingly numbers of 
people.

The planet’s future is in the balance. But a transformation is already under 
way
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/14/un-climate-change-summit-paris-planet-future-balance-science>
This summer, before China’s big announcement, the United Nations revised its 
human population estimates upward 
<http://e360.yale.edu/digest/global_population_projected_to_reach_11_billion_by_2100_un_estimates/4497/>
 from 9 billion to 9.7 billion by 2050. By 2100, it estimates, we’ll hit 11.2 
billion. It’s impossible to predict how China’s new two-child policy change 
will affect population growth. The country’s population wasslowing down even 
before the one-child commandment 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/02/opinion/amartya-sen-womens-progress-outdid-chinas-one-child-policy.html>
, but at the same time, many wealthier Chinese haveflouted the rules and paid 
fines 
<http://qz.com/154079/china-has-collected-3-1-billion-from-one-child-policy-violators-so-far-this-year/>
. The previous rulesskewed the country’s demographics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/datablog/2015/oct/29/impact-china-one-child-policy-four-graphs>
: in 2004, for example, China had 121 boys for every 100 girls.

There’s also an economic consideration: many families can’t afford more than 
one child 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/10/30/why-many-families-in-china-wont-want-more-than-one-kid-even-if-they-can-have-them/>
. In fact, when China relaxed its policy last year, only about 12% of eligible 
families applied to have a second child. Regardless of the percentages, 
however, the country is likely to see an uptick in the number of kids.

Even before the UN’s upward revisions and China’s policy change, we knew that, 
by some estimates, the world would need30% more water, 40% more energy and 50% 
more food 
<http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/special-report/the-nexus-of-food-energy-and-water/>
 by 2030. The harsh reality is that we can’t possibly fulfill those demands if 
we continue to operate the way we do now.


The fundamental challenge is to find a way to sustain 10 billion people by the 
mid-21st century without destroying the planet’s ability to support us. Several 
megatrends – including climate change, resource pressures, increased 
connectivity,rising transparency 
<https://hbr.org/2015/10/keeping-up-with-the-clean-label-movement> and deep 
demographic shifts – could greatly complicate the problem. China’s changing 
child policy, for example, is a reaction to these trends: because of its need 
to support an aging, healthier population, it is laying the groundwork for more 
workers.

With the addition of more people, China’s efforts to green its economy will 
have to accelerate. The threat to its citizens’ health from air quality is 
dire: air pollutionkills 1.6 million Chinese 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/14/world/asia/study-links-polluted-air-in-china-to-1-6-million-deaths-a-year.html>
 every year. And even with China’s torrid economic growth, it’s been clear that 
pollution is damaging the country’s economy. In 2007, the World Bank estimated 
that air and water pollution cost China up to 8% of its gross domestic product. 
Given therecord levels of air pollution lately 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/09/airpocalypse-now-china-pollution-reaching-record-levels>
, that toll is surely growing.

In response, China has committed to capping carbon emissions by 2030. But bold 
promises aside, it has sent mixed signals on carbon management. On one hand, it 
plans to implement anational carbon cap and trade system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/china-national-cap-and-trade-deal>
, and continues toset and meet very large renewable energy investment goals 
<http://www.chinafile.com/reporting-opinion/environment/can-china-really-meet-its-clean-energy-goals-and-how>
. For example, it builtmore solar in the first quarter than exists in France 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-04-20/china-adds-solar-the-size-of-france-s-capacity-in-first-quarter>
, and itscoal imports have plummeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/13/chinas-coal-imports-fall-nearly-half-in-12-months-as-anti-pollution-drive-bites>
.

But China is also planning to build a vast number of coal plants 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/12/world/asia/china-coal-power-energy-policy.html>
, and it now admits that it has been burning17% more coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/china-underreporting-coal-consumption-by-up-to-17-data-suggests>
 than previously thought. That additional coal has produced about 1bn more tons 
of CO2, more thanall of Germany’s emissions from fossil fuels 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/04/world/asia/china-burns-much-more-coal-than-reported-complicating-climate-talks.html?_r=1>
. While China is undoubtedly serious about managing carbon, it also needs 
economic growth – and more people will likely make one of these goals harder 
and one easier.

As China’s balancing act demonstrates, megatrends are creating a profound need 
for shifts in how we power our world, travel, clothe ourselves, eat, consume 
and live our lives in general. Businesses are facing unprecedented change in 
how to source, produce, distribute, use and reuse all products and services.

The business case for acting on our megatrends only grows stronger. Cutting 
carbon, for example, is nowa no-brainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/apr/09/clean-economy-climate-change-renewable-energy-carbon-tax>
 – eco-efficiency saves money, the cost of renewable energy is falling quickly, 
and companies are finding that managing their whole value chain to reduce 
carbon is helping them cut costs and reduce risks.

On a broader, international scale, the argument that reducing emissions will 
slow economic growth has not proved out over the last decade. TheGDP of 
Organization and Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries grew 16% 
while their greenhouse gas production fell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/sep/26/oecd-heinrich-boll-international-energy-association-greenhouse-emissions-global-gdp>
. As more countries separate their economic growth from their environmental 
impact, they’redemolishing many of the myths and arguments against climate 
action 
<http://www.andrewwinston.com/blog/2015/10/the_arguments_against_climate.php>. 

Many key elements of a more sustainable economy can grow without increasing 
stress on resources. Initiatives like renewable energy, circular, closed-loop 
models that use and reuse materials, markets that price the true impacts of our 
actions and choices, equitable wages, and safe workplaces can all help us grow 
economies while increasing sustainability. These are principles are widely 
understood in the sustainability community, but are gaining traction in the 
business community at large.

An inclusive, decoupled, circular and even regenerative economy should be able 
to support a very large number of people. And theopportunity to build multi 
trillion-dollar industries <http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/232544> and 
technologies around these new imperatives should be irresistible to business.

 This shift toward sustainable economic growth – which I call the big pivot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/blog/american-businesses-redefine-corporate-leadership>
 – has already begun. According to a new report from the International Energy 
Agency, “renewables contributed 
<https://www.iea.org/Textbase/npsum/WEO2015SUM.pdf> almost half of the world’s 
new power generation capacity in 2014 and have already become the 
second-largest source of electricity (after coal)”. China’smassive renewables 
buildout 
<http://www.chinaeconomicreview.com/china-seeks-turn-its-potential-wind-solar-power-reality>
 is a core contributor to this trend.

And it’s a good thing the sustainability train is moving. The prospect of more 
Chinese people does not change the destination, but does change how fast we 
need to get there.



 