
Q Last week we signed a contract for solar panels with  Sunuser 
<http://www.sunuser.com/>, following an arranged call from a sales rep. The 
paperwork says: "This contract represents a legal commitment which is binding 
upon both parties immediately upon signature." However, we realise we were 
hasty, and having looked the company up on a forum 
<http://www.sheffieldforum.co.uk/showthread.php?t=109674>, have seen there are 
other customers who say their high pressure sales tactics led to elderly people 
being vulnerable. We have cancelled our deposit cheque to them, but can you 
advise us where we stand legally and what else we might do, or how the company 
might respond?
EH

A Under the Doorstep Selling Regulations 1987 you have the right to a 
seven-day cooling off period, during which you can cancel an agreement to buy 
goods or services worth more than Â£35 from a trader whose visit is unsolicited.

The same right exists where the visit from the trader, though arranged by you, 
follows an unsolicited telephone approach. The regulations also say that 
traders who fail to inform you in writing of your right to a cooling off period 
will be committing a criminal offence.

However, if you approached the solar panel company and arranged for them to 
call at your home, the visit would be classed as solicited. Although the 
government is proposing to introduce cooling off periods for contracts signed 
at home after solicited visits, at present no such protection exists. This 
means you do not have the legal right to cancel. Moreover, the solar panel 
company could claim compensation not only for the deposit, but also for their 
total loss of profits on the deal.

On a separate point, if you think the company is using high pressure selling 
techniques you could report them to your local trading standards 
<http://www.tradingstandards.gov.uk/consumers/consumers.cfm> department. If you 
show them the website with complaints from other vulnerable customers they may 
investigate the company's activities. This might just make the company think 
twice before chasing you for its losses.
 