
Q My mother and sister have just accepted an offer on a two-bed flat they own 
together. My sister lives in the flat and the second bedroom is rented out to a 
lodger - my mother has not lived there for some years. My sister is shortly 
going to work in America for two years and they are both keen not to fall off 
the London property ladder. I have also just sold a house in Kent and relocated 
to London, where I currently rent a room in a shared house. My sister has a 
mortgage of £170,000 to transfer, as well as £70,000 in cash. My mother has 
around £50,000 in cash to invest and no mortgage. I have no cash but have a 
salary of £36,000. Please could you point us in the right direction for a 
mortgage provider that will a) lend to me separately from my sister, and b) 
accept three owners in divisible equity shares. I am finding this a challenge. 
Alternatively, is there a mortgage broker who will be able to help?
EB

A I'm not surprised you are finding it a challenge to get a lender willing to 
lend to you separately from your sister. This is because where joint ownership 
of a property involves a mortgage, the lender usually insists that the mortgage 
is jointly "owned" by all the those named on the Land Registry.

However, you should have little difficulty in finding a lender that will lend 
to multiple owners such as you, your mother and sister. According to Moneyfacts 
<http://www.moneyfacts.co.uk/>, nearly 60 lenders - including well-known names 
such as Abbey <http://www.abbey.co.uk/csgs/Satellite?pagename=>,  Britannia 
building society <http://www.britannia.co.uk/>,  HSBC 
<http://www.hsbc.co.uk/1/2/>,  NatWest <http://www.natwest.com/> and the  Royal 
Bank of Scotland <http://www.rbs.co.uk/default.htm> - offer mortgages to 
multiple borrowers.

One slight complication is the fact that your sister won't actually be living 
in the property once she has left for the US. So instead of approaching lenders 
yourself, it might be better to get advice from an independent mortgage broker 
such as London & Country <http://www.lcplc.co.uk>. Alternatively, it might be 
worth approaching your sister's current mortgage lender. It could also be 
useful to refer to the guidance on buying property with family members at Share 
to buy <http://www.sharetobuy.com/>.
 