
Hello guzzlers,

Today’s puzzle comes courtesy of Jelmer Steenhuis, a legendary Dutch puzzle 
designer. It’s a contemporary twist on riddle that has been around since 
medieval times, and may be of use to revellers out partying today.

Three friends set off to carnival with a jerry can containing 1.2litres of rum 
punch. On arrival they decide to go to three separate sound systems. So they 
must divide the booze equally between themselves. They have brought two large 
bottles for this purpose. But then they discover that these bottles have no 
measurements on them.

One of the friends spots an empty 50cl can of Red Stripe and an empty 15cl 
vial of something marked ‘rave juice’ on the ground. There’s a water tap on 
hand to clean the can and the vial.

The friends are able to divide the punch into three equal portions by pouring 
between the jerry can, the two bottles, the beer can and the vial.

How do they do it?

Remember that the only measurements they have are for a full can and a full 
vial, but they also know there is 1.2litres of rum punch in the jerry can to 
start with. Assume that when you pour from one vessel to another no liquid is 
spilled.

I’ll be back at 5pm with the answer. Try not to put spoilers in the comments, 
thanks.

Jelmer studied law and was a lawyer for 20 years before moving into puzzles 
full time. He is best known in Holland for his crosswords and word games, which 
have appeared in many publications. If you speak Dutch, you can find some on his
website <http://steenhuispuzzels.nl/> .
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fcan-you-solve-it-are-you-smarter-than-a-carnival-reveller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15f561d60dce38995d347cb25e220392564baa15%2F0_0_1546_2341%2F1546.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20solve%20it%3F%20Are%20you%20smarter%20than%20a%20carnival%20reveller%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fcan-you-solve-it-are-you-smarter-than-a-carnival-reveller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20solve%20it%3F%20Are%20you%20smarter%20than%20a%20carnival%20reveller%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fcan-you-solve-it-are-you-smarter-than-a-carnival-reveller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15f561d60dce38995d347cb25e220392564baa15%2F0_0_1546_2341%2F1546.jpg>
 Photograph: Walker Books 
I post a puzzle here on a Monday every two weeks. If you want to propose a 
puzzle for this column, pleaseemail me <mailto:bellospuzzle@gmail.com> I’d love 
to hear it.

My latest book is out this week: Football School: Where Football Explains the 
World <http://amzn.to/2bqxfYt> is for children and uses football to explain 
subjects like maths, English, geography, physics, music, fashion, biology and 
more.

You can check me out on Twitter <https://twitter.com/alexbellos>, Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Alex-Bellos/326738482347?ref=bookmarks>, Google+
 <https://plus.google.com/u/0/100349853927591455618/posts>, my personal website 
<http://www.alexbellos.com/> or my Guardian maths blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland>.
 