
Hello guzzlers,

Today, two puzzles inspired by the Olympics:

1) The 100m final

Early this morning Usain Bolt won gold in the 100m. 

Let’s assume that Bolt won the race by 10m from the second placed runner, 
Justin Gatlin. And now let’s run the final again, but this time Bolt will start 
10m behind the start line. If both Bolt and Gatlin run at the same constant 
speed in the second race as they did in the first, who wins?

2) The mystery games

(For the purposes of this puzzle, any resemblance to real persons, living or 
dead, and Olympic sports, actual or obsolete, is purely coincidental.)

Nafissatou, Jessica, and Brianne are taking part in an athletics competition 
that involves at least two events. In each event the winner gets G points, 
second placed gets S points and third place gets B points, where G, S and B are 
whole numbers, nonzero, and G> S>B. No event is tied. Nafissatou scores 22 
points in total. Jessica and Brianne score 9 points each in total. Jessica wins 
the 100m hurdles. Who is second in the javelin? How many events are there?

I’ll open comments at noon, and post the answers at 5pm BST. Please don’t post 
the answer in the comments before 5pm because this spoils it for the many 
people who want to work out the answers themselves. Thanks!

I post a puzzle here on a Monday every two weeks. If you want to propose a 
puzzle for this column, pleaseemail me <mailto:bellospuzzle@gmail.com> I’d love 
to hear it.


I’m the author of three popular maths books including Alex’s Adventures in 
Numberland <http://amzn.to/24xBFW0>. My new book Football School: Where 
Football Explains the World <http://amzn.to/2bqxfYt> is for children and out on 
Sept 1.You can check me out on Twitter <https://twitter.com/alexbellos>, 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Alex-Bellos/326738482347?ref=bookmarks>
,Google+ <https://plus.google.com/u/0/100349853927591455618/posts>, my personal 
website <http://www.alexbellos.com/> or my Guardian maths blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland>.
 