
The supporters of an open, democratic internet, funded mainly by advertising, 
are facing some big questions about how their vision will unfold. A freely 
accessible digital world, where websites and social networks are open to all, 
is the dream of many. But critics wonder if this is desirable or even possible.

Brands have shifted a huge proportion of their marketing budgets into online 
advertising in recent years, fuelling the growth of the internet and becoming 
the main source of funding for most websites and social networks. But while 
many campaigns hit the spot, others can be irritating, intrusive and irrelevant.

How can advertisers and web publishers make sure ad campaigns are effective 
and entertaining enough to pay the internet’s bills, while ensuring online 
services don’t disappear behind a series of privately accessed paywalls?

To discuss the future of online advertising, the Guardian teamed up with 
advertising technology provider AppNexus to run a roundtable discussion. The 
discussion was conducted under the Chatham House Rule, where comments were made 
on condition that they were not attributed to the speakers, to encourage a 
free-flowing discussion.

A key point of contention in the discussion was how the internet should be 
funded. One participant was passionate about the ad-funded model: “Largely it 
should be free. It is a wonderful tool for accessing information, for consuming 
information and for the distribution of brands.” But another thought that the 
quality of content on the internet inevitably suffers “unless you have the 
resources to fund it.” There are fears that ad revenue is insufficient to pay 
for all the content that is needed for the web. “Generally speaking, the 
ad-funded model puts a downward pressure on the quality of content. I have no 
problem with subscriptions,” the speaker said, adding: “There is no reason why 
it should be free.”

Digital advertising faces some serious challenges if it is to keep the web 
free – one of which is concerns over the ethics of tracking people’s online 
behaviour without their consent. The success of online ad campaigns is 
determined by the data that brands can access about internet users. How old are 
they? What are their interests? Are they male or female, single or with 
children? Much of this data will be collected from cookies downloaded on to 
users’ computers. Cookie data allows web publishers to track users’ online 
journeys and observe the actions they take on different websites. They can then 
use this data to helps them target campaigns to different groups.

The impact of data protection regulation

But the forthcoming European Union General Data Protection Regulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/16/eu-agrees-draft-text-pan-european-data-privacy-rules>
 (GDPR), to be implemented in 2018, will tighten up data privacy – and this, 
some speakers felt, could undermine the ad-funded model of the internet. The 
stringent new rules, which force companies to get “unambiguous consent” from 
online users to make use of their data, are expected to be adopted in the UK 
regardless of Brexit.

Some participants worried that the Directive’s clampdown on using data could 
make it difficult for certain companies to operate on the internet or to run 
advertising campaigns. “Some businesses may not survive,” warned one speaker.

The participants also discussed whether website owners relying mainly on 
cookie data are at a disadvantage to websites and social networks where users 
log in and give their personal details. Facebook, for instance, has in-depth 
login information about users – their locations, names, likes, activities and 
friendship networks. The social network offers this data to brands, 
facilitating highly targeted advertising campaigns.

One participant spoke of an ad campaign for the launch of a new product where 
a strong creative film was shown on Facebook. Depending on how users reacted to 
the film – whether they watched it the whole way through, or just with the 
sound off – more messages were served to them and these were refined in stages 
according to each user’s reaction. The speaker said this was highly effective, 
as it allowed the campaign to filter out those who were not interested and to 
deliver relevant messages to potential customers.

Another speaker said Facebook allows brands to constantly change their online 
advertising as they receive new data about people’s likes and dislikes: “I 
really feel it is only since Facebook has come along that we have had this 
opportunity to assess data very quickly and then tweak that data.”

But another pointed to a recent statement from household products manufacturer 
Procter & Gamble (P&G), the world’s largest advertiser, that it had decided to 
stop using Facebook’s targeting tools.

“They had assumed it would be efficient to target (air freshener) Febreze to 
families with kids and dog owners, but it proved more efficient to go broad in 
the targeting.” P&G said it was better to promote some products to everybody 
rather than paying for targeted audiences, as everyone uses laundry detergents 
or washing-up liquid. Tightly targeted campaigns are more suitable for very 
specific, niche products.

Some of the speakers were concerned that online advertising places too much 
emphasis on data and not enough on creativity and persuasion. The use of data 
was criticised as “the tail wagging the dog” and there was a recognition that 
some advertising creatives believe data gets in the way of making good 
campaigns. “They feel the use of data depersonalises,” said one speaker, who 
added the caveat that attitudes are changing. “I think people have got used to 
the fact it is not a case of either having data or creative – it is about using 
both together.”

There was a consensus that cookie and login data works best for hard-sell 
campaigns, encouraging people to buy now, rather than for softer-focus, 
persuasive brand advertising.

Retargeting – a waste?

And speakers accepted that “retargeting” campaigns – whereby a user who has 
visited a website, perhaps to look at some shoes, then has ads for that website 
follow them around the internet for days, weeks or even months after – are 
unpopular with users. “It is so frustrating as an advertiser that I am spending 
on retargeting,” said one speaker. “I am very well aware that those advertising 
platforms aren’t good enough and that we are overly retargeting.”

The problem of retargeting was seen as a failing of automated advertising – 
called “programmatic advertising” – where software dictates what ads people see 
based on the data. But some thought that as programmatic technology evolves to 
become more sophisticated, it will overcome these drawbacks and will deliver a 
better experience for users and brands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fcan-advertising-support-free-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b3259a6e8a29159d391116bc496b84d09a34556%2F0_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20advertising%20support%20a%20free%20internet%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fcan-advertising-support-free-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20advertising%20support%20a%20free%20internet%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fcan-advertising-support-free-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b3259a6e8a29159d391116bc496b84d09a34556%2F0_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 OgilvyOne’s Jo Coombs gets her point across at the Guardian roundtable event, 
supported by App Nexus. Photograph: Sam Friedrich 
One problem with automated online advertising is that the ads may appear on 
any website and next to inappropriate content, for instance an ad for an 
airline could be placed next to an article about an air crash. But one speaker 
predicted that automated “programmatic” advertising will be able to answer this 
problem and help brands sift through data to find the most receptive audiences 
for their messages and identify the most appropriate places to run the ads.

“Programmatic is very helpful for understanding who those people could be, 
what their behaviour looks like and how you could go about finding them.” 
Another compared the situation of programmatic advertising to email. “Email is 
one of the best-performing channels. But it was tainted for a time because it 
was abused.”

The discussion turned to the use of machine learning, where software analyses 
data to make judgements about what products, ads and content people should be 
offered. One speaker said machine learning and robotics would revolutionise 
marketing. “What we’ve seen in programmatic advertising is one of the earliest 
areas where it has made inroads, but I think it will be right across the shop.”

But another warned that widespread use of robotics and technology would lead 
to a depersonalised world: “People are just turning into a kind of jelly 
between lots of robots.”

The discussion returned to the question of whether advertising will continue 
as the main source of funding for the web. One speaker thought younger users 
would be reluctant to ever pay for online content. But another disagreed: “We 
cannot assume that people between the ages of 12 and 21 are going to behave and 
operate like that for the rest of their lives. We all go through generational 
change.”

At the table

 * Jasper Jackson (Chair) Assistant Media editor, the Guardian

 * Sanjeevan Bala Head of data planning and analytics, Channel 4

 * Romain Bertrand Managing director, eHarmony UK

 * Steve Chester Director of data and industry programmes, IAB UK

 * Chris Clarke Chief creative officer, international DigitasLBi

 * Jo Coombs CEO OgilvyOne

 * Nigel Gilbert Vice-president, strategic development, EMEA, AppNexus

 * Annabel Kilner Commercial director, Made.com

 * Sille Opstrup Head of digital, Pernod Ricard UK

 * Giles Pavey Chief data scientist, dunnhumby

 * Daniel Spears Programmatic director, the Guardian

 * Bradley Love Professor of cognitive and decision sciences, UCL

 * Sarah Todd CEO, Geometry Global

 * Jamie West Deputy managing director, group director of advanced 
advertising, Sky Media UK

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.
 