
In 1955, shortly after directing Rear Window 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/jul/25/my-favourite-hitchcock-rear-window>
 and at the peak of his powers, Alfred Hitchcock made a TV show.Alfred 
Hitchcock Presents <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0047708/>, a mystery anthology 
that ran for seven series, is hardly as memorable as the director's finest 
films, but it at least gave a fair representation of the man's preoccupations, 
interests and sense of humour. It was also the first time an established 
cinematic genius had engaged effectively with the small screen. And while it 
may have taken the rise of cable and, latterly,Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/23/netflix-viewer-data-house-of-cards>
 for film-makers of a similar calibre and independence of spirit to follow suit 
and sign up for a series (we've only had the odd director turning their hand to 
the occasional episode of an established show -Tarantino on ER 
<http://wiki.tarantino.info/index.php/Emergency_Room>, for example) now 
everyone's at it – from David Fincher withHouse of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog+series/house-of-cards-episode-recaps>
 to Todd Haynes withMildred Pierce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/23/todd-haynes-mildred-pierce-kate-winslet>
.
 Oscar-winner Alfonso Cuarón. Photograph: Lucy Nicholson/Reuters 
While Cary Fukunaga, the director behind True Detective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog+series/true-detective-episode-recaps>
, had only a few film credits to his name before the acclaimed series took 
shape,Alfonso Cuarón <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfonso-cuaron>, the 
Oscar-winning director of Gravity, has a lot to live up to with his sci-fi 
fantasyBelieve <http://www.nbc.com/believe>. The 13-part drama series, which 
starts tonight in the UK and is currently airing on NBC, focuses on Bo, a 
supernaturally gifted young protagonist (Johnny Sequoyah) who is assigned a 
reluctant guardian, Tate (Jake McLaughlin), to protect her from a seemingly 
villainous force called Skouras (Kyle McLachlan). So far, so Saturday serial. 
But with awards come expectations – has Cuarón sold his creative soul, or does 
Believe show off the assets of a great director to best effect? Here's my 
verdict on the first episode, which sees him grappling with the following 
challenges (no spoilers included):

Spending wisely

The budget of a network television show can hardly compare to the resources at 
Cuarón's disposal inGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review>, but Believe 
definitely bears a few of Cuarón's visual flourishes. The effects are deployed 
sparingly but tellingly, usually to depict Bo's abilities (telekinesis, 
healing, that sort of thing) in action. Cuarón's trademark, the long single 
take, is twice used to arresting effect: the pummeling opening sequence recalls 
Children of Men, as one of Skouras's goons ambushes Bo in a car crash, and a 
long chase through a hospital is impressively fluid. As Martin Scorsese did with
Boardwalk Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jan/13/have-you-been-watching-boardwalk-empire>
, Cuarón will be stepping back to executive produce the series after directing 
the pilot, but it seems the look of the show has been established. It shouldn't 
be an impossible act for the journeyman TV director to follow.

Working with kids
 Films such as Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban show Cuarón's knack 
with young actors. Photograph: Murray Close/AP 
Cuarón's knack with young actors is what made his The Prisoner of Azkaban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/99920/harry.potter.and.the.prisoner.of.azkaban>
 the best of the Harry Potter series and his adaptation of Frances Hodgson 
Burnett's A Little Princess one of the most engaging, underrated family films 
of the 1990s. The performance of newcomer Johnny Sequoyah in the Believe lead 
is one of startling maturity and the right sort of precociousness; her rapport 
with McLaughlin's Tate is warm and spiky by turns, but convincing throughout. 
Cuarón deserves huge credit for this: a bad child actor can explode a project 
faster than a cloud of space debris.

Collaborating intelligently

Cuarón's ability to pick the right creative partners and work with them 
effectively was central to the success ofGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity> and could be again with Believe. In 
JJ Abrams, he has a fellow executive producer equally acquainted with a 
soaraway smash (Lost), qualified success (Revolution, Fringe) and an outright 
shambles (Alcatraz). Just as importantly, Abrams is also well versed in the 
politics of network television. The departure of two of Believe's exec 
producers – including Cuarón's co-creator, Mark Friedman – and a two-week 
filming hiatus mid-production suggests that all hasn't been well behind the 
scenes, while the pulpy, uneven dialogue does have the ring of a focus group. 
Cuarón wouldn't be the first auteur whose vision was thwarted by network 
demands – Believe offers a sharp reminder that not all US television fosters 
idiosyncrasy like HBO or AMC.

Embracing the weird

While few disputed its astounding visual impact, some found the 
pseudo-spirituality and religious symbolism of Gravity a little hard to 
swallow. Those same people will likely find that Believe sticks even more 
immovably in the craw. The clue's in the title. Bo's cloying compassion and 
inexplicable (albeit uncontrollable) abilities could easily be construed as 
Christlike, while her followers demonstrate a zeal and purity bordering on the 
messianic ("We don't do guns – we're the good guys," reckons Winter). Whether 
this is delivered with total sincerity or intended as a more layered allegory 
remains to be seen. The former seems more likely, which can't be good news for 
the show's credibility in the long run.

Varying the schtick
 Ethan Hawke and Gwyneth Paltrow in Cuarón's Great Expectations. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/20TH CENTURY FOX 
Plenty of cinematic legends have come unstuck by failing to adapt their theme 
or style for television. Christopher Guest's mockumentary style, for example, 
proved hopelessly ill-suited to the already-flawed Family Tree (why would 
cameras be following a nobody around on a genealogical road trip?). By 
contrast, one of the great attractions of Cuarón is his willingness to take a 
risk. His CV already includes children's films (Harry Potter), a coming-of-age 
erotic comedy-drama (Y Tu Mama Tambien) and literary adaptations both modern 
(Children of Men) and classic (Great Expectations). After the philosophical 
sci-fi of Gravity, Believe undoubtedly represents another gamble – but don't 
bet against him pulling it off.

• Believe starts tonight, 9pm, on Watch
 