
Major League Gaming, a professional eSports organization, announced on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/05/activision-acquires-major-league-gaming-esports>
 that it was acquired by video game publisher Activision Blizzard for a 
reported $46m, bringing MLG’s assets and infrastructure under Activision 
Blizzard’s Media Network. This is the latest event in a timeline that begins on 
21 October, when the publisher announced it was creating a new eSports 
competitive video game division chaired by former ESPN CEO Steve Bornstein and 
senior vice president Mike Sepso of MLG. Bornstein has been a large proponent 
of eSports, and Activision Blizzard’s properties like Starcraft, Hearthstone 
and Heroes of the Storm are competitive games. So why has the eSports community 
seemed less than thrilled about the acquisition in forums and comments sections 
all over the internet?

Activision acquires Major League Gaming to become 'ESPN of eSports'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/05/activision-acquires-major-league-gaming-esports>
Major League Gaming became the butt of memes on October 2012. That month, at 
the game awards show broadcast on MLG.tv, journalist Geoff Keighley conducted 
an interview flanked on either side by five bottles of Mountain Dew, a family 
size bag of Doritos and a giant Halo cardboard cutout redundantly plastered 
with more Doritos and Mountain Dew logos. The extremely meme-able visual was 
screenshoted and is still disseminated widely whenever MLG comes up. The moment 
presented everything wrong with games journalists alleged impartiality in a 
media world dominated by product placement. The MLG brand will have to wipe 
itself clean of the residue left over from ‘doritosgate’. Three years since, a 
Google image search of MLG stillretrieves ‘MLG #420 Swag Doritos’ memes 
<https://www.google.ca/search?q=mlg&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiRzvm6lJbKAhXM5xoKHYE3BnQQ_AUIBygB&biw=1280&bih=665#imgrc=Lnsh4FyLkN7CzM%3A>
, mocking the brand for trying to sell gamers products they’ve long been 
stereotyped for liking.

As eSports have expanded into the US since being popularized by professional 
leagues in South Korea, publishers have increasingly taken control of their 
properties. Riot Games, publisher of the most popular title stateside, League 
of Legends, is also in charge of that game’s competitive scene. The same can be 
said of Valve and DOTA. That Activision Blizzard are trying to fulfill MLG’s 
promise of creating an ESPN of eSports seems unlikely given that they don’t own 
the titles that are the most popular. If Activision Blizzard were to launch a 
platform that did not cover their competitor’s titles like DOTA2 or LOL, it 
would be like, as Austin Walkerwrote on Giant Bomb 
<http://www.giantbomb.com/articles/activision-blizzard-buys-mlg-for-46m-aims-to-build/1100-5368/>
, “ESPN being unable to cover the Super Bowl”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F10%2Fcall-of-duty-rise-pro-gaming-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F4%2F9%2F1397059858695%2FCOD-Gaming-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Call%20of%20Duty%20and%20the%20explosive%20rise%20of%20pro-gaming%3A%20'This%20isn't%20a%20niche%20movement%20any%20more'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F10%2Fcall-of-duty-rise-pro-gaming-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Call%20of%20Duty%20and%20the%20explosive%20rise%20of%20pro-gaming%3A%20%27This%20isn%27t%20a%20niche%20movement%20any%20more%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F10%2Fcall-of-duty-rise-pro-gaming-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F4%2F9%2F1397059858695%2FCOD-Gaming-017.jpg>
 In March, the Call of Duty World Championships brought together 32 teams from 
around the world to compete for a prize pot of $1m 
Admittedly, publishers have the most to gain from their properties becoming 
eSports, and therefore the most to contribute. A good example of this symbiotic 
relationship is Valve’s to DOTA 2. By selling cosmetic costumes to DOTA’s 
players, Valve was able to crowdfund an $18m prize pool for its 2015 
international DOTA 2 tournament. Contrary to the non-gaming public’s disbelief 
that this kind of money is on the line for a game, it’s necessary. You can’t 
have a professional sports career unless there’s something approaching 
professional sports money.

There’s a mutual relationship that publishers need to maintain with their 
titles’ respective communities and leagues that is not only appropriate, but 
necessary to grow the industry. On the broadcast side, Twitch accounts for the 
lion’s share of all streaming related game content (which includes eSports), 
with YouTube making moves to position itself as a competitor. Before its 
acquisition, MLG.tv always played second fiddle to Twitch, relying on its own 
dedicated player and exclusives to create an audience. This has lead to some 
skepticism about whetherActivision Blizzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/activision-blizzard> Media Network is 
truly trying to become an ESPN, or whether the AB Media Network is really 
Activision’s version of the WWE network; a separate channel altogether 
dedicated exclusively to their properties.

The other source of uneasiness is Activision itself. Activision has been 
accused of annualizing its most profitable series unnecessarily, Call of Duty 
being the most prominent example. The annual releases have given the publisher 
a reputation for milking their audiences and as a result that series 
competitive scene continues to shrink with each new installment of the 
franchise. Activision is now one of the most maligned publishers in the 
industry; the publisher’s own CEOacknowledged this back in 2008 
<http://www.gamespot.com/forums/playstation-nation-1000002/activision-ceo-we-need-to-fix-our-hardcore-reputat-27387064/>
 and not much has changed. The company will have to change its business model 
if it wants to appeal to the competitive scene. Often, newer games are inferior 
to their old ones. People liked Call of Duty: Modern Warfare and the original 
Starcraft much more than either of their successors. Starcraft was played 
seriously for well over a decade, while theeSports scene for its sequel began 
to wane 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/insertcoin/2012/10/18/starcraft-2-struggles-as-league-of-legends-rises/>
 just two years after its release.

The most enduring eSports communities, like the ones for Counterstrike, Smash 
Bros Melee and Starcraft, were given time to develop into the scenes we take 
for granted today. Them becoming eSports was a long and organic process. These 
games existed before eSports was even a term, and the ‘metagames’ of each took 
years to emerge as players and audiences alike became more skilled at them. It 
took hundreds of commentating hours to come up with the shorthand names for 
techniques that are now widely understood by the audiences watching these games.

Publishers are now trying to capture the eSports lightning in a bottle on 
untested games, the most egregious example of which being the 2015 February 
tournament for Evolve which publisher Take2 set-up at the Penny Arcade Expo in 
Boston less than two weeks after its commercial release. The fanfare at PAX 
included LOL style commentators trying to provide live insight on a game that 
no one had figured the ins and outs of. Evolve turned out to be a commercial 
and competitive failure, in spite of itsimpressive set-up that day 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GR7yoMstF1I>.

For Activision Blizzard to succeed in truly creating the ESPN of eSports, it’s 
going to take a lot more than just money and fanfare.
 