
The 10th anniversary of the invasion of Afghanistan falls in the first week of 
October, but it will attract a fraction of the attention afforded last month's 
events marking a decade since 9/11. Only a few stalwartprotests in the UK 
<http://stopwar.org.uk/> and the US planned for Saturday will try to get an 
inattentive public to engage with what is now America's longest war.

This conflict has lasted longer than the first and second world wars combined. 
Conservative estimates of Afghan casualties are put at about 40,000, and 
coalition casualties almost match those killed in the Twin Towers. Meanwhile 
the costs to the UK alone are running at £12m a day. Operation Enduring Freedom 
has turned out to involve a lot more endurance than was ever envisaged, and 
precious little freedom.

The war fatigue that breeds indifference and bewilderment is in sharp contrast 
with the intense interest that launched this war. In September 2001 there was 
an avid appetite to understand the tragic complexities of Afghanistan's history 
and the plight of a country traumatised by decades of conflict. An art-house 
film hit box office success whenKandahar 
<http:/www.makhmalbaf.com/movies.php?m=10>, made by the Iranian director Mohsen 
Makhmalbaf, discovered the rich seam of sympathy later exploited so 
successfully by the novelThe Kite Runner <http://www.kiterunnermovie.com/>, and 
a string of other bestsellers. Afghanistan seemed a country in need of saving 
from itself. It's hard now to remember that Afghanistan was the popular war in 
comparison to Iraq. Protest was muted or nonexistent.

Key to this largely supportive public opinion was how, over the course of a 
few weeks in 2001, a war of revenge was reframed as a war for human rights in 
Afghanistan, and in particular the rights of women. It was a narrative to 
justify war that proved remarkably powerful. A cause that had been dismissed 
and ignored for years in Washington suddenly moved centre-stage. The video of a 
woman being executed in Kabul stadium that theRevolutionary Association of 
Women of Afghanistan <http://www.rawa.org/index.php> had offered to the BBC and 
CNN without success was taken up by the Pentagon and used extensively. The 
Taliban's brutal treatment of women, the closure of girls schools: all were 
used to justify military invasion and close down debate .

Laura Bush, the then first lady, took over the president's weekly White House 
radio talk 
<http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2001/11/20011117.html>
 the week before Thanksgiving in 2001, and banged the drums for war. She 
conflated the battle for women's rights and the war on terror: "the brutal 
oppression of women is the central goal of the terrorists", she claimed. She 
said that "civilised people" had an "obligation to speak out" across the world 
against what was happening to Afghan women and the "world that the terrorists 
would like to impose on the rest of us". She concluded with "the fight against 
terrorism is about the fight for the rights and dignity of women".Cherie Booth 
echoed her sentiments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/nov/20/uk.september11>.

This isn't just history, the conflation of western aggression and women's 
rights has underpinned the last 10 years of conflict. Laura Bush has expanded 
on her 2001 themes at regular intervals ever since. In 2010, Time ran a cover 
photo of a girl,Bibi Aisha <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bibi_Aisha>, whose 
nose had been cut off, and used the headline: "What Happens If We Leave 
Afghanistan". As my colleague Jonathan Steele points out in his fascinating new 
book,Ghosts of Afghanistan 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846274305>
, Bibi's story didn't quite fit the template of brutal Taliban.

But it didn't much matter. The plight of Afghan women was a rallying cry that 
didn't allow for discussion or nuance. There was enough truth – such as the 
worst maternal mortality in the world – to silence any doubt. This simplistic 
morality tale of how American soldiers would advance the rights of Afghan women 
fits neatly into the thesis put forward by Susan Faludi in her book,The Terror 
Dream <http://susanfaludi.com/terror-dream.html>. Here she analysed how, after 
9/11, Americans used historical myths, of cowboys rescuing and protecting weak 
women, for instance, in a bid to make larger sense of the attack.

Over the last decade little attention has been paid to understanding 
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> and its history. 
The country had experienced various attempts during the 20th century to bring 
progress to Afghan women. These ended in failure, prompting deep resistance 
because they were seen as foreign, imported modernisation that corroded 
traditional Afghan identity. The issue of women's rights opened up divides 
between the urban and rural populations and between different ethnic groups in 
an already fragmented country. The position of women has been deeply 
politicised in this war-torn country. In conservative rural areas, powerbrokers 
built up their legitimacy with appeals to traditional values. Girls' education 
was a particularly sensitive subject, provoking anxieties about the 
transmission of conservative values and the functioning of kinship groups. Such 
entrenched social systems cannot be re-engineered by outsiders, however 
well-intentioned.

What has also been forgotten is that in the long civil war during the 1990s, 
sexual violence against women had become endemic – indeed many of the warlords 
backed by the US had a terrible record. The Taliban managed to reduce it, 
albeit through some brutal methods.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> didn't much like the Taliban, 
but they recognised that they had brought a measure of security.

What has also been ignored is any understanding of how Afghanistan's long 
history of conflict affected gender roles. There is plenty of research on the 
impact of conflict on women, who are increasingly among its primary victims. 
They experience violence from both enemies and friends. The common pattern is 
that conflict polarises gender roles: masculinity becomes more aggressive and 
women are idealised as "the bearers of a cultural identity", in the words of the
World Health Organisation 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=www.who.int/gender/violence/v7.pdf>. Their 
bodies become part of the battle field. This is as true of the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo as of Afghanistan. In the latter, foreign intervention 
ultimately only exacerbates such deeply destructive trends.

This is uncomfortable stuff for someone concerned about women's rights. What 
is the best way to advance them in deeply hostile cultures? How does one 
support those in the country trying to working for change? Was it right to use 
a story about a war for women's rights? Can their spread ever be accompanied by 
military aggression? These are tough questions that can be argued many ways, 
but on the last I persist in thinking,as I did in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/dec/17/afghanistan.politicalcolumnists>
, that the answer is no.

On Monday Oxfam brings out a report 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/applications/blogs/pressoffice/?newsblog> urging the 
international community not to trade in women's rights in a peace settlement 
with the Taliban. It calls for a longterm commitment to support women. I admire 
and understand the sincerity of their intentions but question whether women's 
rights should be an obstacle in the process of a settlement. And I'm sceptical 
as to whether foreign powers are in a position to impose negotiating terms. A 
degree of security in Afghanistan – it hardly merits the word peace – may cost 
women's rights as it did in the 1990s, and many Afghan women may regard that as 
tragic but necessary.

Human rights organisations and aid agencies have been caught in an 
excruciating dilemma over the last decade in Afghanistan. Many opposed the 
invasion but since then they have unwittingly been dragged into the role of 
cheerleaders for the US-led coalition, and been uncomfortably complicit in a 
project of nation-building that was tailored for western publics as much 
as Afghan women. 
 