
The principal of a Canberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra> public school has been 
sacked after an investigation found a boy with special needs was locked inside 
a small, metal enclosure in an attempt to calm him down.

An independent investigation into the incident was announced in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/02/canberra-school-investigated-after-cage-like-enclosure-built-for-special-needs-student>
 by the ACT’s minister for education, Joy Burch, and the director general of 
the education and training directorate, Diane Joseph.

On Tuesday the findings were released, revealing the enclosure had been 
commissioned by the principal at a cost of $5,195 to the school.

Canberra school investigated after cage-like enclosure built for special needs 
student
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/02/canberra-school-investigated-after-cage-like-enclosure-built-for-special-needs-student>
It was built in March and kept in place for 14 school days, including the day 
of construction and dismantling, and had been used to hold the boy once, the 
investigation found.

The decision to construct the enclosure was made without consultation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/03/cage-incident-sparks-calls-for-guidelines-on-treatment-of-children-with-disability>
 or approval from within the school or the directorate, Burch told reporters on 
Tuesday, and was intended for use as a quiet space in which the student could 
calm down.

“I am very disappointed by the things found through this investigation,” Burch 
said.

 “It is completely unacceptable that a decision was taken to build this type 
of structure to respond to the behaviour of a student.

“This decision was wrong, and the officer responsible will no longer be a 
school principal or be working within a school. School principals must be held 
responsible for their actions.”

Constructed with blue powder-coated metal, the enclosure measured 2m x 2m and 
included a self-closing door and latch.

The department could not reveal the name of the school, principal or student, 
in order to protect the identity of the student and his family. When the 
incident first came to light, it was reported the student affected was a 
10-year-old boy with autism.

An audit of other government schools in the ACT found no evidence of any other 
similar structures elsewhere, the investigation found.

Burch said she was frustrated by how long it had taken to complete the 
investigation, saying it did not meet her expectations as minister.


“I thank the school community for their patience while this matter was 
investigated.”

The principal had been suspended throughout the investigation, which also 
found that the department officers notified of the enclosure did not act with 
sufficient urgency or alarm.

A director for families and students would be appointed to focus on the safety 
and wellbeing of students and to act as an advocate for students, their 
families and school staff, Burch said.
 