
Might it be the most star-studded Cannes jury in history? The world's most 
famous film festival has announced that this year's president, Steven 
Spielberg, will be joined by a cavalcade of heavyweight figures –including 
Oscar winners Ang Lee, Christoph Waltz and Nicole Kidman 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/cannes-ang-lee-nicole-kidman-445028>.

The glittering quartet will be joined by Britain's Lynne Ramsay, perhaps with 
time on her hands afterexiting the Natalie Portman indie western Jane's Got a 
Gun <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/25/jane-got-a-gun-lynne-ramsay>, 
French cinema icon Daniel Auteuil, Romanian film-maker Cristian Mungiu, 
Japanese director Naomi Kawase and Bollywood star Vidya Balan.

Mungiu, Ramsay, Auteuil and Kawase are all past Cannes award-winners. Ramsay 
took a Youth prize in 2002 for her elliptical dramaMorvern Callar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/92809/morvern.callar>, while Kawase won 
the Camera d'Or for Suzaku in 1997 and the Grand Prix in 2007 forThe Mourning 
Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/18/cannes-pater-hanezu-review>
. Auteuil won the best actor award at Cannes in 1996 for drama The Eighth Day. 
Mungiu is the only figure on the jury to have taken home the festival's top 
Palme d'Or prize, which he won in 2007 for the harrowing drama4 Months, 3 Weeks 
and 2 Days <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/120862>.

"We have only one criteria and that is already done for the president – the 
legitimacy," festival artistic director Thierry Fremaux told the Hollywood 
Reporter. "So for the jury,Steven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> will be the centre and we 
are finishing it with great people."

He added: "We have a lot of film-makers coming from all over the world. They 
need to be sure that those who make the decisions about the awards have their 
own legitimacy and the respect to do that."

The 66th Cannes film festival runs from 15 to 26 May. The only woman ever to 
have won an Oscar and a Palme d'Or,Jane Campion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/30/how-we-made-the-piano>, will 
oversee theCinéfondation <http://www.festival-cannes.fr/en/cinefondation.html> 
and short film competitions, while Amélie'sAudrey Tautou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/14/audrey-tautou-french-love-amelie> 
will host the opening and closing ceremonies.
 