
It's Groundhog Day at the Cannes film festival. It begins when I take my seat 
for Mike Leigh's Another Year, which is set in London and opens with a scene in 
which an angry, miserable older woman seeks counsel from a younger woman. Next 
up is Woody Allen'sYou Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/136447/you-will-meet-a-tall-dark-stranger>
. It's set in London and opens wih a scene in which an angry, miserable older 
woman seeks counsel from a younger woman. By this point it has all started to 
blur at the Cannes film festival.

How to tell these pictures apart? Well, half of the audience is coughing in 
the Leigh screening, much to the irritation of the other half, which takes to 
shushing them in a fury. Then there is the difference in quality.Another Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/another-year> is frankly streets ahead; 
streets ahead of anything else I've seen so far. It's a tale of loneliness and 
the pursuit of happiness, anchored by terrific performances from Ruth Sheen and 
Jim Broadbent as a contented (and ever so slightly self-satisfied) married 
couple who provide a casual refuge for various souls in torment. Chief among 
these is Mary (Lesley Manville) â€“ jittery, fragile and half terrified by the 
thought that life may have already passed her by.

"I don't smoke," explains Mary brightly, when she actually smokes all the 
time, and drinks to excess as well. At his best, Mike Leigh shows the way in 
which well-scripted conversation can be as layered as a murder mystery and as 
jolting as a car crash. Some of these characters are straightforward and others 
are not. They say one thing and mean another. They leave the crucial stuff 
unspoken, or they try to say it and louse it up. Another Year is beautiful, 
mordant and curiously riveting; a bittersweet salute to the terrors and 
pleasures of growing old. Right here, right now, it's surely inpole position 
for this year's Palme d'Or 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/15/cannes-film-festival-2010-lineup>.

As for the Allen, it was better than I expected, although it did little to 
shake the suspicion that this director has been running on vapour for the last 
decade at least. He's like a boxer who can still dance and shuffle and throw 
the odd sweet left hook. But the power has gone and the chin is glass and You 
Will Meet ... is finally no more than diverting; a genial tale of adultery and 
plagiarism that stars Naomi Watts and Josh Brolin and boasts a decent turn from
Anthony Hopkins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthony-hopkins> as a 
Viagra-popping divorcee.

Elsewhere, Allen's sexual politics remain bizarrely dunder-headed. Brolin has 
his first meeting with Freida Pinto, the sexy neighbour across the street. 
"This is a strange thing to say, having just met," he tells her. "But the other 
night I saw you stand at your window and slip out of your little red dress and 
it was the most purely erotic moment of my life."

At this moment, Pinto does not say, "I'm calling the police." Rather, she 
gives a saucy smile and says, "I guess that's flattering. Look out of your 
window again at midnight tonight." What planet is this man living on?

And still my Groundhog Day goes on. The Zombie Women of Satan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2010/may/14/cannes-film-festival-marche>
 have hopped the bus to the airport, only for a fresh (or at least fresh-ish) 
wave of zombies to step in and replace them. They come staggering down the 
Croisette, men and women, all bathed in stage blood. One zombie has a severed 
head tucked under his arm and then, right behind, comes an elderly Cannes 
gentleman who has somehow blundered into the midst of this hellish parade. 
Tucked under his arm is a small Jack Russell terrier. No sooner had I seen them 
than they were gone. The man shoots me a swift, worried look and is swallowed 
up by the crowd. I pray that he gets out OK. I pray the zombies don't eat that 
dog. "Life can be harsh," says a character from Another Year. And if that's 
true of London, it's true of Cannes.
 