
It was a fitting end to the week in which gay marriage was legalised in 
France: Abdellatif Kechiche's same-sex love storyLa Vie D'Adèle Chapitres 1 et 
2 (Blue is the Warmest Colour) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155325/blue-is-the-warmest-colour>was 
named the winner of the top prize at the Cannes film festival.

Based on a French graphic novel, the film follows the relationship between two 
young students in Lille, one of whom has hair dyed the blue of the title. When 
she reverts to her natural blonde, their affair nose-dives.

Its explicit, groundbreaking sex scenes, one of which beats the 10 minute mark 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/cannes-2013-blue-warmest-colour-review>
, mean it went into the final furlong as both the movie everyone was talking 
about, and critics' favourite to take the Palme d'Or.

That it made good on those odds meant that the film that preceded it as top 
tip – the Coen brothers'Inside Llewyn Davis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154516/inside-llewyn-davis> – instead 
went home with the Grand Prix (runner-up prize).

These crowning awards formed an icing of convention on a series of shocks 
dished out by Steven Spielberg's jury, whose ranks also included Nicole Kidman, 
Ang Lee and the British director Lynne Ramsay. There was nothing for Paolo 
Sorrentino's well-liked Felliniesque tale of middle-aged Roman debauchery,The 
Great Beauty <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154524/great-beauty>, while 
Asghar Farhadi's divorce dramaThe Past 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154520> made do with best actress for 
Bérénice Bejo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/25/berenice-bejo-the-past-artist-interview>
.

Bejo is best known for her role in The Artist, which premiered at Cannes two 
years ago. She went on to be Oscar nominated for that part, losing out at the 
same ceremony where Farhadi'sA Separation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142608/separation> was named best foreign 
language film. Last year, Bejo hosted the Cannes opening and closing ceremonies 
(in 2013, the task fell to Audrey Tautou, who must be feeling positive about 
her chances in 2014).

Veteran star Bruce Dern was named best actor for his role as an alcoholic 
father in Alexander Payne's black-and-white road movie,Nebraska <>. The film – 
fondly, if not ecstatically received 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/cannes-2013-nebraska-first-look-review>
 on the Croisette – gave Dern his first lead in many years. It was, he told the 
Guardian earlier this week, a relief not to be playing"some piece of shit who 
wants to blow up the Superbowl" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2013/may/24/nebraska-alexander-payne-bruce-dern-video>
.

Dern was an unexpected winner; the actor himself had returned to the US, 
leaving Payne to pick up his award. The bookies' choice was Michael Douglas, 
who turns in a game-changing performance as Liberace inBehind the Candelabra 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154523/behind-the-candelabra>, Steven 
Soderbergh's biopic of the pianist, which premiered in the US on HBO just a few 
hours after the festival wrapped.

But perhaps the biggest surprise of the night was the best director award 
doing to 34-year-old Mexican director Amat Escalante, whoseHeli 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155250/heli> unnerved many with scenes of 
torture involving a flambéed penis and a strangled puppy. These scenes had 
looked likely to overshadow its more sensitive moments of young romance and 
Bressonian upset, and when Escalante,speaking to the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2013/may/19/heli-director-amat-escalante-video-interview>
, confessed being taken aback at the "cowardly" reaction of the critics to what 
he felt was a realistic presentation of the world of drug gangs in Mexico. 
Spielberg's endorsement will come as comprehensive vindication of Escalante's 
intended aim to place his audience clear-eyed, in front of human depravity.

The third place "Jury" prize went to Hirokazu Koreeda's gentle domestic drama 
Like Father, Like Son 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154521/like-father-like-son>, while the 
Camera D'Or (for best first film) went to Ilo Ilo. Clio Barnard was the sole 
British winner; her second film,The Selfish Giant 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155239/selfish-giant>, a gritty 
coming-of-age tale about Bradford teenagers won the Critics' Week sidebar.

This year's festival was widely regarded as a rejuvenation after a slightly 
lacklustre couple of years. The majority of competition films were well 
received, and the difficulty of choosing between them upped the ante. While the 
winners in 2011 (Terrence Malick'sThe Tree of Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/139929/tree-of-life>) and 2012 (Michael 
Haneke'sAmour <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147440/amour>) went into 
the festivals as favourites, only the canniest could have foreseen a victory 
for Kechiche.
 