
The Palme d'Or at this year's Cannes film festival for Amour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147440/amour>, by Michael Haneke, makes 
him now a double-winner, having won the Palme for his proto-Nazi parableThe 
White Ribbon <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/130013/white-ribbon>in 2009. 
Amour is the almost unbearably moving story of an old man caring for his dying 
wife at home until her final hour. It's an excellent choice. An impeccable 
choice. Actually, the only possible choice. For me, Amour was the best film in 
this year's competition, no question about it: a glorious demonstration of pure 
artistic intelligence, uncompromisingly exacting and demanding.

And yet … and yet … this is somehow also a slightly anti-climactic ending to a 
faintly unsatisfying festival. Now, it is highly obtuse and ungracious to find 
fault in the right decision being made for an arts prize – especially when this 
so rarely happens in any medium. How grotesque to be so spoiled by Michael 
Haneke's continued brilliance that you find yourself looking around 
speculatively for something else on the horizon. It's almost the critical 
equivalent of Dave Stewart's Paradise Syndrome. But when the time comes for the 
Cannes Palme d'Or announcement you find yourself inevitably longing for 
something provocative, exciting, something with the shock of the new.

The 2012 Palme d'Or salutes Michael Haneke's unarguable but now very well 
established film-making mastery, and he has become almost a kite-mark of 
high-European quality at the festival, a living Cannes classic. For him to get 
the top prize after having won it so recently, is like seeing the apple cart 
piled higher and higher with fruit, its balance eerily undisturbed.

Amour is a superb film and I can't wait to watch it again, but part of me 
would somehow have liked to see the Palme go to Leos Carax's wayward, 
exhilarating and kaleidoscopically weirdHoly Motors 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147447/holy-motors> – a film which in the 
event came away with nothing. A vote for Carax would have shaken things up, 
even though I know, in my heart of hearts, that his film was not as good as 
Haneke's. Well, Nanni Moretti's jury made an eminently sane choice in rewarding 
Amour, such a beautiful and superbly acted movie. A new film by Haneke has 
become a real event, and there is something awe-inspiring in this run of 
superlative form.

As for the rest of the prizes, I suspect a bit of argument and horse-trading 
took place in the jury room.Matteo Garrone's Reality 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/may/18/reality-review> won the Grand Prix, 
which really had me scratching my head. This is an amiable, but essentially 
sentimental and predictable satire about an ordinary guy from Naples who 
becomes obsessed with getting on to the Italian version of Big Brother and 
becoming a big star. This film wasn't anywhere near as good as his earlier 
Gomorrah: a more defensible choice, it seems to me, would have been for the 
jury to have given Reality the best actor prize, for its lead, Aniello Arena, 
who gave a very good performance. However, as Arena is in fact a convicted 
criminal who is serving 20 years in prison – he was allowed out on day-release 
to shoot the picture, but not permitted to come to the festival – this might 
have created some diplomatic problems.

As it happened, the best actor prize went to Mads Mikkelsen for his tremendous 
performance in Thomas Vinterberg's admirable dramaThe Hunt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147441/the-hunt>, as a man wrongly 
accused of child abuse, and the best actress award went jointly to Cosmina 
Stratan and Cristina Flutur as the troubled young women enclosed in a Romanian 
monastery inCristian Mungiu's Beyond the Hills 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146661/beyond-the-hills>, a film which 
also won the screenplay prize. Here again, my personal choice would have been 
to give the screenwriting award to Thomas Vinterberg and Tobias Lindholm for 
their very tight and carpentered script, and I have to say I think the best 
actress award should have gone to Marion Cotillard for her lovely performance in
Jacques Audiard's Rust and Bone 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146658/rust-and-bone>, which went 
unrewarded. And of course, there is an argument that the best actor and actress 
prize should really have gone to Jean-Louis Trintignant and Emmanuelle Riva for 
their deeply moving performances in Amour – it may be that the jury felt that 
the prizes had to be spread out a little.

Mungiu's Beyond the Hills was a fascinating film, based on the true story of a 
young woman who was killed in the course of a bizarre exorcism that took place 
in 2005. It has a strange, almost unreadable tone of black comedy amidst the 
grimness which made it pretty compelling – although I have to concede that it 
was not as good as the film which earned Mungiu his own Palme d'Or: the 
Ceausescu-era drama4 Months, 3 Weeks & 2 Days 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/120862>.

On now to the moment of patriotic pride: Ken Loach (another former Palme 
winner) won the Jury prize for his supremely likable, gentle and funny 
neo-Ealing social-realist comedyThe Angels' Share 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146747/angels-share>, about a reformed 
violent criminal who finds a kind of redemption in his untrained talent for 
"nosing" whisky. I'd like to add a fourth cheer to three that Ken Loach got in 
Cannes. The Angels' Share is all set to be his most commercially successful 
film yet.

That batsqueak of excitement and Cannes-craziness was not entirely neglected 
at the awards. The Director's prize went to the Mexican auteur Carlos Reygadas 
for his very strange filmPost Tenebras Lux 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146647/post-tenebras-lux>, a sexually 
explicit portrait of a stagnant marriage which contained some characteristic 
shock-tactic grenades lobbed into the cinema auditorium, and an ending which 
had delegates clutching their heads with bewilderment, exasperation, amusement, 
invigoration, you name it. Is he just a poseur? I'm still not sure. But there 
is something very satisfying in giving Reygadas exactly this prize – again, 
this is something I'm looking forward to seeing again.

This year's Cannes had a lot of very good films, but only two which achieved a 
sublime quality: Haneke's Amour and Carax's Holy Motors. The Americans were a 
mixed bunch, but Jeff Nichols and Lee Daniels offered highly enjoyable films, 
and Andrew Dominik's crime-dramaKilling Them Softly 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146643/killing-them-softly> was terrific. 
However, the unhappy truth was that with the exception of Haneke, the 
established heavyweights offered lesser works and Alain Resnais, Abbas 
Kiarostami and David Cronenberg presented films which were very disappointing.

Not the very best of years in Cannes, but not a bad year either, and any 
festival which gives us a film as good asAmour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amour> had to be an essential cinema event.
 