
Mike Leigh's Another Year, an ensemble comedy drama starring Leigh regulars 
Jim Broadbent, Imelda Staunton and Lesley Manville, will be flying the union 
flag in competition at this year'sCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>, whose lineup was 
announced today.

The other British film which will debut on the Croisette is Tamara Drewe, 
Stephen Frears'sadaptation of the Posy Simmonds Guardian comic strip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/17/stephen-frears-tamara-drewe-gemma-arterton>
 turned graphic novel. Frears's picture, which stars Gemma Arterton, will 
screen out of competition, as will Woody Allen's London-set You Will Meet a 
Tall Dark Stranger.

At a press conference in Paris today, festival director Thierry Frémaux also 
revealed other high-profile additions to the programme. Ridley Scott's Robin 
Hood was announced as the opening night gala film a few weeks ago. As expected, 
Oliver Stone'sWall Street sequel, Money Never Sleeps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/135251/wall-street>, will close the 
festival, while Doug Liman's spy thriller Fair Game, which stars Sean Penn and 
Naomi Watts, will screen in competition. Also in the 16-strong competition 
field will be the first film made outside Iran by Abbas Kirarostami, Copie 
Conforme, which was shot in Tuscany and stars Juliette Binoche, as well as new 
films from Thai director Apichatpong Weerasethakul (Uncle Boonmee Who Can 
Recall His Past Lives) and Babel's Alejandro González Iñárritu (Biutiful, with 
Javier Bardem).

Festival veterans Jean-Luc Godard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeanlucgodard> and Bertrand Tavernier also 
return, the former with experimental drama Socialisme, the latter with La 
Princesse de Montpensier, starring Mélanie Thierry. Manoel de Oliveira, the 
venerable Portuguese director who turned 101 last year, debuts his latest film, 
O Estranho Caso de Angélica, in the Un Certain Regard sidebar, as will Japanese 
Ring-master Hideo Nakata, whose Chatroom stars Kick-Ass's Aaron Johnson.

Two actors are also making their feature directorial debuts at the festival: 
Tournée, starring and directed by Mathieu Amalric, will screen in competition, 
while Abel, from Diego Luna, is one of the special screenings.

But a few high-profile films rumoured to be in the running were absent from 
the programme, chief among them Terrence Malick's The Tree of Life, starring 
Brad Pitt and Sean Penn, which many had feared would not be completed in time. 
Likewise Potiche, directed by François Ozon and starring Catherine Deneuve and 
Gérard Depardieu. However, last-minute changes and additions to the programme 
have been known in previous years.

Kate Beckinsale and Benicio del Toro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/beniciodeltoro> will serve on the jury 
alongside already-announced president Tim Burton, while Atom Egoyan heads up 
the Cinefondation and Short Film jury, and Claire Denis the Un Certain Regard 
jury.

The 2010 Cannes film festival runs from 12-23 May.
 