
And so the first green shoots of spring emerge, the clocks go forward, the 
first cuckoo is distantly heard, and the Cannes film festival’sofficial 
selection list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/14/cannes-film-festival-2016-full-list-of-films>
 is announced. Always an exciting time for cineastes, cinephiles, Francophiles, 
Euro-celebrity connoisseurs, nerds, red-carpet fanciers and of course critics. 
These are the films that – like it or not – will dominate discussion of world 
cinema for the year, until the more obvious awards-bait English-language 
pictures emerge in the autumn.

Cannes 2016: Ken Loach, Andrea Arnold – and the BFG – headed to film festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/14/cannes-2016-ken-loach-andrea-arnold-and-the-bfg-headed-to-film-festival>
Diversity has become a keynote topic in cinema, and though #CannesSoWhite may 
not become an issue in 2016 it is something on which Cannes does not escape 
scrutiny, certainly considering that it is avowedly an international and global 
platform, which theAcademy awards <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> are 
not. Famously, Cannes and the French cultural establishment are far more 
briskly impervious to web-fuelled social media criticism of this sort. Last 
year, festival directorThierry Frémaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/21/cannes-head-thierry-fremaux-oscars-are-more-sexist-than-cannes>
 smartly dismissed complaints about women without high-heeled shoes being 
refused entry to red-carpet screenings – untrue and not policy, he said, and 
that was that. In Britain or the US, such a row would have concluded with a 
grovelling apology from the director. Not Cannes. Well, there are no women of 
colour among the directors in the selection, although there are women –Andrea 
Arnold <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrea-arnold>, Nicole Garcia and 
Maren Ade – in competition.

In the Un Certain Regard sidebar, there is more ethnic variation, with 
film-makers such as Mohamed Diab, Behnam Behzadi, and the Chad directorMahamet 
Saleh-Haroun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/25/mahamat-saleh-haroun-chad-film>. 
It is traditional for critics to claim that Un Certain Regard is where the real 
interest is, and where the soul of the festival resides. There’s more diversity 
there, to be sure. More light may be shed when the jury is announced. There are 
(so far) no indications of more films to be added to the already bulging list. 
There is no official closing film scheduled – the festival will conclude with 
the Palme d’Or winner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3b19ab4a94f117e1ecc52393fc03a22d7242907%2F672_627_3788_2273%2F3788.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cannes%202016%3A%20big%20names%20and%20some%20great%20Brits%20swell%20an%20exciting%20lineup%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cannes%202016%3A%20big%20names%20and%20some%20great%20Brits%20swell%20an%20exciting%20lineup%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3b19ab4a94f117e1ecc52393fc03a22d7242907%2F672_627_3788_2273%2F3788.jpg>
 Emma Suarez, left, and Adriana Ugarte, stars of Almodóvar’s Julieta. 
Photograph: Agencia EFE/Rex/Shutterstock 
Out of competition there are heavy hitters such as Steven Spielberg with his 
version of Roald Dahl’sThe BFG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/09/the-bfg-trailer-steven-spielberg-film-mark-rylance-video>
 and Jodie Foster with her brassy Hollywood think-piece thrillerMoney Monster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/13/george-clooney-julia-roberts-money-monster-trailer>
, starring George Clooney as the brash host of a financial talkshow who is held 
hostage live on air by a desperate anti-capitalism protester. It’s a selection 
that, as ever, showcases the festival’s avowed masters, such asKen Loach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ken-loach>, Jim Jarmusch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jim-jarmusch>, Pedro Almodóvar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pedroalmodovar> and the Dardennes: the 
silverback gorillas of the arthouse circuit.

The Dardenne brothers – twice winners of the Palme d’Or – are back with their 
La Fille Inconnue, or The Unknown Girl, with Adele Haenel, about a doctor who 
sets out to find the identity of a young woman who died after refusing surgery.

Loach returns – despite having stated that he was withdrawing from fiction 
features – with his longtime screenwriter Paul Laverty, withI, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/23/ken-loach-benefit-sanctions-jeremy-corbyn-food-banks>
, a tough indictment of food-bank Britain and the poverty trap. Almodóvar’s 
Julieta is an adaptation of three interrelated short stories by Alice Munro 
from her 2004 collectionRunaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/feb/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview>. 
A middle-aged woman endures anguish when her teenage daughter runs away from 
home and discovers something about her mother.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c044cb5807af97ff7ca0e8c3ec4803a2cd3ab09%2F117_83_1804_2254%2F1804.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cannes%202016%3A%20big%20names%20and%20some%20great%20Brits%20swell%20an%20exciting%20lineup%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cannes%202016%3A%20big%20names%20and%20some%20great%20Brits%20swell%20an%20exciting%20lineup%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c044cb5807af97ff7ca0e8c3ec4803a2cd3ab09%2F117_83_1804_2254%2F1804.jpg>
 Andrea Arnold, director of American Honey. Photograph: Daniel Deme/EPA 
It is a big year for Britain, with another Cannes favourite being featured: 
Andrea Arnold returns with herAmerican Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/24/shia-lebeouf-head-injury-american-honey>
, featuring Shia LaBeouf and Sasha Lane, about a travelling crew of exploited 
teenagers who get an itinerant job in the midwest, selling magazine 
subscriptions door-to-door. If I had to predict shocks, this might be the film 
to watch.

Actually, one of the most exciting inclusions is Alain Guiraudie, whose 
explicit gay thrillerThe Stranger by the Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/20/stranger-by-the-lake-review> made 
a sensational impression in 2013. He is now in competition with Rester 
Vertical, which he says is set in the heart of France, with no more hints.

There was a time when a new work from the French film-maker Bruno Dumont 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jun/29/1> could mean only one thing: 
extreme cinema, shocking cinema, cinema that had something of Bresson’s 
stillness but also violence and menace. However, Dumont has now embraced his 
funnier side, directing elegant and fascinating comedies. Two years ago, he 
gave us his epic-length, made-for-TVLil’ Quinquin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/ptit-quinquin-review-bruno-dumont-acid-black-comedy-in-small-town-france>
 – now he has Slack Bay, about grandly wealthy French families of a former age 
holidaying in northern France and discovering the exotically grisly locals. It 
featuresJuliette Binoche <https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliette-binoche>, 
who is showing us what she can do with broad comedy. Should be very interesting.

Jeff Nichols is fast becoming the American film-maker to whom Cannes gives its 
benediction: his previous filmsTake Shelter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/24/take-shelter-review> and Mud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/09/mud-review> have featured here, 
and now he returns with his new feature Loving, based on a 2012 HBO documentary 
by Nancy Buirski called The Loving Story, about a notorious 1958 legal case in 
the US in which an interracial couple Richard and Mildred Loving (played here 
by Joel Edgerton and Ruth Negga) were imprisoned for getting married.

Paul Verhoeven is a director who is assured of a certain tongue-in-cheek 
praise from French cinephiles, on account of his much-chortled-overStarship 
Troopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/21/starship-troopers-scifi-fantasy> 
andShowgirls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/mar/19/showgirls-my-guilty-pleasure>
. His new film Elle is in competition, starring the empress of the Cannes 
red-carpet,Isabelle Huppert <https://www.theguardian.com/film/isabelle-huppert>
, whose presence is mandatory. She plays (rather implausibly) the CEO of a 
videogame company who is attacked in her home and then seeks revenge. This 
promises to be a performance with bells and whistles and all guns blazing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa455201004d99324eb6818247d91c4a431684349%2F0_79_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cannes%202016%3A%20big%20names%20and%20some%20great%20Brits%20swell%20an%20exciting%20lineup%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cannes%202016%3A%20big%20names%20and%20some%20great%20Brits%20swell%20an%20exciting%20lineup%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa455201004d99324eb6818247d91c4a431684349%2F0_79_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Jeff Nichols, director of Loving. Photograph: Ian Langsdon/EPA 
If any film-maker has been roundly and unexpectedly trashed by the critics in 
Cannes it isNicolas Winding Refn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolas-winding-refn>, whose Only God Forgives
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/01/only-god-forgives-review> was 
deafeningly mocked in the press in 2013. I found myself its only defender, and 
at that time also discovered that diversity of opinion and legitimate 
disagreement are values that many arts pundits have signed up to in theory 
only. Now Refn has come to Cannes with a film calledThe Neon Demon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/09/amazon-buys-nicolas-winding-refn-neon-demon-elle-fanning-keanu-reeves-christina-hendricks>
, starring Jena Malone about an aspiring model who comes to Los Angeles and 
finds herself under attack from, erm, sinister forces. It is a film that 
reportedly contains vampirism and cannibalism, sounding as if it is inspired by 
that other Cannes favourite Abel Ferrara. Clearly, bad taste will abound. Bring 
it on!

The Romanians are back: Cristi Puiu’s Sieranevada is in competition, as is 
Bacalaureat, or Family Photos, byCristian Mungiu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/cristianmungiu>, a former Palme d’Or 
winner. Sieranevada is inspired byAurel Rau’s poem The Agathirsoi, and about a 
family reunion that is overwhelmed by anxiety.


Sean Penn <https://www.theguardian.com/film/seanpenn> brings his distinctive 
and self-conscious machismo back to the Croisette with The Last Face, written 
by Erin Dignam, withCharlize Theron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlize-theron> as the director of an 
international aid agency in Africa, who fatefully meets a relief medic played by
Javier Bardem <https://www.theguardian.com/film/javierbardem>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf0352b5ca31f80391272be7353218bef78c0c58%2F820_319_4186_2512%2F4186.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cannes%202016%3A%20big%20names%20and%20some%20great%20Brits%20swell%20an%20exciting%20lineup%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cannes%202016%3A%20big%20names%20and%20some%20great%20Brits%20swell%20an%20exciting%20lineup%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf0352b5ca31f80391272be7353218bef78c0c58%2F820_319_4186_2512%2F4186.jpg>
 Charlize Theron stars in Sean Penn’s The Last Face. Photograph: Action 
Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
More British interest: Sarah Waters’ much-loved novel Fingersmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/feb/02/fiction.sarahwaters> is to be 
brought to the screen, unexpectedly enough, by the great Korean master of the 
extremePark Chan-Wook <https://www.theguardian.com/film/park-chan-wook>. 
Entitled The Handmaiden, the story is modernised and transposed to Korea.

And talking of extreme cinema – which we keep doing at Cannes – the 
Philippines’ Brillante Mendoza returns with his Ma’ Rosa. Mendoza is not 
especially associated with controversial film-making but his 2009 film Kinatay 
is one of the most explicitly violent I have ever seen at Cannes. It never got 
a UK release.

The festival’s enfant terrible is probably the Canadian Xavier Dolan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/10/xavier-dolan-mommy>, a positive 
veteran of Cannes, with a clutch of features under his belt, and still – 
incredibly – only 27 years old. HisMommy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mommy> was a smash hit in Cannes and now he 
is in competition once more with his It’s Only the End of the World, with Léa 
Seydoux and Marion Cotillard. Dolan is moving into the big league with these 
starriest of French names. It might be seen as a further, important test of 
Dolan’s sinew as a director, had he not already produced so much substantial 
work.

Jim Jarmusch’s Paterson offers what might be the most attractive pairing of 
the festival:Adam Driver <https://www.theguardian.com/film/adam-driver> and the 
Iranian star Golshifteh Farahani. Driver is the bus driver who writes poetry 
and comes home to his loving wife (Farahani) who has dreams of her own. This 
will be one of the hottest tickets of the festival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6f98e6909ef001c56aa3811bc2c05f46532f4f5%2F442_161_1363_1704%2F1363.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cannes%202016%3A%20big%20names%20and%20some%20great%20Brits%20swell%20an%20exciting%20lineup%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cannes%202016%3A%20big%20names%20and%20some%20great%20Brits%20swell%20an%20exciting%20lineup%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6f98e6909ef001c56aa3811bc2c05f46532f4f5%2F442_161_1363_1704%2F1363.jpg>
 Kristen Stewart stars in festival opener Cafe Society, directed by Woody 
Allen. Photograph: David Buchan/WireImage 
Nicole Garcia’s From the Land of the Moon, or Mal De Pierres, is the big 
offering from French cinema, a literary adaptation starringMarion Cotillard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/marion-cotillard> as a free-spirited woman 
trapped in a loveless marriage, who is attracted to another man. Louis Garrel 
also stars. Garcia’s work has struck me as a type of French cinema that is 
lovely looking, tastefully produced – and a little forgettable. But hope 
springs eternal.

Brazilian director Kleber Mendonca Filho’s Neighbouring Sounds was a hugely 
admired arthouse-circuit movie and his follow-up Aquarius gets a competition 
slot. It sounds fascinatingly weird – and it’s about a critic! A 65-year-old 
retired music writer lives alone, a widow. Her three children have grown up and 
left the nest. But she has the gift of time travel.

Kristen Stewart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-stewart> fans can 
look forward to her second appearance on the red carpet (after her turn in 
Woody Allen’s festival openerCafe Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/29/cannes-2016-opener-woody-allen-cafe-society-jesse-eisenberg>
) as she appears in the intensely awaitedOlivier Assayas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/olivier-assayas> movie Personal Shopper: it’s 
a ghost story set in the Paris underworld. Stewart was a big success in 
Assayas’sClouds of Sils Maria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/14/clouds-of-sils-maria-review-juliette-binoche-kristen-stewart>
 and anticipation is keen for this one.

Germany has a place in competition this year. In Maren Ade’s challengingly 
offbeat-sounding Toni Erdmann, a father visits his daughter abroad and, 
believing that she has lost her sense of humour, torments her with jokes of his 
own. It sounds searingly serious.

As ever, a mouthwatering lineup from Cannes, and, as ever, the sense of 
deja-vu in the names is an illusion. The real delights will emerge, 
unexpectedly, from the familiar-looking thicket of big names. As ever, I can’t 
wait.
 