
The word "festival" is supposed to conjure up joy, lightness, insouciance, 
merriment, n'est-ce pas? That's the theory, but for cinephiles the Cannes film 
festival is an ambivalent affair. For them, the annual 12 days on the Croisette 
are at once a delight and a morbidly obsessive binge, with a dash of boot camp 
thrown in. Oh, we'll rave wild-eyed about the masterpieces but you can also 
expect us to moan like ashen-eyed spectres about the four- or five-film-a-day 
regime, and the way the viewing schedule we so intricately worked out in 
advance suddenly fell to pieces when we failed to notice that this year's hot 
bet for Palme d'Or (Winter Sleep 
<http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/archives/ficheFilm/id/100012204/year/2014.html>
 by Turkish master Nuri Bilge Ceylan) is a cool three-and-a-quarter hours long.

You always hear it said that we are here to celebrate the seventh art at its 
loftiest and headiest peak. Then how does one explain the festival opening with 
a scrap of tawdry tinsel likeGrace of Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/14/grace-of-monaco-cannes-reviews-round-up>
? I can't remember an opening film more roundly, or more justly, savaged by the 
critics: one French paper punned, "De Grâce!" ("Have Pity!").

The film is set after Grace Kelly stopped being Grace Kelly the movie star and 
became Her Serene Highness PrincessGrace of Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/grace-of-monaco>, Duchess of Valentinois and 
Earthly Goddess of Ineffable Fragrance. The year is 1961, and Monaco is facing 
a blockade from France, which threatens to raid its coffers to finance the war 
in Algeria. Grace (Nicole Kidman) is opposed to such bullying tactics 
("Colonalism," she declares, "is so 19th century"), squares up to nasty Charles 
de Gaulle and saves the day by making a speech about the power of love, 
therefore ensuring the survival of Europe's pluckiest little tax haven.

Never mind that Kidman (46) is somewhat mature to play Grace, aged 32 when the 
film was set, and never mind that she only really resembles her when it comes 
to the immaculately silky hair. Personally, I'd be happy to see Bill Nighy play 
the princess, if his performance were convincing. But it's been a while since 
we saw any sort of real performance from Kidman, whose features seem to have 
been embalmed in an eerily immobile L'Oréal-ad placidity. Kidman's Grace is a 
combination of debutante breathiness and a wide-eyed ingenue gaze, as if she's 
constantly walking in on a palace orgy just out of shot. It doesn't help that 
the camera has a bizarre penchant for shooting her face in extreme close-up, 
like a space probe searching for signs of life on a desolate planet.

Directed by Olivier Dahan, this tedious piece of gilded snobbery has been 
denounced by Monaco's royal family as a "farce" on the strength of the trailer 
alone; once the fuss has blown over about what a lousy film it is,Grace of 
Monaco will mainly be remembered as the film that made the Monegasques blow a 
monegasket.

As for the competition proper, so far it's looking lively. Whenever you hear 
of a director's "dream project", you tremble slightly, but given that Mike 
Leigh's dream project, a film about the painter Turner, is a 19th-century 
story, and that period did him well inTopsy-Turvy, there was every chance that 
Mr Turner might be rather fine. It's better than that – this is an 
extraordinary film, perhaps closer to big Victorian social canvases like Frith's
The Derby Day <http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/frith-the-derby-day-n00615> 
than to Turner's own work. It's a huge tableau that offers an expansive sweep 
but also, in characteristic Leigh style, homes in on the fine details and 
eccentricities of society and character.

Structured as an episodic overview of the last 25 years of Turner's life, the 
film gives us the public man – exuberantly holding court at a Royal Academy 
vernissage – as well as the very private one. The intimate Turner engages with 
the various women in his life, shows filial tenderness for his elderly barber 
father (a very impressive Paul Jesson) and, in one very touching scene, waxes 
tearful as he sings Purcell's Dido's Lament in an off-key strangulated bray. As 
Turner,Timothy Spall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/timothy-spall> is 
magnificent: it's a huge, energetically physical performance, whether he's 
holding forth grandiloquently or issuing a strange guttural hoot that is the 
character's taciturn trademark, something between Chewbacca and a rutting 
turkey cock.

Mr Turner will further fuel the tendency to refer to Mike Leigh's work as 
Dickensian, and justly so – in scope and density it feels like a deconstructed 
Victorian novel, the proverbial loose baggy monster. It's a terrific ensemble 
piece, with a magnificently irate Ruth Sheen among Leigh regulars, and 
less-known names excelling, such as Marion Bailey, as Turner's final consort, 
and Joshua McGuire, priceless as a foppish John Ruskin. The film also features 
some succulent period language, such as the imprecation: "Brook your ire, sir!" 
The film is so well liked here that someone could do a roaring trade in 
T-shirts: MR TURNER SAYS: BROOK YOUR IRE.
 Timbuktu: 'clearly a frontrunner for the Palme d'Or'. 
Early days yet but Mr Turner is clearly a frontrunner for the Palme d'Or. So is
Timbuktu 
<http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/archives/ficheFilm/id/100009821/year/2014.html>
, by Mauritanian-bornAbderrahmane Sissako <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0803066/>
. This year looks set to be a very current affairs Cannes, with major 
documentaries in the programme about events in Libya and Ukraine.Timbuktu may 
be fictional but it couldn't be more real and urgent: it dramatises the effects 
of Islamisation in Mali, with ordinary people's lives being fundamentally 
transformed by squads of "police Islamique" surveying every aspect of their 
conduct. The changes introduced start with the seemingly trivial (men forced to 
wear socks), and even afford some comic moments: boys banned from playing 
football instead play matches with an imaginary ball. But this humour only 
offsets the extremity: a couple buried up to the necks and stoned; a woman 
lashed for singing but continuing to chant even while she takes the strokes. 
It's a mightily defiant film, all the more powerful because Sissako isn't 
issuing a tract: he uses grace, lyricism, visual imagination and sweetly dark 
irony to get his message across. It's a very authoritative statement.

Also in competition is the latest from Canadian auteur Atom Egoyan, The Captive
 
<http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/archives/ficheFilm/id/100001748/year/2014.html>
. Expect this film to put some backs up (it took some boos at the press 
screening) because Egoyan has made a teasing and playful puzzler out of 
something horrifying: a case of child abduction and imprisonment with grim 
echoes of theFritzl case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2008/apr/28/austria.internationalcrime>
. Round this ghastly core, Egoyan spins a fragmented detective drama, in which 
Rosario Dawson plays a paedophile-busting cop, and Ryan Reynolds is the father 
of the missing girl. It could be accused of trivialising the unthinkable, but 
this genre thriller with an arthouse twist is Egoyan's strongest in a while.
 Party Girl: 'a daring and fascinating existential project'. 
There's another tricksy crime offering in The Blue Room 
<http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/archives/ficheFilm/id/100005442/year/2014.html>
, from actor-directorMathieu Amalric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/17/cannes-mathieu-amalric-tournee>. 
Cannes just isn't Cannes unless you've seen one – or five – films starring the 
hardest-working man in French cinema. This year Amalric is wearing his 
director's hat, as well as his usual characteristic look of a bewildered veal 
calf, as the lead in his own thriller. Based on a Georges Simenon story,The 
Blue Room is a twist on classic French crime material, a tale of small-town 
infidelity, guilt and death – although we don't find out until an hour in 
exactly what the case is that Amalric's small-town adulterer is implicated in. 
Brilliantly conceived as a narrative Rubik's Cube, this arty and erotic 
modernist thriller is utterly seductive – and, you can bet, the most French 
film we'll see here this year.

In the opening films of festival sidebar sections, programmers seem to be 
doing their best to offset last year's complaints that there weren't enough 
women directors in the programme.Directors' Fortnight 
<http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/article/58102.html> opened with Girlhood <> (
Bande de Filles), by up-and-coming auteur Céline Sciamma, a specialist in the 
sexual and social travails of young Frenchwomen. This one is about an African 
teenager who joins a band of tough-as-nails jeunes filles: there are some 
brutal girl-on-girl rumbles but the gang also goes in for more innocent 
pleasures like dressing up in shoplifted frocks and lip-syncing to Rihanna. The 
film's a little flat dramatically but the young non-professional cast are 
electric: keep an eye on its charismatic lead, Karidja Touré.

And the official Un Certain Regard 
<http://www.festival-cannes.fr/en/archives/2013/unCertainRegard.html> sidebar 
kicked off withParty Girl 
<http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/archives/ficheFilm/id/100001880/year/2014.html>
, directed by three unknowns, two of them women – Marie Amachoukeli, Claire 
Burger and Samuel Theis. This exercise in bustling, docu-style realism is about 
Angélique Litzenburger, a 60-year-old club hostess who decides to build bridges 
with her family and to give marriage a whirl – only to find that the lure of 
late nights, sullen single men and overpriced ersatz champagne is hard to 
resist. Viewed in isolation,Party Girl seems a routine piece of French lowlife 
realism in the Abdellatif Kechiche vein, with some lively screen presences but 
little new to reveal. Then you realise that Litzenburger is playing herself, 
that she's the mother of co-director Theis, and that Angélique's family members 
are also playing themselves – at which point the film takes on the colours of a 
daring and fascinating existential project, or therapeutic exercise.

It'll be a lively fest for Brit-spotters: apart from Leigh and Ken Loach in 
competition, there's a comeback film in store from John Boorman, and offerings 
from Matthew Warchus and editor turned director Andrew Hulme. Directors' 
Fortnight has already unveiledCatch Me Daddy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/16/cannes-2014-catch-me-daddy-review>
 by newcomer Daniel Wolfe. It's another ripped-from-today's-headlines story: in 
Yorkshire a young Muslim girl (Sameena Ahmed) goes on the run and is pursued by 
her brother and his posse. It's clear that an honour killing is in the offing, 
and that's the nitty-gritty that the film moves towards in its troubling 
finale. It's a slightly bumpy ride getting there, shifting gears between 
pursuit thriller, hard-times realism and lyrical film poem à la Lynne Ramsay. 
But it's an intriguingly intense debut.

No-show of the week


Alas, poor Grace – rarely was such an insipid film so controversial, though 
not among the critics, who have been pretty much in agreement about its 
awfulness. The real row was between the film's US distributorHarvey Weinstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harvey-weinstein> and director Olivier Dahan 
over the cut. It was Dahan's cut that screened here, and good luck to Mr W if 
he thinks he knows how to improve it. Weinstein didn't show up for the opening 
night, instead sending a communiqué explaining that he was detained visiting a 
Syrian refugee camp, with writer Neil Gaiman, of all people. This must be one 
of the best festival no-show excuses ever. Last year Ryan Gosling didn't make 
it here forOnly God Forgives because he was busy directing this year's Cannes 
entryLost River. And Jean-Luc Godard, a few years ago, sent a scrawled fax to 
say that he was detained in Venice by "problems of a Greek nature" (which 
everyone took to mean a crash in his personal economy).

But for sheer insouciant absenteeism, you can't beat Gérard Depardieu, who 
failed to turn up at the Venice Film festival to launchPotiche, his 2010 
reunion with Catherine Deneuve. The reason? A more pressing engagement at 
another festival in Armenia.

Tanks for the testosterone


The stars of action pic The Expendables 3 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5bPJrbzjLls> – among them Arnold 
Schwarzenegger, Mel Gibson, Sylvester Stallone, Harrison Ford and Antonio 
Banderas – are expected to proceed down the Croisette today in two Soviet-era 
tanks. Precautions, it seems, have been taken; the treads have been replaced 
with rubber tyres so as not to mince up the pavement, and the gun turrets 
removed. The assembled hard men might have a tough task; they'll be lucky if 
they can actually get anywhere along the Croisette on a Sunday, when the 
streets are filled with locals walking microscopic lapdogs on super-long leads.

My lips are sealed, but…

In addition to elbowing his way into screenings, yours truly is serving on the 
jury for theCritics' Week Grand Prix <http://www.semainedelacritique.com>. The 
president is Andrea Arnold, who made her own Cannes debut in that section in 
1998 with her shortMilk, before graduating to the red carpet with 2006's Red 
Road. Jurist's omertà forbids me from telling you about the films, which in any 
case we haven't seen: but the themes include sexually conflicted Italian teens, 
American kids suffering strange visions, and a Danish woman with paranormal 
body hair issues. It'll be a bracing week.
 