
Rumour has it that the jurors at this year's Cannes film festival occasionally 
bypass the official screenings, preferring instead to watch the films from the 
luxury ofSteven Spielberg <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/stevenspielberg>'s 
yacht, with its infinity pool and state-of-the-art cinema. Obviously, there is 
no way of knowing if such gossip has any bearing on reality (not really mixing 
in those circles and all), but I do relish the image of the millionaire judges 
– Spielberg,Ang Lee <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/anglee>, Nicole Kidman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/nicolekidman> et al – vaguely squinting at the 
screen while the champagne and cigars are passed around. It sounds like 
something out ofLa Grande Bellezza 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154524/great-beauty>.

What they are thinking is anyone's guess. By this stage last year, the 
consensus had it thatMichael Haneke 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/michael-haneke>'s Amour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147440/amour> was the runaway favourite. 
This year we appear to be deep in William Goldman country. Nobody knows 
anything.

Judged purely on the basis of critical response, the current favourites are 
the Coens <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/coenbrothers>' Inside Llewyn Davis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154516/inside-llewyn-davis>, Ashgar 
Farhadi <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/asghar-farhadi>'s The Past 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154520> and Paolo Sorrentino's La Grande 
Bellezza, although Abdellatif Kechiche'sBlue is the Warmest Colour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/cannes-2013-blue-warmest-colour-review>
 – a three-hour coming-of-age lesbian love story – is exciting rave reviews and 
may yet crash the party.

Yet the sad fact is that jurors and journalists do not always walk in 
lockstep. There are whispers that Spielberg – who holds the reins as jury 
president – may well plump for something sweeter and slighter, such as Hirokazu 
Kore-eda's pleasant yet insubstantialLike Father, Like Son 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154521/like-father-like-son>.

Chances are he will look fondly on Nebraska 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155224/nebraska> as well. Alexander Payne 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/alexander-payne>'s monochrome road movie 
amounts to a catchy, maudlin ballad of the American Depression, eased along by 
an over-insistent score and yet anchored by a robust performance from Bruce 
Dern as Woody Grant, an ornery old alcoholic who thinks he's won a fortune.

En route to cash his ticket, Grant and his son fetch up in their former 
hometown of Hawthorne, Nebraska. And it is here that Payne sketches a portrait 
of small-town America that would have Norman Rockwell weeping onto his easel. 
Paint peels off the house fronts, home-loan hoardings hang over Main Street, 
and the family farmstead is standing empty. "It's just a bunch of old wood and 
some weeds," shrugs Woody. The film's a little soft at the centre – and perhaps 
a shade too indebted toAbout Schmidt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/93264/about.schmidt>, in which Payne 
directedJack Nicholson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/jacknicholson> in a 
similar vein – but it makes for a lovely, languid outing all the same. I can't 
believe it will hit the jackpot but I'm awfully glad it was given a slot.

Outside the Palais, a herd of delegates are dragging their cases towards the 
coach. "Terminal one!" the driver is shouting. No luxury yacht for the likes of 
them. They are being packed in like sardines and trundled back to dirty reality.
 