
6.01pm BST 

The phoney war phase of Cannes is nearing its end: the festival is gearing up 
for the opening ceremony and the gala premiere of Gatsby. Below is a fairy 
recent pic of the bow-tied and evening-frocked great and good massing on the 
red carpet, and you don't have to be Sherlock Holmes to notice one salient 
fact: it's raining. So, from everyone not on the Cote d'Azur: ha ha ha ha ha ha 
ha!

And with that, we'll knock the first day's live blog on the head: look out 
later on for the ever popular galleries from the red carpet, as well as 
Charlotte Higgins' report from the Gatsby press conference. Tomorrow you'll be 
in the capable hands of Adam Boult, so please join him then as the team look 
overThe Bling Ring <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154498/bling-ring>, 
Jeune et Jolie <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155219/jeune-et-jolie> and 
Heli <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155250/heli>.
 Photograph: Vittorio Zunino Celotto/Getty Images 
4.32pm BST 

Quick as a flash, Xan Brooks steps in front of the camera and tells us what he 
thinks of Gatsby 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2013/may/15/the-great-gatsby-video-review>
. AfterPeter Bradshaw's denunciation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/14/great-gatsby-review-cannes> 
yesterday, Baz Luhrmann willnot be happy with us.

4.00pm BST 

And, like the London bus, here comes another photocall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/gallery/2013/may/15/cannes-2013-jury-kidman-spielberg-pictures>
, almost immediately. It's the jury this time, led by the donnish Steven 
Spielberg and ballasted by camera-magnet Nicole Kidman. Has no one ever pointed 
out how tall she is?
 Photograph: Ian Langsdon/EPA 
3.10pm BST 

The Cannes photocall is a time honoured tradition, whereby bigshot film types 
stand awkwardly in front of capering, starstruck photographers.Here's the first 
example from this year's Cannes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/gallery/2013/may/15/great-gatsby-cannes-2013>.
 Photograph: Andreas Rentz/Getty Images 
Updated at 3.11pm BST

1.53pm BST 

Random Twitpic, from Indiewire's Eric Kohn, inside the jury press conference, 
clearly.
erickohn (@erickohn) 
Spielberg strikes a giddy pose. #cannes <https://twitter.com/search/%23cannes> 
twitter.com/erickohn/statu… <http://t.co/55rFnuN0jd>
 <https://twitter.com/erickohn/status/334647845808398337> May 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/erickohn/status/334647845808398337> 
12.06pm BST 

Things are really happening now. We've just received the video of our critics 
in Cannes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2013/may/15/cannes-2013-preview-video>, 
Catherine Shoard and Peter Bradshaw, looking over the line-up while reclining 
lazily on the beach. Xan, as you will have noticed from his piece just now, was 
unavoidably detained elsewhere.

Updated at 3.46pm BST

11.27am BST 

BREAKING NEWS! Xan Brooks has filed his first Cannes diary!

Read the sad story of how long he had to wait to get a four-minute interview 
with Leonardo DiCaprio. This, my friends, is what it's really like to be a film 
journalist: the sweaty people carrier, the surly heavies, the interminable 
sitting around....It's all here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/15/cannes-2013-great-gatsby-leonardo-dicaprio>
.

11.21am BST 

In stark contrast, here's a fabulous little trailer for Behind the Candelabra 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/cannes-2013>, Steven Soderbergh's 
too-gay-for-Hollywood biopic of Liberace. You will not regret pressing play.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F14%2Fbehind-the-candelabra-trailer-video-steven-soderbergh&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20the%20Candelabra%3A%20watch%20a%20world%20exclusive%20trailer%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F14%2Fbehind-the-candelabra-trailer-video-steven-soderbergh>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20the%20Candelabra%3A%20watch%20a%20world%20exclusive%20trailer%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F14%2Fbehind-the-candelabra-trailer-video-steven-soderbergh&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F14%2Fbehind-the-candelabra-trailer-video-steven-soderbergh&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20the%20Candelabra%3A%20watch%20a%20world%20exclusive%20trailer%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F14%2Fbehind-the-candelabra-trailer-video-steven-soderbergh>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20the%20Candelabra%3A%20watch%20a%20world%20exclusive%20trailer%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F14%2Fbehind-the-candelabra-trailer-video-steven-soderbergh&media=>
close 
10.57am BST 
 ‘I grew to love him’ … Lanzmann, left, with Benjamin Murmelstein in 1975, in 
a still from The Last of the Unjust 
Right, time for some serious reading. Agnes Poirier went to meet Claude 
Lanzmann, the 88-year-old director of Holocaust documentary Shoah, who has a 
new film,Last of the Unjust 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155229/last-of-the-unjust>, which is 
screening out of competition. It's the sobering story of Benjamin Murmelstein, 
the last president of the Jewish Council in Theresienstadt ghetto, the 
concentration camp in the city of Terezín.Read the full interview here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/14/claude-lanzmann-last-unjust>.

10.32am BST 

Well, hello there. The red carpets are being unrolled, the paparazzi are 
installing their stepladders, the dressmakers are rushing their schmutters to 
the airport – the Cannes film festival is finally upon us. We'll be 
liveblogging every day of the 12-day jamboree, bringing you news and reviews 
from the Cote d'Azur literally as they happen. It cannot get any more exciting, 
I tell you.

So, tonight is the big one, the premiere of Baz Luhrmann's adaptation of The 
Great Gatsby, F Scott Fitzgerald's masterpiece of jazz age disillusion. It's 
bound to be a star-stuffed affair, what with that top-notch cast and it being 
the Cannes opening gala and all. Rest assured we'll be posting galleries of all 
the action later on.

The only slight dampener is that the cat is out of the bag somewhat: the film 
was released in the US last weekend, which means the usual respectful embargos 
have disintegrated. (Read a bit about the toings and froings here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/14/great-gatsby-reviews-embargo>.)

Our critic Peter Bradshaw wasn't especially impressed, if we're being honest. 
Here's a sample:

Having watched this fantastically unthinking and heavy-handed adaptation, the 
opening gala of this year's Cannes festival, I feel the only way to make it 
less subtle would be to let Michael Bay direct it. As it is, the task has 
fallen toBaz Luhrmann <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/baz-luhrmann>, the 
director ofMoulin Rouge! 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/87690/moulin.rouge> and Australia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125809/australia>, a man who can't see a 
nuance without calling security for it to be thrown off his set.

You can read his full review here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/14/great-gatsby-review-cannes>.

Other stuff to look forward to later on: Peter's review of the second 
competition film, Mexican dramaHeli 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155250/heli> – about which remarkably 
little is known at this stage. We'll also have a gallery of the jury photocall, 
which includes Steven Spielberg, Nicole Kidman and Ang Lee among its number, 
and Charlotte Higgins' report from the Great Gatsby press conference. And of 
course, the first of Xan Brooks' legendary daily diaries.
 