
Jennifer Capriati's defence of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title gathered pace 
yesterday as she moved through to the quarter-finals with a 6-3, 7-6 win over 
the unseeded Italian Rita Grande.

It was hardly the smoothest of progress, though. A wily opponent and a 
below-par Capriati ensured that the world No1 at least had to give the crowd 
value for money in an enthralling second-set tie-break which saw the American 
come close to proving Marcelo Rios wrong when he said that the early rounds of 
grand-slam tournaments are too easy for the top women.

Capriati, like almost everyone else in this event, is nursing an injury. With 
her thighs heavily strapped to protect a painful hip, she laboured when made to 
run by Grande's intelligent blend of chipping and slicing, and was almost 
pushed into a third set.

If Capriati is not quite shooting from the hip, she was stronger from the lip. 
After seeing off Grande she levelled her sights on Rios, dismissing his 
comments about the women's game with a mixture of disbelief and venom.

"I think we all know what the truth is and that's just a ridiculous comment," 
she snapped. "What can you say? Stupidity really deserves no answer."

In Rios's defence the facts and figures back up his argument. Wayne Ferreira 
and Albert Costa played more games in yesterday fourth-round match than Martina 
Hingis has in eight days. In a tournament that prides itself on paying equal 
prize money, that smacks of unfairness and Rios believes he is not the only one 
who thinks so.

"I just said what I thought about it and in the locker-room everyone agrees," 
he said. "It is ridiculous what is going on in women's tennis. Everybody is 
winning 6-0, 6-1. I'm not going to start arguing with every girl who says it's 
not true."

If Rios has made no friends with the WTA, it does not seem to bother him 
unduly but he would be well advised to avoid meeting Capriati and her 
colleagues for a bit.

Am√©lie Mauresmo, the runner-up in 1999 who now meets Capriati in the 
quarter-finals, came close to missing the appointment before squeezing out a 
6-0, 4-6, 7-5 win over the unseeded German Marlene Weingartner.

Weingartner was hopeless in the first set and Mauresmo took full advantage but 
she came unstuck in the second, when the German dug her heels in.

The Frenchwoman, a break down at the start of the third set, was forced to 
wait for Weingartner to realise that she was on the brink of a famous win. When 
the penny dropped, Mauresmo struck but it was not the sort of performance to 
fill her with confidence.

"I had a very good start and then maybe I wanted to do too much," Mauresmo 
said later. "I started to make a few mistakes and then . . . she started to hit 
everything and go for it."

If neither Mauresmo nor Capriati looked wholly convincing, the Belgian 
contingent were in striking contrast - relaxed and untroubled once more to find 
themselves in the later stages of a grand- slam event.

Justine Henin and Kim Clijsters ensured that their nervy, intriguing rivalry 
will take on a new twist by setting up an all-Belgian quarter-final. Both were 
in devastating form, with Henin dismantling Elena Dementieva 6-0, 6-3 and 
Clijsters equally ruthless in dispatching Janette Husarova 6-0, 6-2. The last 
time the pair met in a grand-slam event, last year's French Open semi- finals, 
Henin choked at a set and 4-2 up in the second and Clijsters won. Henin has 
been busy living it down ever since.

If she gets into that position again and provided Clijsters and her adopted 
Australian cheer squad will let her, all eyes will be on Henin and her nerves 
of rubber. Given that between them they have dropped only one set, Rios might 
just be watching, too.
 