
Superhero epic Captain America: Civil War is on course to post the biggest 
opening of 2016 at the key US box office next month,according to experts 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/captain-america-civil-war-tracking-884792>
.

Tracking for the Marvel film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-civil-war>, which will see 
Chris Evans’ Captain America and Robert Downey Jr’s Iron Man emerge on 
different sides of a high-stakes battle, suggests it will take between $175m 
(£122m) and $200m on debut. The higher figure would place the Russo brothers’ 
movie in North America’s top four openings of all time, behind onlyStar Wars: 
The Force Awakens <https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> 
($248m),Jurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/23/jurassic-world-past-the-avengers-number-3-all-time-box-office-list>
 ($208.8m) andAvengers: Age of Ultron  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/04/avengers-age-of-ultron-scores-second-biggest-opening-ever-at-us-box-office>
($207.4m).

Five things we learned from Marvel's final Captain America: Civil War trailer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/final-trailer-marvel-captain-america-civil-war-five-things-we-learned>
Captain America: Civil War has been buoyed by strong reviews, with a 94% 
“fresh” rating on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/captain_america_civil_war/> suggesting it 
could be the best-received Marvel film since 2008 series opener Iron Man. Hype 
has also been generated by arecent trailer showing the debut of Tom Holland’s 
Spider-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/final-trailer-marvel-captain-america-civil-war-five-things-we-learned>
 in the Disney-owned studio’s popular superhero cinematic universe.

Captain America: Civil War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-civil-war> debuts in US 
cinemas on 6 May. UK filmgoers will be able to view the film a week earlier, 
from 29 April.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcaptain-america-civil-war-trailer-for-new-marvel-film-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Captain%20America%3A%20Civil%20War%3A%20trailer%20for%20new%20Marvel%20film%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcaptain-america-civil-war-trailer-for-new-marvel-film-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Captain%20America%3A%20Civil%20War%3A%20trailer%20for%20new%20Marvel%20film%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcaptain-america-civil-war-trailer-for-new-marvel-film-video&media=>
In other Marvel news, Avengers: Age of Ultron director Joss Whedon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/18/joss-whedon-avengers-age-of-ultron>
 has expressed regret about comments made about the film and his relationship 
with the studio last year. Speaking at the Tribeca film festival, in an 
on-stage appearance with Avengers star Mark Ruffalo, Whedon said he was proud 
of his 2015 movie.

“There were things that did not meet my expectations of myself and then I was 
so beaten down by the process,” said Whedon,in comments first reported by 
Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/04/joss-whedon-sorry-for-age-of-ultron-comments-mark-ruffalo-tribeca-film-festival-1201739640/>
. “Some of that was conflicting with Marvel, which is inevitable and a lot of 
that was about my own work and I was also exhausted, and we right away went and 
did publicity.

“I created the narrative – wherein I’m not quite accomplished at – and people 
just ran with: ‘Well it’s OK, it could be better, but it’s not Joss’s fault’. 
And I think that did a disservice to the movie, and to the studio and to 
myself. Ultimately, it wasn’t the right way to be because I’m very proud about 
it.”

Added Whedon: “The things about it that are wrong frustrate me enormously, but 
I got to make an absurdly personal movie about humanity and what it means in 
very esoteric and bizarre ways for hundreds of millions of dollars. The fact 
thatMarvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> gave me that 
opportunity twice is so bonkers and beautiful and the fact that I come off as a 
miserable failure is also bonkers, but not in a cute way.”

The Buffy the Vampire Slayer creator, who also oversaw Avengers Assemble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/20/avengers-assemble-review>, told 
Deadline that he might be interested in returning for future Marvel films.
 