
The remote Caribbean island of Redonda, part of Antigua and Barbuda, is home 
to numerous species of plants and animals found nowhere else on earth. It is 
also home to invasive black rats and non-native goats that are wiping out the 
island’s native, rare wildlife, conservationists say.

To help the island’s flora and fauna, the Government of Antigua and Barbuda is 
now initiating a plan to remove all goats and rats from the island. The Redonda 
Restoration Program program has been formed by the Antigua & Barbuda Government 
and the Environmental Awareness Group (EAG) in collaboration with organizations 
like Fauna & Flora International, British Mountaineering Council, Island
Conservation <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> and 
Wildlife Management International Ltd.

“This work will dramatically transform an entire island ecosystem,” Sophia 
Steele of Fauna & Flora International told Mongabay. “It will save a number of 
rare endemic species from otherwise almost certain extinction, such as the 
Critically Endangered Redonda tree lizard, which currently finds itself living 
on an island almost devoid of trees.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fcaribbean-island-launches-plan-to-remove-invasive-rats-and-goats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe13341d5c8040c62294105488546b97868ea167f%2F0_1628_4028_4386%2F4028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caribbean%20island%20launches%20plan%20to%20remove%20invasive%20rats%20and%20goats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fcaribbean-island-launches-plan-to-remove-invasive-rats-and-goats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caribbean%20island%20launches%20plan%20to%20remove%20invasive%20rats%20and%20goats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fcaribbean-island-launches-plan-to-remove-invasive-rats-and-goats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe13341d5c8040c62294105488546b97868ea167f%2F0_1628_4028_4386%2F4028.jpg>
 Rat eradication work is due to be completed by June 2017, with an additional 
two years of monitoring. Photograph: John Cancalosi/Alamy 
The island currently has a population of over 5,000 invasive black rats that 
prey on the island’s native species. The rugged island is also home to around 
60 long-horned goats that humans brought to Redonda more than a century ago. 
The rats and goats are believed to have been introduced into the island by a 
guano mining community, which was disbanded after World War I.

Both species have drastically transforming the island’s landscape, 
conservationists say, changing the “once-forested” Redonda island into a 
“moonscape”.

In fact, the island has such few trees that even the goats are starving. Goat 
skeletons lie littered across the island, according to the statement. There are 
very few standing trees left on the island to stabilize the ground, 
conservationists say, “causing soil and rocks to crumble into the sea, 
threatening nearshore coral reef in the waters below.”

The Redonda Restoration Program aims to capture and move all long-horned goats 
to Antigua, where the Department of Agriculture will care for them.

“This will take around two months depending on how cooperative the goats are,” 
Steele told Mongabay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fcaribbean-island-launches-plan-to-remove-invasive-rats-and-goats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F240b9adfaa6b61e18c1cdb7de025f275144ac0bb%2F0_0_1356_770%2F1356.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caribbean%20island%20launches%20plan%20to%20remove%20invasive%20rats%20and%20goats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fcaribbean-island-launches-plan-to-remove-invasive-rats-and-goats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caribbean%20island%20launches%20plan%20to%20remove%20invasive%20rats%20and%20goats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fcaribbean-island-launches-plan-to-remove-invasive-rats-and-goats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F240b9adfaa6b61e18c1cdb7de025f275144ac0bb%2F0_0_1356_770%2F1356.jpg>
 So few plants survive that even the goats are beginning to starve to death. 
Photograph: Jenny Daltry/Fauna & Flora International 
Astley Joseph, Deputy Director of the Department of Agriculture, added: “We 
believe it is important to rescue this rare breed because it could have useful 
drought-adapted genes that would benefit other herds on Antigua and elsewhere.”

After the goats are relocated, the Program will initiate the eradication of 
rats using a rodenticide bait, which will take an estimated 8 to 12 weeks. 
Rodenticide baits have been previously used to eradicate rats on more than 20 
other Caribbean islands, conservationists say, without harming native wildlife.

“We aim to complete the rat eradication work by June 2017, but an additional 
two years of monitoring will then be carried out before we can confidently 
declare the island to be rat-free,” she added.

Changes to Redonda’s flora and fauna will be visible within the first year, 
Jenny Daltry of Fauna & Flora International told Mongabay. Removal of rats and 
goats, for example, will allow plants to grow, she added. Similarly, with rats 
gone, seabirds, reptiles and other invertebrates can flourish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fcaribbean-island-launches-plan-to-remove-invasive-rats-and-goats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905cc0bb911e969362e52e0b21d4d7b281f7057e%2F0_547_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caribbean%20island%20launches%20plan%20to%20remove%20invasive%20rats%20and%20goats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fcaribbean-island-launches-plan-to-remove-invasive-rats-and-goats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caribbean%20island%20launches%20plan%20to%20remove%20invasive%20rats%20and%20goats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fcaribbean-island-launches-plan-to-remove-invasive-rats-and-goats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905cc0bb911e969362e52e0b21d4d7b281f7057e%2F0_547_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Redonda ground dragon (Ameiva atrata), an endemic species that is found only 
on Redonda Island. Photograph: Jenny Daltry/Fauna & Flora International 
“On other islands we have restored, lizard populations have doubled within two 
years,” Daltry said. “Within five years, the seabird colonies will have almost 
doubled in size, and additional seabirds and land birds will recolonize Redonda 
from neighboring islands. After about 15 years, native trees will have matured 
to re-create woodland in sheltered areas where there are still pockets of soil, 
land birds and butterflies will be returning, and the island will be alive with 
wildlife. Birds and bats will continue to assist the reforestation process by 
bringing nutrients and seeds from neighbouring islands. By this stage we can 
also consider reintroducing species that could not easily colonise the island 
unaided, such as iguanas, burrowing owls and certain tree species.”

However, the island is remote, rocky and hazardous, with seriously unstable 
slopes and tall cliffs, Daltry said. And this makes restoration work risky. 
Moreover, the program is in urgent need of funding to complete this work, she 
added.
 