
A 30-million-year-old petrified tree trunk is bolted to a vertical steel I-beam
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I-beam>. It’s a brown thing climbing another 
brown thing, standing on the wooden floor atDavid Zwirner gallery in Mayfair 
<http://www.davidzwirner.com/exhibitions-2/?l=uk>. Nearby, a white steel tube 
does a loop the loop. This is called Noodle. My eye sucks it up like spaghetti.

Carol Bove <http://www.davidzwirner.com/artists/carol-bove/survey/> calls 
these immaculate white sculptures Glyphs, and they look a bit like a child’s 
first rounded attempts at joined-up writing, redone in fetish-finish fabricated 
steel. Their easy-on-the-eye abstraction also recalls the kind of upbeat art 
that gets plopped down in public squares and corporate plazas, as much a logo 
for art as art itself. They have all the meaning of an uncoiled spring, and 
could almost go anywhere. Bove is aware of this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcarol-bove-sculpture-carlo-scarpa-review-london-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429619486793%2Fb99af1c3-1f0f-430f-884a-0691698c71cf-1943x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carol%20Bove's%20seductive%20sculptures%20force%20us%20to%20confront%20our%20inner%20animal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcarol-bove-sculpture-carlo-scarpa-review-london-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carol%20Bove%27s%20seductive%20sculptures%20force%20us%20to%20confront%20our%20inner%20animal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcarol-bove-sculpture-carlo-scarpa-review-london-leeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429619486793%2Fb99af1c3-1f0f-430f-884a-0691698c71cf-1943x2040.jpeg>
 Circles, 2015, by Carol Bove. Photograph: EPW Studio/Courtesy David Zwirner, 
New York/London 
The American artist currently has two shows in the UK. The other, at the Henry 
Moore Institute in Leeds 
<http://www.henry-moore.org/hmi/exhibitions/carol-bove-carlo-scarpa>, pairs 
Bove with the Venetian modernist architect, designer and artistCarlo Scarpa 
<http://architect.architecture.sk/carlo-scarpa-architect/carlo-scarpa-architect.php>
 (1906-78). Juxtaposing Scarpa’s artworks and utilitarian design objects with 
her own art, and incorporating his work with hers, Bove both honours a 
predecessor and takes him on a journey. Bove’s is an art of constant returns 
and repetitions. Going from room to room, and gallery to gallery, I’m stricken 
by a growing sense of déjà vu. There’s another Glyph, and a second totemic 
tree-trunk and I-beam looming in Leeds.

One large concrete sculpture stands on the downstairs floor at Zwirner, while 
a different version hangs around in the Henry Moore Institute’s lobby, as 
though waiting to be let in. Each of them could easily take centre stage and 
fill a room on its own. Instead, Bove places them in such a way that downplays 
their monumentality, until we get up close. Both sculptures consist of two boxy 
concrete cuboids, one atop the other. The upper concrete section breaks up into 
smaller blocks, steps and elevations, like some kind of fantasy architecture 
hewn from a mountain. Walking round them, we’re surprised by groups of little 
bolted-together open brass cubes or cells, climbing around the concrete ledges. 
They seem to proliferate as we look.

She seems to be saying, I can be one kind of artist today, tomorrow another

Bove’s London show is like a group exhibition by a single artist. Rather than 
having a signature style, the different things she makes could be the products 
of quite dissimilar yet parallel artistic careers. She seems to be saying I can 
be one kind of artist today, tomorrow another. I can divide a room with a 
chain-link curtain that grids the view of whatever you see through it – the 
white gallery wall, other people, other artworks – or I can incorporate another 
artist’s work into my own arrangements.

Bove doesn’t seem to be method-acting different identities. Her works share an 
interest in sculptural syntax: this against this, that against that, the 
natural and organic alongside the made, borrowed things conjoined with her own. 
Her primary focus, as well as an abiding feel for form and placement, seems to 
be display: how things are presented to us, as offerings, gifts, rituals of 
animal attraction. Looking at art, we often forget that we are animals too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcarol-bove-sculpture-carlo-scarpa-review-london-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429624148956%2F2c53e5f5-3813-485d-bcfd-a33db5c47725-2060x2055.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carol%20Bove's%20seductive%20sculptures%20force%20us%20to%20confront%20our%20inner%20animal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcarol-bove-sculpture-carlo-scarpa-review-london-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carol%20Bove%27s%20seductive%20sculptures%20force%20us%20to%20confront%20our%20inner%20animal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcarol-bove-sculpture-carlo-scarpa-review-london-leeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429624148956%2F2c53e5f5-3813-485d-bcfd-a33db5c47725-2060x2055.jpeg>
 Carol Bove’s Self Talk (2015). Photograph: Delfanne/Courtesy David Zwirner, 
New York/London 
“Her sculpture requires no prior knowledge,” writes Andrea Phillips in one of 
the essays in the catalogue accompanying Bove’s show with Scarpa. But there is 
always prior knowledge, if only the mental baggage we carry with us. Bove’s 
subtle and arresting confrontations between different sorts of sculpture and 
objects become part of an ongoing conversation – we forget where it began, and 
who knows where it will end.

On a polished brass pedestal, topped by a small concrete slab, like a cushion 
on a stool, stands a welded armature. A delicate peacock feather, a little 
sea-shell, and some stuff I can’t identify sprout from the angled branches. You 
could imagine a fabulous jewel or swanky watch there, presented in some 
terrifyingly upmarket window display. Similar sculptures and plinths – one 
presenting a frangible lump of pale coral on a wooden block – are set among a 
number of Scarpa’s design artefacts in Leeds: an elegant 1950s painter’s easel, 
and a pair of his empty glass, metal and wood display vitrines,made for the 
Museum of Castelvecchio in Verona 
<http://www.veronissima.com/sito_inglese/html/tour-museums-castelvecchio-scarpa.html>
. Bringing her work together with Scarpa’s encourages us to walk, turn, gaze at 
one thing through another, and catch our own reflections. We constantly have to 
recalibrate our ways of looking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcarol-bove-sculpture-carlo-scarpa-review-london-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429619632531%2F8d2e9fca-5c58-4814-b05e-f020b75dd808-2060x1977.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carol%20Bove's%20seductive%20sculptures%20force%20us%20to%20confront%20our%20inner%20animal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcarol-bove-sculpture-carlo-scarpa-review-london-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carol%20Bove%27s%20seductive%20sculptures%20force%20us%20to%20confront%20our%20inner%20animal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcarol-bove-sculpture-carlo-scarpa-review-london-leeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429619632531%2F8d2e9fca-5c58-4814-b05e-f020b75dd808-2060x1977.jpeg>
 Carol Bove’s Coral Sculpture (2008), in the foreground, and Heraclitus (2014). 
Photograph: Private Collection, courtesy of Marc Jancou Contemporary, New 
York/Henry Moore Institute 
Scarpa’s Asta, a 6m-long steel and bronze rod on which a burnished copper 
ovoid sits high above our heads, is clamped to a gigantic open steel framework 
by Bove. Is her contribution support, or sculpture in its own right? It can be 
both. Nearby, Scarpa’s 1968 steel and gold leaf sculpture Crescita is presented 
on a plinth designed by the American artist. Crescita is a marvel, a 
multifaceted construction of innumerable small cubes that catch the light as we 
walk around it. Bove isn’t so much appropriating Scarpa as restaging him, just 
as those steel I-beams present the ancient lumps of wood in a novel and 
interesting way. She invites us to look again.

Bove’s is a game of staging and placement. For her, making art and showing it 
are part of the same activity. We get tangled in her complications and seduced 
by the elegance and wit of what she does, her generosity of spirit. Somehow she 
keeps it all in concert, with the space it occupies, with history and taste. 
New art talks to the art that came before it. Sometimes it gets lucky, and 
talks to the future too. Some of it makes money, and some of it loses 
everything and ends up in a pauper’s unmarked grave. Most art doesn’t say much 
and we are the ones that end up doing all the talking, if only in our heads. 
Bove keeps the conversation going.

• Carol Bove: The Plastic Unit is at David Zwirner, London, until 30 May 
<http://www.davidzwirner.com/exhibition/carol-bove-3/>; Carol Bove/Carlo Scarpa 
is at the Henry Moore Institute, Leeds, until 12 July 
<http://www.henry-moore.org/hmi/exhibitions/carol-bove-carlo-scarpa>
 