
After nearly two decades, more than 300,000 incredible images and the 
discovery of no fewer than seven moons, theCassini spacecraft orbiting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/may/08/spacewatch-cassini-celebrate-decade-saturn>
 Saturn is set to begin its gutsy swansong.

Launched just over 19 years ago, the Cassini orbiter – complete with its 
lander Huygens – spent seven years journeying toSaturn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/saturn> in order to explore the planet, 
its rings and its moons.

Among the breathtaking discoveries that ensued, the mission revealed icy plumes
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/22/spacewatch-clark-saturn-moon-enceladus-water-plumes-cassini-flyby>
 bursting forth from the surface of the moon Enceladus, followed a megastorm on 
Saturn, and provided definitive evidence of methane lakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2008/jul/31/titan.saturn.water.nasa> on 
the planet’s largest moon, Titan.

Now, in an operation that will conclude with an event dubbed the “grand 
finale”, the orbiter will begin the final stage of its mission, using the last 
of its fuel in a set of intrepid orbits that will offer scientists the chance 
to probe a host of intriguing conundrums before Cassini finally dives into 
Saturn itself on 15 September, burning up in the process.

“I am a little unsettled by what we are going to try and do as far as the 
science is concerned because neither the instrument nor the spacecraft were 
designed to do this,” said Michele Dougherty, professor of space physics at 
Imperial College London and lead for Cassini’s Magnetometer – a highly 
sensitive instrument used to explore the planet’s magnetic field.

A joint endeavour by Nasa, the European Space Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/european-space-agency> (ESA) and the 
Italian Space Agency, and originally engaged on a four-year study of the Saturn 
system, the Cassini-Huygens mission was extended in 2008 and again in 2010. But 
although the end is nigh, it is hoped Cassini will keep giving, right up to the 
last.


In the first phase of the gambit, starting on Wednesday, Cassini will 
repeatedly brush the edge of the planet’s main ring as it swoops from far above 
the planet’s north pole to far below the south pole, travelling at speeds of 
around 76,000 mph. It will then change course in April to begin the 
grandfinale, orbiting between Saturn and the planet’s innermost ring 22 times, 
before entering on its collision course.

The orbits will give scientists the closest glimpse yet of Saturn’s rings, 
offering the chance to probe their makeup and amount of material they contain – 
features that will help to provide clues as to the age of the ring system and 
how it formed. The orbits will also offer the best view to date of many of the 
planet’s minor moons, such as Atlas and Pandora.

The later stage of the plan will also see Cassini approach closer to Saturn 
than any spacecraft before, offering the chance to investigate the planet’s 
gravitational and magnetic fields.

“We are going to try and understand what is going on in the interior of Saturn 
and we are going to try and work out how long a day on Saturn is – it is a bit 
embarrassing, but we still don’t know,” said Dougherty. “You use the magnetic 
field, which is what my instrument measures, to almost see inside the planet.”

The dramatic end to Cassini is both deliberate and necessary. With the mission 
having revealed that bothEnceladus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/apr/03/ocean-enceladus-alien-life-water-saturn-moon>
 and Titan have conditions that could, potentially, host life, the spacecraft 
will be burnt up to prevent contamination from any microbes that could have 
hitched a ride.


“If you don’t make a proper de-orbiting of Cassini then, because we are 
running out of propellant, there is a risk that it drifts in the system without 
navigation control and there is a chance that it impacts on an icy moon – and 
of course this has to be avoided at all costs,” said Nicolas Altobelli, ESA 
Cassini-Huygens project scientist.

But September’s events, says Dougherty, will be emotional. “It is going to be 
a mixture of sadness and excitement I think,” she said. “We plan to have a big 
party the following night where there will probably be some tears and lots of 
celebration.”
 