
Amazon Prime

The Path

Amazon Prime has picked up this tense Hulu series for UK broadcast. It follows 
Eddie (Aaron Paul), a prominent member of the cultish Meyerist movement based 
in upstate New York. Eddie becomes doubtful about a group he has previously 
followed unquestioningly, much to the concern of his still-devout wife Sarah 
(Michelle Monaghan). Meanwhile, Sarah’s charismatic ex-lover Cal – who also 
happens to be the movement’s eloquent new leader – adds fuel to the fire. 
Paranoia, Orwellian levels of surveillance and relationships cracking under the 
strain make this a compelling, claustrophobic drama.

Available now

Noisey

Blackpool Grime

The YouTube phenomenon that is the Blackpool grime scene gets the in-depth 
Noisey treatment. Here, Tottenham MC Poet travels due north-west until he bumps 
into Afghan Dan, Soph Aspin, Little T and various other luminaries of this 
peculiar micro-genre. The scene, such as it is, seems largely based around 
poisonous beefs, and the one between Aspin and N-word-flaunting 12-year-old 
Little T is decidedly ugly. And yet there’s no denying the punkish energy, 
however offensively it’s expressed. “I just wanna put Blackpool on the map,” 
says Little T. For better or worse, job done little man.

Available now

BBC iPlayer

The Undiscovered Peter Cook
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-path-aaron-paul-peter-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F577f1e8934d9e563f97f35847585ecef78e70b5b%2F0_139_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20The%20Path%20to%20The%20Undiscovered%20Peter%20Cook&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-path-aaron-paul-peter-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20The%20Path%20to%20The%20Undiscovered%20Peter%20Cook&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-path-aaron-paul-peter-cook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F577f1e8934d9e563f97f35847585ecef78e70b5b%2F0_139_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Photograph: BBC 
A wonderful BBC4 film exploring the considerable archive recently opened up by 
Peter Cook’s third wife Lin, shortly before her own death last week. It’s a 
treasure trove for fans, featuring as it does, holiday footage, an unreleased 
interview in which the rakish young comic discusses blasphemy, a few Cook cover 
versions of Elvis songs and, particularly excitingly, an unreleased Derek and 
Clive clip. There’s also some intriguing scuttlebutt about the possibility of 
Cook having had an affair with former Flotus Jackie Kennedy.

Available now

Netflix

White Rabbit Project

More frenetic pop-science (with considerably less emphasis on the science) 
from former Mythbusters Tory Belleci, Kari Byron and Grant Imahara. It’s 
vaguely rooted in scripted reality but, essentially, the trio are just 
gleefully messing around with “the coolest tech, the weirdest weapons and the 
craziest escapes”, having plenty of fun and providing a whole series worth of 
geek catnip into the bargain.

Available from Friday

Podcast

See Something Say Something

It’s a scary moment in US history. So, taking his cue from English crisis 
management techniques, BuzzFeed’s Ahmed Ali Akbar is having a cup of tea. Warm 
beverage in hand, he uses this podcast to discuss his personal experiences with 
other American Muslims. From the pressure of representation to how the 
Pakistani-American superhero Ms Marvel has beguiled masses of teenage girls 
across the globe, this weekly podcast is a witty and timely dissection of 
topics big and small.

Available now
 