
BBC3

Sunny D

Comic Dane Baptiste writes and stars in this new offering from the online 
channel, which kicks off tomorrow. In it, he plays a late-twentysomething 
office worker – also called Dane – who lives at home with his fed-up parents 
and is in constant competition with his twin sister. But when fictive Dane 
makes a rum-fuelled announcement at a family party, he might finally have to 
take some responsibility for his future. Part of the BBC’s Black And British 
season, this is a new sitcom with plenty of 90s and 00s R&B on the soundtrack 
and a strong cast: alongside Baptiste, Akemnji Ndifornyen steals the show in 
episode one as arrogant Christian.

New episodes available every 

Home Truths With Adam Pearson
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-sunny-d-to-startup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4ef1806d4cedf82aa923f3db2f2479ad0c4f1d4%2F0_88_5402_3242%2F5402.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20Sunny%20D%20to%20StartUp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-sunny-d-to-startup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20Sunny%20D%20to%20StartUp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-sunny-d-to-startup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4ef1806d4cedf82aa923f3db2f2479ad0c4f1d4%2F0_88_5402_3242%2F5402.jpg>
 Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
Actor and presenter Adam Pearson (pictured) who has a condition that causes 
non-cancerous tumours to grow on his face – has previously explored disability 
hate crime and the ethics of freak shows on screen. Now he’s back with a 
perception-challenging chat show filmed in his living room. In this first 
episode, Pearson meets Chloe “daughter of Richard and Judy” Madeley to talk 
body image. Will Pearson – bullied from a young age for his disfigurement – 
find common ground with the fitness model?

Available from Monday

BBC iPlayer

Culture Shockers

A collection of programmes on what the BBC calls “alternative lifestyles 
throughout the 20th century” – which is a rather polite way of describing 
skinheads and swingers, among others. Bringing together shows fronted by Louis 
Theroux, Alan Whicker and more, it’s a deep dive into the docs archives that 
highlights eight moments that made tellywatchers gasp.

Available now 

Netflix

Shameless USA

Something of a rare feat for a transatlantic remake, the Chicago-based version 
of Paul Abbott’s Mancunian comedy-drama has a clear identity of its own while 
remaining as surreal and uncompromising as the original. The fifth season 
recently landed on Netflix, with William H Macy’s hopeless patriarch Frank 
giving sobriety a go and son Ian battling a bipolar condition.

Available now 

Amazon Prime

StartUp

Amazon’s latest surprise release is this US corruption thriller starring 
Sherlock’sMartin Freeman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/martin-freeman> 
and Adam Brody of The OC fame. Likely to draw Mr Robot comparisons, it tells 
the story of a Bitcoin-esque currency that falls into the wrong hands, forcing 
a banker, a hacker and a gangster to band together.

New episodes available weekly 

Podcast

Black Star

Celebrating the huge range of cinematic contributions by black actors with 
screenings, events and re-releases, the BFI’s Black Star festival is the 
biggest ever celebration of its kind. Also accompanying the festivities is this 
podcast. So far, episodes have focused on pioneering director Oscar Micheaux, 
star of both screen and music Harry Belafonte, and the first black Oscar-winner 
Hattie McDaniel, with three more to follow.

New episodes available weekly
 