
Netflix

Mascots
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DswTWozTxQ-E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DswTWozTxQ-E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DswTWozTxQ-E&media=>
People taking innately ridiculous things incredibly seriously is a comedy 
staple. And, from heavy metal to dog shows, Christopher Guest has wrung more 
humour out of this trope than most. This new film is set in the world of sports 
mascots and features most of Guest’s perennial revolving cast. The likes of 
Parker Posey, Jane Lynch and Fred Willard (pictured) are now joined on the 
roster by relatively recent newcomers including Tom Bennett and Chris O’Dowd, 
but the dry yet goofy humour remains familiarly enjoyable even if this does 
have a touch of “Guest-by-numbers” about it.

Available now

Amazon Prime

Animal Kingdom

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7tuCQl1FHUM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7tuCQl1FHUM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7tuCQl1FHUM&media=>
Catch-up and download: from Ripper Street to Haters Back Off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/08/ripper-street-goliath-haters-back-off>
Ellen Barkin stars in this fiery, violent new drama series as the starchily 
sinister matriarch of a southern Californian crime family. When 17-year-old 
relative Joshua (Finn Cole) moves in with the family, he’s initially shielded 
from their safecracking, blowtorch-torturing excesses. But inevitably it’s only 
a matter of time before he sees something he shouldn’t and finds himself 
dragged into a morass of drugs, brutality and general unwholesomeness.

Available now

Vice

High Society
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzZMETFXFE24&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzZMETFXFE24>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzZMETFXFE24&media=>
We Brits love our ecstasy almost as much as we love our booze. But our 
prolific and perpetual taste for intoxication has a downside, which is explored 
in the opening episode of this new Vice webseries. Matt Shea reports from, 
inevitably, east London on the newly unpredictable properties of ecstasy which, 
increasingly, is varying wildly in strength – with dangerous results. Shea also 
meets dealers and users, and finds out how the dark web has revolutionised drug 
dealing and drug policing alike.

Available now

BBC3

American High School

“This ain’t no fairytale high school” says one youngster at the beginning of 
this new documentary series. And a fight involving a knuckleduster quickly 
confirms this to be the case. However, it’s incredibly easy to root for the 
kids from Orangeburg-Wilkinson High. The school in South Carolina, which is 
majority African-American, draws from impoverished catchment areas and at times 
feels like a militarised zone. Yet it also accommodates and nurtures kids as 
likable and varied as absurdly high-achieving Jalena, male cheerleader Vernon 
and beefcake football-player Kordel. And tough-but-tender principal Dr Peters 
is looking like a promising contender for the best TV teacher ever.

Available from Tuesday

Podcast

In The Dark <http://www.apmreports.org/in-the-dark>

In 1989, 11-year-old Jacob Wetterling from St Joseph, Minnesota was abducted 
and murdered. Jacob was taken in front of two of his friends who called the 
police immediately. However, it wasn’t until August 2016 that Danny Heinrich 
admitted his guilt and directed police to Jacob’s remains. Why did capturing 
the killer take 27 years? This meticulously assembled new podcast – which might 
well fill a Serial-shaped hole in your life – examines the failures in policing 
which potentially cost Jacob his life.

Available now
 