
Netflix

Luke Cage

Having made his on-screen debut last year in Jessica Jones, Luke Cage (Mike 
Colter) now gets his own heroic vehicle. Cage is a reluctant superhero with 
super strength and unbreakable skin, but this isn’t your standard street-level 
spinoff: as well as being the first blackMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> character to land his own series, 
the show promises nods to 70s blaxploitation and a soundtrack of hip-hop 
classics.

Available from Friday
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DytkjQvSk2VA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DytkjQvSk2VA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DytkjQvSk2VA&media=>
BBC iPlayer

Oasis In Their Own Words

To coincide with new feature-length Oasis documentary Supersonic (which hits 
cinemas next month), the Beeb has taken the opportunity to make its own 
programme on the Britpoppers. Some might say the chances of the band getting 
back together are slim, but this new film could shed light on just how intense 
the Gallagher mudslinging is at present (admittedly Liam dubbing Noel a 
“potato” on Twitter earlier this year doesn’t bode well).

Available from Friday

Amazon Prime Video

Crisis In Six Scenes
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6KOsQMfEMXM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6KOsQMfEMXM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6KOsQMfEMXM&media=>
Ostensibly, Woody Allen’s small-screen debut is exactly what you might imagine 
Woody Allen’s small-screen debut should be, namely a comedy series in which he 
plays a struggling, neurotic TV writer. However, this new 60s-set tale doesn’t 
focus solely on Allen’s Sidney Muntzinger – there’s also hippy houseguest Lucy 
(Miley Cyrus) – a younger, weed-dealing woman who’s critical of her ageing 
landlord rather than lapping up his knowledge. Could it be more Wrecking Ball 
than Annie Hall?

Available from Friday

All4

Trigger Happy TV
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-luke-cage-to-bigmouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37413689a051166a9ce96325aefee5483f32551f%2F0_1861_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Luke%20Cage%20to%20Bigmouth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-luke-cage-to-bigmouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Luke%20Cage%20to%20Bigmouth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-luke-cage-to-bigmouth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37413689a051166a9ce96325aefee5483f32551f%2F0_1861_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
 Photograph: Channel 4 
Thirteen years on, Dom Joly and his oversized mobile are returning to our 
screens in an online revival of the hidden-camera show. Proceedings have had a 
slight update from the early 00s, however: new ruses include the Angry Cyclist, 
an Emoji Face with a penchant for photobombing (above) and – of course – that 
giant brick phone has been updated with a collossal smartphone. But will his 
pranks be just as strange and unruly as we remember?

Available from Monday

BBC3

Being Black, Going Crazy

This short but affecting doc sees Radar Radio presenter Keith Dube – who has 
himself experienced depression – investigate why black Britons are a staggering 
17 times more likely to be diagnosed with serious mental health problems than 
their white counterparts. From a perceived stigma towards mental health in the 
black community to racism and deprivation, Dube explores the factors. Along the 
way, he meets others who have experienced a variety of conditions.

Available from Tuesday

Podcast

Bigmouth

Winningly nerdish former music mag editor Andrew Harrison has had the good 
sense to invite a long lunch hour’s worth of Guide writers (David Stubbs, 
Justin Quirk, Hannah Verdier) on to this enjoyable pop-culture podcast in 
recent weeks. With everything from Frank Ocean’s comeback to the Krankies’ 
autobiography under discussion, the result is premier league punditry on music, 
film, TV and everything in between.

Available now
 