
When you look at the crew of a film shoot, which one would you like to be?” 
asks Robbie Ryan. “I tell you cinematographer. As Orson Welles said: ‘You get 
in late and you get out early.’ You don’t do the prep and you don’t do any of 
the post. You just do the shoot, and that’s a buzz that is really addictive.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fcatch-me-daddy-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425043480942%2Fcrop_KP_107504_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch%20Me%20Daddy%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fcatch-me-daddy-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch%20Me%20Daddy%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fcatch-me-daddy-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425043480942%2Fcrop_KP_107504_640x360.jpeg>
 The film team review Catch Me Daddy 
Ryan should know: he’s a cinematographer whose reputation grows with every 
project. Having made his name working alongside Andrea Arnold, he has in recent 
years worked with Ken Loach and, on the Oscar-nominated Philomena, with Stephen 
Frears. He brings extraordinary intimacy to his camerawork, creating a bond 
between viewer and subject that is at once seductive and entirely rooted in 
realism. His unflinching but lyrical collaborations with Arnold have made him 
one of the most highly rated directors of photography (DPs) in the UK. The wiry 
Irishman also loves a music video, and memorably capturedJake Gyllenhaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal> stabbing hipsters in the eye 
with a fencing foil in a promo for French band the Shoes.

When I meet him for a cup of tea in a London club, 43-year-old Ryan is excited 
about the impending release of his latest film, British bounty-hunter thriller
Catch Me Daddy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/catch-me-daddy>. Driven by an 
honour killing, and possessed of a relentless dramatic grip, the film is the 
first feature by the director of that Shoes video, Daniel Wolfe. With his 
brother Matthew as co-director and Ryan at the lens, Wolfe has brought vividly 
to life what might loosely be called a piece of Yorkshire-Asian noir.

“On the Shoes video we clicked, as far as having a laugh goes,” says Ryan, 
whose sense of fun informs most of his descriptions of life on set. “It was 
really quick, fast-paced shooting, which is my favourite way to work – on total 
instinct. You’re thrown into a scenario you have to get the best out of. On a 
low-budget film you are going to have to be inventive. And I really enjoy that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fcatch-me-daddy-exclusive-trailer-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421864743222%2Fcrop_KP-73661_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch%20Me%20Daddy%3A%20world%20exclusive%20trailer%20for%20British%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fcatch-me-daddy-exclusive-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch%20Me%20Daddy%3A%20world%20exclusive%20trailer%20for%20British%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fcatch-me-daddy-exclusive-trailer-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421864743222%2Fcrop_KP-73661_640.jpeg>
 Guardian exclusive Catch Me Daddy trailer. 
The setting of Catch Me Daddy is perfectly suited to the cinematic gifts that 
Ryan showed on the Arnold films: a feel for the beauty of the natural world 
allied to an unsparing eye for urban blight. Opening on the Yorkshire moors as 
a Ted Hughes poem is recited, the Wolfe brothers soon plunge Ryan’s camera into 
a strip-lit nightmare of garage-forecourt crime and burger bars called Sizzlers.

“A lot of preparation went into understanding the world the characters are 
in,” says Ryan. “The [Wolfe] brothers created what they call The Bible, a 
document of 400 pages, mostly location reference photographs. They’d been up 
there three months – places like Hebden Bridge, Todmorden, Halifax, Burnley – 
doing exhaustive research, exhaustive casting.”

As is also the case on many of Arnold and Loach’s projects, finding the film’s 
protagonists by open or “street” casting was central to the Wolfes’ method. 
Among the many compelling newcomers they unearthed, the aquiline features and 
melancholy eyes of the film’s star, Sameena Jabeen Ahmed, make her face the 
most watchable of all. Her mesmerising performance has already been recognised 
with a most promising newcomer prize at the British independent film awards, 
and best British newcomer at the BFI London film festival. “Every time we shot 
her, she looked different,” says Ryan. “It was a struggle. She wasn’t easy to 
coax certain things out of. It’s all about trust. It went right to the wire and 
she did an amazing job of it.”

With the director often stuck behind a monitor, it can be the DP who spends 
more time close to the actors; what kind of relationship does that create?

“On most jobs you’re always right on top,” says Ryan. “You get friendly with 
them and I love that proximity; it’s a comfortable place to be. You’re like a 
middle man: I try and sense what the director wants and interpret it for the 
person. The digital thing’s gone crazy: monitors all over the shop. You’ve got 
to get through so many fucking tellies to get to the set, you know? It drives 
the director far away.”

Though he does shoot on digital, Ryan is of the old school and shares with 
Daniel Wolfe a preference for film. “We shot Catch Me Daddy on film; Daniel 
calls digital his Kryptonite,” he says. “It gives it a texture that brings it 
to another level. When you shoot on film it just gets better and better in the 
post-production. Film throws the look at you and goes: ‘There – that’s what it 
is’, and it’s a lovely thing because you fall in love with that natural 
quality. I struggle with digital to achieve what I get almost instantly with 
film.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Frobbie-ryan-catch-me-daddy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424953511066%2F957f2069-452d-46a3-b0e5-f47a013ea790-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch%20Me%20Daddy%3A%20Robbie%20Ryan%20on%20capturing%20Yorkshire's%20beauty%20and%20brutality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Frobbie-ryan-catch-me-daddy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch%20Me%20Daddy%3A%20Robbie%20Ryan%20on%20capturing%20Yorkshire%27s%20beauty%20and%20brutality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Frobbie-ryan-catch-me-daddy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424953511066%2F957f2069-452d-46a3-b0e5-f47a013ea790-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Robbie Ryan in Cannes, 2014. Photograph: Guillaume Horcajuelo/Corbis 
What about that central relationship? Do directors buy Robbie Ryan’s vision 
when they hire him, or his ability to deliver what they want? “Whenever a 
cinematographer is mentioned in reviews they talk about ‘so-and-so’s vision’,” 
he says. “I don’t necessarily have a vision! The director drives the 
cinematographer, and a good cinematographer adapts to any scenario. But I’m 
drawn to a style I am suited to, which is naturalistic; real stories, with real 
people that don’t involve too much artifice.”

In Fish Tank <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fish-tank>, that story was of 
underage sex and child abduction on the Essex badlands; in Red Road, CCTV crime 
among the tower blocks of Glasgow; and now in Catch Me Daddy, prescription drug 
abuse and lay-by axe attacks on the outskirts of Huddersfield: the view through 
the Ryan viewfinder is certainly pretty “real”. He may claim not to have a 
vision, but these films share an aesthetic that steers an unerring path between 
the bleak and the beautiful.

“The human interaction with nature is a phenomenal thing,” says Ryan. “How we 
abuse it, and rip it apart. And sometimes the mess – the leftovers of human 
inhabitation and decay – looks beautiful because nature grabs it and does 
something with it. I’m a big believer that there’s beauty in everything we look 
at. It’s a great mixture, how nature and man live. In harmony – or maybe not!”

Not everyone shares this stance. “When I was doing The Angels’ Share in 
Scotland withKen Loach <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ken-loach> the 
landscape was phenomenal,” he says. “I loved it. There was a bit in the film 
with a road trip, and I said: ‘Do you want me to get a couple of shots of the 
landscape?’ He looked at me and said: ‘What would I want to do that for?’”

Ryan studied in the late 1990s at what is now Ireland’s national film school 
at Dun Laoghaire, and came to London just before 2000, making a first short, 
Wasp, with Arnold that eventually won an Oscar. Since then, he has worked 
almost continuously, a nomadic life of intense collaborations with 
ever-changing bands of strangers, most recently in New Zealand on the upcoming 
western Slow West, starring Michael Fassbender.

“Shooting a feature, you literally reboot the entire world around you on a 
regular basis,” he says. “On Slow West, the director [ex-Beta Band member John 
Maclean] liked to do one take only. And it was reverse psychology, because by 
the end I was thinking: Christ we’ve only got one go at it, I’d better get it 
right…”

Feeling recently that he needed a year off, Ryan chose to spend his downtime 
touring the world’s film festivals. “I went to Cannes, Venice, Galway,” he 
says. “I realised that the film family is a very strong bond for me. I love 
every aspect of it. The kind of people who get into film-making like a bit of 
freedom. They can have a wildness to them. I think it’s bit of 
self-destruction. Ha! When you work hard, you have to let loose a little bit.”

Catch Me Daddy is in UK cinemas now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpt9wnawn7xQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpt9wnawn7xQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpt9wnawn7xQ&media=>
 Jake’s progress: the video for the Shoes’ Time To Dance, lensed by Ryan.  