
The Catholic church has denied any link to a New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> pregnancy centre 
accused of deceptively pushing an anti-abortion agenda to women, despite 
records showing the local diocese set up its website.

The Women’s Life Centre has operated for several years in Albury, NSW, 
marketing itself as a service that helps “any woman facing an unplanned 
pregnancy or worried that they may be pregnant”.

The centre is currently crowdfunding to buy an ultrasound device and says it 
offers pregnancy testing, counselling, resources on pregnancy and abortion, 
future planning and abortion grief counselling.




The centre is staffed by pro-life volunteers and staff but its website makes 
no mention of its anti-abortion stance, nor does its shopfront, which 
advertises “free pregnancy help” and “free pregnancy testing”.

The website domain name for the clinic is registered to the Wagga Wagga 
Catholic diocese, which covers Albury.

It also receives funding support from a café next door 
<http://www.bordermail.com.au/story/4314433/caring-for-women-the-essence-of-quaint-cafe/?cs=11>
, named Esencia, which is owned by the church,according to the Australian 
Business Register <http://abr.business.gov.au/SearchByAbn.aspx?abn=85800384551> 
and the Australian Securities and Investments Commission database.

A spokesman for the Wagga Wagga diocese said he did not believe there was any 
link between the church and the pregnancy centre. He said there may have been 
“technical assistance” to help the centre set up its website but nothing 
further.

Staff at the centre say they are openly pro-life and that there is no 
deception involved.

A volunteer, Myra Hogan, told Guardian Australia that women who came to the 
centre for help would be immediately aware of its pro-life stance.

“From my point of view, yes 100%,” Hogan said. “I feel like we’re very upfront 
and honest ... That’s why I approached them, because that’s my own personal 
belief. I’m very pro-life.”

Sydney's 'Rose of Tralee' shakes up Irish pageant with abortion rights speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/28/sydneys-rose-of-tralee-shakes-up-irish-pageant-with-abortion-rights-speech>
But senior Albury obstetrician and gynaecologist Pieter Mourik has accused the 
centre of covertly pushing an anti-abortion agenda.

“This [women’s life centre] is a vile deception of vulnerable women who have 
an unplanned pregnancy,” he said. “No member of this clinic would ever agree 
with a woman who wants or medically needs a termination but will use any tactic 
to dissuade them every time.”

The US has seen thousands of “crisis pregnancy centres 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/05/health/pregnancy-centers-gain-influence-in-anti-abortion-fight.html?_r=0&pagewanted=all>
” set up across the country, which purport to offer free medical advice but 
actually attempt to discourage abortion and the use of contraceptives.

The US centres have been accused 
<https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/pregnancy/crisis-pregnancy-centers> of 
lying to women, overstating the health impacts of abortions and using 
misleading films and images to frighten those seeking help.

In France, MPs last week voted to approve a plan to outlaw abortion  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/french-mps-debate-plan-to-ban-abortion-websites-that-intimidate-women>
information websites that masquerade as neutral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/french-mps-debate-plan-to-ban-abortion-websites-that-intimidate-women>
, official services with freephone helpline numbers but promote anti-abortion 
propaganda and pressure women not to terminate pregnancies.
 