
The head of the Catholic church in England and Wales has apologised for its 
part in the” hurt” caused to young unmarried women who say they were felt 
pressured into handing over their babies for adoption in the 1950s, 60s and 70s.


Cardinal Vincent Nichols acknowledged the “the grief and pain caused by the 
giving up of a child through adoption”, adding: “Sadly for unmarried mothers, 
adoption was considered to be in the best interests of the mother and child 
because of the associated stigma and the lack of support for lone parents.”

A documentary telling the stories of some of the women – who gave up an 
estimated half a million children during a period when the Catholic church, the 
Church of England and the Salvation Army ran “mother and baby homes” and 
adoption agencies in the UK – is to be broadcast on ITV on 9 November.

In a statement at the end of the programme, Nichols apologises for the 
church’s role, saying: “The practices of all adoption agencies, whether 
religious, charitable or state, reflected these attitudes and were sometimes 
lacking in care and sensitivity. We apologise for the hurt caused by agencies 
acting in the name of the Catholic church.”

The documentary, Britain’s Adoption Scandal: Breaking the Silence, relates the 
stories of several women whose babies were given up for adoption over the 
30-year period. Adoption reached a peak in 1968, when more than 16,000 babies 
born to unmarried mothers were handed over to new families.

Some women in the programme said they were offered no alternative to adoption 
and were sometimes mistreated. The women speak of their shame and guilt, but 
add that decisions were taken about them and their children without proper, 
informed consultation. “Because I was young, I felt I had to do what I was 
told,” says Alison, one of the women in the documentary.

Angela, who became pregnant at 18 and was sent to a Catholic mother and baby 
home in Essex, said: “You had committed the ultimate sin, and as a Catholic it 
was the worst thing that could possibly have happened to you. So, yes, it did 
feel like punishment.”


Another young mother, Margaret, who was sent to a Salvation Army maternity 
home in Leeds, said: “First of all, I’d like people to know that you didn’t 
give your babies away. They were taken from you, and you didn’t have a choice.”


She recalls a member of staff coming to collect her baby. “And she [said], 
‘Don’t be silly, you’re doing what’s best’, and took him from my arms and went, 
and you’re just left in that room crying and not one person came to you. She 
didn’t come back to me after she’d taken the baby.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6-L_a_lk8A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6-L_a_lk8A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6-L_a_lk8A&media=>
Angela’s story: ‘You have no idea’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_6-L_a_lk8A&feature=youtu.be> 
The Church of England also expressed regret for the hurt caused in a statement 
given to the Guardian. “What was thought to be the right thing to do at the 
time has caused great hurt. That is a matter of great regret,” said a 
spokesperson, although no statement from the church had been provided to the 
ITV programme in advance of the preview transmission.

The issue was highlighted in the 2013 film Philomena, starring Judi Dench. It 
told the true story of Philomena Lee, an Irish woman who searched for her son 
for 50 years after being pressured by nuns to hand him over for adoption in 
1952, when she was a teenager.

In 2014, Lee met Pope Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/05/pope-francis-philomena-lee-steve-coogan>
 before a screening of the film at the Vatican. She said: “I have always put 
great faith in the church and the goodwill to put the wrongs of the past right. 
I hope and believe that his Holiness Pope Francis joins me in the fight to help 
the thousands of mothers and children who need closure on their own stories.”

In 2011, the Catholic church in Australia apologised 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/religion/8660249/Australias-Roman-Catholic-Church-apologises-for-forced-adoptions.html>
 for the forced adoption of 150,000 babies in Catholic-run hospitals.


In Britain, religious institutions ran 150 mother-and-baby homes in the 
postwar years. St Pelagia’s home for destitute girls in Highgate, north London, 
founded by an order of nuns, organised the adoption of thousands of babies 
before it closed in 1971. Young women were obliged to work in the laundry in 
return for their keep. In 1976, the main responsibility for handling adoptions 
was moved from voluntary organisations, which were mainly religious, to local 
authorities.


Carolynn Gallwey, of Bhatt Murphy Solicitors, is one of a team of lawyers 
demanding an inquiry into the handling of adoptions up to 1976. “These women … 
are entitled to have their experiences recognised, and the only way to that is 
through a public inquiry,” she said.


The Catholic Children’s Society – called the Crusade of Rescue until 1985 – 
pointed to different social attitudes in the postwar decades. “When you look 
back to the 1940s, 50s and 60s, in society in general and in terms of 
government policy, there was very little support for unmarried mothers, or 
mothers who were married but had a child by a different man,” said chief 
executive Rosemary Keenan. “Society’s attitudes have changed.

“From looking back at our records from sample years, we estimate that 75% of 
mothers that came to our organisation kept their babies. But it would have been 
difficult for them because of the values of wider society. Most women were in a 
very desperate situation and would have felt pressure from many sources.”


The Crusade of Rescue had lobbied for a change in law to allow adopted 
children and birth mothers to discover details about the circumstances of the 
adoption, she said. Since 1975, adopted children have had the legal right to 
obtain their birth and adoption records.

Responding to the account by one of the women featured in the television 
documentary, the Salvation Army said: “We sincerely sympathise with Margaret’s 
painful memories and can only confirm that her experiences would be different 
today.”


C of E organisations involved in adoption had also helped adopted children 
trace their birth mothers, according to a spokesperson. Many of the postwar 
organisations no longer existed, but current independent organisations “linked 
to but outside the structures of the Church of England still work for the best 
interests of children and have helped in tracing mothers and children.”


Britain’s Adoption Scandal: Breaking the Silence will be broadcast on ITV at 
9pm on Wednesday 9 November
 