
On Friday morning, the Today Show re-aired Anna Nicole Smith's last 
<http://www.showbuzz.cbsnews.com/stories/2007/02/09/tv/main2453035.shtml> 
television interview. The deceased Playmate talked, skin tanned and eyes 
glazed, about the loss of her son and how she felt that her life always kept 
getting worse. As Smith bared her camera-ready soul, her speech was so slurred 
that one could barely understand what she was saying. After the clip, the Today 
Show cut back to a panel of experts who, heads shaking, clucked over how tragic 
and troubled her life was. But rest assured, were Smith still alive and that 
same clip were aired this morning, we would all have rolled our eyes and 
laughed at her unintelligible rambling.

Why does Anna Nicole Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anna-nicole-smith> matter? You'd be 
hard-pressed to find many Americans who could answer that question - and who 
are nonetheless fixated with her and her untimely death at the age of 39. I can 
hardly speak for anyone other than myself, but I would guess that Americans 
"care" (and I use that term loosely) because, in a way, the public felt 
ownership over that woman like one might over a dysfunctional, silly toy.

Smith sold herself - every aspect of herself - to whomever would look her way: 
Her flesh gave her fame and fortune (it was at a Houston strip club where she 
met her octogenarian second husband, the late oilbillionaire 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J._Howard_Marshall> J Howard Marshall). Her 
weight gain and subsequent loss brought her a profit. Supreme Court 
appearances, in which she valiantly sat very still and watched her lawyers 
fight for her right to Marshall's fortune, were in pursuit of unclaimed 
millions. And when her son Danieldied 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Wayne_Smith> of a fatal combination of 
drugs just days after the birth of her baby girl, Danielynn, Smith took his 
last photos and sold them to the highest bidder. Touching.

Ultimately, Smith came from nothing and - with no talents other than her 
ability to take off her clothes - she made it big. It was an ugly big, but big 
nonetheless. You might say that she embodied the worst-case scenario American 
dream.

And we laughed. After all, Anna Nicole Smith was funny, and she reminded us 
that people like her really do, in fact, exist: a shameless woman who wanted so 
desperately to be famous, and who pursued her dreams while rarely saying 
anything intelligent or speaking without slurring. Americans have no problem 
obliging that sort of trainwreck, especially coming from a former pinup. Given 
America's fascination with the celebrity macabre (how else to explain the 
excitement over apanty-less <http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,233458,00.html>
 Britney Spears?), Smith's mess of a life made for pop culture gold.

Until she died, that is. Please don't misunderstand - I do find the whole 
thing quite sad. Nevertheless, her messy life and reckless lifestyle - the very 
things that made her so damn watchable - are ultimately what killed her. Maybe 
Americans feel a little badly about that? If so, consider the media frenzy our 
way of dealing with the sadness of losing a toy, finally broken, once and for 
all.
 