
Dear Doctor, I’m a performance artist, and I have been invited to perform on 
the theme of “family” in a summer show. I wondered what music you’d suggest?

At first I considered the bonkers Sisters duet from White Christmas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RTef_onLNnw>. This Irving Berlin song features 
Rosemary Clooney and Vera-Ellen, who appear from behind a peacock-like puff of 
sparkling turquoise ostrich feathers, before launching into song in front of an 
admiring audience including Bing Crosby and Danny Kaye. It’s a great film, but 
on reflection, the Doctor doesn’t recommend it for your gallery performance, as 
you might, God forbid, fall into burlesque territory (that awful middle-class 
striptease).

Burlesque does neatly bring us to my first song choice, though: a 70s group 
called Family, and a herky jerky track calledBurlesque 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=23VdAJuEU1Y> that you can strut along to 
rather nicely, in a Jaggeresque way.

How about a real family band next? Try The Jackson 5’s Going Back To Indiana 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ldpm1gsW-0>, and listen out for Michael’s 
vocals, brimming with vigour and optimism. You could even play withThe Addams 
Family theme <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X6QzbvH-ZNo>. Remember? “They’re 
creepy and they’re kooky, mysterious and spooky, they’re altogether ooky, the 
Addams family.”

Now let’s go deep, like Barry White, with I Love You Like A Brother 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=64qqox0cSyk>, by Fred Wesley, with its easy 
reggae-like beat. And check out Antony And The Johnsons’You Are My Sister 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S-NziGE6DVY>: “There were times we were 
friends, but times I was so cruel...”

But we’re going to end happily ever after, with a Lightnin’ Hopkins number, 
Little Sister’s Boogie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1UTvOhRQcYM>. This 
track has basslines sure to leave your audience with a smile, no matter their 
family pressures.

• Post your questions to Cerys below.
 