
A French MP and an academic are set to defy an attempt by the Anne Frank Fonds 
 <http://www.annefrank.ch/>to keep control of the copyright on Anne Frank’s 
diary by publishing online texts of the world famous second world war account 
from one of the Holocaust’s most recognisable victims.

Anne Frank <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-frank> wrote her 
red-and-white checked diary between 12 June 1942 and 1 August 1944, charting 
the time she spent in hiding in an Amsterdam warehouse until three days before 
her family was betrayed. She died in Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, age 15, 
in 1945.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F26%2Fanne-frank-diary-digital-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F1%2F25%2F1359132022917%2FThe-interactive-Diary-of--001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anne%20Frank's%20The%20Diary%20of%20a%20Young%20Girl%3A%20the%20digital%20edition%20%E2%80%94%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F26%2Fanne-frank-diary-digital-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anne%20Frank%27s%20The%20Diary%20of%20a%20Young%20Girl%3A%20the%20digital%20edition%20%E2%80%94%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F26%2Fanne-frank-diary-digital-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F1%2F25%2F1359132022917%2FThe-interactive-Diary-of--001.jpg>
Watch an excerpt from the Anne Frank Fonds’ digital edition of her diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2013/jan/26/anne-frank-diary-digital-video>
Copyright across much of Europe expires 70 years after an author’s death, but 
the Anne Frank Fonds, the Swiss foundation established by her father Otto Frank 
in 1963,informed French publishers 
<http://www.livreshebdo.fr/article/le-journal-danne-frank-ne-tombera-pas-dans-le-domaine-public-en-2016?5968>
 in October that the diaries would not be entering the public domain on 1 
January 2016 because Otto, who died in 1980, had done so much work on the most 
widely published version that he had “earned his own copyright”.

Isabelle Attard, a French MP 
<http://www2.assemblee-nationale.fr/deputes/fiche/OMC_PA605625> who is 
preparing to publish the Dutch text online on 1 January, warns that this 
argument dilutes the impact of the diaries.


She is prepared to go to court to defend her publication. “Many revisionists, 
people who want to deny theextermination camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/15/accountant-oskar-groning-auschwitz-jailed-for-the-of-300000-jews>
 existed, have tried to attack the diary for years. Saying now the book wasn’t 
written by Anne alone is weakening the weight it has had for decades, as a 
testimony to the horrors of this war,” said a spokesperson for Attard. “She 
lost her grandparents in Nazi camps, she had uncles who were hidden like Anne 
Frank was – for her it is a very touchy subject, and she wanted to react and 
not to let the Anne Frank Fonds use its interpretation of the law.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffrench-copyright-challenge-publish-anne-frank-diary-online-otto-frank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71468d4aaa189953fe09f188994ed56816d19edd%2F0_0_2158_2971%2F2158.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Challengers%20vow%20to%20publish%20Anne%20Frank%20diaries%20as%20foundation%20moves%20to%20keep%20control%20of%20copyright&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffrench-copyright-challenge-publish-anne-frank-diary-online-otto-frank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Challengers%20vow%20to%20publish%20Anne%20Frank%20diaries%20as%20foundation%20moves%20to%20keep%20control%20of%20copyright&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffrench-copyright-challenge-publish-anne-frank-diary-online-otto-frank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71468d4aaa189953fe09f188994ed56816d19edd%2F0_0_2158_2971%2F2158.jpg>
 Otto Frank in July 1941 with his daughter Anne, right, and friends attending a 
wedding in Amsterdam. Photograph: AP 
The spokesperson added: “On 1 January, Mein Kampf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/03/mein-kampf-strange-tales-of-the-worlds-most-dangerous-book>
 will enter the public domain, and [Attard] feels the symbolism of this, Mein 
Kampf entering the public domain, and a counterpart, Anne Frank’s diary, this 
very important work about the horrors of the second world war, not entering at 
the same time, was inacceptable for her.”

Olivier Ertzscheid, a lecturer at the University of Nantes, is also preparing 
to publish the text of the original Dutch edition of the diaries on 1 January.

“All the arguments of the Anne Frank Fonds are false and legally inaccurate. 
Otto Frank cannot be considered a ‘co-author’ of the text,” said Ertzscheid.

Earlier this year, Ertzscheid illegally published a French translation of the 
diaries, and was asked to take it down by its French publisher. He said his 
illegal publication had accomplished what he set out to do: to move the debate 
“into the public arena”. He is now also hoping to produce a new, free French 
translation of the text for publication in January.

At the Anne Frank Fonds, Yves Kugelmann, a member of the board of trustees, 
said the foundation wasn’t attempting to extend copyright. “AFF is merely 
applying to existing laws under which the diary remains protected after 2015, 
and has decided to inform people about it. We have made clear that in certain 
territories the copyright is protected for a longer time, because this is our 
duty.”

He said: “Otto Frank is not the co author of the original diaries. We as a 
foundation have been fighting for 40 years againstHolocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust> deniers who have said the book is 
a falsification. We proved that it was not - the diary is authentic.”

But he added: “After the war, Otto Frank merged, or compiled, the two versions 
of the Diary that Anne Frank left, that were both incomplete and that partly 
overlapped, into one reader friendly version. He typed over Anne Frank’s 
manuscripts and with scissors and glue subsequently, literally, ‘cut and 
pasted’ them into the version that was published in English from the early 
fifties. The book he created earns his own copyright. For the purposes of 
copyright, he is to be viewed as an ‘author’ of that version. Please note, 
again, that this does not imply that he ‘co-wrote’ anything.”

Anne Frank: 10 beautiful quotes from The Diary of a Young Girl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jan/27/the-greatest-anne-frank-quotes-ever>
On its website, the foundation says <http://www.annefrank.ch/qa-en.html> that 
Otto, along with Mirjam Pressler, who published a later adaptation in 1991, “in 
effect created readable books from Anne Frank’s original writings”, and so 
“Anne Frank’s original writings, as well as the original in-print versions will 
remain protected for many decades”.

With regard to Attard and Ertzscheid’s planned publications, Kugelmann said 
that “if someone takes a risk to infringe copyright, that is their risk”.

“Sometimes we act, sometimes we don’t. It’s not so important for us – we’re a 
foundation, not a commercial enterprise,” he said. “We use the income for 
charity and we’re a voluntary organisation. We grant rights all the time, for 
theatre, books, performances, films. Anyone can put a request in.”

At the Anne Frank Trust in the UK <http://www.annefrank.org.uk/>, chief 
executive Robert Posner said: “What’s most important to us, as an educational 
charity which works with the diary, is that it is seen as Anne Frank’s own work 
– her writing, her work, her thoughts.For many, she represents the true horror 
of the Holocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/mar/30/how-to-teach-anne-frank>
, and she’s one of the most recognised victims, certainly the most recognised 
teenage victim. Anything which puts the veracity of her work into question is 
saddening and disappointing for us.”
 