
Channel 4 has snapped up former MasterChef: The Professionals star Michel Roux 
Jnr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/11/michel-roux-jr-leaves-bbc-masterchef>
 for a new advertiser-funded Saturday morning cookery show Weekend Kitchen with 
Waitrose.

Roux, who stepped down from the BBC2 series due to a commercial conflict of 
interest is joining the new series – alongside another MasterChef star, John 
Torode, and another BBC TV chef,Raymond Blanc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/raymondblanc>.

They will be joined by Heston Blumenthal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/hestonblumenthal>, already a Channel 
4 and Waitrose name, and Gordon Ramsay protegé Angela Hartnett, among others 
yet to be announced. Each week the chefs will make recipes using ingredients 
provided by Waitrose.

The hour-long show will be fronted by Steve Jones and Lisa Snowden and, in a 
similar vein to BBC1's rival showSaturday Kitchen 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006v5y2>, feature chats with celebrity guests.

Weekend Kitchen will air at 9am on Saturdays from 26 April, just before 
Saturday Kitchen.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> head of daytime David 
Sayer, who commissioned the show from independent production company Spun Gold, 
said: "Steve and Lisa are the perfect pairing to present the show's unique 
combination of celebrity chat, seasonal cooking and tips on how to entertain. 
It's a great fit for 4's schedule and will help our viewers make the most of 
their weekends."

Spun Gold managing director Nick Bullen said: "Spun Gold is excited to embark 
on this new project withWaitrose <https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose>
, extending our relationship with the brand to produce their first ever 
television programme."

Waitrose will also run in-store promotion around the show – which is designed 
to reflect its free weekly newspaper Waitrose Weekend.

Channel 4 already airs a cookery and chat show on Sunday mornings at 9.30am 
calledSunday Brunch, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/16/something-for-the-weekend-channel-4>
 hosted by Tim Lovejoy and Simon Rimmer. The broadcaster hired the presenters 
and production team after their BBC2 Sunday morning show, the similar 
cookery-and-chat format Something for the Weekend, was axed.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 