
For at least a decade, the arts have reliably made headlines in this country. 
FromDavid Bowie at the Victoria and Albert Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/david-bowie-is-exhibition-review>
 andMatisse’s cutouts at Tate Modern, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/20/henri-matisse-the-cut-outs-tate-modern-review-laura-cumming>
Leonardo at the National Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2011/may/09/leonardo-da-vinci-national-gallery>
, to the queues outside theVikings exhibition at the British Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/feb/27/british-museum-vikings-show-nordic-noir-longboat>
, or the scarce tickets forOne Man, Two Guvnors at the National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/25/one-man-two-guvnors-review>, 
Britain has enjoyed a long and happy phase in which, energised by lottery 
funds, the popularity of even highbrow art forms has seen them leap from the 
feature pages into the news. And behind this success a team of unfashionably 
white, middle-aged men have been working away.

Now, as we get ready to “ring out the old” at the end of the year, it is 
certainly true to say “the old order changeth” in our cultural realm. Perhaps 
sensing the winds of change, a succession of the distinguished artistic 
directors responsible for this golden era have either left, or are about to 
leave, their posts.

Martin Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/04/martin-roth-v-and-a-director-expected-to-resign-brexit-europe>
, the German director of the V&A, has packed up after a series of 
extraordinarily popular exhibitions, including shows onAlexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/15/alexander-mcqueen-savage-beauty-v-and-a-review-observer-awe-and-unease>
 and Bowie, staged over five years;Sir Nicholas Serota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/six-leading-candidates-nicholas-serota-director-tate-galleries>
, the man who helped transform public interest in contemporary art, is soon to 
step down after nearly 30 years at the Tate; andKasper Holten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/09/kasper-holten-to-quit-royal-opera-covent-garden>
, the Dane who shook up audiences with adventurous productions during his five 
years as director of opera at Covent Garden’s opera house, is off at the end of 
March.

These departures come soon after Sir Nicholas Penny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/23/nicholas-penny-announces-departure-from-national-gallery>
 (the second of three Sir Nicks in this departing “old guard”) left the 
National Gallery in 2015, andSir Nicholas Hytner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/apr/10/sir-nicholas-hytner-national-theatre>
 bowed out at the National Theatre after a long period of unprecedented 
popularity, with hit productions such asWar Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/04/war-horse-big-hit> and The 
Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/03/curious-incident-dog-review>. In 
the past 12 months the reveredNeil MacGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/08/british-museum-director-step-down-neil-macgregor>
 has also been replaced at the head of the British Museum, following an 
illustrious 13-year reign.

So a period of relative stability and collaboration ends. The arts world is 
stepping into the unknown, as together these men operated as a formidable 
political lobby. Some might welcome a general shakeup next year, but for those 
who appreciate the huge shift in attitudes to Britain’s creative industries, 
reflected in a largely successful campaign to protect them from government 
cuts, the outlook is less rosy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93a5c2ab36be7c7e5ac2e5bcd329b0824e6de070%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Changing%20of%20the%20guard%20at%20great%20arts%20venues%20may%20be%20end%20of%20a%20golden%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Changing%20of%20the%20guard%20at%20great%20arts%20venues%20may%20be%20end%20of%20a%20golden%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93a5c2ab36be7c7e5ac2e5bcd329b0824e6de070%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Alexander McQueen’s Savage Beauty exhibit at the V&A in London. Photograph: 
Andy Rain/EPA 
“We have had an amazing generation of artistic leaders in the UK, including 
the likes of the Nicks Serota and Hytner, and with people like Peter Bazalgette 
from the world of business playing an important role at the Arts Council of 
England, too,” said Harriet Finney, deputy chief executive of the Creative 
Industries Federation, a national membership organisation. Speaking this 
weekend, she raised doubts about the potentially diminishing appeal of London’s 
national arts institutions for talent from abroad.

“Britain has long been a magnet for people who are the best in their field 
from all over the world, and the departure of some of them this year amid 
rumbles of discontent over Britain becoming less international in outlook would 
be worrying, were it to become a trend,” she said. “We will have to show that 
fears of the country turning inward are misplaced.”

This Christmas, after the loss of this fairly stable group, the country’s 
cultural status looks vulnerable. Each of their former national institutions is 
in receipt of a large, endangered public grant, and as directors they liaised 
regularly rather than seeing each other as rivals. It was a task that became 
increasingly vital as Tory arts ministers and chancellors questioned the need 
to support them.

At the time, Sir Tony Hall, now director-general of the BBC, was still running 
the Royal Opera House, and a series of meetings was set up to co-ordinate plans 
to combat funding cuts and then to shape the2012 Cultural Olympiad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/cultural-olympiad> that would accompany 
the London games. This joint work indirectly helped deliver unexpected 
triumphs, such as the British Museum’s100 Objects 
<https://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/a_history_of_the_world.aspx> or the 
National Theatre’s acclaimed musicalLondon Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/13/london-road-review>: events that 
could not have been imagined without state subsidy. And that sense of community 
continued, even as some of the personnel changed. So the question is, can the 
next leaders of these celebrated cultural establishments present such a united 
front, while also producing work that delights and stretches their audiences?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5dc0b9fb1ddc23830f52dd9d7c579bf8ebedafc%2F641_9_724_904%2F724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Changing%20of%20the%20guard%20at%20great%20arts%20venues%20may%20be%20end%20of%20a%20golden%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Changing%20of%20the%20guard%20at%20great%20arts%20venues%20may%20be%20end%20of%20a%20golden%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5dc0b9fb1ddc23830f52dd9d7c579bf8ebedafc%2F641_9_724_904%2F724.jpg>
 Sir Nicholas Serota is leaving the Tate after nearly 30 years. 
Predictably, this has been a frenzied time for job applications. With so many 
key vacancies on offer, the keenest of candidates have had to choose which 
prize to set their sights on. Female applicants from all over the world are 
being encouraged to storm these British citadels. Male dominance is, after all, 
not just a British problem. In 2015 the world’s 12 most popular art museums 
were all led by men.

“One of the big challenges is finding the next generation to reflect the 
country at large – women, BAME, people of all socioeconomic backgrounds,” said 
Finney. “Social mobility is a massive issue. If we want to make sure that 
culture in this country is accessible to everyone and is produced by the widest 
range of talents possible, we need to have an education system that gives all 
young people routes in.”

At a farewell lunch at Tate Modern last Tuesday, Serota joked that he might 
decide to stay on. In fact, his new appointment, taking over from Bazalgette as 
the chairman ofArts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>, starts in the new 
year. When Serota first took control of London’s Tate Gallery in 1988, it had 
just one venue, on Millbank. Tate Liverpool opened later that year. His 
application for the role had consisted of a seven-year plan that hinted heavily 
at his expansionist hopes. Last year 4.7 million visitors came to shows at Tate 
Modern, the millennial art venue he set up inside the old Bankside power 
station on the edge of the Thames. It is now the most popular modern art 
gallery in the world and is run, under Serota, by its first female director, 
Frances Morris.

“One of the great advantages of Bankside was that it seemed that there would 
be room to develop in future,” Serota told theArt Newspaper. Sure enough, this 
summer it opened a £260m extension inside the old Switch House, managing it 
just before all the freshly desirable land around Tate was bought up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4ec8e3fc734b67f54eec7d4d361efb1275bb3df%2F112_111_3944_2366%2F3944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Changing%20of%20the%20guard%20at%20great%20arts%20venues%20may%20be%20end%20of%20a%20golden%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Changing%20of%20the%20guard%20at%20great%20arts%20venues%20may%20be%20end%20of%20a%20golden%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4ec8e3fc734b67f54eec7d4d361efb1275bb3df%2F112_111_3944_2366%2F3944.jpg>
 The newly opened Switch House at the Tate Modern in London. Photograph: 
Facundo Arrizabalaga/EPA 
Rumours about who will succeed Serota as overall Tate commandant have focused 
on Maria Balshaw, director of Manchester’s cluster of Whitworth Galleries, 
although a fortnight ago at the Turner prize supper she said she was tired of 
all the speculation.Other contenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/six-leading-candidates-nicholas-serota-director-tate-galleries>
 include Sheena Wagstaff, in charge of modern and contemporary art at New 
York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art, and Nicholas Cullinan, head of the National 
Portrait Gallery.

Over in Kensington, under Roth the V&A drew in a hugely creditable 3.4 million 
visitors last year. Its most visited show ever was the 21-week run of the 
McQueen extravaganza. While 300,000 people went to its Bowie exhibition in 
2013, 493,000 people came to its tribute to the late fashion designer. For the 
show’s final two weekends the museum opened throughout the night for the first 
time, to meet demand.

The German director had come to Kensington from jobs at two leading Dresden 
museums and he replaced Sir Mark Jones, who had led the V&A since 2001. Roth 
has since aired his fears over Brexit and about the future of the V&A in an 
isolated Britain. In July he said planning for the future felt “like skiing in 
very thick fog”.

Luke Syson, the winsome Brit currently running the department of European 
Sculpture and Decorative Arts at New York’s Met, has been talked of as Roth’s 
successor, but picking a woman for the job would also be smart. As Sonnet 
Stanfill, a female curator at the V&A, recently pointed out, there is 
disproportionately bad representation of women at the top of the museum, given 
that about 75% of its curators are women.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb39f0c88483a1a3b2d81075f72adf01a6e807b7c%2F469_173_1394_1742%2F1394.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Changing%20of%20the%20guard%20at%20great%20arts%20venues%20may%20be%20end%20of%20a%20golden%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Changing%20of%20the%20guard%20at%20great%20arts%20venues%20may%20be%20end%20of%20a%20golden%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchanging-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb39f0c88483a1a3b2d81075f72adf01a6e807b7c%2F469_173_1394_1742%2F1394.jpg>
 Martin Roth is leaving the V&A in London citing concerns over Brexit. 
Over at the Royal Opera House, the chance to choose a woman has sailed by. In 
September the board decided to scare the traditionalists by appointing 
37-year-oldOliver Mears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/12/oliver-mears-royal-opera-houses-new-director-of-opera-northern-ireland-opera>
 to succeed Holten in the opera world’s most prestigious British job. Mears 
comes to Covent Garden from the much smaller Northern Ireland Opera and starts 
work in March. He is opposed to “barriers” between audiences and singers, and 
so dislikes period costume and even the sacred original-language performance. 
“As soon as you put people in period costume it becomes about escapism and 
something else,” he has said, adding: “As soon as you sing in English, one of 
those barriers is down. I think particularly in comedy, it’s really important 
that people can understand the humour as its happening rather than looking up 
at surtitles.”

Mears is rumoured to have been recently turned down for a similar role at the 
English National Opera, which lost artistic directorJohn Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/10/john-berry-steps-down-from-english-national-opera>
 in the summer of last year after two decades of service. Berry’s position at 
the Coliseum was filled this summer byDaniel Kramer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/04/english-national-opera-eno-artistic-director-daniel-kramer-interview>
, a 39-year-old American.

Despite losing MacGregor, the British Museum had another hit show this year 
withSunken Cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/15/drowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities>
. It remains Britain’s top attraction, with 6.8 million visitors last year. 
Similarly, the National Theatre is still thriving following the departure of 
Hytner in March 2015. Now run byRufus Norris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/31/rufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview>
, the Hytner legacy continues to play a big financial role. BothThe Curious 
Incident… and War Horse are still in production, either in the West End or on 
tour.

Arts commentator Jan Dalley noted earlier this year that the conventional 
image of the director of an august arts institution as a staid “keeper” of 
treasures and antiquities has long gone. Where once they were appointed for 
their scholarship, now they are required to be strategists, fundraisers and 
entertainers too.

Serota, the member of this retiring old guard with the greatest experience, 
will not, of course, be disappearing. As the chairman of Arts Council England, 
he will need his famous persuasive powers and poker-faced stance. Caricatured 
in theSpectator as a Bond villain stroking a PVC Jeff Koons pussycat, to some 
in the arts world he embodies the hollow showmanship of the modern age. To 
others, his mastery of strategy and attention to detail are their best hope as 
a newly austere funding chill blows in this January.
 