
The gentlemen in green blazers who run the US Masters are nothing if not 
predictable in their unpredictability. After rising speculation over the past 
year that Augusta National would confront the challenges of modern technology 
by introducing a "tournament ball" aimed at reining in the prodigious distances 
achieved by the modern player, the most traditional club committee in golf did 
what no one expected and settled for the most traditional solution to the 
biggest issue facing the game: more yardage.

To the casual television viewer the most familiar course in the world will 
look pretty much the same this week. The flowers will be in bloom, the fairways 
will be a lush, deep green and the streams and ponds will be dyed a bluer shade 
of blue. But standing on the 1st tee come Thursday the players will be faced by 
a challenge that is significantly altered from last year, and radically 
different from the course humbled by Tiger Woods when he won his first Masters 
nine years ago.

At 7,445 yards the course is 155 yards longer than last year, and 520 yards - 
about the length of a medium par-five - longer than in 1997. Six holes have 
been lengthened, five significantly: the 1st, which now measures 455 yards, 55 
yards longer than it was in 1997; the par-three 4th, which has been stretched 
from 205 yards to 240 yards; the 7th, which measured 360 yards in 1997 and is 
now 450 yards; the 11th, now a 505-yard par-four, compared with 490 yards last 
year; and the par-five 15th, up from 500 yards to 530 yards. The tee on the 
par-four 17th has also been moved back 15 yards and to the left, lengthening 
the hole to 440 yards.

"If you had never seen this golf course and didn't know what course you were 
playing, you would think, OK, this is fine," the US tour player Charles Howell 
says of the changes. "But if you see this from the perspective that Augusta is 
one of the most familiar courses in the world, you would look at the changes 
and say, 'Wow, this is going to make a big difference'."

Howell was born and raised in Augusta and is imbued with the reverence most of 
the locals have for the community's most famous institution. He is also closer 
to the start of his career than the end, and needs to make enemies at Augusta 
National about as much as he needs to develop a wicked slice. All of which 
might explain his mild-mannered opinions.

Others are not so restricted by age or background, including the list of 
former champions who have criticised the changes, first for fundamentally 
altering the nature of Augusta National as designed by Alister Mackenzie and 
Bobby Jones and, more prosaically, for turning the hallowed course into a 
bomber's paradise. "I'm sure if Bobby Jones was around he'd say, 'Hey, what are 
you guys doing?'," says Mike Weir, the 2003 champion.

Two critics have captured most of the pre-tournament headlines: Jack Nicklaus 
andArnold Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer>, both of 
them members at Augusta National. Palmer complained that it was no longer the 
course he had known for 50 years, and Nicklaus was vicious. "They've ruined it 
from a tournament standpoint," he told Golf Digest magazine in an interview 
which stunned everyone, including, it seems, the club.

In years gone by, Augusta National's chairman Hootie Johnson might have been 
expected to respond to any criticism on any subject with a curt "No comment" 
but this year he has been forced to issue a defence of the changes to the 
course, granting an interview to the local newspaper in Augusta. "We are 
satisfied the changes . . . are appropriate for today's game," he said. "We met 
our objective of maintaining the integrity and shot values of the golf course 
as envisioned by the Bobby Jones and Alister Mackenzie."

As for the criticisms that the alterations will mean players hitting long-iron 
shots into greens designed to accept mid- to short-iron shots, he was 
characteristically dismissive. "These are the best players in the world and I'm 
certain they will figure out a way to play the holes that have been changed."

That is easy for Johnson to say. Woods, for one, is not so sure and has 
predicted an over-par winning score if it stays sunny and dry, thereby making 
it even harder to hold the greens. For his part, Johnson declines to predict a 
winning score. "Our main concern has been that the course be kept current with 
the times," he says. Yet nowhere in this lengthy self-justification does the 
club chairman address the issue of the times: the impact of technology on 
landmark course such as Augusta National.

In the past Johnson has openly discussed introducing a Masters "tournament 
ball" which would not fly as far as the balls currently in use. The tone of his 
remarks left many assuming that he was in favour of such a radical step, but 
the unveiling of these latest changes to the Augusta National course revealed 
such assumptions to be wrong. There will be no Masters ball.

What changed Johnson's mind? No doubt the subject will be raised at the 
chairman's traditional pre-tournament press conference, and no doubt he will 
avoid giving a straight answer, thereby encouraging even more speculation and 
guesswork from the world's press. And to get that particular ball rolling, here 
is one possible explanation.

The US Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Association and the Royal 
& Ancient are currently conducting a viability study into "rolled back" balls 
with a view to reaching a decision on whether such a ball should be introduced 
throughout the game in order to protect the great courses such as Augusta 
National. Could it be that Hootie Johnson already knows what conclusion the 
sport's governing bodies will reach?

Meanwhile Steve Elkington of Australia pulled out yesterday with a groin 
injury.
 