
Given that it comes from the most perversely inventive mind in American movie 
fiction,Anomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/anomalisa-review-sex-and-depression-in-charlie-kaufmans-superb-stop-motion-breakdown>
 might at first seem like no big deal. Charlie Kaufman’s plot premises have 
tended to be somewhat baroque: identical twin screenwriters, one named Charlie 
Kaufman, agonise over a script (Adaptation 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0268126/>); a playwright mounts an 
autobiographical drama that threatens to engulf the world (Synecdoche, New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/15/synecdoche-new-york>); most 
notoriously, an office building contains a secret portal into the mind of a 
movie actor (Being John Malkovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/oct/03/charlie-kaufman-how-to-write>). 
By comparison, Anomalisa sounds altogether mundane: a depressed, middle-aged 
motivational speaker spends a night in a Cincinnati hotel where he has an 
affair with a gauche young woman. Nothing out of the ordinary – at least not 
until events take the inevitable nightmare turn. Yet Anomalisa comes across 
from the very start as deeply strange and unsettling – because its actors are 
all puppets.

Anomalisa review: sex and depression in Charlie Kaufman's superb stop-motion 
breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/anomalisa-review-sex-and-depression-in-charlie-kaufmans-superb-stop-motion-breakdown>
Initially funded through Kickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/anomalisa/charlie-kaufmans-anomalisa>, 
Anomalisa premiered in Telluride before going on to Venice last week, whereit 
won the grand jury prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/sep/12/venice-film-festival-golden-lion-2015-from-afar-charlie-kaufman-anomalisa>
. The film is written by Kaufman, and jointly directed by him and Duke Johnson, 
a specialist in stop-motion animation best known for the spoof seriesMary 
Shelley’s Frankenhole 
<http://www.adultswim.com/videos/mary-shelleys-frankenhole/> on the Adult Swim 
channel. Anomalisa started life in 2005 as a stage play, part of composer 
Carter Burwell’sTheatre of the New Ear 
<http://www.carterburwell.com/projects/TONE.shtml>, a series of “sound plays”. 
The show was performed withFoley <http://filmsound.org/terminology/foley.htm> 
artists creating sound effects live on stage, and three actors – David Thewlis, 
Jennifer Jason Leigh and Tom Noonan. That trio now comprises the film’s entire 
voice cast: Thewlis and Leigh playing the two leads, while Noonan does all the 
other characters in the same unnerving dead intonations. “I sort of have a 
monotonous voice,” Noonan tells me when I meet the film’s makers in Venice.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNYbKJfls6WM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNYbKJfls6WM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNYbKJfls6WM&media=>
Kaufman, frowning intently behind heavy glasses and a thicket of beard, says 
that when he was approached to turn the play into an animation, he was 
resistant. In the liveAnomalisa <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa>, 
he says, “there’s a disconnect between what’s being said on stage and what the 
audience is seeing – there’s Tom playing all these characters, there’s Jennifer 
and David having sex while they’re really just standing across the stage from 
each other and moaning. You’d lose that.”

Consequently, Anomalisa had to be reinvented, and while the script is 
virtually the same, the effect is utterly different. In the film, there’s 
something uncanny about seeing its puppet protagonist, with his silicone body 
and 3D-printed face, going through the tedious, drawn-out rituals of taking a 
cab, checking into a hotel, listening to the bellhop’s formulaic welcome spiel.

Johnson, boyish and brush-cut, says: “People told us, ‘You can’t make puppets 
that look too real, because it will be disturbing and off-putting.’ And we 
believed that’s not true. The unique thing about stop-motion is that it’s 
infused with organic life, because it’s not made by a computer, it’s not 
perfect – the hands reach in and they move something. No matter how perfectly 
you animate something, as you’re watching it, it’s undeniable – you feel it. 
There’s an organic life that’s present in these inorganic things. It feels 
creepy, and sometimes you’re like, ‘That’s a doll!’ That’s not the same thing.”

“The fact that they’re puppets being manipulated,” Kaufman adds, “becomes an 
existential issue as well. You know someone’s manipulating them – they don’t 
know it.” Although, Anomalisa being a very existential story, there comes a 
moment when its hero, Michael, has a sudden realisation that he’s something 
other than flesh and blood. Kaufman’s stories do tend to remind us that their 
characters are creatures inhabiting fictions. “Yeah,” Kaufman laughs. “I like 
that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442318268366%2F5c137def-e70f-4b5a-a41d-ef04d1b2a45d-2060x1135.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20weirdness%2C%20failure%20and%20his%20new%20puppet%20noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20weirdness%2C%20failure%20and%20his%20new%20puppet%20noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442318268366%2F5c137def-e70f-4b5a-a41d-ef04d1b2a45d-2060x1135.jpeg>
 Deeply strange and unsettling … an image used for the initial Anomalisa 
Kickstarter campaign. 
Audiences have tended to like Kaufman’s self-reflexive turn, too, as have the 
directors who began to film the former sitcom writer’s scripts, beginning in 
1999 when Spike Jonze made the audaciously outre Being John Malkovich. Other 
films followed: Adaptation, again with Jonze; meta-biopicConfessions of a 
Dangerous Mind <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/mar/14/artsfeatures1>, 
directed by George Clooney; and Michel Gondry’sEternal Sunshine of the Spotless 
Mind <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/apr/30/dvdreviews.shopping4>, a 
story of time, love and memory that was as close as American romcom gets to 
modernist maestroAlain Resnais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/mar/02/alain-resnais-60-years-of-sensational-cerebral-film-making>
. Kaufman’s originality and audacity caught on; the term “Kaufmanesque” was 
coined to evoke his singular style; other people’s quasi-Kaufmanesque projects 
got greenlit (egStranger Than Fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/dec/01/willferrell.dustinhoffman>, in 
which Will Ferrell discovers he’s a character in a novel); books on 
screenwriting craft were rewritten to accommodate the radical 
counterintuitiveness of his approach.

Then, in 2008, Kaufman directed his own first film, Synecdoche, New York – 
about a dramatist who attempts to stage his own experience as a vast, 
ever-expanding production. The movie was a sprawling, unashamedly depressive 
confrontation of Kafka, Arthur Miller, Borges and backstage drama. Some critics 
hailed it as a masterpiece for the ages, others threw up their hands in 
despair. Noonan, who appeared in Synecdoche along with Jennifer Jason Leigh, 
remembers the standing ovation it received in Cannes. “I thought, ‘This is 
going to be a monster hit.’ Which I think it was not completely.”

It was not. Costing a reported $20m, Synecdoche grossed only $3m in the US, 
and broke Kaufman’s magical run. After that, he seemed to go underground. So 
what did he do?

“I wrote a screenplay about internet anger,” he says. “A lot of that came from 
my reading stuff after Synecdoche. I was trying to make some use of it in my 
work. I don’t feel having an audience reaction like that is inherently bad. I 
kind of think it’s something to be proud of, because it means you’ve taken a 
position and you’ve put yourself out there. To me, it would have been better if 
it had been a commercial success, because it would have made my professional 
life afterward easier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442323257183%2Fe66b2388-d282-4a7a-8358-9b64f6ad6497-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20weirdness%2C%20failure%20and%20his%20new%20puppet%20noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20weirdness%2C%20failure%20and%20his%20new%20puppet%20noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442323257183%2Fe66b2388-d282-4a7a-8358-9b64f6ad6497-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Charlie Kaufman (right) with Philip Seymour Hoffman (left) and Michelle 
Williams during the making of Synecdoche, New York. Photograph: Everett/Rex 
“I’ve been writing and struggling to get stuff made since then. It’s not like 
I’m just sitting here, but it’s been hard.” The industry too, he points out, 
has been less friendly to idiosyncratic work. “The economy changed in 2008 and 
big studio movies became the thing. I don’t write those and I wanted to direct.”

One thing that Kaufman has done since then is to create the pilot for a TV 
series calledHow and Why 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/19/sally-hawkins-charlie-kaufman-how-and-why-tv-series>
, with a cast including Noonan and Sally Hawkins; last year, the FX channel
turned the show down 
<http://www.indiewire.com/article/fx-passes-on-charlie-kaufman-tv-pilot-how-why-is-the-writer-too-smart-for-tv-20140721>
, but we may see it yet. How and Why sounds appetising, as Noonan describes it. 
“It’s impossible to explain, but it’s amazing. It feels very pedestrian and 
sort of plodding, but it’s really crazy and great – and very scary and sad. Two 
families live in the same house at different points, and one starts to take 
over the other, even though they don’t meet – something like that?”

Kaufman has always had an image as eccentric, at least by Hollywood criteria – 
because he writes strange material, because he takes a highly philosophical 
angle on things, because he’s averse to talking about himself, because he’s 
known to read Kafka. The oddball reputation is all misconception, Noonan and 
Jason Leigh tell me.

Leigh: “He’s really easy to converse with – interested in people, not 
judgmental. He’s kind.”

Noonan: “He’s very down to earth, very nuts and bolts, not a lot of theory or 
bullshit.”

Leigh: “And very sweet.”

Noonan: “And not weird in the least.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442329918349%2Fdd27e3ce-4c7c-47d3-b344-ec1cd79f73ad-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20weirdness%2C%20failure%20and%20his%20new%20puppet%20noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20weirdness%2C%20failure%20and%20his%20new%20puppet%20noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442329918349%2Fdd27e3ce-4c7c-47d3-b344-ec1cd79f73ad-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘Alienation is a big problem in this culture. I think it has a lot to do with 
social media’ … Anomalisa 
Kaufman pinpoints one of his key concerns – although you’ll know this if 
you’ve seen even five minutes of his work – when he says, “Alienation is a big 
problem in this culture. I think it has a lot to do with computers and social 
media, and the inauthenticity of people’s interactions. But we’re going down 
that road, and there’s nothing I can do about it.”

One version of that alienation emerges in Anomalisa through references to a 
delusional condition named Fregoli syndrome, which causes people to believe 
that different people are really the same person in disguise. Synecdoche, New 
York also alluded to something called Cotard syndrome. Is there, I wonder, a 
Kaufman syndrome that compels Charlie always to write complex, self-reflexive 
fictions that turn the rules of character and story inside out?

“I don’t think so. I hope it’s not that. I’m always trying to find things that 
interest and excite me. I’m not interested in doing anything weird for weird’s 
sake. I think about telling stories subjectively, because I think that’s the 
way life is lived.”
 