
Charlize Theron is set to star opposite Seth MacFarlane 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/charlize-theron-may-star-seth-415628>
 in the Ted creator's new comedy western A Million Ways to Die in the West, 
tipped as a homage to Mel Brooks's classic movieBlazing Saddles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77754/blazing-saddles>.

MacFarlane, whose self-penned tale of a foul-mouthed, horny teddy bear was one 
of 2012'sbest-reviewed and highest-grossing comedies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/02/ted-review>, will once again take 
directing, writing and acting roles in the new film. The Family Guy creator's 
star has risen rapidly in Hollywood over the past year, and next month's stint 
as host of the Oscars should further improve his profile with audiences.

A Million Ways to Die in the West centres on a cowardly farmer who avoids a 
gunfight and is consequently left by his girlfriend. Later he meets the wife of 
a notorious outlaw who offers to teach him to shoot. He sees an opportunity to 
win back his woman, but nevertheless begins to fall for his tutor. When the 
project was first announced in December, theHollywood Reporter described it as 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/new-seth-macfarlane-western-movie-397126>
 "a western with contemporary humour, with one undercurrent being just how 
dangerous and painful life really was in the late 1800s".

It is not clear at this stage whether MacFarlane will take the role of the 
cowardly farmer himself, though Theron would appear to be a good fit for the 
pistol-toting tutor. MacFarlane has some on-camera experience in feature films 
after appearing in a supporting role in the2010 comedy Tooth Fairy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/132453/tooth-fairy>; however, the move 
would represent something of a step up from his previous turn as the 
motion-captured title character in Ted. Producers are planning to shoot in May.

Blazing Saddles is widely recognised as one of the greatest comedies of all 
time. Brooks's 1974 filmstarred Cleavon Little as the newly arrived black 
sheriff <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=upvZdVK913I> of a racist wild west 
outpost, with Gene Wilder as his sardonic quick-drawing sidekick. Brooks 
himself played a Native American chief who speaks only Yiddish.
 