
In order to create her 1976 Sun Tunnels <http://clui.org/ludb/site/sun-tunnels>
 – four huge concrete tubes that lie miles from anywhere in the Utah desert –
Nancy Holt <http://www.nancyholt.com> employed a large crew, including an 
astrophysicist, an astronomer, engineers, surveyors, ditch-diggers, drillers, 
drivers and a helicopter pilot. One of the best-known examples of what came to 
be called land art, Holt’s Sun Tunnels are all about alignment with the sun and 
stars, the deep time of the Earth and the shortness of life. They are also the 
result of materials and industry, haulage and trucks.

Holt’s litany of collaborators is repeated in Charlotte Prodger’s video 
Stoneymollan Trail, almost like a nursery rhyme. Rather than the arid and 
immense Utah landscape, Stoneymollan Trail references an old 7km-long burial 
path just outside Glasgow, where Prodger lives and works. Built as a coffin 
road (so the dead could be carried to the nearest consecrated ground), the path 
is but one layer of metaphor inProdger’s largest exhibition to date 
<http://www.spikeisland.org.uk/events/exhibitions/charlotte-prodger-solo-exhibition/>
.

Running for almost an hour, in a dark space behind a curtain at Bristol’s 
Spike Island, Stoneymollan Trail is a compilation of scenes from videos Prodger 
has shot since the late 1990s. Old camcorder, HD and more recent iPhone footage 
are combined, and the film functions almost as her show’s subconscious. It is 
filled with disinterred and often degraded material, some of which she had 
almost forgotten till recently. Prodger seems to use the camera like a 
sketchbook. She describes her iPhone camera as a prosthesis. Looking back at my 
own old notebooks, periods of my life come sharply into focus. At other times I 
haven’t a clue what I have written or drawn or why.

For a long time I don’t know what I am looking at, or looking for. Here’s a 
fox on a mattress sitting in rubbish. Some goats clamber about on rocks, seen 
from a train. Here is the artist, pacing about, her image poorly reflected on 
the dead grey screen of a TV monitor at the back of another shot. Pixels 
frequently stack and jostle and obliterate part of the picture. A voiceover 
commentary explains “Whole tape has pixel corruption down the right side of the 
frame”. There is more than one voice. They come and go. Images of a lovely 
landscape are accompanied by horrible noise. The accidental degradation of the 
magnetic tapes leaves us with frantic juddering and frazzled pixels that look 
weirdly meaningful – a reduction of the image to an abstract semaphore of 
geometry and pattern. You begin to think that this is less the result of 
technical failure than a message from the past, or another planet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcharlotte-prodger-stoneymollan-trail-elegy-to-time-loss-and-casual-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F083babf6ea51624822adbd4f2cad31fbd1231a05%2F0_0_2807_1685%2F2807.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlotte%20Prodger's%20elegy%20to%20time%2C%20loss%20and%20casual%20sex&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcharlotte-prodger-stoneymollan-trail-elegy-to-time-loss-and-casual-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlotte%20Prodger%27s%20elegy%20to%20time%2C%20loss%20and%20casual%20sex&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcharlotte-prodger-stoneymollan-trail-elegy-to-time-loss-and-casual-sex%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F083babf6ea51624822adbd4f2cad31fbd1231a05%2F0_0_2807_1685%2F2807.jpg>
 ‘Frantic juddering and frazzled pixels become weirdly meaningful’ Photograph: 
Stuart Whipps 
While the rest of her show in Spike Island’s elegant white spaces has a formal 
order and elegance, it is a roiling turmoil in the dark behind the curtain. 
Stoneymollan Trail is like stepping into someone’s brain and overhearing their 
inner voices, witnessing the tangle of rushing thoughts and incoming stimuli.

Sometimes the voice is male, sometimes the artist’s own. She reads an 
encouraging email sent byartist and curator Ian White 
<http://chisenhale.org.uk/archive/news/index.php?id=97>, who died last year. 
She describes a class in British Sign Language, though it isn’t clear whether 
Prodger attended the class or if she is reading someone else’s description. She 
also describes, at length, a scene where people meet for casual sexual 
encounters somewhere down by the water, where cabs and trucks park up for the 
night. There is a jolt when Prodger starts talking about her cock.

Later, I discover the passage is written by black, gay science fiction writer 
Samuel R Delany <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LqeAQ01icK0> from his memoir 
The Motion of Light in Water: Sex and Science Fiction Writing in the East 
Village, published in 1988. It is a beautiful piece of writing, describing 
hook-ups and partings and the changing light on the water as dawn approaches. 
Delany talks of wild abandon beyond the edge of control, but also calls the 
whole situation “hugely ordered” and “grounded in a certain care, if not 
community”.

Later still, Prodger reads a transcript of Nina Simone’s asides during her 
rendition of the Morris Albert song Feelings <https://vimeo.com/36880003>, at 
the 1976 Montreux jazz festival. Simone gave the tacky song an unbearable 
pathos. Back home, I watched Simone’s performance again on YouTube. Her 
self-exposure is incredibly moving. Simone keeps going to the brink, only to 
pull herself back into making sense. Like Delany’s description of bodies coming 
together in the bacchanal among the trucks on the Lower East Side, I watch 
Simone’s performance as if it had all the restraint and order of a Noh play.

The cumulative effect of Stoneymollan Trail is elegiac. Prodger channels the 
voices of the living and the dead, mixing them with her own past. I think of it 
as a video essay about time and loss, and how to wrestle with the material of 
our lives – which of course includes the things we have looked at and read as 
well as the aggregate of our own experiences – as the basis for creative work. 
We have to make our own connections.

I struggle to find my own as I walk back into the gallery. Everything feels 
ordered and calm. In two side spaces hang enormous tarpaulins, the kind used on 
haulage trucks. Prodger had them made especially. With their heat-welded 
plastic seams and grey and white translucent panels, their dangling metal 
clamps and webbing, they have the air of fetishistic industrial abstract 
paintings. They seem to pass through the space, like the tarped-up trucks that 
rush by her Glasgow window. I cruise past them, thinking of all those bodies in 
the trucks in Delany’s text.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcharlotte-prodger-stoneymollan-trail-elegy-to-time-loss-and-casual-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d4a97519c6af8b4a883ac2eb73a0317ad41bae5%2F0_0_2808_1685%2F2808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlotte%20Prodger's%20elegy%20to%20time%2C%20loss%20and%20casual%20sex&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcharlotte-prodger-stoneymollan-trail-elegy-to-time-loss-and-casual-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlotte%20Prodger%27s%20elegy%20to%20time%2C%20loss%20and%20casual%20sex&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcharlotte-prodger-stoneymollan-trail-elegy-to-time-loss-and-casual-sex%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d4a97519c6af8b4a883ac2eb73a0317ad41bae5%2F0_0_2808_1685%2F2808.jpg>
 ‘The thin cotton has a blotchy pattern of greyish blooms. I think of 
bloodstains seeping through a shroud.’ Photograph: Stuart Whipps 
In the central area, four identical pieces of clothing are pressed between 
layers of Perspex. They look like white hooded kimonos, or strange duvet 
covers. The thin cotton has a blotchy pattern of greyish blooms. I think of 
bloodstains seeping through a shroud. The clothes are ponchos, designed to be 
worn over uniforms for winter warfare in the snow. Prodger has also removed the 
covers of the sunken plug sockets in the floor, and replicated them in 
powder-coated aluminium, each one a different warm hue from ochre yellow 
through to reddish black. They sit at our feet, running the length of the 
gallery. I stare down at the floor and the exposed electrical sockets, as if 
they were something that shouldn’t be seen.

Everything here is about covering and uncovering, exposure and inspection. Is 
this what Delany was also talking about? “I meant to tell about a story,” 
Simone says to her audience. “Since we all have stories. But I can’t remember 
it anyway.”

What a perplexing and complex exhibition this is. The more time I spend here, 
the more complicated things get. Things keep coming together and apart. I’m 
still wrestling with it, which is as it should be. In the end there’s just 
feelings, and whatever connections we can make.

 * 8004-8019 is at Spike Island, Bristol 
<http://www.spikeisland.org.uk/events/exhibitions/charlotte-prodger-solo-exhibition/>
, until 13 December.
 