
Antonio Conte <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> has 
expressed regret that Steve Holland is to leave his coaching staff at Chelsea 
at the end of the season to take up a permanent position with Gareth 
Southgate’s England setup but has admitted his assistant could not turn down a 
rare opportunity to work with the national team.

Holland, who has been combining his role as first-team assistant manager at 
Chelsea with life as No2 to Southgate, initially with theEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> Under-21s, since 2013, will 
depart Stamford Bridge after eight years on the staff next summer. The 
46-year-old was originally appointed Chelsea’s reserve-team manager in August 
2009 and was promoted to the senior setup as assistant first-team coach by 
André Villas-Boas two years later.

Chelsea target Tiemoué Bakayoko and Djibril Sidibé after £60m Oscar windfall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/chelsea-tiemoue-bakayoko-djibril-sidibe-oscar-windfall>
He has continued in that role under five managers since, playing his part in 
Conte’s team establishing a six-point lead at the top of the table. He will 
work with Southgate for England’s games against Lithuania and Germany in March 
and sever ties withChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> 
before the summer internationals.

“It’s a pity to lose him, I must be honest,” Conte said. “But, also, I can 
understand his choice. Steve is a very good professional and is helping me a 
lot with my time so far at Chelsea. He has great experience with this club.

“But this type of situation can arrive only once in your life, to be a coach 
or assistant coach of your national team and your country. For this reason, I 
understand his decision. It’s a pity because I’ve worked very well with him. 
But, for now, it’s important to be focused on the present and work with this 
staff.

“I have a great staff, a fantastic staff. There is a great spirit, a family 
spirit, with them. In the future, we’ll see [if a replacement is appointed].”

Holland has spoken of his pride at the role that awaits. “It is the ultimate 
honour to be asked to work with your national team into a World Cup campaign,” 
he said. “My immediate focus is on continuing to support Antonio and the 
Chelsea team, and doing everything possible to finish the season with success.

“The summer will be the time to look forward to an exciting future with Gareth 
and England and to reflect on the best eight years of my life at Chelsea. For 
now the next game is Bournemouth.”
 