
Antonio Conte <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> has backed 
Michy Batshuayi to make his mark in the long term at Chelsea as he considers 
handing the Belgian his first Premier League start in place of the suspended 
Diego Costa for the Boxing Day visit of Bournemouth.

Batshuayi, a £33.2m signing from Marseille in the summer, has been limited to 
13 appearances this campaign, his three starts coming in the EFL Cup. His last 
goals were a brace in a3-2 win over Bristol Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/chelsea-bristol-rovers-efl-cup-match-report>
 in that competition in August and he has been reduced to cameos since as Conte 
has been keen to give the striker time to adjust to the physicality and pace of 
the Premier League.

Costa’s impressive form – he scored his 13th goal of the season against 
Crystal Palace last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/crystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 to secure the leaders’ 11th successive win – and improved on-field discipline 
have left Batshuayi on the fringes but the Spain international accrued his 
fifth caution of the season at Selhurst Park and will miss the visit of 
Bournemouth. Conte could ask Eden Hazard to operate as a false No9, flanked by 
Willian and Pedro, but appears likelier to ask the 23-year-old Batshuayi to 
lead the line.

“Michy’s attitude, his behaviour, have been fantastic,” said the manager. “He 
wants to improve his quality. Technical quality, physical quality, and we are 
working a lot with him on tactical aspects.

“He’s showing great commitment, great work-rate during the training sessions, 
great passion. For sure he wants to play and it’s not easy when you have Diego 
Costa in front of you – above all this Costa, who is playing fantastic football 
and scoring a lot of goals. But I repeat: it’s important for Michy to continue 
to work, to continue to improve. I’m sure his moment will arrive. If I decide 
to put Michy in the starting XI, it is because he is ready to play. He must do 
what he knows, what we are doing in the training sessions. Only this. If Michy 
is here, it’s because he deserves to stay here.”

Chelsea agree £52m fee with Shanghai SIPG for transfer of Oscar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/chelsea-oscar-shanghai-sipg-china>
Chelsea have made clear to West Ham United that any attempt to sign the player 
on loan will be swiftly rebuffed and they are keen to grant him game time in 
the Premier League in case they need to rely upon him more regularly over the 
second half of the season. But Conte has been acutely aware of the toils 
endured by his compatriotSimone Zaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/west-ham-striker-simone-zaza-juventus>
, a member of his Italy squad at Euro 2016, at West Ham this season and is 
anxious Batshuayi does not suffer the same teething problems.

He is convinced the forward has improved merely by training alongside players 
such as Costa and Hazard. “I think every single player, every forward, is 
different for characteristics, so Michy is different if you compare him to 
Diego,” Conte said. “Above all because, first of all, he’s a younger player. He 
can improve a lot. For sure, to stay close to Diego, you can learn a lot to 
improve your experience and improve your skills. And to have the training 
sessions with great players improves you.”

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> must also replace the 
banned N’Golo Kanté against Bournemouth, with Cesc Fàbregas likely to step in 
for only his third Premier League start in more than three months. He set up 
Costa for the equaliser at Manchester City and scored the winner at Sunderland, 
in each of the games he has begun since the defeat at Arsenal in September, and 
will seek to inspire a club record 12th consecutive victory.
 