
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have won 10 straight 
Premier League games, they are six points clear at the top of the table and 
their progress towards the title seems inexorable. But are Antonio Conte’s team 
really that good? Can they answer some critical questions?

1) Is matching up a trend capable of demystifying Conte’s 3-4-3 blueprint?

Premier League managers have a new buzz phrase: “matching up”. It entails 
mirroring your rival’s formation and explains why David Moyes, a long-time 
three-at-the-back sceptic, rearranged Sunderland in 3-4-3 configuration forthe 
1-0 home defeat by Chelsea on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/sunderland-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
.

Conte can expect more of the same when his side visit Crystal Palace on 
Saturday – particularly as Alan Pardew is an enthusiastic convert to “matching 
up”. Palace switched from 4-2-3-1 to 3-5-2 during the 3-3 draw at Hull City in 
order to create a certain, theoretically opponent-nullifying, symmetry with 
their hosts.

This tactic made Sunderland a bit more resilient and, conceivably, could have 
enabled them to snatch a draw but Chelsea are capable of wrong-footing the 
opposition by seamlessly switching to four at the back when necessary, notably 
doing so in the second half of their 1-0 win at Middlesbrough and during last 
week’s 1-0 home victory against West Brom.

“All round the country coaches will be working hard on trying to stop 
Chelsea’s 3-4-3,” Moyes says. “They play with very high wing-backs, so at times 
it’s five up front. You have to cope with that when you’ve not got the ball and 
then work out how you can cause them problems when you do have it. They quite 
quickly get back into a back five when they need to and they’ve also got two 
midfield players who sit. But you’ve also got to be aware of their 
counterattacking ability.”

Chelsea's perfect 10 and Zola in at Birmingham – Football Weekly Extra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2016/dec/15/chelseas-perfect-10-zola-birmingham-football-weekly-extra-podcast>
2) Long term, is three at the back really that great an idea?

Moyes is not so sure but acknowledges few managers are as steeped in the 
system as the former Italy coach. “They’re a really technically good, 
well-balanced, team but I don’t think that, in the history of the Premier 
League, a team have won the game playing three at the back throughout a whole 
season,” Moyes says. “The difference withAntonio Conte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> is that he’s played in and 
coached that system and knows it inside out but Chelsea can also play four at 
the back effectively.”

3) How important is Conte’s appreciation of the art of catenaccio?

“Chelsea have a toughness about them all over the pitch,” says Moyes, who 
suspects Conte’s ability not only to bolt the door but to resist attempts to 
pick the lock could be unrivalled this season. “They’re particularly tough at 
the back, whereas maybe people wouldn’t see Manchester City being quite like 
that.”

Such resilience has enabled Chelsea to keep eight clean sheets during 10 
straight top-tier wins, conceding only two goals along the way. “It’s amazing,” 
says Marcos Alonso, the wing-back and, like Victor Moses on the right, a 
catalytic influence. “But it’s not just about the system. It’s that our team’s 
working very hard. We’re concentrating very hard.

“Everyone puts everything into defending and we have also to thank Thibaut 
Courtois in goal; he’s amazing. He’s not participated much in recent games but 
his two saves at Sunderland gave us three points. He’s one of the best 
goalkeepers in the world. He’s very important.”

4) Are Chelsea stronger than their rivals in mind and body?

It looks that way. “We’re getting used to winning,” Alonso says. “And we don’t 
celebrate it like we used to. Instead we just keep working hard. We want to 
keep the amazing atmosphere in our dressing room that comes with winning but we 
know we’ve got to be at 100% every game because it’s a tough league. The 
manager hasn’t changed with success, he hasn’t mellowed, definitely not. He 
wants the players to keep giving everything and we know that’s very important.”

Significantly Conte also has competition for places in key positions with Cesc 
Fàbregas putting pressure on Nemanja Matic by shining at Sunderland and proving 
he can both thrive and be trusted in a 3-4-3 formation after all.

Then there is the fitness aspect. “From the start of the season we’ve worked a 
lot on physical aspects and we continue to work on them,” Conte says. “In this 
league it’s important to have intensity and strength as well as good technique. 
This league’s very tough so, if you’re not strong, it’s difficult to win. I 
trust in my conditioning work and now I’m seeing what I wanted to see at the 
start.”

It also helps that Chelsea do not have the mental and physical distraction of 
European involvement. And they know how to pace themselves and how to slow 
games right down before returning to high-intensity mode. There is possibly 
less danger of burning out than with Jürgen Klopp’s full-on Liverpool.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the midweek action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/15/premier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action>
5) What happens if Costa, Moses or Alonso are injured?

With his aggression now controlled, Costa increasingly looks the complete 
centre-forward and his loss would be a body blow. Nonetheless Chelsea do have a 
£29m striker on the bench in Michy Batshuayi. He has not done much since 
joining from Marseille but should be anxious to prove a point. Moreover a 
revolving front three of Willian, Eden Hazard and Pedro would not necessarily 
be too shabby.

In one sense losing the width and zip provided by Moses and Alonso could 
arguably prove more damaging to an otherwise rather narrow team. Ditto David 
Luiz’s imperious sweeping skills. Even so, if forfeiting Costa would not be 
quite as bad as removing Alan Shearer from Blackburn’s 1995 title-winning team, 
it would probably be broadly comparable to Manchester City losing Sergio Agüero 
or Arsenal Alexis Sánchez.

6) Can they break Arsenal’s 14-game run of wins?

In 2002 Arsenal won 14 straight games. To better that, Chelsea require 
victories against Crystal Palace (a), Bournemouth (h), Stoke (h), Tottenham (a) 
and Leicester (a). Easy-peasy or what?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fantonio-conte-on-chelseas-10th-league-win-in-a-row-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antonio%20Conte%20on%20Chelsea's%2010th%20league%20win%20in%20a%20row%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fantonio-conte-on-chelseas-10th-league-win-in-a-row-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antonio%20Conte%20on%20Chelsea%27s%2010th%20league%20win%20in%20a%20row%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fantonio-conte-on-chelseas-10th-league-win-in-a-row-video&media=>
Antonio Conte on Chelsea’s 10th league win in a row – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/15/antonio-conte-on-chelseas-10th-league-win-in-a-row-video> 