
Antonio Conte believes Chelsea’s match with Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> this weekend will provide 
a true gauge of his team’s progress to date this season, as the Premier League 
leaders seek to extend their lead over Pep Guardiola’s team at the top of the 
table.

A disappointing start to the campaign saw the Blues suffer successive defeats 
by Liverpool and Arsenal before the end of September but Conte’s side visit the 
Etihad having won their last sevenPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> games and are a point 
ahead of City.

“Tomorrow is a really tough game,” said Conte. “This is a great test for us, 
for our formation, to continue this way. We know that it won’t be easy because 
we face a really great team, with really great players and a good idea of 
football. But we want to show we are working very well and are growing. This is 
another step to show us if something has changed since the start of the season.”

Love John Terry or loathe him, an unignorable career is winding down | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/02/love-john-terry-loathe-chelsea-manchester-city>
In last weekend’s 2-1 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/chelsea-tottenham-premier-league-match-report>
 at home over Tottenham the league leaders suffered their biggest scare since 
the defeat by Arsenal. Mauricio Pochettino’s side took a first-half lead 
through Christian Eriksen and were on top for large parts of the first period. 
Conte was impressed with his side’s comeback and believes the team he was in 
charge of at the start of the season would have lost that game.

“The first half against Tottenham was very difficult but, when you have this 
kind of difficulty, you can learn a lot,” he said. “This week we studied our 
first half a lot and I showed how we can improve this situation in the future. 
Tottenham are a top team with a great squad and a great manager. Don’t forget, 
last season they fought for the title until the end while we arrived in 10th 
place.

“This season for Tottenham to have seven points less than us is a great 
achievement. They can fight until the end of the season to win the title. 
They’re a really good team. I showed the first half to the players and we 
learned a lot. But I think that, if we were the team at the start of the season 
against Liverpool and Arsenal, I’m sure we’d have lost this type of game.”

Chelsea’s well-documented change in system has played a big part in their 
upturn in form and their top scorer, Diego Costa, has thrived at the centre of 
Chelsea’s in-form attacking trio. Conte is very happy with the Spaniard’s 
application since the start of the season, especially with the striker having 
avoided a fifth booking, which would bring a one-match suspension, since 
picking up his fourth at Arsenal in September.

“I’m pleased for him,” added Conte. “Diego is showing great respect, great 
passion but in the right way during the games. It’s fantastic for him, for his 
team-mates, for the club. It’s great to talk about Diego in a positive way and 
not a bad way. I remember at the start of the season, the only questions on 
Diego were about his passion not being good and about trying to change his 
behaviour and attitude. I think Diego is behaving very well and his attitude is 
fantastic. Now it’s important to continue this way.”

The London club will tomorrow come up against their former player, Kevin De 
Bruyne, who was sold to Wolfsburg for an initial £15m in January 2014. De 
Bruyne went on to make a club-record £54mmove to City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/28/kevin-de-bruyne-manchester-city-wolfsburg>
 a year later. Asked if he believed the club had let go of the Belgian too 
early, Conte said: “De Bruyne used to play with Chelsea and is a really great 
player. It’s a pity that now he’s playing for another team. He’s a fantastic 
player. But now he plays with Manchester City I wish for him the best, after 
our game.”
 