
Andreas Whittam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andreas-whittam-smith>
 leapt into the limelight again the other day - the Bishop as Batman - by 
saying there should be sex shops in every town. His argument was perfectly 
logical. As president of the British Board of Film Classification, he oversees 
a species of video-rated 'Restricted 18' that can only be sold in licensed sex 
shops. But if there is no licensed shop in an area - and there are very few 
outside Soho - porn-seekers go to illegal traders who sell videos out of the 
backs of cars and mix paedophile and bestial material along with the normal 
hardcore. So Andreas believes local authorities should control and supervise 
the trade rather than ignore it, by encouraging the establishment of sex shops.

Like so many of Andreas's arguments, this is on the one hand sensible and on 
the other hand slightly mad, or at any rate unrealistic. Naturally it sent the 
Daily Mail into a screaming frenzy. Stephen Glover, his old adversary from The 
Independent, accused him of wanting to sweep a tide of filth through every high 
street, so that you couldn't pop out for a loaf of bread without confronting 
'window displays of mind-boggling sexual contraptions'. Other papers took up 
the hue and cry but Andreas, far from being alarmed by the clamour, was 
delighted. 'There was even a cartoon in The Sun !' he beams. He is an absolute 
Liz Hurley when it comes to publicity.

He became president of the BBFC two years ago, and until that moment he had 
never been a consumer of pornography in any form. What, really, never - not at 
school, not in the Army, never ever ever? 'No. I'd never seen a sex video in my 
life. The first one I saw - which wasn't strictly speaking a sex video - 
astonished me hugely. It was called Pregnant and Milking No 5 - it was the 
number five that got me! So I looked at this thing and I discovered that there 
is a genre, which some men pay money to see, which is of pregnant women very 
dolefully and unenergetically stripping and fondling their breasts - that's all 
they do. I was very new to the job; I didn't know the rules at all. So I 
thought, oh dear, we can't have this in ordinary shops -- we'd better make it 
R18. So that's what I did. I now know that that was a completely wrong decision 
- it's not like hard porn where the camera is about one inch from the action - 
but it still languishes in R18.'

I must say I find it weird discussing blue films with Andreas - I keep wanting 
to hoot and snigger and shout 'weyhay'! He was my boss for three years when I 
worked on the Independent on Sunday, and although I knew he was not the 
sanctimonious prig depicted in Private Eye, I don't think we could have 
discussed Pregnant and Milking in those days - or certainly not with the 
suavity he brings to it now. But he says one of the things he likes about this 
job is the complete absence of cant. 'If we say to the distributors, "There's 
not a shred of a plot here of any kind," they say, "No there isn't. We didn't 
intend there to be."'

Most of his job consists of classifying videos as suitable either for general 
release, R18 release (to sex shops only) or no release at all, and there is a 
very precise legal framework for making these decisions. Classifying cinema 
films is a comparatively minor part of his work - 700 films a year as against 
7,000 videos - and so far he has shown no inclination to cut anything, as he 
made clear from the beginning when he licensed Lolita uncut. He believes that 
cinema-goers broadly know what they're getting and 'I think at 18 adults should 
make up their own minds. Of course I'm sure 16- and 17-year-olds are running 
into 18 films but I don't think 12-year-olds are; I think it's quite well 
policed. And no other country comes up to 18 - most of them stop at 17. We are 
the most highly censored country in the world.'

Alexander Walker (the Evening Standard 's film critic) had 50 fits last year 
when Andreas passed the French film Romance complete with full-frontal 
erections. 'Allow one pioneering male sex organ to rear its head,' he shrieked, 
'and suddenly dozens more will come out of hiding.' (Actually, Walker was too 
coy to mention it, but there was ejaculation as well.) But Andreas is 
unconcerned - he thinks there probably will be more onscreen erections but only 
when the public is ready for them. 'The public is becoming less tolerant of 
violence on film - and you can see this in that the Hollywood action heroes 
aren't getting roles any longer. But the public continues to become more 
relaxed about sexual explicitness - that tide has not turned. So slightly more 
explicit stuff will gradually seep through. Because guidelines reflect what we 
can read as public opinion and if public opinion is slowly becoming more 
relaxed, then we will too.'

Apparently Jack Straw approves. According to Andreas, 'I have a very good 
relationship with the Home Secretary.'

Not all the issues are about sex and violence. There's a genre of videos at 
the moment that are offcuts of television news footage, which no one dares show 
on a regular news programme - people running out of houses burning, or the 
police opening a door and finding someone hanging. Andreas again is permissive. 
'I have to say, I'm sympathetic to showing it. I suppose it's my news instinct 
- I think, well that's what happens. People do run out of fires burning. It 
isn't acting. It isn't a story encouraging violence, it's real.'

He has a team of 20 examiners who classify most of the films, but he watches 
the one or two a week that are 'problematic'. He has just passed Pasolini's 
Salo which has never been licensed in this country and refused to make cuts. 
'What you find with a good film-maker - it's like with good prose - you can't 
cut it. Secondly, the best film-makers, when you look carefully, suggest 
everything, they don't actually show it. You think you've seen all sorts of 
things, but you haven't really. And censors can only deal with what we see.'

So has he been depraved and corrupted by watching all these dirty movies? Has 
he started fantasising about having sex with goats? 'No - but I don't think you 
ever get hardened to it. It's very like going to the dentist. You've got this 
date - 11 o'clock, Wednesday morning. And often you know it's going to be 
pretty tough, and you think "ohmigod". I always ask, "How long is it?" and if 
there's a lot of time spent on the introductory stuff, I think, oh that's good, 
10 minutes gone! And then quite often of course it's nowhere near as bad as you 
fear. But when it is bad, I definitely feel as if my mind has been soiled. I 
come out of the Board and walk towards Tottenham Court Road tube station. And 
as I pass people in the street I've still got the film going in my head, and 
these people are part of it somehow. The only word I can think of is soiled.'

Does he find gay films difficult? 'Yes, I think I'd have to say I find it even 
harder to watch a gay film than I do a heterosexual one, but that's just me. 
They can be very sado-masochistic and often run into greater problems for that 
reason.' The video he found hardest of all to watch was one about body piercing 
- 'It showed everything - it showed the bolt going through, it showed the 
operations. And it ended up with men - I don't think women do it - men having 
hooks placed in their backs - apparently the skin is strong enough - and then 
they're dangled from some sort of pulley arrangement, hanging from these hooks 
on their back, and revolve. They're looking for an out-of-body experience, so 
they say. And perhaps they achieve it, I don't know. Well, that was a new one! 
I knew nothing about that!'

Conversely, does he ever get turned on by these videos? 'No, not by sex videos 
because they're too up close. They are fantastically unnatural. And one mark of 
that is that I can never remember individual titles. If someone says, "Do you 
remember Office Tarts ?" I don't. I remember the genre well enough, but they're 
all the same. I can easily be turned on by a beautiful or romantic comedy with 
fairly explicit sex, sure, but not by that. I need a bit of class to be turned 
on!' And he utters his strange barking laugh.

The great thing to remember about Andreas Whittam Smith is that he may look 
like a bishop, he may on occasions talk like a bishop, but he is not a bishop. 
True, he is a clergyman's son (as were seemingly half the staff of the 
Independent in his day) and he takes his religion seriously. But his 
high-minded puritanism is mixed with a wacky iconoclasm, or what Glover calls 
his Baader-Meinhof streak. He can do gravitas in spades, but there is also a 
flighty, flouncy side, subject to strange tantrums and vanities, delighted by 
gossip, thrilled when Pamella Bordes once came to the Independent office, happy 
to pose for Annie Liebovitz with a golden eagle on his arm, and always eager 
for any excuse to open champagne. Sebastian Faulks, who was at the Independent 
from the beginning, recalls him as an inspiring editor and says that 'to me he 
seemed a bit like the Jack Nicholson character in Easy Rider: a real straight 
who had suddenly been given his head'.

Rupert Murdoch said he had 'the charisma of a poached egg'. On the other hand, 
everyone who worked on the Independent was obsessed by him and would try to 
read the runes of his ever-changing complexion - was mauve a good sign? Was it 
better to ask for a rise when he was mildly pink or positively white? I always 
thought he was an actor manqu√© but he says, on the contrary, he would hate to 
be an actor, and he actually has a recurring nightmare in which he is made to 
act and 'I haven't learned my lines, we're just about to start, and I'm going 
to have to go on stage and look a complete and utter clown'. That's an imposter 
dream, I tell him. 'Exactly, yes.' So is he an imposter? People who believed in 
his bishop image were always terribly shocked when they came across his flighty 
side and accused him of being a hypocrite. But, as he says, it's not his fault 
if people read him wrong.

He doesn't understand how he ever got this bishop image: 'I'd like to shake it 
off - I don't really want to go around looking like a bishop. My greatest 
desire has been to be cosmopolitan and it shattered me one day when the then 
editor of La Repubblica said "Andreas, whenever I think of an Englishman I 
think of you". I thought, "My God - all this time I've tried to be 
cosmopolitan!" And when I was feeling very metropolitan one day I went to 
Harrods to get my hair cut, and as I lay back in the chair, the barber said, 
"Up from the country, sir?" And I hadn't moved out of the city for six months! 
So I can't achieve the self-image I want. I'd like to be either cosmopolitan or 
metropolitan or both really - a man of the world, at ease everywhere in the 
world. The nearest I came to it was when the Daily Mail was really cross with 
me about Lolita; the leader was a big attack, which ended up by describing me 
as "this urbane liberal" and I was so pleased with the urbane! That's the only 
thing I can set against this wretched bishop image.'

He is about to become more cosmopolitan because he and his wife have just 
started 'an experiment in two-city living', which means she lives in a rented 
flat in Paris during the week and he joins her at weekends. It sounds rather 
lonely for him, but he says, 'I've got lots to do, my oldest son is often here 
and we're slowly turning it into a men's club - it's like a men's club without 
any members at the moment.'

He is 63 but has no thought of retiring. When he left the Independent in 1994 
he decided to plan his life on the basis that he had 30 more working years 
ahead of him. 'Some people have a fear of death, which I don't. But I do have a 
very deep, powerful fear of not working. The notion of retirement has no 
attraction of any kind - I can't understand it when people my age start going 
on cruises. I know I shall always work whatever happens. So that tells you 
something about what drives me. It's not to do with accumulating money, it's to 
do with a sort of puritanical view, I think, that I always wish to contribute 
in some minor way. And maybe that comes from the vicarage.'
 