
A controversial weapon in the war against antisocial behaviour should be 
banned, the children's commissioner will warn this week in a move that 
threatens a new Whitehall battle over 'hoodies' rights'.

The row centres on the so-called Mosquito, a Â£500 device that emits a 
high-pitched whine loud enough to drive away teenagers in the vicinity. 
Marketed as the 'ultrasonic teenage deterrent', it is increasingly being 
adopted by shopkeepers, local councils and even private homeowners to disperse 
gangs of young people because it operates on a frequency that can be detected 
only by under-25s, whose hearing is more acute.

Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, who was 
appointed by the government to champion children's interests, will argue the 
Mosquito infringes their human rights and penalises innocent children. Parents 
have also questioned its long-term effects on children's hearing.

Aynsley-Green will launch a campaign this week calling on businesses to 
abandon the tactic, and encouraging children to report instances of its being 
used against them. He is understood to be prepared to bring a test case in the 
courts if necessary.

However, a Home Office source said the Home Secretary, Jacqui Smith, backed 
the use of the Mosquito as a way of combating yob culture, adding: 'We would 
always put ourselves on the side of the law-abiding minority rather than on the 
side of gangs of hoodies.'

Gordon Brown last week cited teenage lawlessness and gang violence as a key 
priority for his government and the clash over the Mosquito marks an early 
test. The Prime Minister had signalled a change of tack in his early months by 
disbanding the Respect Taskforce set up by Tony Blair to tackle yob culture, 
putting its staff under the control of the Department forChildren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> and Families, which was seen as 
a signal that he would offer more carrot and less stick to disaffected 
teenagers.

That approach has come under pressure, however, with the Tories attacking the 
government over levels of street violence and teenage offending.

Thousands of Mosquitos have been bought by police forces, retailers, housing 
associations, train companies and private individuals who want to get rid of 
teenagers loitering near their homes. The device consists of a black box that 
emits a pulsing noise several times a second over a 15m radius, loud enough to 
force children to leave the area within minutes. It is advertised to stores on 
the grounds that unruly teenagers might discourage 'genuine shoppers' prepared 
to spend money.

Its manufacturers insist they have sought legal advice that it does not 
contravene human rights, and that very young children are not affected by it. 
But civil liberties group Liberty say it is a degrading and indiscriminate 
weapon that targets children in a way that would provoke uproar if it were used 
against other groups.

'I would think the Home Office would be on the side of child protection,' said 
Liberty's director Shami Chakrabarti.

'This device could affect a babe in arms as well as a teenager. Imagine such a 
device applied to people of one race or gender and ask what position they would 
take.'

Liberty has been looking for a test case to bring over the issue, but has been 
hampered by the fact that it requires a child to make and pursue the complaint.

Aynsley-Green is expected to argue that the Mosquito infringes children's 
human right to free assembly, because it is used against teenagers hanging 
around in groups, and also potentially discriminates on grounds of age.

The Mosquito was invented by a former British Aerospace engineer, Howard 
Stapleton, after his daughter was intimidated by a gang of boys hanging around 
outside shops. It is based on a noise that Stapleton remembered from his 
childhood, generated by ultrasonic welding in the factory run by his father.
 