
Nine of the Chilean miners who were trapped underground for more than two 
months in 2010 have sued their lawyers for failing to secure an adequate share 
of the revenue from a new Hollywood film about their 69-day ordeal.

The plaintiffs – many of whom are still suffering from physical and 
psychological after-affects – say their lawyers offered bad advice and cheated 
them out of income from books, TV serials and the movie.


The dispute appears to have divided the group of 33 men, who were trapped for 
more than two months 700 metres underground after a collapse of their mine in 
the Atacama desert in 2010.


The protracted rescue attempt made news around the world. Initially, the men 
promised one another not to profit from the experience, but the pact fell apart 
as their fame spread along with the lure of riches.


A movie The 33, starring Antonio Banderas and Juliette Binoche, will be 
released in the US later this month 
<http://deadline.com/2015/10/the-33-review-chilean-miners-movie-antonio-banderas-juliette-binoche-1201596730/>
. Several of the miners reportedly served as consultants on the film.


The 33 survivors had formed a joint company, which they hoped would allow them 
to split the proceeds and manage their finances, but they said in the lawsuit 
that they were misled by lawyers Remberto Rodrigo Valdés and Fernando Garci.


“The contracts we signed were not what the lawyers said they would be, for 
example of the $150m [£97m] paid to our company, we only received 17%,” the 
group’s leader Luis Urzúa, told reporters at the courthouse. “Today we’re being 
rescued for a second time”.


Chilean miners struggling with financial and psychological problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/04/chilean-miners-financial-psychological-problems>
The money is needed, they say, to help with a long and sometimes traumatic 
adjustment. Most have suffered health problems. Several have had difficulty 
finding work.


“I suffered a mental breakdown two years after the accident which led to panic 
attacks, insomnia and forgetfulness. I am still off work for health reasons and 
need to see a psychologist in Santiago every month,” Carlos Barrios, one of the 
younger miners, told the BBC earlier this month.


Despite their celebrity status, the survivors remained scarred, according to 
the author who interviewed them for the bookDeep Down Dark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/01/fall-2015-best-latin-american-novels>
.


“They were like guys who had been through war,” said Pulitzer Prize-winning 
writer Héctor Tobar, whose account is the basis for the new film, which 
premiered inChile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> in August.


“They feel like they have been treated with a lack of respect. That people 
sort of see them as these ordinary guys who accidentally got buried underground 
and hoped to get rich and famous off of it,” Tobartold Reuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/10/09/us-chile-miners-idUSKCN0S32NA20151009>
 in an interview earlier this month.

 