
The government is planning to review official targets for reducing poverty, 
arguing that simply comparing relative incomes leads to perverse incentives and 
does little to promote better life chances.

The move was signalled by the work and pensions secretary, Iain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith>, and David Cameron in 
the week that the government was forced to admit that its autumn statement will 
mean another 100,000 children brought into child poverty under the measure 
enshrined in law by the Labour government. Labour set the target of eliminating 
child poverty, so no household has an income of 60% or below the national 
median, by 2020.

But Duncan Smith described that approach as hugely expensive and said: "It 
looks set to have failed." He argued: "Levels of family income are just an 
approximate and by no means perfect measure of family wellbeing. I do believe 
that increased income and increased wellbeing do not always follow the same 
track."

Cameron also attacked Labour's primary measure of child poverty, saying: "I 
think there is a real problem. Because it is done on relative poverty, it means 
that if you increase the pension, that means more children are in poverty. I 
think that is illogical. It doesn't make any child in this country poorer 
because you are giving pensioners more money at a time when they need it.

"I think what we've got to start doing is measuring how we help children out 
of poverty and keep them out of poverty."

Duncan Smith went further, suggesting state provided income could actually 
have a negative impact. "Take a family headed by a drug addict or someone with 
a gambling addiction: increase the parent's income and the chances are they 
will spend the money on furthering their habit, not on their children. 
According to the relative income poverty figures they might be above the line, 
but by any reasonable measure of long-term life chances they would be stuck 
firmly below.

"Or take a family where no one has ever worked. Increase their benefit income 
– while taking no other proactive action – and you push the family further into 
dependency, only increasing the chance that their child will follow that same 
path as an adult. So while income is important we should be clear that the 
source of that income can have very different effects."

He added: "Income through benefits maintains people on a low income, whereas 
income gained through work can transform lives."

Duncan Smith's aides said he was not planning to repeal the Child Poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> Act, but his remarks mean the 
target is no longer going to be a central goal of government policy.

Picking up some analysis made for the coalition by Frank Field, the Labour 
former welfare minister, Duncan Smith said: "The public debate on poverty is 
still overwhelmingly focused on the narrow relative income measure. This focus 
drives a number of perverse incentives in the way that governments have 
approached policy." This led to policy such as tax credits being targeted at 
families just below the poverty line, he said.

Focusing on child poverty risked ignoring the plight of working age poverty, 
Duncan Smith claimed. "Simply pulling people out of poverty with increased 
welfare payments is a dangerous and ineffective strategy," he said. Support for 
early years, family relationship advice or health visitors may be more 
important in boosting life chances than welfare payments.

The child poverty debate came as the shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, 
published a breakdown of the autumn statement showing women would lose over 
£1.5bn from the measures.

Of the changes to tax credits and capped public sector pay amounting to 
£2.37bn, Cooper said 73% would come from women, who would lose £1.73bn while 
men would lose £640m. Her figures were calculated by the House of Commons 
library. She then looked at all the changes since the 2011 election and showed 
that of the £18.9bn the government is raising each year, £13.2bn is from women 
and £5.7bn from men.

The Labour leader, Ed Miliband, said: "Let's be clear – this is the biggest 
attack on women in a generation."
 