
A child abuse victim named by the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk>, as a friend 
and key inspiration for her government’s push to end time limits on civil 
claims has attacked her proposed legislation as a betrayal of many victims.

Allan Allaway says he is “absolutely livid” the the bill, which is due to be 
voted on in parliament on Tuesday, excludes survivors of physical and 
psychological abuse.

Queensland locking up more 10 and 11-year-old children than any other state, 
says Amnesty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/31/queensland-locking-up-more-10-and-11-year-old-children-than-any-other-state-says-amnesty>
When introducing the bill to parliament in August, Palaszczuk singled out 
Allaway for thanks and acknowledged his advocacy, describing him as “a friend 
for many years and whose personal stories have touched my life”.

But Allaway, 76, who suffered serious physical abuse at Neerkol orphanage near 
Rockhampton after being taken from his mother as a baby, said the legislation 
abandoned him and thousands of other victims because their abuse was not sexual.

The bill would retrospectively abolish the need for victims of institutional 
child sexual abuse to file lawsuits by the age of 21.

But the Palaszczuk government has defied widespread calls from legal groups 
and victims’ advocates such as Allaway to expand the definition of eligible 
abuse victims to mirror that in New South Wales.

It has also ignored calls to empower courts to set aside previous secret 
out-of-court settlements by institutions with victims whose claims would have 
been ineligible under the statute of limitations.

“I am absolutely livid,” Allaway told Guardian Australia.

“Unless the government or governments, both state and federal, are going to 
agree to include the physical and psychological abuses along with the sexual 
abuse, then it is nothing more than what we have received our entire lives, 
which is double talk and hollow promises.

“We’ve heard all the fancy talk and speechmaking and where are we today? We 
are still being treated as society’s detritus.

“Unless they are going to combine the physical and psychological abuses along 
with the sexual abuse then once again we are still being abused.

“What is it we’re asking for? This is not about money. This about recognition.”

Palaszczuk told parliament in August 
<http://www.parliament.qld.gov.au/documents/Hansard/2016/2016_08_16_WEEKLY.pdf#search=(Allan 
AND Allaway)> that the introduction of the bill was “a historic occasion”.

Along with Allaway, she thanked social advocacy group Micah Projects, the 
Historical Abuse Network and members of the Brisbane Grammar abuse victims 
network.

“Having had the opportunity to sit there and personally hear their stories has 
had a deep and lasting impression upon me,” Palaszczuk said. “I have conveyed 
those views to my cabinet and to caucus … what I say today is that your 
government is listening; your government has heard your voices.”

Micah Projects and members of the Grammar network have since argued for the 
time limit to be lifted for a broader category of victims – including those 
outside institutions, such as foster children.

They have also argued for courts to be allowed to set aside unjust past 
settlements by institutions who invoked the statute of limitations. This would 
be in line witha parallel bill tabled by the independent MP Rob Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/queensland-may-allow-child-sex-abuse-victims-to-revive-previously-settled-claims>
, which the government refuses to support.

All except one of 23 submissions to a parliamentary committee supported those 
changes. They included theQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> Law Society, the 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Service, and Knowmore, the official 
legal service for the royal commission into institutional responses to child 
sexual abuse, run by the former top state anti-corruption official Warren 
Strange.

Allaway, who decades ago founded what he believes to one of Australia’s first 
child abuse victims groups representing those who went through Neerkol, said he 
had known Palaszczuk “for a long, long time” through his advocacy.

“She is an honest, decent person,” he said. “But she is not in control. It’s 
the establishment that is in control.

“She is being controlled by the establishment and why? Because the 
establishment knows that unless they control this they will be exposed and they 
and those that worked in the system, even to this very day, the bureaucrats are 
still protecting those that worked in the system and those that are dead.

“That is what they are petrified of.

“Those in positions of power need to ask themselves one question and one 
question only. What would they do if their children were stolen from the to the 
extent that we have been abused. They would move mountains.”

While the government has said it will not use past settlements to block fresh 
lawsuits brought against the state, it hascited potential “far-reaching and 
unintended consequences” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/05/queensland-opts-not-to-scrap-age-limits-on-child-sex-abuse-victims-lawsuits>
 of legislating to override legal barriers preventing repeat claims against 
churches and schools.

A spokesman for the state’s attorney general, Yvette D’Ath, said before the 
bill’s introduction that a national redress scheme may be “more appropriate”.

Child sex abuse survivors may get up to $150,000 in national compensation 
scheme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/04/child-sex-abuse-survivors-150000-dollars-compensation-scheme>
Victims’ legal advisers, including Strange, have separately highlighted the 
need for a national redress scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/queensland-to-scrap-age-limits-on-child-sex-abuse-victims-lawsuits>
 for those who would struggle to muster sufficient evidence for a civil claim 
owing to the passage of time and lack of records.

Palaszczuk, speaking in parliament on Tuesday, said she would “implore” the 
prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, at the Coag meeting next month to enact a 
broad national scheme after directly raising the issue on his last visit to 
Queensland.

“While the initial signs are encouraging that the federal government is 
looking at this very important issue, I firmly believe that as a nation we must 
address this issue, as a nation,” she said.

“It has been a long time coming and the victims of childhood sexual abuse and 
abuse in other institutions need justice.”
 