
Box office revenue in China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> hit an 
all-time high in February with a mammoth $650m total, beating both the Chinese 
monthly record and the US figure for the same period.

While the north American equivalent was initially $710m for a month which saw 
the release of erotic smash Fifty Shades of Grey, once Canada’s input was 
stripped away, the number was down to just $640m.

February has become a big month in China with the Lunar New Year holiday 
bringing huge numbers. This year, that week alone brought in $270m. In the US, 
however, February isn’t traditionally a key period for releases and the month 
is often dominated by awards titles still on release and Valentine’s day fodder.

Out of Focus: low turnout to Will Smith movie – but film still tops US box 
office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/02/focus-will-smith-margot-robbie-kingsman-fifty-shades>
Box office winners which contributed to the record take include The Man from 
Macau II, a comedy sequel starring Chow Yun-fat that took $104m, and Dragon 
Blade, an action film with Jackie Chan, John Cusack andAdrien Brody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/adrien-brody> which grossed $95m.

The biggest international hits of the month came in the shape of The Hobbit: 
The Battle of the Five Armies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hobbit-the-battle-of-the-five-armies> and The 
Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 1 which made $36m and $35m respectively. Last 
year’s biggest film in China was Transformers: Age of Extinction which made 
$301 million – higher than its gross in the US.

One of the key reasons for the increase in box office is a rise in screens 
with over 24,590 in the country. But this is still far behind the US where 
there are an estimated 40,000.

This month in China sees the release of Kingsman: The Secret Service, which has
already become a huge hit in South Korea 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/korea-box-office-kingsman-and-imitation-game-hotter-than-fifty-shades-or-focus-1201444178/>
, and Jupiter Ascending which is currently performing better outside the US.
 