
Chinese firm Hareon Solar is “actively” considering a billion dollar 
investment in large scale solar projects in Australia, but the stability of 
government climate policy is its major concern, a senior company executive has 
told Guardian Australia.


Jie Zhang, Hareon’s vice president of global business development said 
government subsidies were not necessary for the investment decision, to be 
taken within a year, but policy stability was required.

“Our only wish for government is a stable policy, don’t flip back and forth, 
of course we are concerned what has happened in the past in Australia with the 
renewable energy target,” he said in an interview at the Paris climate summit.

Uruguay makes dramatic shift to nearly 95% electricity from clean energy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/03/uruguay-makes-dramatic-shift-to-nearly-95-clean-energy>
“Stability of policy is the number one thing that we look for. We made a very 
sad investment in Bulgaria, we responded to a call from government together 
with other companies and then they changed their policies. Solar is a 25 year 
investment. If a government can’t keep its policy stable for five years how can 
we inves,” he said.

Hareon solar is a major Chinese solar cell manufacturer and global investor in 
large scale solar projects, founded by Australian citizen Samuel Yang.

It has invested in solar projects delivering 700 megawatts of power in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> as well as big projects in Bulgaria, 
Romania and the United Kingdom and smaller projects in the US and Japan.

Zhang said investment decisions were driven by government subsidies, but now 
required strong demand and policy stability.

Australia’s east coast electricity market is oversupplied, but Zhang insists 
large scale solar could be competitive at peak supply times.

“If you really had oversupply, your electricity price should be dirt cheap, 
but I don’t see that, your prices are high.

“ Oversupply can mean two things, it can mean over-supplying at the wrong time 
... our cost per kilowatt hour during peak times will be lower than coal at 
peak hours,” he said.

“We are very interested in investing in Australia, we are actively looking at 
this market and the generation and distribution in each state. We could install 
between 1 and 2 gigawatts of solar in Australia in the near future.”

“We will make a decision within a year. The market has matured for this 
investment, the cost of solar has come down and the electricity price in 
Australia remains high – so even without a proactive government strategy it is 
good to invest – of course we like government incentives, but we do not depend 
on them.”

Large-scale solar farms given $350m push by renewable energy bodies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/09/large-scale-solar-farms-given-350m>
The Australian Renewable Energy Agency has announced a large-scale solar 
competitive round 
<http://arena.gov.au/programmes/advancing-renewables-programme/large-scale-solar-pv/>
, seeking bids from major solar PV project proponents for grants of up to $30 
million from a $100mn program. The Clean Energy Finance Corporation has 
announced a complementary $250 million large-scale solar financing program.

Renewable energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/renewableenergy> 
investment in Australia froze in the early years of the Abbott government when 
the renewable energy target was under review. In the end in was wound back, but 
not abolished.
 