
“You must choose a subject you enjoy. You’re going to do it for at least three 
years and pay an awful lot of money for it,” says Tracey Griffin, head of sixth 
form at Bournemouth and Poole College, who has helped hundreds of young people 
choose what to study at university.

While this might sound like obvious advice, for many young people enjoyment is 
bottom of the list – behind reputation (of both the university and the course) 
and location. “If the course is fantastic, you’ll put up with a less than ideal 
location and still have a good time. But if you hate your course you could end 
up having a miserable time,” she says.

But knowing what you want to study is just the first step. Applicants also 
need to look closely at course content. Griffin says: “Let’s say you want to 
study politics. While there might be some common themes or topics, no two 
universities will have exactly the same content. So a politics degree at 
Edinburgh could be completely different to one at Sussex. ”

Researching the modules offered on different history degrees is what led Louis 
Jeffries to apply to the University of Southampton. “When I saw there were 
modules that involved looking at history through the lens of film, along with 
others in military history – something else I’m really interested in – I knew I 
had to apply.”

University league tables 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-league-tables-2016>
A similar approach helped Sammi Cham decide on a course when she was applying 
for English literature courses throughClearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> last year. “I had several 
options, but when I saw that Lancaster offered lots of modules in Victorian and 
gothic literature, I knew that was the right choice for me.”

Finding out how courses are assessed is important too. “For students who find 
exams hard, an examination-only syllabus could be a disaster,” says careers 
adviser Susan Burke.

For highly motivated students, two-year degree courses – currently offered at 
10 UK higher education institutions – can be a good option.

“I’ve always thought the long summer holidays were a waste of time, so being 
able to fully devote myself to my subject all year round really appealed to me” 
says Florence Towler, who opted for a two-year degree at the University of 
Buckingham.

It has also saved her money. Although tuition fees, at around 12k, are higher 
than at other universities, to reflect the extra semester in the summer, 
students save a year’s worth of accommodation and living costs, making the 
degree more cost-effective overall. It was also great value-for-money, says 
Towler.

If the course is fantastic, you’ll put up with a less than ideal location

“I was generally taught in classes of 20 or less. My tutorials had a maximum 
of six or seven students – much smaller than the classes my friends at other 
universities were in – which meant I wasn’t just a face in the crowd.”

But with record numbers of young people going to university, having a degree 
is no longer a guarantee of a job, or progression onto further study. Griffin 
advises students to consider degree courses that offer added value for 
prospective employers, such as those which offer a year working in industry or 
studying abroad.

Traditionally, the newer universities have offered more courses that help 
students develop employability skills. But this is changing, says Kathryn 
Parker, National Champion for the Engineering Development Trust’s The Year In 
Industry programme, which provides paid work placements for students, before or 
during their degree course. “We’re seeing much more interest from the Russell 
Group universities and it’s growing,” she says.

Many UK universities now offer an optional year overseas (usually the third 
year) through the European Union’s student exchange programme, Erasmus. However 
this isn’t offered on all courses, so if you think you might be interested in a 
year abroad, it’s worth checking out which courses offer it before you start 
applying.

For students who are torn between subjects, a joint or combined degree course 
is an obvious compromise. Some students worry that this might make them appear 
less committed, as might applying for different degree subjects on their Ucas 
form, says Jack Wallington, community director at the Student Room, but there 
are ways round it. “Let’s say you’re applying for courses in psychology and 
music, for example – you can use your personal statement to convey your passion 
for these areas and how they complement each other.”

Business courses: a route to the corporate top
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f02c0da78b64140405992a84c99aae869eabdfd%2F0_0_2160_1296%2F2160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choosing%20your%20university%20course%20during%20Clearing%3A%20pick%20a%20passion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choosing%20your%20university%20course%20during%20Clearing%3A%20pick%20a%20passion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f02c0da78b64140405992a84c99aae869eabdfd%2F0_0_2160_1296%2F2160.jpg>
 The Said Business School in Oxford. 
If your passion is business, the league table of business courses in the 
Guardian’s University Guide is a good place to start looking for places to 
study.

Oxford University, with its BA in economics and management and its MBA-pumping 
Saïd business school, topped the table this year. But while a significant 87% 
of Oxford’s business students found graduate-level jobs or were in full-time 
education six months after tossing their mortarboards in the air, the figure 
was higher at this year’s third-best-rated business studies institution, the 
University of Bath. Of the students on its eight different business courses, 
more than nine in 10 students now have a graduate job.

Warwick University was ranked second-best in the UK in the league table, while 
you have to travel out of England for the league table’s fourth-best-rated 
institution for business courses, St Andrews.


It’s not just about essays and lectures at the London School of Economics – 
its website hosts a long list of startups and established businesses run by 
current students and alumni, from mindfulness firm OWBA by Dana Zelicha to 
charity donation app GivTree.


Number eight in the Guardian’s ranking of business courses, the LSE offers 
undergraduates courses in management and in business and accounting. The low 
student to staff ratio – of 11.1 – offers considerably more personal attention 
than at almost any other university on the list bar Oxford and the University 
of Buckingham.

Humanities: the stand-out courses

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60beeef12330cd9d5407e890f3ec83fa9626d86e%2F0_333_7360_4418%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choosing%20your%20university%20course%20during%20Clearing%3A%20pick%20a%20passion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choosing%20your%20university%20course%20during%20Clearing%3A%20pick%20a%20passion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60beeef12330cd9d5407e890f3ec83fa9626d86e%2F0_333_7360_4418%2F7360.jpg>
 Almost 80,000 undergraduates study languages at UK unis. Photograph: 
PeopleImages.com/Getty Images 
Tell someone you’re a humanities student and they’ll still ask what exactly 
you’re learning. The wide range of degrees falling under the humanities banner 
include philosophy, literature, religion, art, music, history and languages. So 
what are some of the stand-out courses?

For philosophy, Oxford Brookes has a huge range of related degrees, ranging 
from Japanese studies and philosophy to mathematics and philosophy, with six 
other associated courses. Other high-ranking institutions in the discipline 
include third-ranked St Andrews, and fourth-ranked the University of West 
England, Bristol. At both institutions, student satisfaction levels were high, 
but the UWE’s student philosophers were really over the moon with their courses 
and teaching, handing out a 100% satisfaction rate.

For English and creative writing students, you’ll get the most contact with 
tutors lecturers and other faculty staff at the universities of Southampton, 
Reading, Essex and Kent, all of which have fewer than ten English students per 
staff member. By contrast, it’s over 16 at the University of Cambridge, which 
tops the league table for the subject, nevertheless. The University of East 
Anglia, whose famous creative writing course’s alumni include authors Kazuo 
Ishiguro, Ian McEwan and Rose Tremain, took 16th place.

For would-be student historians, Exeter University, which offers eight diverse 
history-related BAs, including art history and history, English history, and 
history and visual culture, gained a huge 97% satisfaction rating from 
students. Undergraduates at De Montford and LSE, meanwhile, benefit from good 
staff ratios of fewer than 10 students per lecturer or tutor.


Almost 80,000 undergraduates study languages at UK unis, and this year’s 
overall best five are Cambridge, Oxford, Leicester, Durham and Sussex. While 
all offer the likes of French and Spanish, you’ll need to hunt around if you’re 
keen to go beyond the mainstream.

Media studies: look for the right mix of theory and vocational study

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5b164f8aedecefa0a2c2485d36d5f80ab9cb35e%2F0_275_1968_1769%2F1968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choosing%20your%20university%20course%20during%20Clearing%3A%20pick%20a%20passion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choosing%20your%20university%20course%20during%20Clearing%3A%20pick%20a%20passion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5b164f8aedecefa0a2c2485d36d5f80ab9cb35e%2F0_275_1968_1769%2F1968.jpg>
 Students of film, media and cultural studies at Lancaster University will be 
watching the likes of Batman – the Movie. Photograph: 20thC.Fox/Everett / Rex 
Featur 
As well as pondering global cinema and film theory, students of film, media 
and cultural studies at Lancaster University will be watching the likes of 
Batman – the Movie or Dick Tracy as part of a comic-book movies module. 
“Whatever you think of these films, they can’t be ignored,” says lecturer Dr 
Gary Bettinson. “They now occupy the economic centre of mainstream Hollywood.”

Film studies, often contained within wider media studies degrees, is popular, 
but often labelled a “soft” subject – unfairly, say many students who’ve spent 
long hours meeting production deadlines, finishing off hefty assignments and 
working in industry placements.

Degrees vary hugely, of course, so applicants will need to research which 
courses have the right mix of theory and vocational study.

It’s also worth comparing the facilities. Film studies students at London 
South Bank University, for example, will get to test their skills on some 
state-of-the-art post-production facilities when the university’s £4m media 
centre opens in December, and many other universities have invested heavily.

“I’ve had access to some incredible facilities,” says Cameron Sutherland, 
who’s just finished his second year studying journalism and PR at the 
University of the West of England. “A newsroom used by the BBC and all the 
software I could come across in today’s journalism – along with someone to 
teach it.”

Some theory-based media degrees cross over with subjects such as English or 
politics and, increasingly, students choose to mix subjects; Surrey and 
Nottingham Trent (NTU) both offer media and film degrees that can be combined 
with languages or other humanities, for instance.

Industry links are also key. NTU students benefit from collaborations with 
local television and gaming businesses and also work on live projects, while in 
Ealing, west London, the Met Film School’s emphasis is heavily vocational, 
focusing on producing, directing screenwriting or editing and taught, as many 
courses are, by industry professionals.

Other media courses that are rated highly for satisfaction and graduate pay on 
Which? University Include the London College of Communication, the Universities 
of Portsmouth, Hull, Leicester, Leeds and more.

Social sciences: a huge range of courses to choose from


The social sciences – which involve studying society and how people behave and 
influence the world – span a huge range of university courses, including 
economics, politics, sociology and psychology.

In the latest Guardian league table, top economics courses include those from 
Warwick, Surrey and Herriot Watt universities. Many offer the chance to study 
the real-world application of economic theories – such as the global recession, 
tax, and the job market – in international settings. Queen Mary’s, for example, 
has an exchange programme that allows students to spend either a year in the 
USA, Australia or Singapore or a term in Italy or Spain through the Erasmus 
scheme.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21444d88bc23eeeda3b99bc7cfc3111167b9b6bb%2F0_797_2912_2789%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choosing%20your%20university%20course%20during%20Clearing%3A%20pick%20a%20passion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choosing%20your%20university%20course%20during%20Clearing%3A%20pick%20a%20passion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fchoosing-your-university-course-during-clearing-pick-a-passion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21444d88bc23eeeda3b99bc7cfc3111167b9b6bb%2F0_797_2912_2789%2F2912.jpg>
 Monica Ali studied philosophy, politics and economics at Oxford. Photograph: 
David Levenson/Getty Images 
Elsewhere, Coventry University’s economics degree has one of the highest 
levels of tutor satisfaction, with more than 98% of undergraduates giving the 
quality of their teaching a thumbs-up. For top-notch facilities, look at what 
universities spend per head: the universities of Lancaster, Cambridge and Leeds 
all rate highly in this measure for economics courses. And for student 
satisfaction with their course, Coventry received a huge 99% rating and at the 
University of East Anglia, 98% of economics students said they were happy with 
their modules and study content.

For politics undergraduates, St Andrews beats the rest with its eight main 
politics-related courses, including international relations, international 
relations and medieval history, and Arabic & international relations. About 
three quarters of its politics graduates secured a full-time job or further 
study six months after completing their degrees, and 96% of students said they 
were satisfied with their course.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 