
The 1,800-year-old Odeon of Herodes Atticus, the Roman amphitheatre on the 
south slope of the Acropolis, known locally as the "Herodion", lies somnolent 
until late spring but, with the onset of summer, it fills to the brim with 
5,000 people most evenings of the week. As the sky turns deep purple and the 
last rays of sunlight illuminate the distant hills across the Saronic Gulf, an 
expectant silence descends as the evening's performance begins.

My visit to Athens coincided with the programme announcement for this year's 
Athens and Epidaurus Festival <http://www.greekfestival.gr/Default.aspx>. The 
annual festival of the performing arts has undergone something of a renaissance 
in the last few years under the directorship of Yorgos Loukos. International 
theatre, music and dance performances take place from early June to late August 
in venues across the city, including the sublime setting of the Herodion.

For me, as a former student of the theatre, Athens is almost a place of 
pilgrimage. It was here that the plays of Euripides, Aeschylus, Sophocles and 
Aristophanes were first performed, many of them at the site of the Theatre of 
Dionysus (soon to be restored 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/nov/25/greek-theatre-to-be-restored>), a 
few hundred metres along the slope of the Acropolis from the Herodion, in the 
shadow of the Parthenon. The ancient city's Festival of Dionysus was celebrated 
here each spring with music, poetry and three days of plays, performed from 
dawn until dusk.

Mercifully, perhaps, the modern festival does not require visitors to endure 
days on end of Greek tragedy, although this year's programme does include a 
revival of Peter Stein's 12-hour epic adaptation ofDostoevsky's The Demons 
(performed in Italian, at Peiraios 260, 3 and 4 July).

It's midday, the sun is at its zenith, and all of Athens is at lunch, eating, 
drinking and chatting in the shade of the vine-shrouded trellises and 
colonnaded terraces of the city's tavernas and cafes. Anna, an actor friend, 
and I have come to the pleasant neighbourhood of Ano Petralona. We visit the 
tastefully renovated meze cafeRendez Vous (Kallisthenous 85, Ano Petralona) 
and, over dishes such asthrapsalo (arrow squid) and kopanisti (a strong soft 
cheese from the Cyclades), washed down with an excellent raki, discuss upcoming 
events. Venue by venue, highlights include ...

At the Odeon of Herodes Atticus (Dionysiou Areopagitou street) is the Japanese 
Noh theatre performance,The Sutra of Great Wisdom (16 June), with the 
17th-generation Noh actor Rokuro Umewaka. On 8 July, theState Orchestra of 
Athenspresents Symphony No 4 by the pre-eminent Greek composer, Mikis 
Theodorakis (known to the world as the writer of the theme tune to Zorba the 
Greek), and singerCaetano Veloso, "the Brazilian Dylan", performs on 12 July.

The dedicated festival space, Peiraios 260, has three atmospheric auditoria 
set within the warehouses of an abandoned furniture factory. Greek company 
Sforaris presentFables in Song or Little Everyday Tragedies (21, 22 June), an 
outdoor installation/performance vividly reworking a series of gruesome folk 
tales. And French actress Isabelle Huppert will be playing inA Streetcar, based 
on Tennessee Williams' play (2–5 July).

The essential outdoor theatre experience is to be found at the Ancient Theatre 
of Epidaurus <http://www.greekfestival.gr/gen_content.aspx?pgid=4&vid=10> – 55 
tiers of limestone seating holding up to 14,000 spectators and, for a backdrop, 
the lush pine forests of the northern Pelopponese. Though some two hours by 
road from Athens, the performances every Friday and Saturday throughout July 
and August are an integral part of the city's arts calendar. Hiring a car is 
recommended, though bus services are frequent (special KTEL buses 
<http://www.ktel-argolidas.gr/?module=default&pages_id=60&lang=en> run direct 
from Athens to the theatre for €20 return; +30 210 512 4910). Epidaurus mainly 
hosts performances of ancient Greek drama, and this year seesthree productions 
of plays by Aristophanes(The Knights, 2, 3 July; Lysistrata, 16, 17 July; The 
Acharnians, 23, 24 July). No doubt the dark political clouds gathering along 
Greece's horizons of late were the inspiration for including so many of the 
ancient satirist's works. Most performances are in Greek, but the spectacular 
arena is more than enough reason for a visit.
 Dancers from Tanztheater Wuppertal perform one of the late Pina Bausch’s 
works. Photograph: Mohamed Omar/EPA 
Another major festival space is the Megaro Mousikis <http://www.megaron.gr/> 
(Athens Concert Hall, Vasillisis Sofias Avenue, +30 210 728 2333). The 
Tanztheater Wuppertalwill be performing two of the late and great Pina Bausch's 
dance works, Água (7, 8, 9 July) and Nefés (13, 14, 15 July). The Megaro is 
Athens' principle orchestral music venue and has a year-round programme of 
classical and jazz concerts and more.

There are many options beyond the festival. I have spent many a sunny 
afternoon hidden among the olive, pine and cypress trees on the Hill of 
Filopappou, listening to the hypnotic wail of a clarinet drifting up from 
rehearsals at the open-air Greek dance theatre ofDora Stratou 
<http://www.grdance.org> (Filopappou Hill, +30 210 921 4650), nestled in the 
slope of the hill below. Greek folk dances Tuesday to Sunday until 
mid-September.

For evenings at the opera, the Olympia Theatre (Akadimias 59, +30 210 361 
2461) is home to theNational Opera 
<http://www.nationalopera.gr/index.php?lang=en>, with productions running year 
round outside the summer months when it transfers to the Herodion. The city 
also has a number of dedicated children's theatres. Among them are theNational 
Theatre's Katina Paxinou 
<http://www.n-t.gr/en/nationaltheatre/theatres/Paxinouchildrenstheatre/> 
auditorium, located under the beautifully restored art-decoRex Theatre 
(Panepistimiou 48, +30 210 330 1881), and theMikri Porta 
<http://www.portatheatre.gr/english/index.htm> (Mesoghion Avenue 59, +30 210 
778 0518), which will present the festival co-production Ela, Ela (Come On!), 
19–27 June, a play without words for toddlers and adults alike. Performances of 
Karagiozis shadow puppetry, with a history dating back to Ottoman times but now 
something of a dying art, can still be found ad hoc, usually from a 
hand-painted sign pointing the way to a makeshift venue.

Doctors used to recommend the Attic climate for its health-giving properties. 
Soaking up the sun is an undeniable pleasure, but then so is spending a few 
hours reclining under a clear night sky, enraptured by the music of the 
orchestra below.

• British Airways <http://www.britishairways.com/travel/home/public/en_gb>, 
Olympic Air <http://www.olympicair.com/Home.aspx?a_id=549>, Aegean Airlines 
<http://en.aegeanair.com/> all fly direct to Athens from Heathrow; easyJet 
<http://www.easyjet.com/asp/en/book/index.asp?lang=en> flies direct from 
Gatwick. The aptly namedHerodion Hotel <http://www.herodion.gr/homepage.asp> 
(Roberto Galli 4, +30 210 922 4044), a stone's throw from the amphitheatre, has 
doubles from €172. Further information:greekfestival.gr 
<http://www.greekfestival.gr/>, breathtakingathens.com 
<http://www.breathtakingathens.com/>, visitgreece.gr 
<http://www.visitgreece.gr/eot/splash/splash.htm>. Greek Tourist Office 
<http://www.gnto.co.uk/> in London: 020-7495 9300. Tickets for the Athens and 
Epidaurus Festival <http://www.greekfestival.gr/Default.aspx> are on sale now 
(+30 210 327 2000).
 