
Chris Coleman <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chris-coleman> has 
dismissed Marcel Koller’s suggestion that Wales were lucky at Euro 2016 and, in 
a carefully worded response, implied the Austria coach was in charge of a team 
who “couldn’t handle the pressure in the tournament”. Speaking before Thursday 
night’s World Cup qualifier in Vienna, Koller said Wales “were lucky that a 
match did not turn in another direction” in France, prompting Coleman to defend 
his players.

Chris Coleman accepts Wales are a prized scalp after taking seat at top table
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/wales-austria-chris-coleman-world-cup-2018-qualifier>
“I wouldn’t put our semi-final achievement down to luck,” he said. “You can 
get lucky over 90 minutes sometimes but you don’t achieve a semi-final by being 
lucky, that’s for sure. We had a little bit of luck here and there, we had bad 
luck. But the reason for our achievements is because we’re a good team. A lot 
of teams went into the tournament with big reputations because they had 
fantastic [qualification] campaigns, but they couldn’t handle the pressure. Our 
players handled the pressure, so that’s not luck.”

Coleman claimed he had no intention of using Koller’s comments as part of his 
team-talk. “These boys know what is at stake,” he said, looking across at 
Ashley Williams, the captain. “One thing we don’t do is worry or concentrate on 
anybody who has anything to say about us. You hear all sorts of stories being 
said about us, about how we work, which are not necessarily true. We 
concentrate on ourselves, we know the gameplan, we know we need to stick to 
that. We give all opposition respect. But it’s all about us.”

The match is taking place at the Ernst Happel Stadion, which is where Coleman 
marked hisWales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> debut with a goal 
in 1992. Around 4,000 travelling fans have travelled to Vienna for the game, 
which is Wales’ first away from home since Euro 2016.

Koller said that Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> will 
mark Gareth Bale tightly - “We will not only have one player on him, we will 
have two or three players in close vicinity for 90 minutes to try to disturb 
him” - but Coleman has no qualms about those tactics. “That’s normal, that’s 
what he faces every week with Madrid and with us. We played Hazard and Ronaldo 
and you can work as much as you like defensively and shut them out for 89 
minutes but in a split second they can change everything. That’s what Bale can 
do.”
 