
On Sunday, a fan named Michael Tran popped a question to Chris Davis, via 
Twitter, that no member of the media had dared to ask:
Chris Davis (@ChrisDavis_19) 
@MichiganMagic1 <https://twitter.com/MichiganMagic1> No
 <https://twitter.com/ChrisDavis_19/statuses/351425727981297664> June 30, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/ChrisDavis_19/statuses/351425727981297664> 
Davis didn't have to answer the question but he did. Despite his reply, the 
slugger, who has whacked 31 home runs (the fifth fastest to reach 30) 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/d/davisch02.shtml> along with 25 
doubles, is unlikely to satisfy any doubters out there. That's because if we 
were to describe the relationship status between baseball players, fans and the 
media on a dating website, it would read "it's complicated".

It's hard to be surprised by such a question at this point, especially after 
witnessing baseball's escalation of drug testing failing to stop scandals such 
asthe one currently playing out with Biogenesis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2013/jun/07/biogenesis-mlb-peds-a-rod>. 
Especially because in the not too distant past we've seen the games statistical 
pool sulliedby the so called "Steroids Era" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/10/clemens-bonds-sosa-baseball-hall-of-fame>
.

Last season was a breakout year for Davis – he hit 12 more homers than his 
previous high while playing in 139 games, also a career high. This season he 
nearly matched his 2012 home-run total by June, and has eclipsed his OPS by 
close to 200 points. That is a colossal spike and in 2013, in the minds of many 
observers, fairly or unfairly, colossal spikes equal potential PED use.

That's not Chris Davis' fault at all, but rather Melky Cabrera's 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/may/15/melky-cabrera-ring-giants-blue-jays>
, Alex Rodriguez', Barry Bonds', Mark McGwire's, Sammy Sosa's, Rafael 
Palmeiro's and plenty of others'.

Are we so jaded that we can no longer appreciate a player, a little farther 
into his career than we may believe to be "normal", explode in a major way? I 
would certainly hope not, but I would venture to guess that a large portion of 
fans who follow the Orioles slugger, who leads the league in homers, slugging 
percentage and OPS, have thought or mentioned, even as a lighthearted joke 
among friends, that he may be using. But there is no evidence to back up such 
casual claims, and as we saw, Davis steadfastly denied it.

Some fans and media are fighting the temptation to jump to conclusions. On 
Tuesday, appearing on WFAN radio in New York, Peter Gammons was asked about 
fans sudden interest in Davis' medicine cabinet. He said:

Chris Davis is the same age figuring out his strike zone that David Ortiz 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/o/ortizda01.shtml> was when he 
figured out his.

Perhaps he has a point. Chris Davis is not David Eckstein. He is a big man who 
plays first base, who showed power in the minor leagues – 1.029 OPS over 77 
games in 2008 at AA and AAA ball. A year later he hit 21 homers with Texas in 
just his second season. Incidentally, before last season, that 2009 campaign 
was the last time he played more than 100 games, so staying healthy and getting 
an opportunity certainly figures into his power surge and improved batting 
average. As Gammons points out, it's Davis' eye for the ball and baseball brain 
that's shown improvement, something that PED's are less likely to help.

Perhaps the most interesting element of all this is how the question many 
wanted to ask was asked by a fan rather than the press – who, at least in 
theory, adhere to the idea of having some sort of evidence before asking that 
question. The fans, empowered by social media and buying the tickets, are freer 
to do what they like – rightly or wrongly. Even if players are suspended for 50 
or 100 games, or are (or were) never caught, it's the court of public opinion 
where most baseball trials are truly played out.

Papelbon pops off

Jonathan Papelbon had something to say about the prospect of Yasiel Puig 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/p/puigya01.shtml> making the 
All-Star Game on 16 July in Queens. 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/events/all_star/y2013/index.jsp> The Phillies closer 
told MLB Network Radio:

The guy's got a month, I don't even think he's got a month in the big leagues. 
Just comparing him to this and that, and saying he's going to make the All-Star 
team, that's a joke to me.

Puig has taken Los Angeles and the baseball world by storm, getting off to 
what could be the best start to a career in the history of the game. After 
another three hits on Tuesday, coming a triple short of the cycle against the 
Rockies, he's put up seven hits in his last 10 at-bats. His batting average up 
to .443 thru 27 games, along with eight home runs and an OPS of 1.218.

Papelbon added:

It's just really what happens in baseball when … to me it really does an 
injustice to the veteran players that have been in the game for eight, nine, 
10-plus years. It kind of does them an injustice because they've worked so hard 
to stay there.

That's true, and I understand where he is coming from. I do, really. However, 
Papelbon should understand this – what we are watching right now is one of the 
greatest month-long baseball shows we've seen, ever. The All-Star Game is for 
the fans, whether"it counts" 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article.jsp?ymd=20120705&content_id=34484968&vkey=news_mlb&c_id=mlb>
 or not, and if Puig, who is not on the ballot right now, can impress fans 
enough to vote him in via a write-in or a late-stage fan vote, then that's 
their business. The All-Star Game is full of injustices and those sort of 
conversations about who deserves to be there will always take place. Papelbon 
should know better.

Streaky is as streaky does
 Cleveland Indians manager Terry Francona. Photograph: Dominick Reuter/Reuters 
The Cleveland Indians are in first place. You read right, they woke up on 
Wednesday morning,looked at the standings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/index.jsp?tcid=mm_mlb_standings>, and saw 
themselves a half game up on the Detroit Tigers, who despite having a great 
deal of talent are in the midst of underperforming in the regular season for 
the second straight year. Last year Detroit struggled until pipping the White 
Sox at the post. In 2013, it's the Indians who are taking on the role of AL 
Central pests, while also becoming one of the streakiest teams – if notthe 
streakiest team – in baseball.

So far this season, they've had three three-game winning streaks, two 
four-game win streaks, two five-game win streaks and one six-game win streak. 
They've also had a pair of three-game losing streaks, two five-game losing 
streaks and an eight-game losing streak. Right now they're on a five-game 
winning streak, in the midst of winning 15 of 20 games, beating Kansas City 6-5 
on Wednesday and improving their record to 45-38.

One reason for their success is an 18-7 record in one-run games, taking 
advantage of Detroit's faltering in tight ballgames – they're 9-12 after 
beating Toronto 7-6 on Wednesday. The Indians were in asimilar place a year ago 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/index.jsp?tcid=mm_mlb_standings#20120702>, 
when they eventually finished under .500, but this revamped Tribe team, headed 
by Terry Francona, has a somewhat improved pitching staff, a new bench and a 
high-octane offense that's top-five in the AL. Most of all, they have shown an 
ability to bounce back from some serious spirals. Whether or not they can keep 
this up and fend off the heavily favored Tigers remains to be seen, but they'll 
take their shot , when they host Detroit. Perhaps a big series like that will 
bring out fans, who despite the early season success still rank dead last in 
attendance.

Happy returns

Bryce Harper was back in action on Monday, after missing more than a month 
with left-knee issues. No doubt he was a welcome sight toWashington Nationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-nationals> fans, even if he's now 
donning a knee brace, one that allegedly won't prevent him from playing in the 
all-out style we've grown accustomed to watching. Harper took the second pitch 
he saw from Brewers pitcher Yovani Gallardo and put it into the bullpen in left 
center – his 13th home run of the season.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FuVQIDHQj5iA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FuVQIDHQj5iA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FuVQIDHQj5iA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The Nationals struggled without Harper but also struggled with him playing 
early in the season, failing to come out of the gate strong after racking up 98 
wins in 2012, the most in Major League Baseball. Now the run-starved lineup 
will look to Harper to help provide what was missing from a pitching staff that 
isn't as good as last season but is stilltop five in staff ERA 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/WSN/2013-pitching.shtml> – run 
support. The Nationals rank 13th of 15 NL teams in runs scored, down eight 
places from a season ago. After putting up 10 runs against Milwaukee on Monday, 
Washington were shut out on Tuesday.

Down in Tampa, reigning AL Cy Young Award winner David Price returned to the 
field in a major way on Tuesday <http://wapc.mlb.com/play?content_id=28549113>, 
shutting down the Houston Astros for seven innings while striking out 10. We 
all know the Astros will never be mistaken for the1927 Yankees 
<http://i.cdn.turner.com/si/multimedia/photo_gallery/0911/mlb.yankees.championships.through.years/images/1927-yankees.jpg>
, but before missing 44 games with a left biceps strain Price had struggled, 
much as the vaunted Rays staff has all season long. Perhaps that turns around 
now, with Price flashing a 96mph fastball, Matt Moore putting together three 
solid starts and Alex Cobb hopefully returning from a concussion after the 
All-Star break. It also doesn't hurt that Evan Longoria will avoid the DL after 
a flare-up of plantar fasciitis. Despite a staff that has performed way below 
expectations, the Rays are 45-39, 5.5 games behind Boston in a highly 
competitive division that's wide open. They also have five more games against 
Houston and home games against the Chicago White Sox and Minnesota Twins over 
the next 12 games – a set against minnows that could see them leap from third 
to first place.

Close quarters in the NL West

There's lots of talk about just how tight the American League East is, and 
deservedly so – just nine games separating the penthouse from the outhouse. 
Rather incredibly, the National League West is even more crowded.

Heading into Wednesday, just three games separate the first place Arizona 
Diamondbacks <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-diamondbacks> (42-41) 
with the last place San Francisco Giants (39-44). So how do we handicap this 
awful and ugly division, mostly filled with below average ballclubs as we reach 
the halfway point of the season? Let's take a quick look.

Favorites: Dodger and Giants

Surprise! The team with the $200m payroll and the World Series champs still 
have be ranked ahead of the western field. Los Angeles are four games below 
.500, a position that would put them 12 behind the surging Pirates in the NL 
Central and 9.5 behind Atlanta in the NL East; but out west, they got em right 
where they want them. Despite losing Chad Billingsley and Josh Beckett for the 
season and Ted Lilly and Zack Greinke for extended periods, not to mention 
large chunks of Hanley Ramirez, Matt Kemp and Yasiel Puig, who was tearing up 
AA while Dodgers fans lined up to jump from windows around Los Angeles, they 
are making their move, winning nine of 10. Now they've made a move to to try to 
shore up their pen as well, hoping a change of scenery will help Carlos Marmol 
succeed in the Dodgers after acquiring him from the Cubs for Matt Guerrier and a
bunch of other stuff 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/9444901/carlos-marmol-chicago-cubs-traded-los-angeles-dodgers-matt-guerrier>
, a move that generated much protest from LA's team mascot community.
Bailey LA Kings (@BaileyLAKings) 
Hey dodgers. I thought about it for a while..... Carlos Marmol DON'T DO IT!
 <https://twitter.com/BaileyLAKings/statuses/351874730556538881> July 2, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/BaileyLAKings/statuses/351874730556538881> 
Look for them to also add a starter and perhaps a second baseman, rumored to 
be Chase Utley.

Meanwhile, the Giants have their issues. Their outfield is weakened by the 
loss of spark plugAngel Pagan 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/blog/eye-on-baseball/22515888/angel-pagan-needs-surgery-will-miss-12-weeks>
 for three months, after he tore a hamstring, but even so, offense is less of a 
problem. Of the starting pitching triumvirate that served San Francisco so well 
last season, only Madison Bumgarner is putting up similar numbers in the first 
half. Ryan Vogelsong was getting hammered before fracturing his right hand and 
is a month away. Matt Cain has recently recovered from his poor start, putting 
together five straight quality outings. Barry Zito and Tim Lincecum, who many 
fans believebelongs in the bullpen 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/giants/ci_23373770/report-giants-considering-tim-lincecum-bullpen-role>
, have ERA's hovering in the mid-fours. The bullpen is still a relative force, 
and should the starters get on a roll, don't count out the Giants, even if they 
have the worst record in baseball (four wins in 16 games) since 15 June and 
have now been no-hit to boot. I've learned my lesson by now.

Best of the rest: For a team that spent 53 days in first place, the 
Diamondbacks get little respect – and don't expect that to change, especially 
after starting off their 10-game road trip with a 1-8 record. We all know the 
D'Backs can hit, but pitching is another issue. Like the Dodgers they have 
blown 16 saves, and besides Patrick Corbin, who suffered his first defeat (9-1) 
to the Mets on Wednesday, and Wade Miley, the team has some real problems. 
Trevor Cahill has given up 16 runs in his last two starts and is heading to the 
DL, Daniel Hudson is out for the year, Brandon McCarthy is also hurt. Now what? 
It's up to the bats, featuring future all-star Paul Goldschmidt and his over 
.900 OPS, to put up some major runs until the staff comes around. It's a long 
shot.

Meanwhile in Colorado, the Rockies are hanging in despite losing Troy 
Tulowitzki 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2013/06/27/troy-tulowitzki-progressing-with-broken-rib/2466479/>
, their all-star shortstop, with a broken rib. One season removed from 98 
losses, the Rox have watched Dexter Fowler develop and will now watch him sit, 
losing the surging center fielder to a wrist issue until after the All-Star 
break. Not good news. Nor is the way Josh Rutledge has hit in the first half. 
Still, Rockies fans have to be happy how Michael Cuddyer hit in 27 straight 
games (he's played in 63 games this season, failing to hit in just eight), a 
streak broken up by the Dodgers on Wednesday, and the performance of starters 
Tyler Chatwood, Jorge De La Rosa and Jhoulys Chacin, not to mention closer in 
waiting Rex Brothers, who has an ERA nearly under 0.50, which is ridiculous. 
They still need another arm if they are going to get serious, and that could 
mean dealing Fowler once he gets healthy. There's a lot to like here, and they 
are possibly better than Arizona, which is still not saying a whole lot. If it 
weren't for the Dodgers ability to do whatever they want, they might consider 
taking a flyer on another starter and going for it.

Bringing up the rear: It's never a good thing to drop three of four games to 
the Miami Marlins, but before that debacle the Padres were holding their heads 
relatively high. They started out the season 5-15 and have are 35-29 since, 
which is a mighty fine recovery. It's a mixed bag in San Diego, but overall 
things are looking up for the long haul. Just not right now, not with Luke 
Gregson and Huston Street stinking it up in the pen while Edinson Volquez and 
Clayton Richard suffer through June, as did Mark Kotsay, who had all of four 
hits during the month. Chase Headley has disappeared as well. Despite all of 
this the Padres areenjoying life over .500 for the first time since 2010 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/SDP/2013.shtml>… but their fans 
shouldn't get greedy, yet.
 