
Diana Athill
Editor and writer
 londoners.tiff 
I am crazy about Craig Taylor's Londoners 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/travel-guides/9781847082534/londoners-the-days-and-nights-of-london-now-as-told-by-those-who-love-it-hate-it-live-it-left-it-and-long-for-it>
 (Granta £25), a brilliant collection of "voices" in the manner of Studs 
Terkel. It's quite long, but I wanted it to go on and on, and I can't imagine 
any lucky recipient not enjoying it. One I'm sure I'll enjoy myself when I get 
my hands on it is Claire Tomalin's biography of the most glorious of all 
Londoners,Charles Dickens: A Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780670917679/charles-dickens-a-life>
 (Viking £30).

Richard Eyre
Theatre director
 Christopher Hitchens Arguably 
I'd give Christopher Hitchens's collected essays, Arguably 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780857892553/arguably-selected-prose>
 (Atlantic £30), in the hope that in return I'd be given John Updike's 
collected essays,Higher Gossip 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780307957153/higher-gossip-essays-and-criticism>
 (Knopf £25). Hitchens is said to be the best British essayist since Orwell; 
anyone who doubts this, considering him a mere provocateur, will be convinced 
by this collection. Updike was the best novelist of his generation and also a 
prolific critic and essayist. His posthumous book is a distillation of his 
non-fiction writing over nearly six decades.

Russell T Davies
TV dramatist
 magnus mills.tiff 
It's too late to make a Christmas present out of How to Be a Woman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9780091940737/how-to-be-a-woman>
 (Ebury Press £11.99) by Caitlin Moran, because as soon as I'd finished it, I 
bought five more copies. One each for my two sisters and three nieces. I think 
this is the most important book they might read in their lives. Underneath 
beautiful, aching and hilarious memories of family life, it's a true polemic, 
arguing that women still eat, shave and dress entirely for the benefit of men. 
As for me, I'll haveA Cruel Bird Came to the Nest and Looked In 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781408821206/a-cruel-bird-came-to-the-nest-and-looked-in>
 (Bloomsbury £12.99) by Magnus Mills. For the title alone!

Tim Adams
Observer writer
 Thinking fast and slow by Daniel Kahneman 
Daniel Kahneman's Thinking, Fast and Slow 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781846140556/thinking-fast-and-slow>
 (Allen Lane £25) – a terrific unpicking of human rationality and irrationality 
– could hardly have been published at a better moment. Kahnemann is the 
godfather of behavioural economics, and this distillation of a lifetime's 
thinking about why we make bad decisions – about everything from money to love 
– is full of brilliant anecdote and wisdom. It is Kahnemann's belief that 
anyone who thinks they know exactly what is going on hasn't understood the 
question; as such it's the perfect gift for opinionated family members 
everywhere.

It would be interesting to know what Christopher Hitchens would make of 
Kahneman's faith in doubt; one of the many pleasures of reading our greatest 
contrarian over the years has been his ability to give the impression that he 
knows exactly what he thinks about almost every subject under the sun. 
Hitchens's collected essays,Arguably 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780857892553/arguably-selected-prose>
, is the book I'd most like to receive, for its bravura certainties, in spite 
of everything.

Joe Dunthorne
Novelist
 nicholson baker.tiff 
A recent issue of McSweeney's magazine included a severed head (opening that 
morning's post was like the final scene in the filmSe7en), but the current 
edition, the 38th, focuses on what the magazine does best: great stories, both 
fiction and non-fiction. I would give it to anyone with a short, 
persistent commute.

For myself, I'd like House of Holes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780857206596/house-of-holes>
 (Simon & Schuster £14.99) by Nicholson Baker. Although reviewers have been 
bewildered, I'm intrigued by Baker's transition from writing a (brilliant) 
low-key novel about a struggling poet to this one, which is, by all accounts, a 
cheerful porno odyssey. Not the sort of book to be seen buying for oneself, 
mind you.

Rachel Johnson
Editor and author
 bossypants.tiff 
Whoever says women aren't funny should be tied to chairs and force-read 
Bossypants 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/stage/9781847445162/bossypants> 
(Little Brown £16.99) by Tina Fey, a darkly hysterical monologue-memoir by the 
writer/actor about growing up with dark shin fur in the land where yellow hair 
is king, writing skits forSaturday Night Live, her aborted honeymoon cruise 
(the ship caught fire) and Kotex panty-pads.

Johnson's Life of London 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780007418930/johnsons-life-of-london-the-people-who-made-the-city-that-made-the-world>
 (Harper Collins £20), by Boris Johnson, is not only the book I want to 
receive, it's the only book I can guarantee Iwill be given, as the author gives 
only two things to his family as presents: condiments he's made himself and 
books he's written. I am looking forward to both as I have been assured by my 
brother that his book on London is every bit as good as his apple chutney.

Philip Hensher
Novelist
 fear index.tiff 
I'm giving everyone Robert Harris's The Fear Index 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780091936969/the-fear-index>
 (Hutchinson £18.99) for Christmas, because everyone's already read Alan 
Hollinghurst's superbThe Stranger's Child, and The Fear Index is a total 
ripsnortingDemon Seed-type romp through the bowels of high finance and whirring 
computer-cogs. In the usual way of things, people kept sending me copies of 
things such as Samuel Beckett's wildly boring letters (Volume 2) when what I 
really wanted was Tessa Hadley's excellentThe London Train 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780224090971/the-london-train>
 (Jonathan Cape £12.99).

Joan Bakewell
Journalist and broadcaster
 sebastian barry.tiff 
The past shapes our lives today, and both of my choices throw light on our own 
times. Sebastian Barry'sOn Canaan's Side 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780571226535/on-canaans-side>
 (Faber £16.99) – the book I'll be giving – takes up the story of the Dunne 
family, which he has told in several previous novels. Together, these works 
cover the time of Ireland's troubles, from within the Unionist protestant 
community. The gorgeous prose adds to the pleasure.

I would like to receive Amanda Foreman's epic A World on Fire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781846142048/a-world-on-fire-an-epic-history-of-two-nations-divided>
 (Penguin £12.99), which deals with the British/American relationship 
throughout the American civil war. Growing up near Lancashire, I have always 
known that American exports of raw cotton fed the cotton mills of Britain. But 
I have never understood what happened when the civil war broke out. This 
lavishly praised book will explain this and many other things. And at 1,000 
pages, it will last the year!

Michael Palin
Actor and broadcaster
 mountain to tibet.tiff 
Colin Thubron's To a Mountain in Tibet 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/travel-guides/9780701183790/to-a-mountain-in-tibet>
 (Chatto & Windus £16.99) is an absolutely terrific book. Thubron has perfect 
pitch. He uses the minimum of words for the maximum effect. His descriptions 
are fresh and acute and he can convey atmosphere and emotion on the head of a 
pin. The journey to Mount Kailash is enthralling and he keeps the reader right 
beside him every inch of the way.

The book I'd like in my stocking is Adam Macqueen's Private Eye: The First 50 
Years 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781901784565>
 (Private Eye Productions £25). TheEye has given me more consistent pleasure, 
pain and provocation than any other publication in my lifetime.

Rachel Cooke
Observer writer
 In this book cover image released by HarperCollins, "State of Wonder," by Ann 
Patchett, is shown. (AP Photo/HarperCollins) Photograph: AP 
What you need at Christmas is a novel that thoroughly muffles the sound of 
tired and overemotional relatives. So, I will be giving all of my girlfriends
State of Wonder 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781408818596/state-of-wonder>
 (Bloomsbury £12.99) by Ann Patchett, a sort of feministHeart of Darkness. It 
has the barmiest plot ever – plucky scientist enters Brazilian jungle in search 
of her lost colleague and the secret of everlasting female fertility – but, 
honestly, it grips like a vice.

The book I would most like to receive is William Nicholson: Catalogue Raisonné 
of the Oil Paintings 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/art/9780300170542/william-nicholson-a-catalogue-raisonne-of-the-oil-paintings>
 (Yale £95) by Patricia Reed, Wendy Baron and Merlin James. I can stare at a 
single Nicholson painting for long minutes at a time. He is just the best.

Fergus Henderson
Chef
 sarah winman.tiff 
Life is peculiar at the moment, but nothing could be as bad as Bernie 
Gunther's lot: prison camp to prison camp, interrogation after interrogation… 
Philip Kerr's battered hero inField Gray: A Bernie Gunther Mystery 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/thrillers/9781849164122/field-grey-a-bernie-gunther-mystery>
(Quercus £17.99) is an ex-Berlin policeman who gets knocked around from Cuba to 
postwar Europe. When he finally gets his glass of German brandy I sighed a sigh 
of relief for the poor chap.

A very different kettle of fish – not much mention of the Gulag – is Sarah 
Winman'sWhen God Was a Rabbit 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-fiction/9780755379286/when-god-was-a-rabbit>
 (Headline Review £12.99). I feel that at this point in life I'm ready to 
tackle a book about love, and Sarah Winman's charm will make her the perfect 
guide.

Chris Patten
Chairman of the BBC Trust
 Snow Drops 
The most enjoyable new novel I have read this year is Snowdrops 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781848874534/snowdrops> 
(Altantic £7.99) by AD Miller. It's a very well written page-turner that 
confirmed all my prejudices about Putin's Russia. I came to it after reading 
Vasily Grossman'sLife and Fate 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780099560630/life-and-fate>
, my number one discovery of the year, which to be fair to Mr Putin, does at 
least show how much worse things were under Stalin.

I have asked for David Gilmour's The Pursuit of Italy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781846142512/the-pursuit-of-italy-a-history-of-a-land-its-regions-and-their-peoples>
 (Allen Lane £25) for Christmas. It may help me to understand rather better 
this heavenly country, which has given the world great buildings, cities, music 
and food, as well as Mr Berlusconi.

Mary Warnock
Philosopher
 nelson cover 
The book I'm going to give, specifically to people nostalgic for their 
childhood in the late 1960s and 70s (of whom I know many), isNelson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/comics/9781906653231/nelson> (Blank 
Slate £18.99), edited by Rob Davis and Woodrow Phoenix. I am fascinated by the 
comic strip format (like the excellentcomic book versions of Shakespeare 
<http://www.shakespearecomics.com/>), by the different styles of each 
participating artist in this collaboration between 54 British comic artists, 
and by the way the central character develops under one's eyes as each year in 
her life unfolds. It is perfect for anyone without a great deal of reading time 
at Christmas.

The book I'd most like to get is one that I have already reluctantly given 
away,Charles Dickens: A Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780670917679/charles-dickens-a-life>
 by Claire Tomalin. I'm not a Dickens fan, but Tomalin is the best biographer 
there is.

Julie Myerson
Novelist
 obedience.tiff Photograph: Reuters 
By far the most impressive novel I read this year was Jacqueline Yallop's 
Obedience 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780857891013/obedience> 
(Atlantic £12.99). The prose is as intense, opaque yet elastic as its morally 
complex themes: guilt, sexuality and secrecy in a convent in wartime France. 
I'd give it to anyone who wants, as I do, to have their head and heart churned 
up by what they read.

The book I'd most like to be given is anything bought at one of the two 
independent bookshops in Southwold, Suffolk. Except both have now closed down. 
Which makes membership of Southwold Library – now ludicrously also under threat 
– the best free gift you could give anyone there this Christmas.

Philip French
Observer film critic
 The Sense of an Ending by Julian Barnes 
A worthy Booker laureate of this or any other year, our most versatile 
novelist Julian Barnes paid tribute in his acceptance speech to Suzanne Dean, 
cover designer ofThe Sense of an Ending 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780224094153/the-sense-of-an-ending>
 (Jonathan Cape £12.99). This makes it a perfect present in these last days of 
the book as singular object. The one I hope someone will send me is Brian 
Kellow'sPauline Kael: A Life in the Dark 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780670023127/pauline-kael-a-life-in-the-dark>
 (Viking $27.95). I read her for more than 30 years and wrote an introduction 
to her final collection.

Daljit Nagra
Poet
 tahmina anam.tiff 
Tahmima Anam's The Good Muslim 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781847679734/the-good-muslim>
 (Canongate £16.99) is a perfect page-turner for the festive period. It is a 
powerfully gripping story about the birth of Bangladesh. Subtle plotting and 
vivid dramatisation of characters allow Anam to explore the formation of 
national identity. CB Editions is an exciting new poetry press which has 
published JO Morgan's second collection,Long Cuts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/poetry/9780956735928/long-cuts> 
(£7.99), this year. For me, this would be an ideal gift as I loved his first 
collection,Natural Mechanical 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/poetry/9780955728594/natural-mechanical>
, and reviews suggest this one is even better.

Tristram Hunt
Historian and Labour MP
 amanda foreman.tiff 
Maya Jasanoff's Liberty's Exiles 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780007180080/libertys-exiles-how-the-loss-of-america-made-the-british-empire>
 (HarperPress £30) is going to be in the Christmas stocking for a number of 
nearest and dearest. Jasanoff is an exceptional scholar of British history in 
all its global dimensions, and her evocative chronicle of the loyalist diaspora 
from the American war of independence allows us to rethink the cultural legacy 
of the Thirteen Colonies' rebellion. And, in turn, I would like an equally big 
book on US history by another transatlantic female historian – Amanda Foreman's
A World on Fire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781846142048/a-world-on-fire-an-epic-history-of-two-nations-divided>
. British involvement in the American civil war is still under-appreciated, and 
Foreman's work, on the 150th anniversary, looks like a useful corrective.

Wendy Cope
Poet
 Caitlin Moran how to be a woman 
I always enjoy Caitlin Moran's columns, so I read her How to Be a Woman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9780091940737/how-to-be-a-woman>
 as soon as it came out. Although I didn't agree with every word, it is spot on 
about most things, and very entertaining. If I hadn't already given my copy to 
my partner's daughter, I would buy it for her. Another 2011 favourite is
Edgelands 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/scienceandnature/9780224089029/edgelands>
 (Jonathan Cape £12.99) by Paul Farley and Michael Symmons Roberts, which I 
will be giving as a Christmas present. My Christmas wish-list includesDeath 
Comes to Pemberley 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/crime/9780571283576/death-comes-to-pemberley>
 (Faber £18.99) by PD James andBlue Monday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/crime/9780718154950/blue-monday> 
(Michael Joseph £12.99) by Nicci French.

Curtis Sittenfeld
Novelist
 oregon experiment.tiff 
I thoroughly enjoyed The Oregon Experiment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-fiction/9780307594785/the-oregon-experiment>
 (Knopf $26.95) by Keith Scribner. Set in a college town in America's Pacific 
Northwest, it's a novel about – among other things – anarchists, adultery, new 
babies, hippies, and a woman with such a powerful sense of smell that it lets 
her discover secrets about other people. The book is just really smart and 
juicy. A novel I haven't yet read but have heard is wonderful isLove and Shame 
and Love 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780316129398/love-and-shame-and-love>
 (Little Brown $24.99) by Peter Orner. It's about a Chicagoan named Alexander 
Popper and his messy family – and I do always like family messiness!

Geoff Dyer
Novelist and essayist
 magnum.tiff 
The book I'd most like to receive this Christmas is Magnum Contact Sheets 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/art/9780500543993/magnum-contact-sheets>
 (Thames and Hudson £95), edited by Kristen Lubben: a collection of the 
pictures that were made either side of some of the famous images from the 
photojournalists' archive. The book is an exemplary bit of publishing in that 
it is stunningly beautiful – and huge, and expensive – but is full of the kind 
of material that might be considered the preserve of scholars or researchers. 
I'll be giving copies of Terry Castle's screamingly funny – and lethally sharp 
– collection of autobiographical essays,The Professor 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781848877405/the-professor>
 (Atlantic £20).

Marina Warner
Writer and academic
 poetry of translation.tiff 
So much of what I read is in translation – from Alice Oswald's new reworking 
of the Iliad,Memorial 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/poetry/9780571274161/memorial>, to 
Richard Hamilton's compendium of Marrakech stories,The Last Storytellers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9781848854918/the-last-storytellers-tales-from-the-heart-of-morocco>
. Matthew Reynolds, inThe Poetry of Translation: From Chaucer & Petrarch to 
Homer & Logue 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780199605712/the-poetry-of-translation-from-chaucer-petrarch-to-homer-logue>
 (Oxford £50), shows us what is at stake in these border crossings. Close 
looking is close reading's counterpart, and Deanna Petherbridge is one of its 
most impassioned advocates. If I don't findThe Primacy of Drawing: Histories 
and Theories of Practice 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/art/9780300126464/the-primacy-of-drawing-histories-and-theories-of-practice>
 (Yale £55) under the tree, I'll buy it, gladly.

William Dalrymple
Historian and travel writer
 cables from kabul.tiff 
I greatly enjoyed Sherard Cowper-Coles's brilliant account of how and why we 
are losing Britain's fourth war in Afghanistan.Cables from Kabul 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/politics/9780007432011/cables-from-kabul-the-inside-story-of-the-wests-afghanistan-campaign>
 (HarperPress £25) is the most insightful record yet published of the 
diplomatic wrangling that has accompanied the slow military encirclement of 
western forces in the country. It is also the best account I have read of how 
post-colonial colonialism actually works.

A book I would love to be given is the fabulously illustrated catalogue 
accompanying the Masters of Indian Painting show at the Rietberg in Zurich this 
summer – unquestionably the most remarkable and ambitious exhibition of the 
Indian miniature tradition ever mounted.Masters of Indian Painting, 1100-1900 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/art/9783907077504/masters-of-indian-painting>
 (Museum Rietberg £120) is a huge, two-volume affair, with essays by the three 
great historians of Indian art: BN Goswamy, Eberhard Fischer and Milo Cleveland 
Beach.

Mariella Frostrup
Observer writer and TV presenter
 stranger magic.tiff 
Robert Harris's fine new thriller, The Fear Index 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780091936969/the-fear-index>
, is a must-have in every Christmas stocking. It's highly "readable" – the buzz 
word in literary circles this year – but more importantly, it manages to 
explain what a hedge fund actually is, using the example of lacy black 
lingerie. With our lives currently in turmoil thanks to the machinations of the 
financial markets, understanding how they work should be a priority, and Harris 
manages to combine such instruction with a fast-paced thriller.

I'd love to receive Marina Warner's epic study of the Arabian Nights, Stranger 
Magic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780701173319/stranger-magic>
 (Chatto & Windus £28), a dissection of the myths in these enduring classics 
that promises to throw light on the countries from which the stories spring and 
the lives of women in them.

Hari Kunzru
Novelist
 savage messiah.tiff 
To London friends I'll be giving festive copies of Laura Oldfield Ford's 
Savage Messiah 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/art/9781844677474/savage-messiah> 
(Verso £19.99), the seminal fanzine (now released in book form), which reveals, 
in photos, text and beautiful drawings, the abject underside of the regenerated 
city. The book I'm hoping to find under the tree is Esther Duflo and Abhijit 
Banerjee'sPoor Economics 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/businessandfinance/9781586487980/poor-economics-a-radical-rethinking-of-the-way-to-fight-global-poverty>
 (Perseus £17.99), which apparently overturns many received ideas about what 
it's like to be very poor.

Shami Chakrabarti
Director of Liberty
 private eye at 50.tiff 
Sometimes the most serious messages are best expressed with humour, and this 
Christmas should be a time to try to smile. The book I'd love to receive is
Private Eye: The First 50 Years 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781901784565>
 by Adam Macqueen. But because I would love the next 50 years to be better for 
women, I would most like to give Caitlin Moran'sHow to Be a Woman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9780091940737/how-to-be-a-woman>
. I've already bought a spare copy for a female friend. I will give it in 
celebration of Moran's wit and wisdom and in loving memory of my mother – an 
unsung feminist.

Geoffrey Wheatcroft
Writer
 great sea.tiff 
No better history books were published this year than David Gilmour's wonderful
The Pursuit of Italy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781846142512/the-pursuit-of-italy-a-history-of-a-land-its-regions-and-their-peoples>
 andThe Great Sea: A Human History of the Mediterranean 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/scienceandnature/9780713999341/the-great-sea-a-human-history-of-the-mediterranean>
 (Allen Lane £30) by David Abulafia. Both tell riveting but melancholy stories. 
Gilmour shows that the "unification" of Italy 150 years ago has been a profound 
failure, while in the course of Abulafia's account his great sea ceases to be 
the centre of civilisation.

Bright Particular Stars 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781848872486/bright-particular-stars-a-gallery-of-glorious-british-eccentrics>
 (Atlantic £25) is the latest of David McKie's sesquipedal peregrinations. This 
"Gallery of Glorious British Eccentrics", some of whom are a good deal more 
eccentric than glorious, is unfailingly droll and will make a perfect 
stocking-filler.

Nicholas Hytner
Artistic director of the National Theatre
 Charles Dickens, a life by Claire Tomalin. 
Anthea Bell's new translation of Stefan Zweig's Beware of Pity 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/classics/9781906548414/beware-of-pity>
, published this year by Pushkin Press (£8.99), is the latest in a brilliant 
series of Zweig translations. A psychological thriller with an emotionally 
dense unreliable narrator, and a terrifyingly needy heroine, it is compulsively 
readable.

I hope I'm given Claire Tomalin's Charles Dickens: A Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780670917679/charles-dickens-a-life>
. Her biography of Dickens's mistress, Nelly Ternan, is a phenomenal feat of 
literary reclamation, but I fear that her new book will do nothing to refute my 
long-held belief that the novels ascribed to Dickens could not possibly have 
been written by the son of a naval pay-office clerk who left school at the age 
of 12, and are plainly the work of the Duke of Wellington.

Kirsty Wark
Broadcaster
 strangers child.tiff 
If you want to make someone happy, lying on the sofa in front of the fire on 
Boxing Day, then you must give them Robert Harris's new thriller,The Fear Index 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780091936969/the-fear-index>
. You might think you've had enough of the economic crisis – but this is the 
hugely entertaining version. Thinking of that same sofa, I'd like to receive 
Alan Hollinghurst'sThe Stranger's Child 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780330483247/the-strangers-child>
 (Picador £20), which somehow eluded me this year. As an added extra, please 
may I have Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall'sVeg Everyday! 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/food/9781408812129/river-cottage-veg-every-day>
 (Bloomsbury £25), which I know is a very good thing for us all. Go on Santa.

Andrew Rawnsley
Observer political editor
 one on one.tiff 
For anyone you know who likes to be provoked to both laughter and thought, I 
can't think of a better stocking filler than Craig Brown'sOne On One 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/referenceandlanguages/9780007360628/one-on-one>
 (Fourth Estate £16.99), 101 ingeniously linked encounters between the famous 
and the infamous. As a great admirer of Max Hastings's military histories, I 
would be pleased to unwrapAll Hell Let Loose 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780007338092/all-hell-let-loose-the-world-at-war>
(HarperCollins £30), his latest, much-praised volume on the second world war, 
focusing on the experiences of those at the sharp end of the conflict.

Kate Kellaway
Observer writer
 story of swimming.tiff 
There is one book that has bowled me over – on a subject close to my heart. 
The Story of Swimming 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/sportandleisure/9781905928071/the-story-of-swimming>
(Dewi Lewis £25), by Susie Parr, not only looks ravishing (filled with unusual 
mermaids, avid modern swimmers and stunning photographs by the author's 
husband, Martin Parr) but is also a fascinating, idiosyncratic, beautifully 
written history. Readers will want to do far more than dip in – I intend to 
give it to all my amphibious friends. Meanwhile, the book I can't wait to read 
is Matthew Hollis's said-to-be-outstandingNow All Roads Lead to France  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780571245987/now-all-roads-lead-to-france-the-last-years-of-edward-thomas>
(Faber £20), about the last years of Edward Thomas.

Peter Carey
Novelist
 debt.tiff 
I have twice given away David Graeber's Debt: The First 5,000 Years 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781933633862/debt-the-first-years>
 (Melville House £21.99), and Christmas will not change my habits. The book is 
more readable and entertaining than I can indicate in 100 words. It is a 
meditation on debt, tribute, gifts, religion and the false history of money. 
Graeber is a scholarly researcher, an activist and a public intellectual. His 
field is the whole history of social and economic transactions. He has been an 
important figure at Zuccotti Park and Occupy Wall Street. Here, he uses his own 
klieg lights to illuminate the pea and thimble mechanisms that have delivered 
the current debt crisis. Would someone, please, give me a copy this Christmas. 
I promise to keep it for myself.

Elizabeth Day
Observer writer
 the submission.tiff 
One of the most thought-provoking novels I read this year was Amy Waldman's 
The Submission 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780434019328/the-submission>
 (William Heinemann £12.99), an elegantly plotted debut that charts the fallout 
after a New York jury chooses a Muslim architect to design a memorial to 9/11. 
Waldman uses this central focal point to unravel the tensions and 
contradictions at work in modern America.

The book I'd most like to unwrap underneath the Christmas tree (hint, hint) is 
Claire Tomalin's new biography,Charles Dickens: A Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780670917679/charles-dickens-a-life>
. I've read every biography Tomalin has produced and am in awe not only of her 
impeccable research but also of her real feeling for her subjects and her 
exquisite writing.

AN Wilson
Writer and columnist
 maccarthy.tiff 
The book that I am hoping to find in my Christmas stocking is Fiona MacCarthy's
The Last Pre-Raphaelite: Edward Burne-Jones and the Victorian Imagination 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/art/9780571228614/the-last-pre-raphaelite-edward-burne-jones-and-the-victorian-imagination>
(Faber £25). I have enjoyed all Fiona MacCarthy's biographies (Eric Gill, 
William Morris, Byron...) and I cannot believe that this will disappoint.

The book I shall be giving is Robert Douglas-Fairhurst's compelling critical 
biography,Becoming Dickens: The Invention of a Novelist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780674050037/becoming-dickens-the-invention-of-a-novelist>
 (Harvard £20). If you only read one book on Dickens during the bicentenary 
year of 2012, it should be this. Every page illuminates the books and the 
genius who produced them.

Bidisha
Writer and cultural commentator
 dovekeepers.tiff 
So many contenders, but I would share the incredible creative power and 
intense imagination of Alice Hoffman, whose novelThe Dovekeepers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780857205421/the-dovekeepers>
 (Simon & Schuster £16.99) shows just how far and deep historical fiction can 
go. I would love to receive Sarah Hall's short story collection,The Beautiful 
Indifference 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/short-stories/9780571230174/the-beautiful-indifference>
 (Faber £12.99), which I expect to be as gripping and cerebral as a previous 
novel of hers – one of my favourites –The Carhullan Army. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780571236602/the-carhullan-army>

Salley Vickers
Novelist
 ronald blythe.tiff 
The book I shall be giving for Christmas is Ronald Blythe's At the Yeoman's 
House 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/poetry/9781904634881/at-the-yeomans-house>
 (Enitharmon Press £15). The "house" is the mysteriously named "Bottengoms", 
once home of farmers and shepherds and rescued and restored by John Nash, for 
whom the author worked as a young man. The book is a quiet meditation on the 
nourishment to be found in the past. The book I most want to be given is
Thinking, Fast and Slow 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781846140556/thinking-fast-and-slow>
 by Daniel Kahneman. I'm a speedy thinker myself, so am hoping to be endorsed 
in that practice.

Robert McCrum
Associate editor of the Observer
 Selected poems 
Amanda Foreman's A World on Fire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781846142048/a-world-on-fire-an-epic-history-of-two-nations-divided>
, an epic history of two nations divided by conflict, is an enthralling 
portrait of Britain and the US during the American civil war. It's a book that 
ought to be a natural Christmas present. Unfortunately, at 1,000 pages, the 
publishers have made it almost unreadable (ie impossible to hold in bed). This 
is a shame. To turn a brilliant narrative history into an infuriating doorstop 
is an insult to Foreman's work. Perhaps, for the gift market, Penguin should 
consider a two-volume paperback edition.

I've followed Christopher Reid's poetry for years, and was delighted when he 
won the Costa prize withA Scattering. Now Faber has issued his Selected Poems 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/poetry/9780571273270/selected-poems> 
(£14.99). This is high on my list of books to read at Christmas.

Fintan O'Toole
Journalist and author
 connemara.tiff 
The book I'll be giving is Tim Robinson's Connemara: A Little Gaelic Kingdom 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781844882373/connemara-a-little-gaelic-kingdom>
 (Penguin £20). In an age of sundered specialisms, Robinson – mathematician, 
map-maker, naturalist, folklorist – is a marvel. This last volume of his 
wonderful trilogy on Connemara ranges through political history, music and 
topography, marking him as the supreme practitioner of geo-graphy, the writing 
of places. I'd like to receive Derek Mahon'sNew Collected Poems 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/New-Collected-Poems-Derek-Mahon/dp/1852355123/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1322045928&sr=8-1>
 (Gallery £17.95). Mahon's combinations of savage indignation and ludic 
delight, of high formality and apparent ease, repay endless revisiting.

What do you think are the best books of 2011? Take part in our open thread 
discussion here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2011/nov/25/your-books-of-2011>
 