
Christian Bale is set to play Moses in Ridley Scott's retelling of the story 
of the biblical hero,according to Deadline 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/03/christian-bale-eyeing-moses/>. The suggestion 
follows reports last week thatSteven Spielberg has left rival Moses project 
Gods and Kings 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/03/tom-hooper-ang-lee-david-fincher-and-steven-spielberg-eye-intriguing-movies/>
, with Oscar-winning Life of Pi director Ang Lee tipped to replace him.

Deadline reports that 20th Century Fox is moving forward apace with its take 
on Moses, which is titled Exodus, as confusion surrounds the future of rival 
studio Warner Bros's proposed version. Bale is being lined up to star and 
Scott's American Gangster screenwriter Steve Zaillian has signed on to do a 
rewrite. The US blog says Scott could make it his next project as director 
after completing work onThe Counselor <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2193215/>, 
his forthcoming thriller based on novelist Cormac McCarthy's debut screenplay.

Spielberg's Moses film was previously described as an epic biopic of the 
Israelite leader in a gritty Braveheart-meets-Saving-Private-Ryan style.Scott, 
meanwhile, was expected to plump for a detailed reworking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/06/ridley-scott-prometheus-to-moses> 
which would focus on the minutiae of his subject's life, such as the leader's 
relationship with Pharaoh Rameses II, as well as more famous episodes.

The most famous Hollywood retelling of the Moses story is the 1956 Cecil B 
DeMille epic The Ten Commandments, which starred Charlton Heston in the lead 
role and was one of the highest grossing films of its era. It received seven 
Academy award nominations including best picture, and also won the Oscar for 
best visual effects, thanks largely to its famousparting of the Red Sea 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OqCTq3EeDcY> scene.

Given the history of Moses on the big screen, both films are likely to require 
enormous budgets. There is therefore the strong possibility of one movie's 
backers withdrawing should their project find itself lagging behind in the race 
to multiplexes. It has happened before to some well-established film-makers, 
notably Baz Luhrmann, whose Alexander the Great biopic was canned in the wake 
of Oliver Stone's 2004 film Alexander hitting cinemas.
 