
Christmas cards used to be about mangers, kings and shepherds. Then they 
became about robins. Then about reindeer. Now they are about us."Religion has 
gone away," said the novelist AS Byatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2010/aug/25/as-byatt-facebook> "and 
all we are left with is ourselves, so we have to be interested in ourselves. 
And we can be psychoanalytically interested in ourselves or sociologically 
interested in ourselves or interested in why we wear these clothes rather than 
those, or we can put ourselves in reality houses on the television."

On one reading of this phenomenon – call it the secularisation thesis – the 
change of the look of our Christmas cards reflects a transference of interest 
from fantasy to reality. But reality, of course, is always a slippery idea. 
Take an extreme example: the celebrity family, theKardashians' 2013 Christmas 
card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/05/kardashians-christmas-card-illuminati-message#zoomed-picture>
. Costing a quarter of a million dollars to produce, this ghastly orgy of 
celebrity self-indulgence required an extensive stage set and the services of 
elite fashion photographer David Lachapelle. It features glorified images of 
curvy bodies posing next to huge gold dollar signs, set in some hideous pink 
and neon dystopia. Is this reality?

To be fair, it was ever thus. The first Christmas card was produced by Sir 
Henry Cole in 1843 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2000/dec/18/christmas2000.shopping>. It too was 
nausiatingly self-satisfied,showing three generations of the Cole family 
looking prosperous and well-fed, all raising glasses to the card's recipient 
<http://news.bbcimg.co.uk/media/images/57204000/jpg/_57204216_cole.jpg>. It too 
was produced by a celebrity image-maker, John Calcott Horsley from the Royal 
Academy. Flanking the central image of the family were scenes of philanthropy. 
This was how the Coles wanted to be seen: wealthy and generous. What the 
recipient sees is smug.

For Byatt, "the map of the world provided by Christian belief had gone and 
this means how you say who you are has become very very difficult." I'm not 
sure I completely buy this. I suspect it's always been difficult. As the Cole 
card suggests, we have long been concerned to tactically position ourselves 
towards others, whether religious or not. But Byatt is surely on to something 
that those with a weak sense of internal self-definition find their identity in 
the gaze they elicit from other people. It is not I think therefore I am, but I 
tweet therefore I am. In such a world, I exist in so far as I am told that I 
exist by the attention of other people.

The French psychoanalyst Jaques Lacan says something similar in his idea of 
the mirror stage. When the child becomes fascinated with her own reflection in 
the mirror, she sees a coherent self, a self that is together and somehow 
integrated as one. But it is a sense of self totally at odds with her own 
internal incoherence and uncoordinated bodily dysfunctions. This discrepancy 
between the image and the emerging subject is often resolved in favour of the 
image. This reflected self becomes a controlling source of how we think about 
who we are.

All of which is turbo charged in the age of social media. As Byatt contends: 
"The wordFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> is very 
interesting, because it means it's a mirror. And you need a mirror because you 
haven't got a picture. You need a mirror to tell you who you are." In other 
words, social media is all about "exchanging constant reassurances that you 
exist". So, as a sort of digital fasting, I'm going to give up social media for 
a while. The problem is that we have become terrorised by image, constantly 
fretful to manage the self that is reflected back to us, neurotically checking 
how many followers we have, at the mercy of other people's sense of who we are. 
Once we followed the star. Now we follow the stars, hoping they too might 
follow us. But maybe, just maybe, the star itself is a better guide. And, best 
of all, it doesn't always lead back to me. Which is perhaps why I think, 
counter-intuitively, it may be more about reality and less about fantasy.

Twitter: @giles_fraser <https://twitter.com/giles_fraser>
 