
In the last few months, big-name artists like Pink, Akon and Snow Patrol have 
launched their own applications, or "apps", for Apple's iPhone and iPod Touch 
viaiTunes. That might sound terribly cutting edge, but the apps often offer 
little more than the content you'd be able to see on the acts' websites via the 
internet browser on those devices anyway. However, the bar has been raised by a 
new app that combines six exclusive new Christmas songs by Weezer with Tap Tap 
Revenge, a popular Guitar Heroesque game (of which a dance music version 
featuring existing tunes by Daft Punk, Justice andChemical Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/chemical-brothers> has also just been 
released). Christmas With Weezer does cost Â£2.99, where many artist apps are 
free, but the band's powerpop reworkings of Christmas hymns are worth the fee 
alone, with their stirring version of O Holy Night a particular treat. In fact, 
the only slight pity is that they're not available as audio tracks without all 
the manic tapping.

This column has probably covered Radiohead more than any other act, but that's 
mainly because they keep associating themselves with terrific online 
innovations. The latest one has just been launched by Japanese TV channel 
Wowow, to drum up interest in the station's forthcoming broadcast of 
Radiohead's recent Tokyo show. Go totinyurl.com/radiowowow 
<http://tinyurl.com/radiowowow> and you can create your own video of the band 
playing In Rainbows opener 15 Step, by flicking between 12 colour-coded camera 
angles of a typically impressive (if rather pixellated) performance. Once 
you've done it, you can then watch your video back, marvelling at your 
directorial nous. You can also check out the "rainbows" of angles selected by 
several thousand other users and view graphs of the most popular angles for 
each part of the song. Very nifty indeed.

The pay-what-you-want model introduced by Radiohead continues to flourish on 
NoiseTrade.com <http://www.NoiseTrade.com>, which bills itself as a site for 
"fair trade music". Artists pay $250 to set up an account with the site, which 
covers the cost of facilitating 20,000 downloads of their album or EP. Those of 
us who want to download that music are given the option of either paying our 
desired amount, starting from $1, or getting the album for free if we provide 
five friends' email addresses. The artist thus either receives revenue (90% of 
whatever's paid) or the viral buzz and increased mailing list of the free 
option. It's a smart idea, impressively realised. The site currently features 
several decent Christmas albums on its front page, including a mix of 
traditional songs and originals from Wilco-inspired Chicago folkster So Elated 
and the indie-folk Advent Songs collection from Louisville's Sojourn Community 
Church.
 