


Chris Froome’s decision to release all independent analysis of his test 
results will not be enough to satisfy the two-time Tour de France winner’s 
critics, according to one of his key rivals,Alberto Contador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador>.

Alberto Contador: ‘It would be perfect to win the Tour, do the Olympics and 
end’ | Donald McRae
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/16/alberto-contador-tour-de-france-olympics-end-interview>
In an exclusive interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/16/alberto-contador-tour-de-france-olympics-end-interview>
, Contador,who tested positive for clenbuterol in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/sep/30/alberto-contador-positive-test>, 
said Froome’s publication of new data next month will not stem the vitriolic 
campaign against the British rider.

The Spaniard also claimed that Team Sky’s approach may make the situation 
worse for Froome.

“It won’t give too much to resolve this problem,” he said. “Maybe it’s more 
important that people can see you being more open in the way you work. I think 
that’s more useful than just giving out lots of data.”

Contador, who won the Giro d’Italia this year before finishing fifth behind 
Froome in the Tour, said he was disappointed that his rival was spat at 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2015/jul/25/chris-froome-spat-tour-de-france-stage-19-video>
 and had urine thrown at him by spectators. “Of course I feel some sympathy for 
Froome. During the Tour you put in an incredible effort. And to lead the race 
takes even more. I still think cycling is a beautiful sport but some people 
just want to disturb the race. It’s sad.”

But Contador thinks Team Sky’s way of working is problematic – and means that 
Froome suffers much more scepticism than either Astana’s Vincenzo Nibali or 
Contador himself.Despite his own tainted reputation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/feb/06/alberto-contador-ban-tour-cycling>
, the Spaniard has been targeted less than Froome by irate fans supposedly 
critical of doping. “Some people like Team Sky and Froome. Others dislike him. 
Maybe his system of work is hermetic,” said Contador.

When pressed to clarify what he meant, Contador added: “It’s not open. Maybe 
[Team Sky] work in different ways to other teams and maybe people dislike this 
way of working. But we all have that. Every rider and every team has critics 
and fans.”

Contador did say that he believes current anti-doping controls mean the sport 
is much cleaner. “With the system of anti-doping control we now have and the 
quantity of those tests for the top riders it is impossible to cheat,” he said. 
“If you do it’s like a suicide. I’ve no doubt this is why it’s clean at the 
very highest level.”

In February 2012 Contador was found guilty of “accidental ingestion” of 
clenbuterol, an incident he continues to attribute to eating contaminated meat.

He was subsequently stripped of his victories in the 2010 Tour and 2011 Giro 
d’Italia, but the Spaniard said that he still believes he holds nine Grand Tour 
titles – rather than the officially adjusted figure of seven. “Without doubt 
I’ve won nine. Look at the jersey of the Tour 2010 and the Giro 2011. I won 
both those races in a clean and honest way. Only with work and sacrifice. I put 
those up as an example.”
 