
There is no cliche more tired than the oft-repeated assertion that cinema 
isn’t what it used to be – that “modern movies” are somehow less adventurous 
than their predecessors, and the celluloid landscape was once more diverse than 
it is today. It’s a claim you hear throughout the industry, from the critics 
who complain about a constant diet of franchised superhero blockbusters to 
A-list Hollywood stars such as Dustin Hoffman who declared “it’s the worst that 
film has ever been 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/06/dustin-hoffman-film-is-the-worst-it-has-ever-been>
” in 50 years.

Certainly if you take box office as the only indicator, it’s possible to form 
a depressing view of contemporary cinema in which the most significant movies 
of 2014 wereTransformers: Age of Extinction, Captain America: The Winter Soldier
,X-Men: Days of Future Past and The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 1. Yet far 
from being a homogenised mass of teen-franchised Hollywood fare, the movies 
released in the UK in 2015 represent a dizzyingly diversesmorgasbord of 
international talent in which – for those wishing to go the extra mile – there 
are delights aplenty to be found.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32845d77316bcbb6365e0fb9a62a91b89a5ceb1a%2F0_0_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%202015%3A%20A%20year%20of%20change%20and%20reinvention&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%202015%3A%20A%20year%20of%20change%20and%20reinvention&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32845d77316bcbb6365e0fb9a62a91b89a5ceb1a%2F0_0_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
 Nadine Marshall and Kai Francis-Lewis in Second Coming. Photograph: Publicity 
image from film company 
Look at the evidence. Among the movies that have played the UK independent or 
“arthouse” circuit this year are: Céline Sciamma’sGirlhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/26/girlhood-film-karidja-toure-assa-sylla-celine-sciamma>
, a vibrant evocation of Parisian banlieue life; Carol Morley’sThe Falling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/jan/21/the-falling-carol-morley-world-exclusive-trailer-video>
, a sublime tale of mass fainting which evokes both Peter Weir’sPicnic at 
Hanging Rock and Nicolas Roeg’s Don’t Look Now; debbie tucker green’s Second 
Coming <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Qp1_Ay41-A>, a suburban British drama 
with a boldly mysterious quasi-Biblical twist;A Girl Walks Home Alone at Night 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jnSYzXhyWFY>, the attention-grabbing 
monochrome first feature from Ana Lily Amirpour, which was billed as “the first 
Iranian vampire western” (even though it was shot in America); andSuffragette, 
Sarah Gavron’s adaptation of Abi Morgan’s empowering script, which opened the 
London Film Festival earlier this month.

A key theme of the festival this year was the role of women in film, with 
Geena Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/27/geena-davis-institute-sexism-in-film-industry>
 headlining a symposium on gender imbalance in the media, and festival director 
Clare Stewart highlighting the need “to support women directors across the 
chain – not just in development but all the way through to making sure there’s 
equity in opportunities for the films to be screened”. There’s no doubt that 
the history of cinema has been blighted by male bias: it took the Oscars eight 
decades to award their top prize to a female film-maker, with Kathryn Bigelow’s
The Hurt Locker scooping best film and best director in 2010. But perhaps we 
can take heart from the fact that so many of this year’s most exciting films 
have been helmed by women. Maybe the industry’s long-established gender bar is 
finally starting to crack.

Documentaries continue to thrive too, with Asif Kapadia’s Amy becoming the 
highest-grossing British-made documentary in UK cinemas. Other recent 
home-grown non-fiction gems have included Jeanie Finlay’s bizarrely poignant
Orion: The Man Who Would Be King, the story of an American singer who wanted to 
be so much more than an Elvis impersonator; Julien Temple’s supremely 
life-affirmingThe Ecstasy of Wilko Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/19/ecstasy-wilko-johnson-review-mark-kermode>
, which documented the guitarist’s acceptance of imminent death and unexpected 
reprieve from a diagnosis of terminal cancer; and Sean McAllister’s 
heart-breakingA Syrian Love Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/17/a-syrian-love-story-review-refugees>
, which delved behind the headlines to examine the personal impact of conflict 
on a family torn apart by political oppression.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a899db5c03b3be712342bb0d7128f6bdf35c55%2F0_53_7053_4229%2F7053.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%202015%3A%20A%20year%20of%20change%20and%20reinvention&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%202015%3A%20A%20year%20of%20change%20and%20reinvention&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a899db5c03b3be712342bb0d7128f6bdf35c55%2F0_53_7053_4229%2F7053.jpg>
 Amy Winehouse, as seen in Asif Kapadia’s documentary. Photograph: Allstar 
Picture Library 
Meanwhile, the Bigelow-produced US documentary Cartel Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/30/cartel-land-film-director-matthew-heineman-interview-mexico-drugs-war-interview>
 gave dramatic features such asSicario a run for their money with its depiction 
of vigilante groups on both sides of the US/Mexican border taking the law into 
their own hands in the hellish battle with drug cartels.

There’s further cause for rejoicing when one surveys the state of 
international animation, which seems to be experiencing a new golden age. While 
Hayao Miyazaki’sThe Wind Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/08/the-wind-rises-review-hayao-miyazaki>
 and Isao Takahata’sThe Tale of the Princess Kaguya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/22/tale-of-princess-kaguya-review-kermode>
 provided poignant swan-songs for Studio Ghibli, 2015 saw the release of 
Pixar’s 3D digital animationInside Out, which may yet become the first animated 
feature ever to win the Oscar for best picture. Loved by audiences and critics 
alike, this depiction of the emotional traumas of childhood is a miracle, a 
genuine “family film” that has won the hearts of youngsters and oldies alike. 
At the time of writing, its Academy Awards odds are shortening by the day. Will 
2016 be the year when animation is finally acknowledged as something other than 
a childish adjunct to the more serious trajectories of “live action” movies?

Perhaps more than any other area of movie-making, animation demonstrates 
perfectly how the old and the new, past and future, can coexist. With 
home-grown stop-motion treats like Aardman’sShaun the Sheep finding a firm 
foothold in the multiplexes, Tomm Moore’s breath-takingSong of the Sea taking 
inspiration from the hand-crafted 2D artistry of Ghibli and Sylvain Chomet, and 
Laika studios continuing to blur the line between the physical and the digital 
with scrungy delights likeThe Boxtrolls, it’s hard to remember a time when 
ancient skills and newfangled advances were so intertwined.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445862245940%2F84eae066-98b5-4690-be8c-79edd03b7aa6-2060x1159.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%202015%3A%20A%20year%20of%20change%20and%20reinvention&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%202015%3A%20A%20year%20of%20change%20and%20reinvention&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445862245940%2F84eae066-98b5-4690-be8c-79edd03b7aa6-2060x1159.jpeg>
 Inside Out: a possible contender for best fIlm 2016? Photograph: 
Pixar/Allstar/Disney/Picar 
This intermingling of past and present technologies can be found filtering its 
way throughout the film industry. Toward the end of last year, a group of 
high-profile directors including Christopher Nolan and Martin Scorsese helped 
to secure a deal with the major Hollywood studios which would ensure that Kodak 
continued to produce 35mm film stock for the foreseeable future.

While digital cameras are considered by some to be a better alternative to 
their photo-chemical predecessors, directors such as Paul Thomas Anderson, 
Quentin Tarantino and JJ Abrams continue to shoot on film, preferring depth and 
richness of image to economic efficiency and technical malleability. Crucially, 
both formats are now available – for the time being – meaning that film-makers 
can choose to originate on film or digital, or a combination of the two. As 
Kodak chief executive Jeff Clarke said in a statement in February: “Film has 
long been – and will remain – a vital part of our culture. With the support of 
the studios we will continue to produce motion picture film, with its 
unparalleled richness and unique textures, to enable film-makers to tell their 
stories and demonstrate their art.”

Changes are afoot in distribution too. Although most mainstream cinemas have 
converted to digital projection (a format that has allowed lower-budget films 
to be exhibited without the restrictive costs of producing and shipping 
prints), several UK cinemas retain the skill and technology to project film, 
boosted by the efforts of Christopher Nolan who ensured that celluloid prints of
Interstellar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/09/interstellar-review-sci-fi-spectacle-delivers>
 (35mm, 70mm, and 70mm Imax) opened in advance of their digital counterparts. 
Tarantino’s high-profileThe Hateful Eight is being distributed in a 70mm 
“roadshow” version in December.

Meanwhile, on the digital front, the advent of laser projection has helped to 
overcome some of the light-loss issues traditionally associated with 
stereoscopy. Anyone who saw Robert Zemeckis’s vertiginous dramaThe Walk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/04/the-walk-review-vertigo-inducing-thrills>
 in pin-sharp laser-projected Imax 3D will know that the only thing darkening 
the image would be the fact that you’re hiding your eyes behind your hands as 
Joseph Gordon-Levitt’s Philippe Petit steps out on to the Twin Towers high wire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcff5f7cb20dda7a76627857b24bfc4587528f7de%2F109_51_2780_1669%2F2780.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%202015%3A%20A%20year%20of%20change%20and%20reinvention&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%202015%3A%20A%20year%20of%20change%20and%20reinvention&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinema-2015-change-reinvention-mark-kermode%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcff5f7cb20dda7a76627857b24bfc4587528f7de%2F109_51_2780_1669%2F2780.jpg>
 Idris Elba in the Netflix film Beasts of No Nation, directed by Cary Fukunaga. 
Photograph: AP 
Such advances are being made at a time when the very way in which we view 
movies is in flux. This month, the powerful dramaBeasts of No Nation received a 
near-simultaneous theatrical and Netflix streaming release in the UK, a 
development that has ruffled the feathers of some exhibitors who demand a 
clearly defined “window” in which a movie can only be seen in cinemas. Yet with 
the rise of “on demand” services such as Curzon Home Cinema and the BFI-Player, 
viewers are becoming increasingly used to the idea that they can choose whether 
to watch a movie at home or in a theatre.

In 2013, Ben Wheatley’s ground-breaking A Field in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/07/a-field-in-england-review> was 
released simultaneously across a range of platforms (free-to-air TV, 
video-on-demand, DVD, cinemas) “enabling viewers to decide how, where and when 
to view the film”. Rather than scuppering its theatrical life,A Field in England
 was deemed to have performed as well in cinemas as it would have done without 
the other platforms – perhaps even slightly better. Since then, lovers of 
independent, arthouse and foreign language movies who don’t have access to a 
local alternative cinema have increasingly turned to streaming services to 
broaden their cinematic landscape.

Like it or not, simultaneous distribution is the future. We are moving towards 
an environment wherein audiences will decide whether to watch a film on the 
phone, their laptop, their television or projected on the big screen in a 
cinema. With more films – and, hopefully, more varied films – vying for our 
attention, the keyword for audiences in the 21st century is “choice”. The 
future of cinema is in our hands, and will be defined by what, how and where we 
watch. Let’s choose wisely!
 