
The question of safety came up early in a discussion about promoting my new 
book,Nightwanderers 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/408952/s/nightwanderers/>
. Was it responsible, I asked my publicist and editor, to show teenage girl 
friends creeping from their bedrooms after dark, to wander their home turf in 
the moonlight?


It’s something I did as a teenager with one of the friends who inspired the 
character of Titania De Furia. She led me, breathless, through the deluxe 
garden of her rich neighbour, past his babbling rush of brook, and with cool, 
dewy air on our faces, we were giggling and tickled and free.


We’d met in Bad Times. Before my parents sussed out how to divide childcare 
fairly, time with my mum meant weekly sleepovers in this new friend’s spare 
bedroom. Her dad had left for another woman, the story went, and once us kids 
were in bed we’d hear the notes of Cher’s Love and Understanding, the clink of 
ice. After midnight, as the mothers slept, we’d let the door off the catch, 
running into the night, those indecipherable things far behind us. We leapt 
like mad things, and laughed our heads off, strong and wild and capable of 
anything.

No taboo should be off limits when writing for teenagers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/05/censorship-taboos-limits-teen-ya-books>
Later, I found my own novices to enlighten. We dressed in black, one 
sawdust-threaded balaclava between three, and gave ourselves burglar names, 
Bill and Biff and Betty, the books of our childhoods still high on our 
reference lists. We wandered streets and gardens with butterflies buffeting our 
stomachs, the queens of our own private suburbia until, just before sunrise, we 
crept back in through my bedroom window – careful not to disturb my sleeping 
dad – let the adrenalin dissipate, and slept.

Was this behaviour safe? It never crossed my mind. A huge part of 
nightwandering’s appeal was that it was forbidden, but I don’t remember 
considering why this was the case. Sneaking out after midnight was a pleasure 
throughout my adolescence, and something I visited in my first novel,Infinite 
Sky <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/infinite-sky.html>, in which Iris, the 
12-year-old protagonist slips out after dark to meet a boy. During a recent 
school visit, a teacher admitted that this part of the story had given him 
nightmares.

“I have a 13-year-old daughter, see,” he said, ruefully, as though this should 
speak for itself. And it did. I understood why the scene in which Iris meets 
her Irish Traveller boyfriend in a cornfield alarmed him, in spite of the fact 
that the characters share only one chaste kiss, preferring to swim in the lake 
and talk through problems to which no one else will listen. I wonder if this 
teacher would have had fewer nightmares if it was a 13-year-old boy that slept 
in the bedroom nearby.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcj-flood-teen-girls-have-a-right-to-roam-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10697b950d11f40b9854f470f0be287b326461c8%2F0_382_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=CJ%20Flood%3A%20%20teen%20girls%20have%20a%20right%20to%20roam%20too&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcj-flood-teen-girls-have-a-right-to-roam-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=CJ%20Flood%3A%20%20teen%20girls%20have%20a%20right%20to%20roam%20too&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcj-flood-teen-girls-have-a-right-to-roam-too%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10697b950d11f40b9854f470f0be287b326461c8%2F0_382_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 ‘The idea of women’s freedoms being curbed for our own protection is mirrored 
in the pervading rape culture of today’: CJ Flood 
As a teen, my older brother was allowed to roam further than me, and to stay 
out later, disproportionate to our ages. This, I inferred from the various rows 
and pleading discussions that took place on the subject, was due to biology. Us 
girls had the facilities to get pregnant, and the best way to prevent this 
disaster was to keep us extra safe, preferably, it seemed, at home or at the 
homes of pals.

In their 1977 essay Girls and Subcultures, Angela McRobbie and Jenny Garber 
talk about the indoor leisure pursuit of trying on clothes and experimenting 
with make-up, and how it might have, in part, explained the relative absence of 
young females in late 20th-century subcultural groups (think punks, mods, 
bikers). Looking back, it’s evident how this type of indoor activity was 
sanctioned by our parents, via pizza and videos and ice cream; how neatly it 
fit with their predilection to keep daughters indoors.

The idea of our freedoms being curbed for our own protection is mirrored in 
the pervading rape culture of today, which puts the onus of women’s safety 
strictly in their own hands. We are encouraged to dress modestly, and not talk 
to strangers. To watch our drinks for roofies, and not have so many vodkas that 
our judgement is impaired. To be careful who we invite home, and not walk 
through parks at night alone. To not make eye-contact with strangers in the 
street, or respond to catcalls. To plant our feet firmly so we can’t be toppled 
over. To wear sensible shoes. To keep our wits about us, and let people know 
where we are.

laughing at something weakens its power

The list goes on and on. 

“Text me when you get home,” we say to each other. 

For years, I’ve walked home alone, defiantly taking shortcuts that make my 
heart race, in spite of dear friends’ beseechments to get taxis and avoid parks 
and jitties. “Just between the really dangerous hours,” my best friend said 
once, by which she meant between 3 and 5am. The unpalatable truth, of course, 
is that more women are attacked by men they know than by strangers, and that 
these attacks can take place indoors with soft lighting as easily as in 
lamp-post-less back streets.

“I’ve been murdered,” we text back from the safety of our beds. Not because 
women being raped and murdered is hilarious, but because laughing at something 
weakens its power. A web of irony around your flesh and bones can make them 
feel impervious to the violence of men.

Why there are no taboos in Scandinavian children's books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/25/scandinavian-childrens-books-norway-ingelin-rossland-sex-swearing>
“The night promises harm to women,” wrote Andrea Dworkin in The Night and 
Danger, in 1979.

The truth is that men do experience freedom of movement and freedom in action 
and that women do not. We must recognise that freedom of movement is a 
precondition for freedom of anything else. It comes before freedom of speech in 
importance because without it freedom of speech cannot in fact exist. So when 
we women struggle for freedom, we must begin at the beginning and fight for 
freedom of movement, which we have not had and do not now have. In reality, we 
are not allowed out after dark.

Cheryl Strayed, in her memoir, Wild 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wild-12.html>, discusses the way in which 
women are still considered brave (or foolish) for travelling a significant 
distance alone, unlike their male counterparts, and the dread that this bias 
can generate.

It was a deal I’d made with myself months before and the only thing that 
allowed me to hike alone. I knew that if I allowed fear to overtake me, my 
journey was doomed. Fear, to a great extent, is born of a story we tell 
ourselves, and so I chose to tell myself a different story from the one women 
are told. I decided I was safe. I was strong. I was brave. Nothing could 
vanquish me.

This double standard bothers me in its injustice, but also in its inaccuracy. 
I know men who would be hard pushed to defend themselves against an attacker; 
women who would stand a fighting chance. I know women who have been assaulted 
while travelling alongside a man. Terrible violence happens, and the person who 
needs to change their behaviour is the perpetrator.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcj-flood-teen-girls-have-a-right-to-roam-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95501a523ff981058ca12a79dfbd02ad50654f8f%2F4_0_2040_1224%2F2040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=CJ%20Flood%3A%20%20teen%20girls%20have%20a%20right%20to%20roam%20too&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcj-flood-teen-girls-have-a-right-to-roam-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=CJ%20Flood%3A%20%20teen%20girls%20have%20a%20right%20to%20roam%20too&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcj-flood-teen-girls-have-a-right-to-roam-too%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95501a523ff981058ca12a79dfbd02ad50654f8f%2F4_0_2040_1224%2F2040.jpg>
 Reese Witherspoon in the 2014 film, Wild.
 Photograph: Allstar/FOX SEARCHLIGHT PICTURES 
Men are not safe from being attacked, but as a culture we believe them to be, 
and this allows them to travel more freely, gives them psychic protection. 
Strayed gave herself this protection through mind control; similar to that 
which I exercised during my, albeit, somewhat shorter walks through pitch-black 
parks after midnight.

If we believe we are safe, we enjoy increased liberty. Sexual violence is 
real, but fear around it is disproportionate and misplaced, due in part to the 
prevailing myth that rapists are dangerous strangers, prowling parks and back 
streets, rather than men that walk among us, and who many of us have or will 
invite into our homes.

Terrible things happen in spite of the precautions we take, but the world is 
too glorious and complicated to hide from.

In the end, my publicist and editor, and the teen magazines that will publish 
me, recommended that when encouraging young women to nightwander I ask them to 
leave their houses in groups, and just before sunrise; and to take a guardian 
if they are under 16. More longsighted advice for our teenage girls might be to 
learn a martial art, and gain some upper body strength. At 33, I am beginning 
to take this advice myself.

There’s a scene I wrote after the book had been printed, in which best 
friends, Rosie and Ti, bask in each other, and the freedom they have stolen for 
themselves, and the early Cornish sunlight. It’s a beautiful moment, something 
rare enough that I’ve experienced it with only my most beloved friends. Their 
minds are free from fear as they walk, and they are safe, as my friends and I 
were safe.

Webchat: teen fiction and taboos – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/live/2016/may/15/webchat-the-taboos-of-writing-for-teenagers-live>
Terrible things happen in spite of the precautions we take, but the world is 
too glorious and complicated to hide from, and so I urge you to be unafraid, as 
I will urge my teenage readers to be unafraid, to not curtail your own freedom 
or listen to those who would have it curtailed, even for your own safety.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcj-flood-teen-girls-have-a-right-to-roam-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4d6bb4a6562eb966a5f1e74e16ded884b9b05bc%2F0_0_1526_2337%2F1526.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=CJ%20Flood%3A%20%20teen%20girls%20have%20a%20right%20to%20roam%20too&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcj-flood-teen-girls-have-a-right-to-roam-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=CJ%20Flood%3A%20%20teen%20girls%20have%20a%20right%20to%20roam%20too&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcj-flood-teen-girls-have-a-right-to-roam-too%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4d6bb4a6562eb966a5f1e74e16ded884b9b05bc%2F0_0_1526_2337%2F1526.jpg>
 CJ Flood is the author of Infinite Sky 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/infinite-sky.html> and Nightwanderers 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/408952/s/nightwanderers/>
 (Simon & Schuster), both of which are available from the Guardian Bookshop.
 