
The notion that Brexit could save the NHS by freeing the health service of 
burdensome immigration is a “dangerous lie” that could see the UK starved of 
medical resources, four formerLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> health secretaries have warned.

Alan Milburn, Patricia Hewitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/patricia-hewitt>, Andy Burnham and Alan 
Johnson said leaving the EU would risk “frightening consequences for staffing, 
waiting times and levels of service care”.

Their statement, which comes as the future of the NHS emerged as a key 
battleground in the EU debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/01/senior-tories-brexit-vote-leave-attacks-david-cameron-letter-nhs-staff>
, supports the warning by Jeremy Hunt, the current health secretary, that a 
vote to leave would put NHS funding at risk.

Leaked Brexit email claims David Cameron has 'starved' NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/01/senior-tories-brexit-vote-leave-attacks-david-cameron-letter-nhs-staff>
Campaigners for Brexit have argued that leaving the EU could secure the health 
service, reducing the burden on the NHS caused by immigration from Europe. 
Priti Patel, the employment minister, has warned the health service is under 
threat because of the UK’s membership, an argument echoed byMichael Howard, the 
former Conservative leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/26/former-tory-leader-michael-howard-call-uk-leave-eu>
.

“We will be talking a lot about the NHS in this campaign because we believe 
that a leave vote is vital if we are to protect the NHS for future 
generations,” Patel said. “Current levels of migration are causing 
unsustainable pressures on our public services and we can see that theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is creaking under the strain.”

The former health secretaries rebutted this idea in their letter, saying the 
economic implications of Britain leavingEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> would be “felt at the heart of 
our cherished national institution”.

Brexit would mean less money for the NHS | Letter from Alan Milburn, Patricia 
Hewitt, Andy Burnham and Alan Johnson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/03/brexit-would-mean-less-money-for-the-nhs>
“There is a dangerous lie being propagated by those wanting to leave the EU 
that they will protect the NHS. The opposite is true,” they said.

“These are the same people who have campaigned for increased NHS charging, 
increased privatisation and cuts to spending. People should not trust their 
motives or their maths.”

The Labour politicians argued leaving Europe would mean less, not more, money 
for the NHS: “Independent experts have repeatedly shown that leaving will 
seriously damage our economy with some suggesting Britain would enter 
recession. That means reduced funding for public services – strangling NHS 
finances, with potentially frightening consequences for staffing, waiting times 
and levels of service care.

“The economic damage wreaked by leaving Europe will have devastating knock-on 
effects, including in the health service. Given the millions of lives who 
depend on our NHS, it is a risk we simply cannot afford to take.”

The row comes as new research suggested the leave campaign is gaining ground 
and may benefit from higher turnout among its supporters.

Brexit campaigners have track record of hostility to NHS, say MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/29/brexit-campaigners-have-track-record-of-hostility-to-nhs-say-mps>
Research by the Fabian Society <http://www.fabians.org.uk/> found remain had a 
narrow lead among theadult population, but highlighted three factors in favour 
of the leave campaign: leave voters being more likely to vote, leave arguments 
seeming to have a greater power to persuade and weaker loyalty to their cause 
among remain’s voters.

An online Opinium survey for the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/02/eu-referendum-young-voters-brexit-leave>
 found the Brexit campaign on 43% to remain’s 39%, with only just over half of 
under-35s planning to vote compared with more than 80% of over-55s.

Ken Clarke, the Conservative former cabinet minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2016/feb/12/ken-clarke-im-not-isolated-on-brexit-eu-referendum>
 and pro-EU campaigner, said he was worried about the findings.

“That poll is very worrying because it attributes that to the fact that young 
people have not been engaged in it and are unlikely to vote,” he told Radio 5 
Live’s Pienaar’s Politics. “It’s them who are going to be living with the 
consequences of the vote that seem least inclined to turn out to vote.

“I can’t think of a more disastrous way of resolving the future of the 
country. Of course the short-term effects of having Brexit in the present state 
of the global economy, the European economy, the British economy would be 
catastrophic.”
 