
In a bizarre postscript to the bruising 1991 Senate hearings in which Anita 
Hill recounted sexual harassment by US Supreme Court nomineeClarence Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clarence-thomas>, Thomas's wife Ginni has 
telephoned Hill and asked that she apologise for "what you did with my husband".

According to ABC News 
<http://blogs.abcnews.com/politicalpunch/2010/10/virginia-thomas-leaves-anita-hill-a-voicemail-asking-for-an-apology-hill-says-no.html>
, Ginni Thomas confirmed that she had called Hill earlier this month and left a 
voicemail message asking her to apologise and to "pray about this" â€“ but said 
she was offering an olive branch.

Hill, now a professor at Brandeis University, said she had received the 
voicemail message, which she initially reported to university authorities. The
message said 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/newsdesk/2010/10/anita-hill-gets-a-call-from-ginni-thomas.html>
:

"Anita Hill, this is Ginni Thomas, and I just wanted to reach across the 
airwaves and the years and ask you to consider something. I would love you to 
consider an apology sometime and some full explanation of why you did what you 
did with my husband. So give it some thought and certainly pray about this and 
come to understand why you did what you did. OK, have a good day."


In a statement last night, Ginni Thomas said:

"I did place a call to Ms Hill at her office extending an olive branch to her 
after all these years, in hopes that we could ultimately get passed what 
happened so long ago. That offer still stands, I would be very happy to meet 
and talk with her if she would be willing to do the same. Certainly no offense 
was ever intended."

For her part, Hill said: "I have no intention of apologising and I stand by my 
testimony in 1991."

Hill told ABC News: "Even if it wasn't a prank, it was in no way conciliatory 
for her to begin with the presumption that I did something wrong in 1991. I 
simply testified to the truth of my experience. For her to say otherwise is not 
extending an olive branch, it's accusatory."

Hill's testimony in 1991 came close to derailing Thomas's nomination for the 
Supreme Court post after shedetailed her experiences working for Thomas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2001/aug/07/gender.uk>, telling the Senate 
Judiciary Committee that Thomas had made repeated detailed sexual remarks and 
suggestions, which Thomas later denied. Hill herself wasthe victim of repeated 
smears <http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2001/jun/28/michaelellison>.

In recent months Ginni Thomas has been taking an active political role with 
the Tea Party movement and its Republican supporters, and last weekspearheaded 
a fundraising drive for conservative Republican candidates 
<http://www.redstate.com/brianfaughnan/2010/10/12/the-1013bomb/> ahead of the 
US midterm elections in November.

In this online video for supporters <http://www.twitvid.com/VWMWH>, Ginni 
Thomas reels off a list of her favourite Republican candidates, exhorting 
people to donate money to them.

Earlier this month the New York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/09/us/politics/09thomas.html> that Thomas is 
the founder and head of a new right-wing group calledLiberty Central 
<http://www.libertycentral.org/stop-obama-taxes/welcome.html>, dedicated to 
opposing what she describes as the "tyranny" of President Obama and the 
Democratic party. Liberty Central is funded by undisclosed donations.

As the wife of an associate justice of the Supreme Court, the highest judicial 
body tasked with interpreting and upholding the US Constitution, the anonymous 
funding of Ginni Thomas's group presents an ethical challenge.

Ginni Thomas's call to Hill's voicemail appears to have taken place on the 
same day as the New York Times printed its investigation into her fundraising 
and political activities.
 