How does Edward Lear describe The Jumblies?  They had luminous noses  Their 
heads were green and their hands were blue and they went to sea in a sieve  
They didn't like porridge  They tried to swim the English channel with their 
toes wrapped in pink paper Who is the main character of AA Milne's poem, 
Disobedience?  Christopher Robin  Samuel Samuel Thomas Quentin Crimp  Percy 
Simon Duffy  James James Morrison Morrison Weatherby George Dupree Which of 
these does Isabel NOT triumph over in Ogden Nash's poem?  A bear  A witch  A 
crocodile  A doctor What creature was slain in Lewis Carroll's poem from Alice 
Through the Looking Glass?  The Jabberwock  The Cheshire Cat  The Pobble  A 
sleepy giant Which character from a poem by Hilaire Belloc illustrates the 
dangers of telling lies?  Jim  Matilda  Edmund  Belinda In Kenneth Grahame's 
The Song of Mr Toad, who is superior to the great Mr. Toad?  The Queen  The King
 The generals  Nobody is better than Mr. Toad What happens at the end of Roald 
Dahl's poem, Little Red Riding Hood and the Wolf?  The wolf eats little red 
riding hood  The grandmother eats the wolf  Little red riding hood acquired a 
new wolfskin coat  All the characters run away In which Spike Milligan poem do 
the teapots jibber jabber joo?  On the Ning Nang Nong  A Silly Poem  In the 
Pingaling River  Have a Nice Day Which mystery cat has been immortalised in 
poetry by TS Eliot?  Crookshanks  The Cheshire Cat  The pussycat who went to 
sea in a pea green boat  Macavity What line follows "Tyger Tyger" in William 
Blake's classic poem?  Bold and bright  Burning bright  Light and bright  
Wearing tights so bright  You gotâ€¦  What a wonder! What a wiz! You have really 
aced our quiz.  What a wonder! What a wiz! You have really aced our quiz.  What 
a wonder! What a wiz! You have really aced our quiz.  Indeed that is a very 
good score, I can only watch in awe.  You've done quite well to get five or 
six, For our quiz is like Macavity - full of tricks.  You've done quite well to 
get five or six, For our quiz is like Macavity - full of tricks.  Oh dear! 
You'd better read some more, Or the jabberwock will catch you in his claws!  Oh 
dear! You'd better read some more, Or the jabberwock will catch you in his 
claws!  Oh dear! You'd better read some more, Or the jabberwock will catch you 
in his claws!  Oh dear! You'd better read some more, Or the jabberwock will 
catch you in his claws!  Oh dear! You'd better read some more, Or the 
jabberwock will catch you in his claws!  Challenge your friends Submit answers  