
Classic FM has signed up Alan Titchmarsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-titchmarsh> just months after 
the TV gardener was dropped by its BBC rival, Radio 2.

Titchmarsh will present a new Saturday morning show between 9am and midday, 
replacing Mark Forrest's Classic FM chart, which moves to Sunday afternoon.

The avuncular presenter was dropped by Radio 2 controller Bob Shennan in August
 <http://radiotoday.co.uk/2011/08/radio-2-drops-titchmarshs-sunday-show/> after 
four years presenting the station's long-running Melodies For You show, which 
was also axed.

Classic FM said Titchmarsh was now exclusive to the Global Radio-owned 
station, which celebrates its 20th anniversary next year. His new show will 
begin on 7 January.

Titchmarsh said: "I am delighted to be joining the radio station that I tune 
in to most of all and look forward to sharing my passion for a wide range of 
classical music at, what to me, is a very special time in the week – Saturday 
morning."

Shennan, talking to Radio 4's Feedback in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2011/sep/25/media-monkey-diary?INTCMP=SRCH>
, said Melodies For You had been axed because of the "cost of the programme, 
the attractiveness of the slot and the way the audience is going".

Global Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio> director of 
broadcasting, Richard Park. said: "Alan is a first-class presenter and 
broadcaster and this, alongside his love of classical music, makes him the 
perfect addition to the Classic FM family as we kick off our 20th anniversary 
celebrations."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 