
The 12th PEN World Voices festival <http://worldvoices.pen.org/> opened last 
night at Cooper Union  <http://www.cooper.edu/>in New York City. The question 
of illegal drugs and the drug trade – why do they exist, why are we so obsessed 
with parallel realities, and if we find them, which is the more real? – was 
posed to eight writers from around the world, includingAnne Enright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/anne-enright>, Boris Akunin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/01/he-lover-death-boris-akunin-review>
 andMarlon James <https://www.theguardian.com/books/marlon-james>. 

But who knew drugs could be so funny? Often piercing and insightful, the 
stories read by these highly acclaimed international writers were perhaps as 
much surprising for their cautionary nature as for their laugh-out-loud humor. 
From Mexican journalistLydia Cacho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/01/lydia-cacho-mexican-journalist-interview>
 reading a story about Sean Penn getting his drug supplier arrested to Enright 
using her incisive wit to talk about aid workers one-upping her in Honduras, 
the readings never shied away from exploring the unreality drugs inflict on us 
all.

The evening was opened by PEN America president Andrew Solomon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrew-solomon>, who said that PEN and the 
festival’s role was “to ensure many voices from many places can be heard”. But 
in recent years PEN has had some trouble smoothing out conflicts among its 
membership, usually ones which reflect the fault lines of global politics.

At the beginning of this month, when PEN’s program acceptance of sponsorship 
from the Israeli government for the writer Dalia Betolin-Sherman and playwright 
Yael Ronen resulted in theonline publication of an open letter 
<https://adalahny.org/web-action/1376/letter-pen-american-center-don-t-partner-israeli-government>
 signed by over 100 PEN American Center members includingAlice Walker and Junot 
Diaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/06/israeli-backing-for-new-york-festival-rejected-in-angry-letter-by-authors>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fpen-world-voices-festival-opening-marlon-james-anne-enright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe36983c0dcbabb2e32ee16875d6c264569e4b712%2F0_114_1800_1079%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Class%20A%20books%3A%20PEN%20World%20Voices%20Festival%20opens%20with%20riffs%20on%20drugs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fpen-world-voices-festival-opening-marlon-james-anne-enright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Class%20A%20books%3A%20PEN%20World%20Voices%20Festival%20opens%20with%20riffs%20on%20drugs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fpen-world-voices-festival-opening-marlon-james-anne-enright%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe36983c0dcbabb2e32ee16875d6c264569e4b712%2F0_114_1800_1079%2F1800.jpg>
 Juan Villoro at PEN: the Mexican writer read a highly entertaining excerpt 
from his short story Amigos Mexicanos. Photograph: Beowulf Sheehan/PEN America 
“Given PEN American Center’s mission of supporting freedom of expression, it 
is deeply regrettable that the Festival has chosen to accept sponsorship from 
the Israeli government, even as it intensifies its decades-long denial of basic 
rights to the Palestinian people, including the frequent targeting of 
Palestinian writers and journalists,” the letter, written byAdalah-NY, the New 
York Campaign for the Boycott of Israel 
<http://adalahny.cmail20.com/t/r-l-edtlult-duujuihdih-d/>, said. Several 
authors, including poets  
<https://adalahny.org/press-release/1403/rights-advocates-publishers-meet-pen-executive-director-discuss-call-pen-drop>
Jennif(f)er Tamayo and Jennifer Hayashida, 
<https://adalahny.org/press-release/1403/rights-advocates-publishers-meet-pen-executive-director-discuss-call-pen-drop>
 then withdrew from the festival.

In this, there were shades of the debate from last year’s decision by the 
festival to award the satirical French newspaper Charlie Hebdo the Freedom of 
Expression Courage prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/29/writers-join-protest-charlie-hebdo-pen-award>
.

Neither event was mentioned in the opening speeches, which focused instead on 
getting to the evening’s program. First, the festival chairColm Tóibín  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/colmtoibin>told a charming anecdote which 
compared the city to the act of writing, and the festival to a “pedestrian 
crossing” that allowed for “city strollers to access the next page”. Then 
curatorLászló Jakab Orsós 
<https://www.pen.org/l%C3%A1szl%C3%B3-jakab-ors%C3%B3s> spoke briefly about the 
region selected for this year’s festival – Mexico, with occasional sprinklings 
of Cuba and Russia – and the evening moved quickly onto the quirky and 
meditative readings on drugs.

New Yorker poetry editor Paul Muldoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/31/paul-muldoon-life-in-poetry> 
opened with a poem about a drug trip written from the perspective of a talking 
horse. Like drugs, “we make art because it makes us feel good”, he said to the 
chuckling crowd. Mexican writer and journalistJuan Villoro  
<http://bombmagazine.org/article/2000006/juan-villoro>followed this with a 
highly entertaining excerpt from Amigos Mexicanos, from his short story 
collection The Guilty, about an American journalist who goes to Mexico wanting 
to write about the violence of the country but, possibly like Jack Kerouac upon 
visiting friend William Burroughs, “never finding anything outrageous to write 
about”.

The Russian writer Akunin took a more existential look at the theme by reading 
an extract from his first novel, which was concerned about how to find life’s 
real purpose. “I believe the reason why some people, roughly 3% of the world’s 
population, ruin their life by doing drugs, is exactly the same as why the 
overwhelming majority of humans ruin their life work jobs they do not like,” he 
said, referring to the human need to find a palliative for the reality of their 
existence.

Later, Olga Torkarczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/oct/20/fiction.features2>, who is well 
known in her native Poland for her mythical stories, enthralled the audience 
with a tale about God deciding to create drugs “as an addendum” to the creation 
of the rest of the world.

Mexican Chicano artist Guillermo Gómez-Peña <http://www.pochanostra.com/> 
ended the evening on an odd note, with a seemingly unanticipated physicalized 
incantation from the voices of the oppressed and censored. But although the 
performance was the most aesthetically out of sync with the evening, it 
remained conceptually en pointe. Before his poem at the beginning of the 
evening, Muldoon had mused: “Every poem is a drug trip in the way it is written 
and read.” And after an evening of mind-expanding literature, there wasn’t a 
truer word said.
 