
After the US election <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016>, 
many people feel we’re on the verge of an apocalypse. What might not be obvious 
is that it’s an artificial intelligence apocalypse, like the ones in The 
Terminator and The Matrix. The fact is the machines have taken over, enslaved 
us, and may now destroy us.

No, seriously. Let me explain.

Here’s what an AI apocalypse looks like in broad brushstrokes:

1. We carefully program AI with a well-defined goal for the betterment of the 
human race, give it power, and set it loose.

2. It develops unexpected emergent behaviours, and begins to have impacts 
unforeseen by its creators.

3. The well-defined goal is achieved. Unfortunately, the unintended 
consequence is the downfall of humanity.

Let’s compare this to current circumstances.

The Nieman Foundation for Journalism at Harvard reports that nearly half of 
all Americans get their news from Facebook 
<http://www.niemanlab.org/2016/05/pew-report-44-percent-of-u-s-adults-get-news-on-facebook/>
. The social media site delivers news via its algorithms, which decide what 
stories you, as an individual user, see, and in what order. You might ask 
what’s wrong with that, when Facebook’s mission statement is to “give people 
the power to share and make the world more open and connected”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fai-apocalypse-facebook-algorithms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74e7e2103a5b2d6860f11efecbba5eda4e872331%2F0_0_2207_1324%2F2207.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Click%20here%20for%20the%20AI%20apocalypse%20(brought%20to%20you%20by%20Facebook)%20%7C%20Robert%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fai-apocalypse-facebook-algorithms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Click%20here%20for%20the%20AI%20apocalypse%20%28brought%20to%20you%20by%20Facebook%29%20%7C%20Robert%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fai-apocalypse-facebook-algorithms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74e7e2103a5b2d6860f11efecbba5eda4e872331%2F0_0_2207_1324%2F2207.jpg>
 ‘We’re on the verge of an AI apocalypse, like the one in The Matrix.’ 
Photograph: Cine Text/Sportsphoto Ltd /Allstar 
But the fact is that rather than serving this goal, Facebook’s AIs are 
servicing a far older and more well-established social goal, which was designed 
for the betterment of mankind. This is the goal of maximising value in pursuit 
of economic self-interest.

Neoliberal economics is based on the idea that the pursuit of individual, 
economic self-interest leads to the creation of greater value, which benefits 
society and results in the emergent betterment of mankind.

The individual self-interest being pursued in this case is that of Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, a legal person who is 
programmed, within our economic and legal system, with a single mandated goal: 
the delivery of maximum value to its shareholders. Facebook’s AIs are the 
technological limbs of that person, and they must ultimately reach out into the 
world to carry out that goal.

To that end, an election cycle is a goldrush, where these value-maximising AIs 
can reach out to mine your eyeballs. The more you check your feed, the more 
ad-based value the AIs can generate for the shareholders.

What no one foresaw was that in order to keep us clicking and sharing, 
headlines had to work harder to grab our attention, shouting ever more 
sensational and titillating news stories, millisecond-by-millisecond. The 
resulting lightspeed feedback loop coupled our fears and hopes for the future 
to the simple, relentless value system of the AIs and their corporation. It was 
only a matter of time before humans became collaborators, or asArron Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/27/arron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit>
, friend of Nigel Farage and financier of the Leave.eu campaign, stated in the 
recently published account of its Brexit campaign: “The more outrageous we are, 
the more attention we’ll get. The more attention we get, the more outrageous 
we’ll be 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/11/bluster-and-blunder-birthed-new-political-era>
.”

If the outrageous headlines can get you to take action, and click through, 
then there are even more AIs out there ready to feed their own revenue loops, 
with highly shareable, click-baiting stories and memes. They even exploit 
simple human foibles, with finger slips that activate ad links, and malware 
that infects our devices to keep other AIs informed about us, so we can be 
further targeted with material tuned to our particular trigger points. Each 
step in this massive computational network manipulates you for a click-through, 
generating a micropayment-driven AI ad placement feeding frenzy.

Of course, it’s not just Facebook involved as an end supplier in this new 
economic boom. Note that beneath each CNN article, every one of them sold with 
a tempting headline, there usually appears copious paid content. This is part 
of an algorithmically driven revenue generation strategy called “smart ad 
placement 
<http://www.turner.com/pressroom/cnn-international-commercial-takes-digital-advertising-next-level-%E2%80%98native-24%E2%80%99>
” by Turner Broadcasting, the subsidiary of Time-Warner that owns CNN. Turner’s 
site boasts of how optimising algorithms place ads “in the style of CNN 
editorial content, with the ability to be placed directly in editorial streams 
of content and alongside relevant CNN editorial videos and articles”. Even a 
“pure information” site like Nate Silver’s FiveThirtyEighthas been accused of 
warping its statistical algorithms 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/nate-silver-election-forecast_us_581e1c33e4b0d9ce6fbc6f7f>
 to make the US election seem closer than it might have done, and its graphs 
therefore more tempting for obsessive checking. Silver has defended himself 
against these accusations, tweeting: “The reason we adjust polls for the 
national trend is because **that’s what works best emperically** [sic]. It’s 
not a subjective assumption.” But there is no doubt that his site is now a 
for-profit poll predictor, owned by ESPN.

Some are concerned that the problem that has developed is so-called “fake news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/fake-news-donald-trump-election-alt-right-social-media-tech-companies>
”. WhileWikipedia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/News_satire> defines “fake 
news” as a synonym for news satire, in the post-election shock it has now 
become an umbrella term forthe uncontrolled explosion of misleading information 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/19/business/media/exposing-fake-news-eroding-trust-in-real-reporting.html?smprod=nytcore-iphone&smid=nytcore-iphone-share&_r=0>
 dispersed on social media during the election.Mark Zuckerberg has pledged to 
make Facebook impede “fake” news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/19/facebook-fake-news-mark-zuckerberg>
. Perhaps he’ll use real human editors, but in the recent past,his company has 
eliminated real people in this role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/29/facebook-trending-news-editors-fake-news-stories>
, in favour of algorithms, to ensure less bias in their presentation of news.

A moment of truth for Mark Zuckerberg | John Naughton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/20/fake-news-facebook-mark-zuckerberg-donald-trump>
Being able to discern what is true and what is fake is not a goal that AIs can 
achieve easily. As Zuckerberg himself has said, the problem is “complex, both 
technically and philosophically”. This is because the “truth” is a complex 
human concept that is very hard to programme. Witness that the websitePolitifact
 <http://www.politifact.com/>, dedicated to fact-checking US politics, has to 
place “truth” into six categories (only half of which are definitive) and 
provide a detailed, carefully written analysis to explain the nuances of the 
verity of each statement it examines. Human truths and falsehoods are not 
simple 0s or 1s.

Furthermore, the war on fake news misses the point. Regardless of whether AIs 
present “true” or “false” news, they will still be working towards their 
primary directive: the maximisation of value for the corporation.

The unforeseen outcomes of neoliberal values coupled to highly efficient AIs 
are ultimately emergent effects on our social fabric. AIs “personalise” 
newsfeeds for you, but this personalisation isn’t really for your benefit, it’s 
to place you in a tighter demographic category, making you a more targeted 
value proposition to sell to advertisers. The effect of this is that we have 
all been herded into digital echo chambers. And, with our emotions engaged by 
clickbaiting, profit-generating, dubious headlines, we’ve aided the process 
through enraged blocking and unfriending of anyone whose opinions differ from 
our own.

The truth is that Americans are no more simply Republican and Democrat than 
news is simply true and false, and our segregation into crisp, sale-able 
demographic packages serves only to reduce a complex human picture made up of 
difficult social and political issues. But the vast, unsympathetic network of 
AIs is not concerned with this complexity, it is working towards its programmed 
goal: to maximise value. And it is doing a great job. Through the election cycle
Facebook’s stock rose 924% faster <http://amigobulls.com/stocks/FB/stockcharts> 
than the US stock market index, the S&P 500.

The unintended consequence of this massive AI success may now be our own 
downfall: an apocalypse, heralded not by trumpets, but by Trump/Pence. Leaders 
who are more than willing to collaborate with our new robot overlords, 
communicating with us through them via a series of ever more inflammatory 
tweets. A world where we are more closed as individuals, and where we are less 
connected as communities, the ironic opposite of the world envisioned in 
Facebook’s mission statement.

I’d write more, but right now I’ve got to go and check my Facebook feed, CNN, 
and any other news site I can find to see what outrageous things our 
president-elect may have done in the past few minutes. Or perhaps find 
something to share that might help impede his progress. Perhaps a funny Joe 
Biden meme.

Somewhere an AI would smile. If it had a face.
 