
Not a Williams sister in sight and the third all-Belgian grand slam final out 
of four. "It's just something crazy for a little country," said Justin 
Henin-Hardenne, who last year defeated her compatriotKim Clijsters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kim-clijsters> in both the French and US 
Open finals. Clijsters has since become engaged to Lleyton Hewitt and the 
Australians, with none of their own players left in the singles since the 
fourth round, have turned to "our Kimmy" for solace.

"She's Belgian," came a cry inside the Rod Laver Arena yesterday as sections 
of the Melbourne crowd embraced Clijsters as one of their own and cheered her 
on to a 6-2, 7-6 semi-final victory over Switzerland's Patty Schnyder.

This has not been a great women's tournament, with Serena Williams, the 
reigning champion, and Jennifer Capriati absent, Venus Williams beaten in the 
third round and Am√©lie Mauresmo dropping out injured.

It has hardly been helped by the organisers' refusal to play any women's 
matches in the showcase evening sessions since the middle of the first week. 
Men's doubles has been preferred.

Hopefully tomorrow's final will be a cracker, although neither the 
all-Williams finals nor the all-Belgian finals have ever really caught alight. 
The last women's grand slam final of true drama was here two years ago when 
Capriati defeated Martina Hingis.

Those between Clijsters and Henin have failed to ignite principally because 
Clijsters has been consumed by nerves. Even at her best she might not have won 
either as Henin's game has more variety. Neither was close. Henin won 6-0, 6-4 
in Paris and 7-5, 6-1 at Flushing Meadows and must be expected to win again 
tomorrow.

Henin has not found it easy entering a major as favourite and world No1 for 
the first time. "I had the feeling I had to prove I was the best player in the 
world, which was stupid," she said.

Clijsters rose to the top last year without having won a grand slam event, 
though with an exceptional record on the Tour, including nine titles. Should 
she beat Henin, she will return to No1, although a first grand slam triumph is 
what she most wants.

Her chances of winning may, perversely, have been aided by the left ankle 
injury she suffered in the Hopman Cup in Perth in the build-up to this 
tournament. Expectations in the Australian media were increasing daily, with 
talk of a love double involving her and Hewitt. The injury, which at one stage 
appeared serious enough to prevent Clijsters playing here, deflected the 
pressure.

Even before yesterday's semi-final Clijsters was unsure if she would be able 
to carry on and again the ankle was heavily strapped, though it did not appear 
to restrict her movement, tested early on by Schnyder's inquiring drop shot.

"I knew it was going to be a bit sore but the doctors had reassured me that 
I'm not going to make it any worse by playing. When I hurt it again in my 
previous match I was a worried but I felt comfortable yesterday."

Clijsters will take it easy today. Last year she felt she did not perform at 
her peak against Henin because she had played too much. This year she has cut 
back and now finds herself a little short on preparation, or so she believes.

Clijsters has reached the final without dropping a set which, taking the 
injury into account, is more than a little disconcerting for those who claim 
the women's game has strength in depth. "I think I've just been very, very 
lucky," said the Belgian.

Perhaps that luck will hold. Henin, who beat Colombia's Fabiola Zuluaga 6-2, 
6-2 yesterday, has been short of her best, though rose to the challenge against 
Lindsay Davenport in the quarter-final. She remains favourite, though many 
inside and outside Australia would love Clijsters to win.
 