
Mountain Madness was the name of an expedition whose leader perished in the 
1996 Mount Everest disaster,chronicled by Jon Krakauer in Into Thin Air 
<http://intothinairmcwilliams.wikispaces.com/1996+Everest+Disaster+Examined> – 
and it was well-named. There is an explicit madness attached to serious 
mountaineering; a desire for pain, isolation and submission, either of man or 
mountain, whichever breaks first. There is something necrophiliac to it. But 
this is the game, and it is all the more fascinating to outsiders for being 
ill-expressed by those in thrall to it. Why climb Everest, George Mallory was 
famously asked before it killed him in 1924 and swallowed his corpse. Did he 
even know? He could only say, and this is thought quotable, because there is 
nothing else to print from his testament: "Because it's there."

Now a new kind of madness has been exposed, made partially of the above and 
partially – inevitably – of money. Everest has attracted wealthy amateur 
climbers for many years; the kind who would not make it up or down without 
bottled oxygen, expensive steroids, pre-laid ropes and ladders and, of course, 
the Sherpas native toNepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal>. They lay 
the ropes and ladders; they carry the supplies (and sometimes beleaguered 
tourists) in the manner of two-legged pack animals, all the better to 
facilitate the disgusting Freudian apogee of these expensive holidays, which is 
now expressed in a word fit only for the illiterate – "summiting".

As conditions are made safe for these blithe cretins they become more 
dangerous for Sherpas, whose job is to loiter in the dangerous parts of the 
mountain and secure them for ever greater numbers of incompetents to hurry 
through, en route to their photographs on the top of the world. You could call 
the Everest selfie the ultimate selfie: the true selfie.

A crisis was inevitable, and last Friday it arrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/18/everest-avalanche-sherpas-killed>
, an unsurprising epilogue to a job estimated as being12 times more deadly than 
being a US soldier at the height of the Iraq war 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/everest-sherpas-have-higher-death-rates-than-all-other-careers-2014-4>
: 16 people, of whom 13 were Sherpas, were killed in an avalanche as they 
readied the slopes for the summit window in May.

Now it is properly named the worst tragedy in the mountain's history, and 
Sherpas are agitating for better insurance, a monument to the dead, and a 
rescue fund – that is, a fairer share of the spoils that come to the Nepalese 
government and western guides.Many have left the mountain and will not return 
this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/20/everest-sherpas-halt-climbs-avalanche>
; reports from base camp tell of anger as climbers who paid up to $100,000 to 
"summit" feel robbed of their opportunity for ecstasy. One Sherpa said the 
tourists "pointed out that they have spent so much money, so how can we leave?".

This is hubris. As commercial climbing has exploded, Everest has shifted from 
an explicit wasteland to a moral and internal one which also serves as a 
perfect metaphor for the contempt in which we hold the planet.

It is not simply the ordinary exploitation of the Sherpas, which is soothed 
away with the knowledge that in Nepal, where the average annual wage is $700, a 
Sherpa can make $5,000 in a two-month season – although it is impossible to 
imagine this kind of death rate being tolerated if the dead were rich and white.

To climb to the summit it is usual to pass dead bodies – they are too 
difficult and expensive to recover – and sometimes the dying too. You could 
call them a macabre attraction, a monument to the magnitude of your achievement 
should you make it up and down. This too is sheer delusion; most climb Everest 
on Sherpa legs. In 2006 up to 40 people passed theBritish climber David Sharp 
as he died in the snow 
<http://kashsbookcorner.blogspot.co.uk/2008/05/dying-to-climb-mount-everest.html>
. Edmund Hillary, the first man to climb and survive the summit, called it 
"horrifying", and he is right.

The prosaic question for the armchair mountaineer is, can the dying be saved? 
Yes, sometimes. In 2012 the IsraeliNadav Ben-Yehuda rescued the Turkish-born 
American Aydin Irmak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/25/climber-rescue-summit-everest>; 
in 2006 an entire American-led teamrescued the Australian Lincoln Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/01/lincoln-hall>. For this they 
were lauded as heroes, although such behaviour was considered mere 
professionalism when only those fit to do so climbed Everest – that is, before 
the money arrived. But more tourists claim "tunnel vision" and "summit fever". 
They do not pause; they are slaked on their own fantasies; they paid too much. 
Madness indeed.

Twitter: @TanyaGold1 <https://twitter.com/TanyaGold1>
 