
For thousands of years the ice-capped Aru mountain range in western Tibet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tibet> has been a steady presence, but this 
year, two vast ice avalanches changed the shape of the region in an instant.

The first, which occurred without warning on 17 July, sent 60m cubic metres 
(24,000 olympic swimming pools) of ice and rock tearing down a narrow valley in
Rutog county <https://www.mapquest.com/china/rutog-county-283536988>, killing 
nine herders and hundreds of sheep and yaks. By the time it stoppedthe debris 
covered 10sq km 
<http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=88677&src=twitter-iotd> and 
was up to 30 metres deep.

Dramatic glacier collapses like this are exceedingly rare – the only known ice 
avalanche of comparable size was the2002 Kolka glacier event 
<http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1659/0276-4741%282004%29024%5B0078:TSKGCI%5D2.0.CO%3B2>
 in the Caucasus mountains – and yet, just two months later on 21 September, a 
neighbouring Tibetan glacier also imploded, generating a similarly large 
avalanche deposit, but thankfully no casualties this time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fclimate-change-likely-cause-freak-tibet-avalanches-terrawatch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea78a54e1ad559be014954a808d469f8b99a51cc%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%20change%20likely%20cause%20of%20freak%20avalanches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fclimate-change-likely-cause-freak-tibet-avalanches-terrawatch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%20change%20likely%20cause%20of%20freak%20avalanches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fclimate-change-likely-cause-freak-tibet-avalanches-terrawatch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea78a54e1ad559be014954a808d469f8b99a51cc%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Aru range before the disaster Photograph: Landsat 8/NASA/ESA 
That “one such event should occur is remarkable; two is unprecedented”, writes 
the geoscientist Dave Petley inhis landslide blog 
<http://blogs.agu.org/landslideblog/2016/10/24/tibet-avalanches-1/>.

The trigger for these massive avalanches, which occurred on relatively gentle 
slopes, has left scientists baffled. One explanation for the sudden movement 
may be global warming. Temperatures in Tibet have risen by 0.4°C per decade – 
double the global average.Glacier melt 
<http://extremeicesurvey.org/why-do-glaciers-matter/> plus increased rainfall 
may have rapidly lubricated the base of these glaciers.

“The most likely explanation for the Tibet avalanches … is climate change,” 
Petley concludes in his blog. If he is right then we can expect to see more of 
these events, and scientists are now keeping a careful eye on satellite images, 
to spot the next glacier failure before it occurs.
 