
Australia is lagging behind other countries on tackling climate change after 
signing the historicParis Agreement 
<http://unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9485.php> last year, a new report 
shows.

The Climate Council’s new report, “Towards Morocco: tracking global climate 
progress since Paris,” questions Australia’s ability to meet its 2030 emissions 
reduction target.

It says Australia is likely to face serious pressure next week when world 
leaders meet in Marrakesh, Morocco, for the first time since the landmark Paris 
agreement was signed.

Exclusive: land-clearing surge in Queensland set to wipe out Direct Action 
gains – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/29/exclusive-land-clearing-surge-in-qld-set-to-wipe-out-direct-action-gains-report>
Eighty-seven countries have ratified the Paris agreement, including 10 of the 
largest polluters. These countries cover more than 55% of global emissions. The 
Paris agreement will come into force on 4 November.

The world’s top three emitters of carbon dioxide – China (27%), the US (15%) 
and India (7%) – have ratified the agreement.

Australia has not yet ratified 
<https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXVII-7-d&chapter=27&clang=_en#1>
 the agreement.

Prof Will Steffen, a climate change expert and researcher at the Australian 
National University, told Guardian Australia it was “virtually certain” that 
2016 would be the hottest year on record.

“I think Australia will face quite a bit of pressure at the meeting, because 
when you look at the targets we made in Paris, they’re weak compared to other 
countries in the G20,” he said.

“And even with those weak targets, we’re not on track to meet them. So I think 
there’s going to be some very direct questioning of Australia about its effort, 
about what its plans are and what policy instruments it plans to use in coming 
years to significantly reduce emissions.”

The Climate Council report says Australia’s emissions reduction target of 26% 
to 28% by 2030 (on 2005 levels) relies on the introduction of energy 
productivity and vehicle efficiency measures, which the federal government has 
yet to bring into force.

“The most recent update of Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions shows our 
emissions are rising,” the report says.

“Countries including China and the United States have put more than 30 
questions to the federal government, asking for detail about how Australia will 
meet its 2030 emissions reduction target and raising concerns about a lack of 
transparency over how the government calculates and reports emissions.”

A year ago in Paris, at the 21st session of the Conference of the Parties for 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), world 
leaders agreed to limit global temperature rise to well below 2C above 
pre-industrial levels.

The agreement was signed by 197 countries, including Australia.

But the Climate Council says if Australia is to fairly contribute to staying 
below the 2C target, a “more rapid downward trend in emissions from all sectors 
of the economy is required, with much stronger action to reduce our emissions.”

There has been widespread expert criticism of the government’s Direct Action 
climate policy. Experts argue the framework is not sufficient to deliver the 
emissions reductions Australia signed on to in Paris.

There has also been a change of political emphasis in the Turnbull government 
over renewable energy.

Greg Hunt, the then federal environment minister, at the Paris conference, 
gave state governments clear encouragement to develop their own renewable 
energy schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/04/renewable-energy-get-your-story-straight-act-tells-coalition>
. “I have encouraged the states that if they want to do something extra, [they 
should] apply reverse auctions to the renewable energy target (RET) in the way 
the Australian Capital Territory has done,” Hunt said last December in Paris.

But since the election, the Turnbull government has been sharply critical of 
state-based renewable energy targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/06/victoria-says-coalitions-energy-meeting-a-stunt-to-save-malcolm-turnbulls-skin>
 that will help Australia meet its Paris commitments.

State governments argue the commonwealth will not be able to meet the 
emissions reduction targets agreed in Paris without the state-based RET schemes.

Direct Action funds 'spent on projects that would have happened anyway'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/16/direct-action-funds-likely-spent-on-projects-that-would-have-happened-anyway>
Correspondence from a senior federal official to the energy regulators after 
an energy council meeting in August seen by Guardian Australia underscores that 
point, suggesting the state-based schemes will deliver just under 40% of 
renewables in the national electricity market by 2030.

The Coalition has agreed to review the Direct Action climate policy in 2017, 
but the government has played down expectations that review will lead to a 
significant strengthening of the current policy framework, despite the 
widespread criticism of the current regime.

The South Australian government has signalled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/07/chief-scientist-to-lead-review-into-australias-energy-security>
 it wants to build broad support across the states for a form of carbon trading 
to apply to the electricity sector.
 