
Clive Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/clive-palmer> has 
finally updated his parliamentary register to disclose changes to his business 
interests more than 18 months after they occurred.

The Palmer United party (PUP) leader, who has come under intense scrutiny over 
the collapse of Queensland Nickel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/29/clive-palmers-queensland-nickel-owes-308m-to-past-and-present-workers>
, updated the register this week to note he had become a director of Palmer 
Coolum Resort on 11 January 2013.
DisclosureBot (@AusDisclosure) 
Mr Clive Palmer has updated the interests register. https://t.co/2sl4SR9e1F 
<https://t.co/2sl4SR9e1F>
 <https://twitter.com/AusDisclosure/status/695036678369443840> February 4, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/AusDisclosure/status/695036678369443840> 
He also disclosed that he ceased to be a director of Cosmo Developments on 25 
May 2014. Both omissions werehighlighted by Guardian Australia last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/22/clive-palmer-failed-to-declare-end-of-queensland-nickel-directorship-for-months>
.

MPs are required to update the parliamentary register within 28 days if 
details of their interests change.

Palmer’s update, submitted on Tuesday, contained another late declaration of 
his resignation as a director of Waratah Coal on 2 July 2014.

But it also advised of several other changes that were submitted on time, 
including ceasing his directorships of China First (12 January 2016), 
Mineralogy Canada Acquisition Corp (10 January 2016) and Palmer Aviation (9 
January 2016).

He further ceased to be a director of Queensland Nickel Sales, which is 
beneficially owned by QNI Resources, on 10 January 2016.

Palmer noted that his wife, Anna Palmer, had become a director of two of the 
relinquished companies – China First and Mineralogy Canada Acquisition Corp – 
around the same time.

The PUP leader and MP for Fairfax has previously attracted attention for late 
disclosures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/22/clive-palmer-failed-to-declare-end-of-queensland-nickel-directorship-for-months>
. In December 2015, he disclosed that he ceased being a director of Queensland 
Nickel, QNI Resources and QNI Metals on 16 February 2015.

Clive Palmer's claims not to be company director contradicted by documents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/10/clive-palmer-claims-not-company-director-contradicted-documents>
Queensland Nickel, which runs a refinery near Townsville, went into voluntary 
administration last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/18/clive-palmers-queensland-nickel-calls-in-administrators>
, shortly after announcingit would cut nearly 240 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/15/clive-palmers-queensland-nickel-refinery-to-cut-hundreds-of-jobs>
 in a bid to weather operational losses amid a slump in nickel prices.

Donation records show more than $21m has flowed from Queensland Nickel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/17/clive-palmers-queensland-nickel-defends-donation-to-pup-before-job-cuts>
 to the PUP since mid-2013. This includes about $1m during Palmer’s 26-day 
stint as the director in early 2015.

Palmer defended these donations, saying the company had not been in financial 
trouble.

“At that time, I owned the company 100%,” he told the ABC’s Lateline program 
on Wednesday.

“It had zero debt. And that year, June, 2015, it had a surplus. That was my 
money. It was the company’s money. It wasn’t anyone else’s money.”

Palmer reinforced that argument in a letter to Malcolm Turnbull, who had 
accused the PUP leader of “shocking” management of Queensland Nickel.

“There has been substantial comment by your ministers that raised the question 
whether a private family-owned company, which is certified as being fully 
solvent, has the right to donate funds to the political party of its choosing,” 
Palmer told the prime minister on Thursday.

“As you should be aware, in the years prior to 2013, the political party which 
you lead, was the beneficiary of substantial donations from Queensland Nickel 
Pty Ltd. I have heard no such criticism in respect to those donations.”
 