
Mining magnate Clive Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/clive-palmer> has been cleared to 
sit in the House of Representatives in the new 44th parliament, with the 
Australian Electoral Commission declaring him victorious in the lower house 
seat of Fairfax.

Palmer has secured the sunshine coast seat on a recount, defeating the LNP 
candidate Ted O'Brien by just 53 votes.

The recount in Fairfax was challenged at every point by scrutineers and 
according to AEC officials is the longest recount in recent political history.

The official declaration of the Fairfax result will take place at noon on 
Friday in Maroochydore.

The declaration of the Fairfax result came on a day where Palmer resumed 
rhetorical warfare with the AEC, accusing the commission of trying to rig the 
2013 election in an effort to deprive his Palmer United party representatives 
of balance of power.

The blistering attack from Palmer on Thursday relates to the AEC losing 1375 
senate ballot papers during a separate Senate recount in Western Australia. The 
embarrassing blunder in the west will be the subject of an investigation by 
former federal police chief Mick Keelty. The WA recount was triggered by Greens 
senator Scott Ludlam, who lost out narrowly to a PUP candidate.

If Palmer goes on to take his place in the House of Representatives he will be 
required, like other parliamentarians, to declare his interests publicly on the 
pecuniary interest register.

It is unclear how he will balance the demands of politics and the potential 
for specific conflicts of interest with the substantial practical demands of 
managing his various business interests.

Palmer has suggested previously that if he secured Fairfax he would direct his 
senate group as PUP leader in a conventional political party arrangement, just 
as leaders of the Liberal party and the ALP direct their senators.
 