
George Clooney interview: ‘Donald Trump is a xenophobic fascist’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/03/george-clooney-donald-trump-is-a-xenophobic-fascist>
The Silicon Valley investor hosting George and Amal Clooney at his home this 
week for aHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> 
fundraiser said he’s unfazed by a protest planned by as many as 1,500 Bernie 
Sanders supporters with pots and pans at his gate.

Shervin Pishevar, best known as a major investor in Uber, said he “welcomed” 
the protest against the VIP fundraiser, which will take place at his hilltop 
San Francisco home and cost upwards of $30,000 for a seat (and selfie) with the 
Democratic frontrunner.

The protest was a sign of Democratic freedom in the US, he said, and drew 
attention to what he described as his own humble upbringing.

“Only in America would an Iranian-born immigrant son of a taxi driver and maid 
trying to help elect our first woman president be protested at his home,” 
Pishevar told the Guardian. “I welcome nonviolent protests as an exercise of 
our great democracy.”

Pishevar, co-founder of the Hyperloop <http://hyperlooptech.com/>, a still 
conceptual high-speed transportation system that involves tubes and pressurized 
capsules, is opening his home and bringing in the star couple to encourage 
Silicon Valley to back the former secretary of state. Tickets start at $33,400 
to attend and go up to $353,400 to get a roundtable with the Clooneys and 
Clinton. Pishevar is undeterred by the fact thatClinton once promised to crack 
down on the ride-hailing startup 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/07/15/clinton-says-shed-crack-down-on-independent-contractor-abuse-obama-just-did/>
 that’s made his fortune.

“Hillary is one of the most qualified presidential candidates in American 
history,” Pishevar said in his only interview about the forthcoming event that 
will feature the Clooneys, tech investors and entrepreneurs. “Our nation will 
be in good hands under a president Hillary Rodham Clinton administration.”

Politicians and Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> founders are still only 
just beginning to understand how important they are to each other, Pishevar 
said: “Silicon Valley is the engine for creativity today and obviously 
ridiculous amounts of wealth and with that comes a responsibility.”


It’s that wealth, as perceived by supporters of Sanders, which has spurred the 
protest on Friday.

Sanders supporters will be gathering with banners and pots and pans (“to make 
some noise”).More than 1,500 people have said they’re interested 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/493351924181671/>, with around 400 pledging to 
attend.

“Let the people of San Francisco gather and march through the main streets of 
Nob Hill to protest this event and to show Hillary Clinton that we don’t accept 
this kind of corruption,”the protest invitation reads 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/493351924181671/>. “Imagine, for example, how 
far $30,000 could go to help the homelessness problem in San Francisco. This 
corruption-fest is not just undemocratic, it is immoral and obscene!”

This is a divided time in a deeply divided city, and Sanders’ populist message 
has struck a chord. San Francisco usually coalesces behind one candidate – and 
California rarely matters in a primary. This year, though, the stakes are high 
and the divisions are wide. Sandershas raised twice as much from the tech world 
as Clinton since late 2015 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/carolineodonovan/bernie-sanders-is-still-outraising-hillary-clinton-among-tec>
 – $3.2m from tech industry donors, compared to Clinton’s $1.5m.

Silicon Valley’s fundraising brass is stuck in a hard place this year, with no 
candidate quite aligned to their interests. There was a flurry of excitement 
across town for former New Yorkmayor Mike Bloomberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/16/michael-bloomberg-president-silicon-valley-2016-election>
, who has since said he is not running.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fgeorge-amal-clooney-hillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-fundraiser%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa49cc4f6f842da1714346aa55ac9820bcb160aac%2F0_151_4560_2737%2F4560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clooneys%20to%20attend%20a%20VIP%20fundraiser%20for%20Clinton%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Sanders%20fans%20are%20outraged&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fgeorge-amal-clooney-hillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-fundraiser%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clooneys%20to%20attend%20a%20VIP%20fundraiser%20for%20Clinton%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Sanders%20fans%20are%20outraged&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fgeorge-amal-clooney-hillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-fundraiser%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa49cc4f6f842da1714346aa55ac9820bcb160aac%2F0_151_4560_2737%2F4560.jpg>
 Sanders has raised twice as much from the tech world as Clinton since late 
2015 – $3.2m from tech industry donors, compared to Clinton’s $1.5m. 
Photograph: Wilfredo Lee/AP 
Clinton – who once asked an aide to print out the entire Washington Post 
website 
<http://gawker.com/which-friend-of-sid-blumenthal-did-hillary-try-to-hook-1745354641>
 and questions the very foundation of the so-called sharing economy that is the 
star of this tech boom – is not a natural candidate for tech leaders. She 
promised to “crack down on bosses who exploit employees by misclassifying them 
as contractors 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/07/15/clinton-says-shed-crack-down-on-independent-contractor-abuse-obama-just-did/>
”, assome argue Uber does <http://uberlawsuit.com/>.

“The traditional hierarchy here who would normally be putting together 
fundraisers by now, they’re in chaos,” said Paul Holland, a tech investor with 
Foundation Capital who’s been organizing a political discussion salon series.

“Most people who’ve started tech companies are interested but maybe a little 
confused by this presidential election,” said Matt Mahan, the founder of 
Brigade, a social network for political action (or, as he calls it, Tinder for 
Politics). “I’m not seeing a huge groundswell or organizing around the 
presidential to be honest with you,” he said. “Part of our theory is that 
democracy just hasn’t scaled well.”


This is a more chastened tone for Mahan who hosted a media-heavy event when 
Republican hopeful Rand Paul opened his Tech Hub office last May 
<http://www.nbcbayarea.com/news/local/Rand-Paul-Speaks-About-Disrupting-Democracy-in-SF-During-Campaign-Stop-303184791.html>
.

The chaos among donors shows in the campaigns. Clinton’s Silicon Valley 
fundraising push started with a stumble. One of her first big tech fundraising 
events was at Theranos, a startup whose innovative blood testing solution has 
been exposed as mostly fraudulent.

The public alignment with Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes was bewildering to 
the tech press 
<http://recode.net/2016/03/14/theranos-ceo-elizabeth-holmes-is-holding-a-hillary-fundraiser-with-chelsea-clinton/>
 and seemed out of sync to the Silicon Valley community.


Pishevar, who raised $692,610 for Obama’s reelection campaign, was born in 
Iran and says he’s more politically engaged because of it.

“I was forced to be political because I had bombs falling on me as a child in 
Tehran,” he said. “I remember vividly a moment where me and my mom are stuck in 
a doorway while bombs are dropping. We finally escaped to America, and I 
recently found these drawings I did as a child, and they were these drawings of 
DC with planes and bombs and everything. My city changed but my mind was still 
there for years.”

Pishevar talk about Silicon Valley’s ever-bigger role on the national stage 
and the need to be involved in the political machine. After raising for Obama, 
Pishevar was appointed by the president to be on the J William Fulbright 
foreign scholarship board and frequently visits the White House.

“People in Silicon Valley are starting to realize politics is not a toy,” he 
said.

Pishevar added he sees the technological boom that that has led to the rise of 
behemoths like Uber and Airbnb as the founding of a new America.

“Right now everyone’s talking about Hamilton the musical. New York during the 
American Revolution had 25,000 people founding democracy, a moonshot to build a 
nation,” Pishevar said, using the phrase popular here for big ambitious ideas. 
“That’s now the role for Silicon Valley.”

Where there were once the founding fathers of democracy, there are now startup 
founders, he argued.

“If Alexander Hamilton were coming from a little island today, would he go to 
New York City?” he said. “No, he would be arriving in Silicon Valley.”


 