
“Send in the clowns. Don’t bother, they’re here,” goes the Stephen Sondheim 
song 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/03/11/theater/send-in-the-sondheim-city-opera-revives-night-music-as-composer-dotes.html?>
.

And now hysteria over creepy clown sightings has been rising to fever pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/05/clown-sightings-south-carolina-alabama>
 in the US since August and isspreading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/07/creepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain>
 internationally.


But the situation is so absurd that police departments are pleading 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/creepy-clown-craze-claims-new-victim-ronald-mcdonald-n664721>
 with the attention-seekers to stop dressing up as evil clowns to scare people, 
while a woman organized a “peace march” that had been scheduled for Saturday 
night in support of clowns.

However it turned out that she herself wears some pretty scary clown makeup 
and had decided to call theevent <http://www.azcentral.com/> Clown Lives Matter.

When that crass echo of the protest movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/19/blacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement>
 overpolice killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> unarmed black 
men triggered an avalanche of protest on social media and personal attacks 
against the organizer, who identifies herself on Facebook as Nikki Sinn, 
abruptlycanceled <https://twitter.com/FOX10Phoenix/status/786545872108675073> 
the event. Sinn had at first declared herself amused.

“Lol, literally being called homophobic and racist for using ‘lives 
matter’….Haha wooow,” sheposted <https://www.facebook.com/shelly.gutierrez.902> 
on the social network, beneath a picture of herself grotesquely smiling with 
green hair and smudged eye make-up, seemingly as a version of Batman’s lethal 
nemesis,Joker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/16/mark-hamill-jack-nicholson-heath-ledger-joker-batman-best>
.

That was followed by a further post on Thursday after she had canceled the 
event, reportedly because ofthreats 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/clown-lives-matter-march-canceled-death-threats/story?id=42805927>
, saying: “Kiss my ass ... I’ll march alone.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fclowns-scary-black-lives-matter-arizona-halloween%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6438d4d36cca5b30e16ffd83fed541223b3a078%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clown%20sightings%3A%20hysteria%20in%20the%20US%20reaches%20a%20fever%20pitch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fclowns-scary-black-lives-matter-arizona-halloween%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clown%20sightings%3A%20hysteria%20in%20the%20US%20reaches%20a%20fever%20pitch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fclowns-scary-black-lives-matter-arizona-halloween%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6438d4d36cca5b30e16ffd83fed541223b3a078%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 The Cirque du Soleil with their show Alegria in Cologne, Germany. Photograph: 
Ullstein Bild/Getty Images 
Professional clowns are decidedly unamused.

“It’s not appropriate,” said Dick Milhollan, the last director of the former 
Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey Clown College, which was based in Florida 
and closed in 1997, and half of the veteran clownduo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZSmxNNuKDKg> Slappy and Monday.

“My livelihood could be affected by the latest bout of clown impersonators 
scaring people but that’s nothing on the scale of the painful struggles being 
protested by Black Lives Matter, someone being shot or disliked because of the 
color of their skin,” he said.

“Meanwhile, every amateur Bozo is going to come out and that’s going to be 
what America sees, reinforcing the stereotype that being a clown is just about 
a big wig and face paint.”

The term has been trending 
<https://twitter.com/BBCWorld/status/786148415126269952> on social media and 
overall clown hysteria is refusing to go away.

“Clown Lives Matter? Oh my God. I really don’t know that’s a good idea,” said 
Lorenzo Pisoni, a dramatic actor who originally began performing as a clown 
when he was two years old , and has just completed a documentary, Circus Kid, 
about growing up in the ring.

The controversy even reached 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/oct/13/ronald-mcdonald-not-lovin-creepy-clown-craze>
 Ronald McDonald when McDonald’sannounced 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/creepy-clown-craze-claims-new-victim-ronald-mcdonald-n664721>
 it was giving the clown mascot a break until the wave of hysteria passes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fronald-mcdonald-forced-to-lie-low-amid-global-clown-terror-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ronald%20McDonald%20forced%20to%20lie%20low%20amid%20global%20clown%20terror%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fronald-mcdonald-forced-to-lie-low-amid-global-clown-terror-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ronald%20McDonald%20forced%20to%20lie%20low%20amid%20global%20clown%20terror%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fronald-mcdonald-forced-to-lie-low-amid-global-clown-terror-video&media=>
Ronald McDonald forced to lie low amid global clown terror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/oct/12/ronald-mcdonald-forced-to-lie-low-amid-global-clown-terror-video>
And while some schools 
<http://www.unionleader.com/Creepy-clown-craze-leads-to-ban,-alarm-in-N.H.-schools>
 arebanning 
<https://www.denverpost.com/2016/10/12/colorado-schools-ban-clown-costumes-halloween/>
 clown outfits from Halloween celebrations this year, costume shops are making 
a killing and demented clowns are likely to be out in full force during 
trick-or-treat rituals and parades this 31 October.

“We’re selling out. Right now we have no clown costumes, because of this whole 
clown thing that’s happening in the news. You’d better look online,” a cashier 
at a New York branch of Party City said on Wednesday.

People across 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/killer-clown-sightings-global-map-2016-timeline-creepy-phenomenon-threats-arrests-2429124>
 the US are now, variously, being arrested with fright-wigs, red noses and
weapons <http://www.fox46charlotte.com/news/local-news/210781036-story>, filmed 
clinging 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/story/news/local/detroit-city/2016/10/11/clown-detroit-bus/91893852/>
 to the back of a moving bus, perpetratinghoaxes 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory/clown-hoaxes-force-police-check-pranks-real-threats-42596808>
, causing schoollockdowns 
<http://www.dailyrecord.com/story/news/local/2016/10/07/clown-forces-lockdown-hopatcong-middle-school/91735246/>
, scaring the daylights out of people andexporting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/07/creepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain>
 the craze to, at least, Britain and Australia.

Milhollan, alias Dick Monday, is at first offended even at being asked about 
the hysteria, having been clowning for more than 40 years in a profession where 
slapstick and self-mockery belies a finely-honed art form.

“If I dress up as a nun and stand on a street corner with a knife, it would 
seem odd if nuns then had to come out and defend their profession,” he said.

But he acknowledges that in “the world of clowns”, there are many paradoxes.

“In history they have been very powerful, you think of the court jester 
speaking truth to the king, Shakespeare’s wise fools as key characters, the 
European tradition of masks, the era of silent movies,” he said.

From Shakespeare’s Puck, King Lear’s Fool and the riddling gravediggers in 
Hamlet, uncovering the skull of the jester, Yorick, to Charlie Chaplin and 
Buster Keaton, today’s top clowns are steeped in a proud but enigmatic 
tradition.

American circuses emerged in the 18th century and the traveling circus took 
off in the 19th century, performing in gigantic arenas, where clowns 
exaggerated their outfits and makeup to help audiences follow their comedic 
expressions and gestures more easily, Milhollan explained.

The 50th Smithsonian Folklife Festival will pay tribute to clowning and other 
circus acts in 2017 with exhibitions on the National Mall in Washington.

“Since President George Washington attended John Bill Ricketts’ circus in 
Philadelphia in 1793, circus arts have intrigued generations,” the festival 
websitestates <http://www.festival.si.edu/2017/circus-arts/smithsonian>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fclowns-scary-black-lives-matter-arizona-halloween%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95c4dd2de501c59d86f2a5cca7830b8daf197a4d%2F0_257_3796_2278%2F3796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clown%20sightings%3A%20hysteria%20in%20the%20US%20reaches%20a%20fever%20pitch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fclowns-scary-black-lives-matter-arizona-halloween%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clown%20sightings%3A%20hysteria%20in%20the%20US%20reaches%20a%20fever%20pitch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fclowns-scary-black-lives-matter-arizona-halloween%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95c4dd2de501c59d86f2a5cca7830b8daf197a4d%2F0_257_3796_2278%2F3796.jpg>
 When Ringling Brothers and Barnum Bailey Circus opened at Madison Square 
Garden in New York City on 5 April 1945, Lulu, a 35-year-old English woman, the 
only woman clown in the world at that time, was one of the main attractions. 
Photograph: Bettmann Archive 
Multi-talented clown Dan Rice became a household name 
<http://www.app.com/story/news/local/monmouth-county/2015/04/05/weird-nj-jumping-dan-rice-bandwagon/25324423/>
 in America in the mid-1800s, with his performing pig, Sybil. He ran for 
president – unsuccessfully, obviously – but coined the popular phrase “jump on 
the bandwagon” after inviting future president Zachary Taylor onto his 
traveling circus cart. Legend has it Rice even inspired Uncle Sam’s aesthetic .

But the traveling circus in both Europe and the US always had its vagabond 
side with performers, circus hands and animals crammed into wagons, side-shows 
drawing pick-pockets and brawlers, life on the road attracting runaways and, no 
doubt, the odd fugitive.

“Shaking that stigma isn’t easy,” said Milhollan.

His clowning partner and wife Tiffany Riley, alias Slappy, said that clowning 
is a much misunderstood art form.

“Being ridiculous is a serious business,” she said. Slappy graduated from New 
York University’s Tisch School of the Arts and she and Monday toured with the 
Big Apple Circus.

They’ve trained clowns and straight actors and now are often employed to 
perform in schools or cheer up children in hospitals, where the kids call her 
Dr Slappy. She’s currently writing her master’s thesis on the effects of humor 
on healing.

“It upsets me, it really hurts,” she said of the new wave of clown hysteria 
and hopes it will die down after Halloween. “But some people are drawn to the 
dark side of everything and if you put the make-up on a certain way, it’s 
scary, I’ll grant you that”.

Vocational clowns are not only up against amateurs and imposters – a new film 
version of Stephen King’s horror novel It is underway, with an evil clown who 
preys on children as well as everyone’s phobias and fears.

And TV’s American Horror Story series has twice 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2015/11/walking-dead-twisty-the-clown-american-horror-story-john-carroll-lynch>
 recentlyinvoked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/02/american-horror-story-season-four-freak-show-review>
 the real life serial killer John WayneGacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/12/john-wayne-gacy-victims-search>, 
a former clown whomurdered 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/nationworld/politics/chi-chicagodays-gacy-story-story.html>
 at least 33 males in Illinois in the 1970s.

“Distrust of clowns is deeply entrenched. The make-up that can be un-nerving 
and the archetype of the jester operating outside the normal rules of society – 
if you take that one step further you can draw that character as a killer and 
then you’re off to the races, a figure that is adored and revered is co-opted 
and professional clowns have to reassure people and separate themselves from 
the crazy people running around. It’s exasperating,” said Pisoni.

But he also acknowledges that “there is an inherent distrust of someone who is 
always smiling”.

But while scary pretend clowns hide behind their garb to threaten people, 
Pisoni said professional clowns flip that on its head – they are vulnerable, 
baring their souls as they attempt the tricky art of making an audience laugh.

His new documentary, Circus Kid, which screened at the Woodstock Film Festival 
on Friday and is showing at DOC NYC in New York on Monday, is based on his 
biographical play Humor Abuse, charting the trials and tribulations of growing 
up in the circus.

Pisoni began clowning principally to get the attention of his distracted 
father, clown Larry Pisoni, who created the Pickle Family Circus in California 
in 1974.

He describes how, beneath the costume, the gags and the acrobatics, his father 
was a depressive who dealt poorly with his mental “demons” and had a nervous 
breakdown in 1987.

As that famous Smokey Robinson lyric goes: “Ain’t too much sadder than the 
tears of a clown.”

Lorenzo Pisoni fled the circus once when he reached adulthood and became a 
dramatic stage and screen actor. Performing drama is a lot easier than comedy, 
he pointed out.

And he’ll be distancing himself a long way from Clown Lives Matter.

“It’s making a lot out of something that’s not funny,” he said.
 