
The federal government has announced it will make it a crime to breach 
personal protection injunctions issued by federal family courts, in the lead-up 
to the Council of Australian Governments (Coag) meeting on Friday.

The Turnbull government has also provided a reprieve to homelessness services, 
extending a $117.2m contribution to the sector by one year.

A packed Coag agenda will see the states and territories discuss a push by 
Queensland and Victoria toagree on measures to help victims of family violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/coag-victoria-and-queensland-push-to-legislate-family-violence-leave>
 and an emissions intensity scheme, after thechief scientist, Alan Finkel, lent 
support for the scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/finkel-review-criticises-climate-policy-chaos-and-points-to-need-for-emissions-trading>
.

Labor MP Emma Husar recounts personal story of domestic violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/23/labor-mp-emma-husar-recounts-personal-story-of-domestic-violence>
Under the proposed new offence, police will have the authority to immediately 
charge offenders for a breach, instead of victims of family violence having to 
bring an application to the court.

“This new offence sends a clear message that family violence is not a private 
matter – it is criminal,” Turnbull said in a statement. “The changes will also 
relieve victims from the cost of taking family law proceedings to enforce an 
injunction.”

The government will also lift the requirement on parties to go back to family 
courts within 21 days to ensure an interim family violence order takes effect 
and simplify processes for families dealing with family law matters across 
jurisdictions.

But the move falls short of Victoria and Queensland’s demands to introduce 
family violence leave as a workplace entitlement and Victoria’s push fora new 
Medicare item for family violence counselling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/sussan-ley-rejects-royal-commissions-call-for-medicare-subsidy-for-family-violence-victims>
.

A copy of the Coag agenda obtained by Guardian Australia says the leaders will 
discuss:

 * economic reform, including competition policy, housing and homelessness;

 * the national energy market and the Finkel review into energy security and 
Australia’s climate change commitments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/finkel-review-criticises-climate-policy-chaos-and-points-to-need-for-emissions-trading>
; 
 * health and hospitals funding – with the key issue being what happens to 
funding after 2020;

 * several agenda items on Indigenous affairs;

 * the national firearms agreement and the regulation of the Adler shotgun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/adler-shotgun-restrictions-come-from-the-smashed-avocado-curtain-say-nationals>
;

 * water allocations in the Murray-Darling Basin. 
On Friday the Turnbull government announced the move to extend the national 
partnership agreement on homelessness (NPAH) by one year. The federal 
government will ask states and territories, which match its contributions 
dollar for dollar, to do so again at Coag.

The decision also gives a small $2.2m boost to federal funding for the 
agreement, up from $115m.

The government said the extension of NPAH funding came “well ahead” of the 
2017 budget, despitehomelessness services warning they would have to lay off 
staff and clients 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/04/homelessness-groups-call-for-funding-extension-as-deadline-looms>
 without funding certainty before Christmas.

In a statement the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, and social 
services minister, Christian Porter, said the extension of the agreement until 
June 2018 “will provide certainty while state and territory governments 
continue to work together on long-term homelessness reforms”.

Homelessness organisations and their peak bodies, including the Council to 
Homeless Persons,had called for an extension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/04/homelessness-groups-call-for-funding-extension-as-deadline-looms>
 of up to five years.

In November the council’s chief executive, Jenny Smith, told Guardian 
Australia extending funding by only one year seemed to be based on “an 
assumption that supporting people is a business you can turn on and off”.

“Recruitment of staff and developing services capacity to support people isn’t 
something you can just turn on and off,” she said.

Smith cited the example of a woman with preschool-age children escaping family 
violence, who would need support over a “considerable period” from crisis 
accommodation and into more permanent accommodation with ongoing support.

But the council will welcome the indexation of funding, which has been frozen 
at $115m since 2014-15.

On Thursday, Labor’s housing and homelessness spokesman, Doug Cameron, said 
the Turnbull government’s “indecision over funding” had caused employees at 
homelessness services to look for more secure work and caused problems with 
leasing premises.

“Hundreds of homelessness advocates and service providers have signed an open 
letter 
<http://chp.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/NPAH-open-letter-to-PM-with-signatories-2.pdf>
 to Mr Turnbull calling on him to ensure that people experiencing homelessness 
get the services they need,” he said.

Homelessness <https://www.theguardian.com/society/homelessness> is on the rise 
in Australia, as evidenced by the 8% increase in the number of people accessing 
homelessness services since 2011-12, up to 255,000 people in 2014-15.

Australia does not have a welfare problem. We have a poverty problem | John 
Falzon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/australia-does-not-have-a-welfare-problem-we-have-a-poverty-problem>
“It has become increasingly clear that there is an urgent need for reforming 
both the affordable housing and homelessness sectors,” Turnbull and Porter said 
in their statement.

“Despite significant investment in housing and homelessness assistance by all 
governments of almost $10bn a year — including around $6.8bn of commonwealth 
funding — housing and homelessness outcomes continue to decline.”

The comments signal the government may seek to restructure its contribution to 
homelessness after the one-year extension of the NPAH.

Cameron told Guardian Australia that Labor is concerned the government will 
either try to disengage from the homelessness sector and push it back to the 
sole responsibility of the states “or end up in some situation in 12 months 
time” with funding uncertainty in the sector.
 