
The Turnbull government has appointed a Tasmanian Liberal MP who lost his seat 
in the Coalition wipeout in the state at the 2016 election as an additional 
adviser for the Senate president, Stephen Parry.


Eric Hutchinson lost his seat of Lyons in the 2016 election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/the-election-scalps-jamie-briggs-and-andrew-nikolic-lead-coalitions-casualty-list>
 but has now joined Parry’s staff in a “representational” role.

Parry, appearing before a Senate estimates hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/oct/17/politics-live-turnbull-shorten-parliament>
 in Canberra on Monday, confirmed Hutchinson had joined his office but denied 
the new appointment was political.

He characterised Hutchinson’s appointment as putting a round plug in a round 
hole.

“I think an ex-member of parliament is an ideal person to represent the 
president of the Senate at functions both here and certainly inTasmania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania> when I’m not available,” 
Parry said Monday.

“I couldn’t have asked for anyone better.”

Labor characterised the appointment differently.

Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/penny-wong>, told the hearing 
appointing a past Liberal MP to do representational work in his electorate 
“sound[ed] pretty political.”

“You appointed a mate who lost his seat to do work in your electorate,” Wong 
said to Parry.

The election scalps: Jamie Briggs and Andrew Nikolic lead Coalition's casualty 
list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/the-election-scalps-jamie-briggs-and-andrew-nikolic-lead-coalitions-casualty-list>
The Senate president insisted the appointment was recognition of his 
additional workload as Senate president. “I have many friends, both Labor and 
Liberal,” Parry told the hearing.

Parry said he may have asked the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, for another 
staffing position before the recent election but Hutchinson had joined his 
staff a couple of weeks ago.

The government has not boosted the staffing allocation of the House of 
Representatives Speaker, Tony Smith, and the position was not advertised.

The Coalition lost three lower house seats in Tasmania at the recent federal 
election, and alsowent backwards in Senate representation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/tasmanian-senate-result-an-early-indicator-of-eventual-upper-house>
.
 