
The Turnbull government and Labor have queried whether the Family First senator
Bob Day <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bob-day> was validly elected during 
the recent campaign, and the controversy is set to be resolved by the high 
court.

The questions raised late on Tuesday follow a cryptic letter sent to all 
senators by the Senate president, Stephen Parry, which indicated he was not in 
a position to advise the governor ofSouth Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> that Day had 
resigned because there were constitutional issues.

The latest twist in what has turned into a minor political saga was triggered 
by Day’s decision on Tuesday tofinally tender his resignation to the president 
of the Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/bob-day-resigns-senate-effective-immediately>
, citing the withdrawal of a potential investor in his embattled housing 
companies.

Bob Day resigns from the Senate, effective immediately
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/bob-day-resigns-senate-effective-immediately>
Day’s resignation – which was expected to set off a routine process where he 
would be replaced by another candidate from Family First through a casual 
vacancy – was followed by Parry’s letter to senators, which reads as follows.

“Today I received the resignation of Senator Day as a senator for South 
Australia and notified the governor of South Australia of the vacancy,” Parry 
told colleagues on Tuesday.

“However, I informed the governor that it was not yet possible to advise his 
excellency whether the vacancy was one to which section 15 of the constitution 
applied.

“I am considering information which raises difficult constitutional questions 
relating to the composition of the Senate and I am seeking further advice 
before I put the matter before the Senate on Monday.”

Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, said Parry’s letter to all senators “raises 
the question as to whether Mr Day was validly elected to the Senate at this 
year’s federal election”.

“If he was not, Mr Day’s resignation would not create a casual vacancy because 
he was never validly elected in the first place,” Wong said on Tuesday.

A joint statement from the attorney general, George Brandis, and the special 
minister of state, Scott Ryan, said concerns had been referred to both Parry 
and to Day last Friday about whether there was a potential breach of section 44 
of the constitution.

The statement cited “a potential indirect pecuniary interest in a contract 
with the commonwealth” which is understood to relate to the lease of the Family 
First senator’s Adelaide electoral office.

“When the Senate reconvenes on Monday 7 November the government intends to 
initiate a Senate referral of the matter to the high court pursuant to s376 of 
the Commonwealth Electoral Act,” the joint statement said from the ministers 
said.

Day declined to comment when contacted by Guardian Australia on Tuesday night. 
“I’m not a constitutional expert, I can only refer you back to President 
Parry,” he said.

The government says the concerns were raised about Day’s eligibility with 
Parry and the Family First senator last Friday,but curiously, the former 
solicitor general, Justin Gleeson, said two weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/gleeson-says-he-ignored-invalid-direction-from-brandis-to-seek-consent>
 he had provided “urgent advice on a high court proceeding which has questions 
of law attached to it which relate to the composition of this Senate.”

Gleeson’s evidence to a Senate committee on October 14 was that on October 13 
the Australian government solicitor had sought urgent advice from him about the 
composition of the Senate.

The former solicitor general said he’d elected to ignore a controversial 
direction from Brandis which restricted his capacity to give independent legal 
advice in order to provide the opinion about the composition of the Senate.

Day is a critical vote for the Coalition. The government had been relying on 
his support on issues like reconstituting the Australian Building and 
Construction Commission – the issue which was ostensibly the trigger for the 
double dissolution election.

Day’s prevarication over the past couple of weeks over whether or not to 
resign as a consequence of his multimillion-dollar construction empire being 
put into liquidation related in part to concern his replacement in the Senate 
may not vote the same way as he intended to on the ABCC.

Section 44 of the constitution sets out the criteria for ineligibility, which 
includes being a foreign citizen, being bankrupt or insolvent, or holding an 
office of profit under the crown.

That section of the constitution also says people cannot be elected to 
parliament if they have “any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any 
agreement with the public service of the commonwealth otherwise than as a 
member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company 
consisting of more than twenty-five persons.”

Wong said the situation needed to be resolved by a recount of the Senate 
election.

“Precedent suggests the appropriate method for replacing Mr Day in the Senate 
would therefore be through a recount of the SA Senate vote rather than through 
the SA parliament appointing a replacement.”

Wong said a similar case occurred in 1987 when Robert Wood from the Nuclear 
Disarmament party was found not to have been validly elected.

She said the ALP would seek its own legal advice on the issue “including 
whether it is desirable to refer the matter to the court of disputed returns.”

“We will take a principled approach by seeking to ensure that the situation is 
resolved in accordance with the constitution and electoral laws, that the 
outcome reflects the democratic will of SA voters and that the matter is dealt 
with transparently and openly,” Wong said.
 