
Summer blockbuster checklist: budget-hollowing action sequences – check; 
trailer-ready quips dripping in smugness – check; source material that renders 
original ideas irrelevant – check; clumsily open endings allowing for sequels, 
reboots, remakes and an expanded universe – check; forced romance culminating 
in a kiss, usually, carelessly, during a life-threatening situation – ermmm ...

All hail Tom Cruise and the era of the equal opportunity action movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jul/28/tom-cruise-equal-opportunity-action-movie-women-mission-impossible-rogue-nation>
While previous summer seasons have ticked all of the boxes with dull 
precision, this year has been notably absent of one key element: romance.


In Mad Max: Fury Road, Tom Hardy and Charlize Theron were too busy duffing 
each other up; in Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation, Tom Cruise and Rebecca 
Ferguson ended their working relationship with a handshake; in Fantastic Four, 
Miles Teller and Kate Mara kept their flirtation to a brief glance or two; in 
Spy, Melissa McCarthy’s crush on Jude Law remained unrequited and inAvengers: 
Age of Ultron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>, 
fear over Mark Ruffalo’s potential predilection for angry sex rendered nights 
in with Scarlett Johansson a frightening impossibility.

If you were looking for a side order of swoon with your stunts, you’ll have 
left the cinema in a curiously unaroused state. Even the films featuring a 
small glimmer of romance have been a cold shower in comparison to previous 
summers (barely there subplots from Ant-Man and Terminator Genisys and an 
underwritten dynamic in Jurassic World).

This summer didn’t even offer up an action-centric romance in the vein of 
Knight and Day, Mr & Mrs Smith, This Means War or The Tourist. Which, yes, 
isn’t exactly a bad thing but it helped to make for a curiously asexual season 
at the cinema.

An injection of romance into a special effects-heavy blockbuster was typically 
seen as a way of appealing to the stereotypical idea of the female viewer who 
would be completely bored by any plot that didn’t involve kissing (women, eh?). 
But this shift towards the construction of a crowd-pleaser that doesn’t feel 
the need to crowbar in a superfluous love story implies that Hollywood is 
heading for a more balanced playing field.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fcold-summer-has-2015-been-the-least-sexy-blockbuster-season-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439389964724%2F6dac4d6d-393e-45fb-afda-374e1ed947fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cold%20summer%3A%20has%202015%20been%20the%20least%20sexy%20blockbuster%20season%20ever%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fcold-summer-has-2015-been-the-least-sexy-blockbuster-season-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cold%20summer%3A%20has%202015%20been%20the%20least%20sexy%20blockbuster%20season%20ever%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fcold-summer-has-2015-been-the-least-sexy-blockbuster-season-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439389964724%2F6dac4d6d-393e-45fb-afda-374e1ed947fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Missionary: Impossible ... Rebecca Ferguson and Tom Cruise shared an asexual 
working relationship in this summer’s action thriller. Photograph: David James 
This year’s crop has blessed female characters with the ability to be seen as 
more than passive love interests. Rebecca Ferguson’s role in Mission: 
Impossible – Rogue Nation gave her the opportunity to fight, double-cross and 
even saveTom Cruise <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomcruise> from near 
death and yet, for the first time in an Ethan Hunt adventure, there wasn’t a 
shred of romance. In a film that was largely forgettable, the briskly efficient 
working relationship between the pair was a refreshing change.

Charlize Theron was inarguably the driving force, quite literally, behind the 
action inMad Max: Fury Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>
, with Tom Hardy merely along for the ride, a smart and daring subversion of 
the franchise-associated expectations. Her motivation (to save a band of 
oppressed women) was paramount above all else and again, her male co-star was a 
colleague of sorts, rather than a love interest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fcold-summer-has-2015-been-the-least-sexy-blockbuster-season-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439393693701%2F943ac7aa-acb4-4035-bcf1-b70440ccefa1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cold%20summer%3A%20has%202015%20been%20the%20least%20sexy%20blockbuster%20season%20ever%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fcold-summer-has-2015-been-the-least-sexy-blockbuster-season-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cold%20summer%3A%20has%202015%20been%20the%20least%20sexy%20blockbuster%20season%20ever%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fcold-summer-has-2015-been-the-least-sexy-blockbuster-season-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439393693701%2F943ac7aa-acb4-4035-bcf1-b70440ccefa1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 No Hulk smash ... Johansson and Ruffalo kept things PG in Avengers: Age of 
Ultron, Photograph: Everett/Rex Shutterstock 
The romantic disinterest in the Avengers series was parodied in this year’s 
Age of Ultron with a brewing frisson between Scarlett Johansson’s Black Widow 
and Mark Ruffalo’s Hulk made futile by the pair’s inability to consummate. The 
reason? Fear over his superpower, aka the more important focus of the film, 
getting in the way. Again, business trumps pleasure.

The real Hollywood scandal: why Jennifer Lawrence, Angelina Jolie and other 
female stars get ripped off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/american-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism>
George Clooney’s sci-fi flop Tomorrowland might have been largely tiresome but 
it did manage to avoid lazily pairing lead Britt Robertson with someone to 
smooch. Co-writer Damon Lindelof spoke about the decision to avoid this cliche.

“If you have a female lead, people suddenly go, ‘Oh, there has to be a 
romantic entanglement’,” he toldVulture 
<http://www.vulture.com/2015/05/george-clooney-on-tomorrowland-and-his-haters.html>
. “So Brad [Bird] and I thought, What if she doesn’t get distracted by romantic 
entanglements? What if her ‘romance’ is with the future? It’ll be nice in 10 or 
15 years for this not to be a thing anymore.”

Maybe we’re almost there? The monstrous success of The Hunger Games franchise 
($2.3bn and counting at the worldwide box office) taught Hollywood an important 
lesson: love isn’t all you need. While Jennifer Lawrence’s Katniss did find 
herself in a boy triangle of sorts, it was so superfluous to her main 
objective, that it barely registered at all. Her priority is freeing the 
people, not falling in love and the fact that this could then be a profitable 
dynamic for studio Lionsgate sends a message to the industry.

The terse, down-to-business relationships at the heart of this summer’s films 
aren’t necessarily reflective of the industry at large (this spring’s hits: the 
desperately archaic Cinderella and worryingly sexist Fifty Shades of Grey prove 
that) but it’s a beacon of hope in a season lacking in originality. That’s not 
to say there isn’t a place for romance (last summer’s Guardians of the Galaxy 
excelled by ensuring that Zoe Saldana was as integral to the plot as Chris 
Pratt) but forcing a ring on it, just to tick a box, is hopefully becoming a 
thing of the past.

At least until the next reboot ...
 