
Coldplay’s new album A Head Full of Dreams is being withheld from 
music-streaming service Spotify, but made available on rivals includingApple 
Music <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music>.

However, this is not a decision to consciously uncouple from Spotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> entirely, but rather a choice 
based on the company’s refusal to restrict the album to its paying customers 
only.

In that, Coldplay’s decision mirrors Taylor Swift’s decision to remove her 
entire back catalogue from Spotify in 2014, after it declined to use a similar 
“windowing” policy for her music.

“The band’s team aren’t anti-Spotify, they’re just not in love with ‘free’ – 
you can probably expect it to drop on the service after a few weeks,” a source 
told music-industry siteMusic Business Worldwide 
<http://www.musicbusinessworldwide.com/new-coldplay-album-wont-be-on-spotify/>.

“Coldplay’s A Head Full Of Dreams is not yet on Spotify, but we look forward 
to making it available very soon,” said a spokesperson for the service. The 
album is already available on Apple Music, while Google has confirmed that its 
Google Play Music service will also have it.

Coldplay: A Head Full of Dreams review – a failure to commit to pop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/04/coldplay-a-head-full-of-dreams-review-a-failure-to-commit-to-pop>
Coldplay’s back catalogue remains available on Spotify, as do two singles from 
their new album: Adventure of a Lifetime and Everglow. According to the band’s 
Spotify profile page, they have 16.2 million monthly listeners on the service.

Spotify may come under pressure from more major artists to relent in its 
policy of making all its music available to all its users, even the non-paying 
ones, following Swift and Coldplay’s lead.

In November 2014, Adele’s manager Jonathan Dickins suggested that restricting 
some albums to premium subscribers onlymight solve some of Spotify’s 
high-profile disputes with artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/06/adele-manager-jonathan-dickens-streaming-spotify>
.

“The premium tier to me are real active record buyers, paying their $9.99 or 
€9.99 or £9.99 a month. My feeling would be to get around the situation with 
someone like Taylor Swift – but Spotify won’t do it – is a window between 
making something available on the premium service, earlier than it’s made 
available on the free service,” said Dickins.

Adele’s latest album 25 is not currently available on any streaming service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/19/adele-new-album-25-not-stream-spotify-apple-music>
 – free or premium. Her label and management have yet to confirm whether they 
will press for windowing once it is released to stream.

• Thom Yorke: YouTube steals music ‘like Nazis in second world war’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/01/thom-yorke-youtube-steals-art-nazis-second-world-war>

 