
Colorado Springs, the location of an attack on a Planned Parenthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood> clinic that left three 
people dead, is a centre of rightwing Christian culture with a “wild west 
mentality” when it comes to guns.

The attack, by a lone gunman carrying a rifle or shotgun, took place at a 
clinic that is the site of regular anti-abortion protests by the city’s 
pro-life Christian groups.

Planned Parenthood, aware of hostility about their work, recently moved to the 
new facility, hoping it would provide more security for staff.

The building has been likened to a fortress by anti-abortion campaigners and 
Friday’s attacks revealed that it is equipped with “safe rooms” for staff to 
shelter in the event of such an event. It also has an extensive security camera 
system.

With anti-abortion policies supported by many Republican presidential 
candidates such as Ted Cruz, Rand Paul and Jeb Bush, rhetoric attacking Planned 
Parenthood and other such organisations is not hard to find in the city.

Last spring, following the gruesome attack on a Colorado woman who had her 
unborn-baby ripped from her womb with a knife, state representative and Springs 
resident Gordon Klingenschmittsaid the attack was “the curse of God upon America
 
<http://www.denverpost.com/news/ci_27799276/gordon-klingenschmitt-fallout-from-comments-continues>
for our sin of not protecting innocent children in the womb”.

Colorado’s second largest city, with a population of 445,800, has built itself 
a reputation as a playground for white, pro-gun, pro-life Evangelical 
Christians. It is also home to one army base, two air force bases, and an air 
force.


Colorado Springs featured in the documentary film Jesus Camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/sep/29/usa.danglaister>, where 
evangelical Christian children were taught to engage in anti-abortion protests. 
Two of the film’s lead characters travelled to the New Life Church in Colorado 
Springs, where they met church pastor Ted Haggard, a one-time leader of the 
National Association of Evangelicals who had weekly communications with 
president George W Bush. Haggard resigned from his position later that same year
following revelations that he purchased methamphetamine and the services of a 
male prostitute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/06/us-gay-scandal-pastor-church>.

The city’s pro-gun contingent flexed its muscles in 2014 with an unprecedented 
recall election, ousting state senator John Morse. The recall was primarily 
motivated by new gun control laws in Colorado – followingthe Aurora cinema 
shootings in Denver <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/aurora-shooting> – 
which banned magazines holding more than 15 rounds, and demanded a universal 
background check for all gun purchases.

As the first state to legalise abortion and the first to implement a regulated 
marijuana market,Colorado <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> is a 
state that doesn’t take kindly to government infringements on personal rights.

Three weeks before Friday’s Planned Parenthood shooting, a man was seen 
brandishing a rifle while walking down the streets of Colorado Springs on 
Halloween morning. A concerned citizen called the 911 Emergency Line to notify 
the police, but was told by the operator: “Well, it is an open carry state, so 
he can have a weapon with him or walking around with it,” referencing state 
laws that allow the brandishing of a firearm in public.

Shortly after the call the man shot and killed three people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/01/colorado-shooting-spree-four-dead>
 before being shot dead by police.

Following the Halloween shooting, Colorado Springs resident Jessie Pocock 
organised a vigil with her fellow citizens, who expressed a mix of grief and 
outrage at the deaths. She feels that there is a “wild west mentality” when it 
comes to guns in Colorado Springs.

“It’s important that we can go to the grocery store and not be worried about 
someone randomly shooting us down on the streets, and right now that is not the 
case in Colorado Springs, said Pocock, who lives close to the abortion clinic. 
“You’re not safe on the streets here, and that is a problem.”

Colorado Springs’ year of violence began last January when a bomb detonated 
outside the local chapter of the NAACP. No one was harmed in the attack, but 
the incident put many in Colorado Springs on edge.

“I’m a little overwhelmed with the war zone that is my home,” says Pocock.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcolorado-springs-shooting-three-dead-and-one-man-in-custody-following-attack-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colorado%20Springs%20shooting%3A%20three%20dead%20and%20one%20man%20in%20custody%20following%20attack%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcolorado-springs-shooting-three-dead-and-one-man-in-custody-following-attack-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colorado%20Springs%20shooting%3A%20three%20dead%20and%20one%20man%20in%20custody%20following%20attack%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcolorado-springs-shooting-three-dead-and-one-man-in-custody-following-attack-video&media=>
Colorado Springs shooting: three dead and one man in custody following attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/28/colorado-springs-shooting-three-dead-and-one-man-in-custody-following-attack-video> 