
Jurors were left with conflicting portraits of the man accused of shooting 12 
people dead and injuring scores more at aColorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> movie theater in July 2012 after 
the opening of his murder trial on Monday.

The defense painted James Holmes as a young man who on that night lost a 
lifelong battle with mental illness, while prosecutors described him as 
calculated and driven to kill by a foundering academic career and a breakup 
with his first and only girlfriend.


Arapahoe county district attorney George Brauchler began by recalling for 
jurors – 19 women and five men – the cool night in July when roughly 400 people 
crowded into a cinema in suburban Aurora to watch the latest Batman film, The 
Dark Knight Rises.

“One person came there to slaughter them … One guy who felt as if he had lost 
his career, lost his love life, lost his purpose, came to execute a plan he had 
in his heart for his life, but for two and a half months in his mind,” 
Brauchler said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fjames-holmes-trial-colorado-aurora-theater-shooting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430188254850%2Fecf40297-5083-475d-93d4-d4b7449071f3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colorado%20shooting%20trial%3A%20'He%20tried%20to%20murder%20a%20theater%20full%20of%20people%20to%20make%20himself%20feel%20better'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fjames-holmes-trial-colorado-aurora-theater-shooting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colorado%20shooting%20trial%3A%20%27He%20tried%20to%20murder%20a%20theater%20full%20of%20people%20to%20make%20himself%20feel%20better%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fjames-holmes-trial-colorado-aurora-theater-shooting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430188254850%2Fecf40297-5083-475d-93d4-d4b7449071f3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 James Holmes, left, and defense attorney Daniel King in a courtroom sketch. 
Photograph: Jeff Kandyba/AP 
On a courtroom screen Brauchler showed a trail of blood leading to the door 
where Holmes slipped into the theater that night, wearing a gas mask and body 
armor and blasting techno music.

“Through this door is horror,” Brauchler told the 12 jurors and 12 alternates. 
“Through this door is bullets, blood, brains and bodies.”

At the trial’s end the jurors will determine whether Holmes will be executed, 
spend his life in prison or be committed to a mental health facility.

Holmes has pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity to 166 counts of murder, 
attempted murder, explosives possession and committing a crime of violence.


His lawyers admit that he was the gunman who carried out the attack at the 
Century theater in Aurora three years ago. But public defender Daniel King said 
Brauchler’s narrative did not tell the “whole story”. Holmes, who sat 
impassively in the courtroom wearing glasses, a blue shirt and khakis, suffered 
from schizophrenia, King said, and was under the control of the disease when he 
carried out the attack on 20 July.

“When James Holmes stepped into that theater in July of 2012 he was insane,” 
King said. “His mind had been overcome by a disease of the brain that had 
plagued him and pursued him for years.”

In the course of the two hours allotted Holmes’s lawyers attempted to show 
that his actions before, during and after the attack were consistent with 
schizophrenia. They told of a family history of mental disease, and of a 
troubled teen who struggled with social anxiety before the illness became 
full-blown in the months leading up to the killing.

On that night, his lawyers said, his behaviour was prompted by a delusional 
concept in which he believed killing people would help wrench him from the 
depths of his illness.

“All we’re asking in this case is that you accept the reality of mental 
disease,” King said.

King told jurors their job not to be swayed by the emotions and drama of the 
courtroom, but on the facts that were before them.

“I’m concerned,” King said, adding: “Sympathy and prejudice cannot affect your 
decision … I don’t know how you’re going to do that, but that is your task.

Holmes’s clown-like red hair grew out long ago and the bushy beard he wore 
awaiting trial was gone too. Out of sight Holmes was being restrained: under 
his blue dress shirt was a harness, cabled through the leg of his khaki pants 
to the courtroom floor. Holmes swiveled slightly in his chair as the prosecutor 
chronicled the night of the attack.

Robert and Arlene Holmes, who were in court on Monday, have pleaded with 
jurors to save his life, calling their son a “human being gripped by a severe 
mental illness”.

Prosecutors are seeking the death penalty. Brauchler, who reportedly refused 
an offer of a guilty plea in return for life without parole, declaring two 
Aprils ago that for Holmes “justice is death”.

 If he is convicted the jury will be asked to decide in a second phase of the 
trial whether Holmes should be executed or sentenced to life in prison. If he 
is found not guilty he will be sent to a mental health hospital. He could 
conceivably be released one day, though such an outcome is unlikely given the 
severity of his case.

During opening statements the jury heard conflicting interpretations of 
Holmes’s mental health, based on expert evaluations by experts.

Brauchler said two court-ordered psychiatrists concluded Holmes was sane even 
though doctors called by the defense found he was insane.

The defense also said that all of the doctors who worked with or examined 
Holmes agreed he suffered from some sort of psychosis - even if they couldn’t 
agree on what to call it.

A second mental evaluation was ordered after prosecutors challenged the 
conclusions reached by Dr Jeffrey Metzner, a psychologist appointed by the 
Colorado Mental Health Institute to examine Holmes. The second medical exam was 
performed by state psychiatrist Dr William Reid. Both men are expected to 
testify during the trial.

Survivors sat among those in attendance, some in tears. Brauchler used 
photographs, texts, online chats, bank statements, emails, video from Holmes’s 
evaluation with Dr Reid and Holmes’s notebook to demonstrate how Holmes 
willfully plotted the attack, practising shooting, purchasing ballistic gear, 
stockpiling weapons and ammunition and skillfully rigging his apartment before 
he left for the theater.

“He tried to murder a theater full of people to make himself feel better and 
because he thought it would increase his self-worth,” Brauchler said, pointing 
at the defendant.

Brauchler said Holmes planned to escape after the shooting, including by using 
devices thrown to puncture the tires of any police cars that might chase him, 
but realized he was outnumbered by officers and decided to give up.

But Holmes’s public defender Katherine Spengler countered that “planning is 
not inconsistent with insanity when it’s fueled by a delusional illness” and 
said schizophrenia had been a lifelong struggle for Holmes.

Brauchler interspersed his timeline of Holmes’s movements with anecdotes about 
each of the victims.

Some jurors wiped tears from their faces during Brauchler’s opening 
statements, especially when he showed the bodies of 10 people who died in the 
theater next to photos of them alive and happy.

In the coming months the jury will hear from survivors, witnesses, police 
officers and mental health experts, and will be shown emails, texts, online, 
chats, excerpts from his notebook as well as graphic photographs of the crime 
scene and of the carnage that ensued.

In their final remarks, the prosecutor and Holmes’s attorney told the jury 
what they would stand before them and ask.

“I’m going to stand right here to ask you to hold him accountable for 
murdering 12 people and for trying to kill 70 others,” Brauchler said 
forcefully.

Ending her remarks, Spengler said she too would stand before the jury at the 
trial’s end and ask them to reach a very different conclusion. “When he stepped 
into that theater, his thoughts and actions were no longer driven by choice, in 
his vulnerable and sick psychotic state,” Spengler said. “His mind was so 
diseased that he did not make that choice based on ability to tell right from 
wrong.’”

Spengler asked the jury to accept that the answer to “why” did Holmes’ carry 
out this mass shooting was his mental illness. “Even though there is a ‘why’ 
you have to be prepared for it not to make logical sense,” she said.

Survivors sat among those in attendance, some in tears, during the court 
proceedings. One of them, Marcus Weaver, said he wasn’t satisfied with the 
defense’s argument, that his friend, Rebecca Wingo, lost her life that night 
because of a man’s untreated mental illness.

“It’s just pretty upsetting that their defense is actually something that is 
all hypothetical,” Weaver said after court adjourned on Monday evening. “If 
someone was in a psychotic rage they would just pick up a gun and shoot. This 
guy went out and bought guns and magnesium, used different [credit] cards. I 
believe Mr Holmes was acting on his own volition. He was malicious in his 
attack. He murdered my friend and shot me in the arm and killed 11 others.”

Judge Samour has said he expects the trial to take four to five months and 
would like it to finish by Labor Day on 7 September. The trial is due to 
continue on Tuesday morning.

 