
In Adelaide during March, there are so many events competing for punters' 
attention that it's no wonder some of them get confused.Adelaide Festival 
director David Sefton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/feb/24/adelaide-festival-australia-david-sefton>
 once tried to explain the difference between his event and the Fringe by 
saying that only one of them would stagePuppetry of the Penis 
<http://www.puppetryofthepenis.com/>, and received the reply "You have Puppetry 
of the Penis on at the festival?"

While nowhere near the size of Edinburgh's, the Adelaide fringe is has long 
been largest in the southern hemisphere and is growing faster than ever. Set 
up, like Edinburgh's, to allow emerging artists the chance to take advantage of 
the audiences the official festival brings into the city, it has several 
manifestations. The most visible is theGarden of Unearthly Delights 
<http://www.gardenofunearthlydelights.com.au/>, a bustling park full of venues 
packed out after dark, boasting gigs by big-name comedians from Aussies likeWil 
Anderson <http://www.wilanderson.com.au/> and Peter Helliar 
<https://twitter.com/pjhelliar>, to Brits like Frisky and Mannish 
<http://friskyandmannish.co.uk/>. (Ross Noble, Sarah Millican and Stephen K 
Amos are also in town).
 The Bally in Gluttony at the Fringe. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian 
Adjacent to the Garden is Gluttony <http://gluttony.net.au/>, a lower key and 
more leftfield area decorated with sculptures of pigs - and a painting of 
Justin Bieber - in which all manner of artists sweat it out in tents.

But the fringe takes over the whole city – which is just as well, according to 
comedy awards judgeKatie Powell <http://www.mrc.org.au/join-us/staff/katie>, 
who says that the fees imposed by the Garden and main comedy venue theRhino Room
 <http://www.rhinoroom.com.au/>are too high for up-and-coming comedians. There 
are standups in the pubs, circus performers in back alleys and a one-man play 
based on the experiences of a Venezuelan immigrant in Australia 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/the-book-of-loco/f8a029a8-8d1c-4d54-95da-35af348f9b46>
 at a back room ofTandanya <http://www.tandanya.com.au/>, the Aboriginal art 
gallery.

Ground zero of this more experimental scene seems to be Tuxedo Cat 
<http://www.tuxedocat.com.au/>, who take over buildings due for redevelopment 
in Adelaide and Melbourne and turn them into performance venues. The Adelaide 
branch is currently situated near the official festival site in an old shopping 
centre with a handsome stone facade. Inside it's all exposed pipes, bare 
concrete and an enjoyably bohemian ambience, boasting a bar, cafe and an 
astonishing six theatres ranging between 80 and 30 seats apiece. Tuxedo Cat has 
a non-stop schedule of eccentric shows 
<http://www.tuxedocat.com.au/fringe-shows.html> – 500 over the course of the 
fringe – ranging from performance artistLe Foulard 
<http://everguide.com.au/perth/event/2013-feb-19/fringe-world-le-foulard/> to a 
naked cabaret where both punters and performers are unclothed.
 Bryan Lynagh at Tuxedo Cat on Adelaide's North Terrace. Photograph: Alicia 
Canter for the Guardian 
The venue prides itself on supporting new artists. American silent comedian 
Doctor Brown 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2011/sep/21/doctor-brown-comedy-interview>
performed in their Melbourne branch for three years before eventually scoring 
awards and sell-out concerts. Tuxedo Cat also stages gigs from bigger names who 
want to try out more experimental material.Daniel Kitson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2012/aug/05/daniel-kitson-god-small-things>, 
revered in standup circles, is set to perform the Melbourne space.

Tuxedo Cat was set up by two artists, Cassandra Tombs and comedian Bryan 
Lynagh. "I was doing festival shows up until that point," says Lynagh, "and we 
found that the venue hire to perform a festival show was just extraordinarily 
high and if you broke even you were a success story. So we thought 'let's start 
our own venue'. The ethical backbone would be to keep the venue hire as low as 
possible so the artist would have a chance of making some money and reinvesting 
in themselves."
 Gravity and Other Myths perform A Simple Space (from ground up) Martin 
Schreiber, Jacob Randell and Lachlan Binns. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian 
Making money on the Adelaide Fringe seems to be a hit and miss affair, but 
according to circus troupeGravity & Other Myths 
<http://www.gravityandothermyths.com.au/>, it can be done. Their astonishing 
show A Simple Place, at converted cinema The Birdcage, delights a sizeable 
audience with physical feats including a woman doing gymnastics on a pole 
suspended by two men on one another's shoulders – and no-one's complaining 
about the flash of male nudity either. The company, who teach and train at 
Adelaide's circus schoolCirkidz <http://www.cirkidz.org.au/>, are on their 
third year on the Fringe, and have been drawing 500-strong audiences. They get 
government funding too. "We've got it from the South Australian government a 
couple of times and we've been funded by the national government to go on tour 
which we're doing in a couple of weeks, so we're going round regional 
Australia," says a delighted Jascha Boyce, the company's female member.

However, a more typical picture emerges among the artists taking the 
late-night air at the Fringe Club, an outdoor space with a dancefloor where 
fringe artists and workers can hang out after their shows. Brisbane-based 
writer and actorBelinda Locke  <https://twitter.com/bzlocke>says that her 
one-woman showThe Tiger's Bride 
<http://www.fringebenefits.com.au/index.php?PID=262&ID=73f94dc1-07e6-4340-a211-ce8b6bbc094f>
, based on the book by Angela Carter, is unlikely to break even, though the 
costs of signing up to the fringe are relatively modest. It costs around $400 
(£276) to be included in the fringe publicity, she says, then the organisers 
help the artists find a venue. The venue's fee is then negotiated between venue 
and artist.

Actor Tom Dent, in 22 Short Plays 
<http://www.mka.org.au/program/previous-production/2011-2/22-short-plays> by 
David Finnigan, which he describes as "Monty Python with a lot of dick jokes" 
says that he has occasionally been the beneficiary of grants, but in this case 
will settle for covering his costs. Besides the buzz of performing – which goes 
without saying – if their shows don't earn money these performers hope that the 
fringe will bring them reviews, exposure and networking opportunities. Locke is 
part of the government-supportedHoney Pot programme 
<http://www.dfat.gov.au/acc/our-relations/honey-pot-fringe-festival.html>, 
which gives producers in Australia and around the world free tickets to see 
shows, which they will then hopefully programme in their festivals and theatres.

Two Brits, Dan Steele and Ben Mellor, seem rather out of pocket from bringing 
their brilliant showAnthropoetry <http://www.benmellor.net/anthropoetry/> to 
Perth and Adelaide (though Arts Council England paid for their flights), but 
say they have met several people involved in the Edinburgh festival through the 
Honey Pot scheme. They'll return there with their show this August.

Amidst all this hustling, just as in Edinburgh 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/jul/30/stewart-lee-slow-death-edinburgh-fringe>
 there are performers who believe that the fringe has lost its soul. Glen R 
Johns - who has just staged a circus show calledDead End 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/dead-end/c8c76af1-e9ea-478d-aa36-288c0d43a2c1>
 and a one-woman show calledThe Mother Woman 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/the-mother-woman/4c140f9d-2f22-488d-a714-1777514e8d12>
 in the same Adelaide back alley – says that more experimental artists are 
struggling to get bums on seats, though his own shows were at least 80% full. 
Locke and Dent both profess themselves happy with their audience figures. "It's 
not been lower than 10 people," says Dent, a born trouper who says he would 
happily play to an audience of three. "If people have paid for the show, they 
get the show."
 The Garden of Unearthly Delights at the Fringe. Photograph: Alicia Canter for 
the Guardian 
"This is my 13th fringe and it's a corporate business now," complains Johns. 
"In the old days, even at management level it was much quirkier and smaller and 
more charming - it didn't have the branding. Essentially what's happened in the 
fringe is that comedy has taken over. People go and see big-name comedian in 
the Garden and think they're having a fringe experience, and there's so much 
more to it than that.

"At fringe time you should be trying to see small people doing strange things, 
things that maybe fail and you think 'Oh my God, I can't believe they did 
that', but at least you've had that experience."

Yet Dent says that Aussie audiences are still up for something which may be 
the opposite of slick, as long as it has conviction. "You need actors, a 
director, a light, maybe a couple of props and you can just slap it together 
and people are happy to watch it. It's not about how nice the costume is or how 
amazing the lights are. When you see that sort of thing it's awesome, but 
people are there to see a show and you make that show with whatever you've got."
 