
Comic Relief's chief executive has promised a full review of its investment 
policy following a public backlash triggered by a Panorama investigation into 
the charity's multimillion-poundholdings in tobacco, arms and alcohol companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/dec/10/comic-relief-tobacco-arms-alcohol-panorama>
.

Kevin Cahill admitted for the first time on Tuesday that the Red Nose Day and 
Sport Relief charity still had money in managed funds that held shares in 
tobacco, arms and alcohol firms but said they were "a small percentage, no more 
than 5% of our funds in any of those particular areas".

He was speaking after details emerged of Tuesday night's Panorama documentary 
on BBC1, which reported that between 2007 and 2009,Comic Relief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comic-relief> money was put in shares 
in schemes that critics say contradict the core aims of the charity.

The Panorama investigation had prompted several months of wrangling between 
the programme-makers and Comic Relief, straining the close working relationship 
the charity has with theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, which has 
broadcast its Red Nose Day and Sport Relief fundraising telethons for nearly 30 
years.

Comic Relief's law firm, Harbottle & Lewis, attempted to get the programme 
stopped, warning that its accusations would "damage vulnerable people in the UK 
and abroad".

However, after sustained criticism of Comic Relief on Tuesday, including 
caustic tweets <https://twitter.com/search?q=comic%20relief&src=typd> from some 
of the charity's own high-profile supporters, including comicsFrankie Boyle 
<https://twitter.com/frankieboyle/status/410334786025439232> and Al Murray 
<https://twitter.com/ajhmurray/status/410343244938379264>, Cahill signalled a 
sudden change of tack.

"We will do a full review of our policy after this particular programme and 
these discussions we are having now," Cahill told Martha Kearney on Radio 4's 
World at One.

"It's really important that the public stick with us, that they trust us to do 
the right thing and they understand that we are listening to the messages that 
are out there on the social networks."

Cahill said it was a "no-brainer" that the charity would rather invest in 
ethical concerns if they could match or better the returns offered by other 
investments.

But he added that Comic Relief and other charities should seek more 
clarification over the rules around ethical investments from theCharities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> Commission.

"Our trustees were acting in good faith in doing what they were doing. It's 
very good to hear the potential exists within ethical funds to match the return 
[of funds with non-ethical investments], because Comic Relief would clearly 
choose to be in those if the return was equal or better to where we currently 
are. It's a no-brainer for us."

Cahill said the charity's trustees had made their investment decisions 
believing "they delivered the greatest benefits to our benefactors".

"When a moment like this occurs for a charity like ours, that's never had a 
blemish on its reputation in its entire 25-year history, which has never been 
cited for any kind of transgression of Charity Commission regulations or 
guidelines, the past is important but the future is even more important."

Prior to Cahill's announcement, the charity had come under attack from Boyle, 
whose controversial routine was axed from a BBC3 broadcast of a Comic Relief 
fund-raising night this year.

Boyle tweeted: "Will happily perform at this year's Comic Relief if paid in 
guns" and "Those fairy cakes your kids baked for Comic Relief bought [Ugandan 
warlord] Joseph Kony a rocket launcher", which had been retweeted 2,000 times 
at the time of publication.

Murray, better known as the Pub Landlord, who appeared in Comic Relief Does 
Fame Academy on BBC1 in 2005, was also critical on Twitter. Referring to Comic 
Relief's 1991 single, The Stonk, he pointed out that one definition of a stonk 
is "a concentrated artillery barrage".

Other key figures connected to Comic Relief defended the charity.

Journalist and broadcaster Emma Freud, wife of Comic Relief co-founder Richard 
Curtis,replied to a comment on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/emmafreud/status/410313876971208704> that said Panorama 
producers would "have blood on their hands if their ill-judged programme leads 
to just one person not donating to future Comic Reliefs". Freud responded: 
"Thank you for that ... I know."

Controversy has surrounded the Panorama documentary, All in a Good Cause, 
since it was postponed in October, amid claims that a string of executives had 
ruled themselves out of taking decisions on the programme, as a result of the 
BBC's longstanding ties with Comic Relief.

The BBC director general, Tony Hall, and its director of news and current 
affairs, James Harding, became involved, with the latter understood to have 
asked the producers to go back and firm up the investigation.

Hall told an industry conference last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/29/bbc-panorama-investiation-comic-relief>
: "It's James's [Harding's] programme. He wants to get it right. It's quite 
right the director of news has views about programmes – it'll broadcast."

In a string of letters to the BBC and the programme's production team, Comic 
Relief's lawyers Harbottle & Lewis said: "We should not have to remind you of 
the enormous damage your unsubstantiated allegations will cause to our client 
and its charity aims.

"This is especially so given such claims will damage the vulnerable people in 
the UK and abroad who our client seeks to help."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 