
Asbos are now an accepted way of life on many of our deprived housing estates. 
Changing behaviour will need support and involvement of a whole community. Your 
editorial (23 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/may/22/antisocial-behaviour-asbo-crackdown-editorial>
) agrees with the home secretary that bullying and unruliness is difficult to 
tackle through criminal law. With police service cuts, the proposed replacement 
of asbos with CPIs (crime prevention injunctions) may be less effective in 
providing the necessary help to protect the vulnerable.

So what's left? On many of our high crime estates you mind your own business 
and lock your doors. Residents are not organised and are powerless. Our 
political system has failed to address the root causes of antisocial behaviour 
and urban decay. Yet there has long been good practice. The early Liverpool 
pilot programmes in community development were low-cost and sustainable over 
the past 40 years. Independent evidence was produced by Liverpool University on 
the success of the projects, Partnership with the People, 1965-1993. Community 
spirit lost in our urban life can be rebuilt by drawing on the skills of our 
retired and unemployed, who are part of the untapped social capital in every 
street. Antisocial behaviour can be changed when whole communities, young 
people and adults become involved.
Teddy Gold
Retired community worker, and founder, School Councils UK 
<http://www.schoolcouncils.org/>

• Too many have their lives blighted by antisocial behaviour (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/may/22/may-tougher-antisocial-behaviour-laws?newsfeed=true>
, 22 May). But there is no evidence that asbos, or the new orders proposed by 
the government, are or will be effective. Teenagers with asbos often come from 
troubled and disadvantaged families. Two-thirds of asbos imposed on under-18s 
are breached and many teenagers end up in prison because breach of the civil 
orders attracts criminal sanctions.There is no evidence that these kinds of 
sanctions prevent or stop antisocial behaviour or address the underlying 
causes. The new orders proposed are not fundamentally different to asbos and 
thus are unlikely to work better. Proven measures to cut crime and reduce 
antisocial behaviour lie in constructive ways for offenders to make amends to 
victims, and investment in public health, youth work and support for vulnerable 
families.
Penelope Gibbs
Director, Out of Trouble programme <http://www.outoftrouble.org.uk/>
 