
One year ago, the killing of the Russian ambassador to Ankara by a former 
Turkish policeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/russian-ambassador-to-turkey-wounded-in-ankara-shooting-attack>
 would have provoked a rupture in Turkish-Russian relations on the scale that 
followed the shooting down of a Russian plane by the Turkish jets in November 
2015.

But ahead of Andrei’s Karlov’s funeral on Thursday, there has been no Russian 
démarche. Insteadthe two countries appear drawn closer towards a new embrace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/why-killing-of-russian-diplomat-is-likely-to-bring-turkey-and-russia-closer>
, taking Turkey ever further away from the west.

Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, declared for the first time it was 
obvious that the assassin was a follower of Fetullah Gülen, the cleric living 
in American exile andallegedly the ringleader of a shadowy movement behind 
July’s abortive military coup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/17/fethullah-gulen-alleged-coup-mastermind-and-friendly-neighbour>
. His followers even implied the CIA may have been involved in Karlov’s murder.

Russia has sent 18 investigators to Ankara, but Moscow accepted Ankara’s 
condolences delivered in person by Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, the Turkish foreign 
minister, when he arrived inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> 
on Tuesday for a prearranged meeting with his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov.

Why killing of Russian diplomat may well bring Turkey and Russia closer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/why-killing-of-russian-diplomat-is-likely-to-bring-turkey-and-russia-closer>
The reason for the Russian restraint is simple. The president, Vladimir Putin, 
after the fall of Aleppo,is in the middle of a power play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/17/aleppo-fall-syria-iran-winner-influence-analysis>
, and the death of a diplomat, however talented and tragic, will not avert him 
from his chosen course.

Exasperated by what he sees as the American failure to deliver on its promises 
to isolate the jihadis in the Syrian opposition, Putin plans with Turkey and 
Iran toprepare his own Syrian peace roadmap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/iran-aleppo-syria-shia-militia>. 
He wants to capitalise on his military victory with a diplomatic triumph. 
Tuesday’s meeting between the foreign ministers of Turkey Russia and Iran, with 
its portentous Moscow Declaration, is supposed to be the first stage in the 
closure of the civil war on Russian terms.

At this point at least, the Gulf States, Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the US are excluded from 
the process. Moscow even said “almost every level of dialogue with the US is 
now frozen. We don’t communicate with one another, or if we do at minimal 
level”.

But Putin may find diplomatic success more elusive than victory on the 
battlefield. Above all, he depends on the help ofTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, the most loyal supporters of the 
Syrian opposition through the past five years. Apart from energy cooperation, 
the best deal he can offer Erdoğan is a guarantee that the Syrian Kurds on 
Turkey’s southern border will not be strengthened by any agreement. Hatred of 
Kurdish independence, even more than hatred of the Gülenists, binds Erdoğan’s 
supporters together.

But Turkey itself is internally divided. There is a strong Eurasianist group 
around Erdoğan that want to cut their losses with the EU after years of being 
rebuffed and lack of gratitude for housing millions of Syrian refugees. Others 
say Europe remains the only viable route to economic modernisation.

In Moscow, Çavuşoğlu pointedly said a ceasefire in Syria should not only 
exclude terrorist groups such as Islamic State and Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, but 
also Lebanon’s Hezbollah – which fights on the government side. Lavrov implied 
Hezbollah, like Russia, was inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> 
at the government’s invitation.

Anti-Iranian feeling is at a fever pitch in Erdoğan’s party since it is 
Tehran’s artillery, as much as Moscow’s air power, that led to the humiliation 
ofAleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>.

Possibly unclear himself of his strategy, Putin has said his initiative is 
designed to complement, and not conflict with, the UN’s existing peace process. 
But his move has caused unease in the UN; Staffan de Mistura, the UN Syrian 
special envoy, has announced he will convene rival UN talks on 8 February in 
Geneva.

So far, the UN talks have been plagued by Syrian government objections to the 
composition of the opposition delegations, the role of the Syrian Kurds and 
whether it is a requirement that the Syrian government accepts that the 
president, Bashar al-Assad, will stand down in some way at the end of a 
transition process.

US Syria policy: signs of shift as Trump son meets pro-Russia Damascus figure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/donald-trump-jr-syria-russia-meeting-randa-kassis>
Putin’s rival peace show may take place in Astana, the capital of Kazakstan. 
Surrounded by the world’s largest steppe,the futuristic, even bizarre, city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/28/astana-kazakhstan-strangest-capital-cities-on-earth>
 is not an entirely random venue to choose since it has played a role in trying 
to normalise relations between Turkey and Russia, two of its closest allies.

It hosted members of the Syrian opposition for talks in May 2015 and has 
overseen various other international mediation efforts, including 2013 talks 
between Iran and the P5+1.

The May 2015 Syrian talks were initiated by Randa Kassis, the head of the 
Coalition of Secular and Democratic Syrians.

Many rebel groups regard Kassis as part of a tame tolerated opposition with 
little popular support, but she met Donald Trump’s son in Paris recently, 
suggesting her political star is in the ascendant. However, any attempt to 
re-stage these talks without key members of the opposition, including those in 
the Riyadh-convened high negotiations committee are likely to leave them 
discredited.

Putin may just be starting to find his role as the great disrupter is a lot 
easier than that of the great conciliator.
 