
The children's commissioner for England today urged councils, businesses, 
charities, schools and the government to allow children and young people to 
take over their organisations for a day.

Sir Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> said 
the move would be a significant gesture to allow the country's 11million 
children to have input into decisions that affect their lives.

The 11million Takeover Day is to be held on the November 23 as part of 
celebrations to mark the signing of the United Nations Convention on the Rights 
of the Child.

Sir Al said: "We are calling on individuals, organisations and institutions to 
sign up to this exciting initiative. Whether you run a business, are a 
politician, work in your local council or in the media - this is your chance to 
hand over the reins for a day and demonstrate your commitment to listening to, 
and nurturing the talents of children and young people across England.

"I want adults to value the 11 million children and young people in our 
society more. They are amazing and talented - and they have the right to have a 
say about decisions that affect their lives.

"The 11million Takeover Day is a great opportunity to showcase how you already 
involve children and young people in your work, or to provide a kick-start to 
participation activities in your organisation."

Eleven organisations have already signed up for the day, including BBC's 
Newsround; the National Union of Teachers; BT; Scope; and the Prince's Trust

Jon Sparkes, the chief executive of Scope, said: "I am delighted to be handing 
over my job to a young disabled person on 23rd November. We must recognise the 
talents of young people and ensure that we build their confidence by listening 
to, and valuing, their views and experiences. I would urge more Chief 
Executives to join in on the 23rd - you could be surprised by what you learn!" 
Adrian Hosford, the director of corporate responsibility for BT, said the 
company was committed to promoting and championing the voice of children and 
young people through their Better World campaign/.

"We are delighted to be signed up to the 11million Takeover Day," he added. Â· 
Organisations interested in getting involved in the 11million Takeover Day 
should email the children's commissioner at takeover.day@11MILLION.org.uk  
<mailto: takeover.day@11MILLION.org.uk> or visit the 11million 
<http://www.11million.org.uk/takeover-day.html> website for further information.
 