
Happy Christmas! If you're Russian Orthodox, today is Christmas Eve; and I'm 
in the middle of Slavic celebrations because I'm in a hotel in Tallinn, a city 
that's full of Russian tourists making the most of their Christmas and new year 
in the beautiful Estonian capital. I've been here to interviewArvo Pärt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arvo-part>, the famous Estonian composer, 
and someone who has a reputation as a shy recluse; a seeming paradox given that 
his music is celebrated all over the world.

He talked to me in the building that houses his archive 
<http://www.arvopart.ee> – a half-hour drive through the snow, forest and 
flatness of the landscape outside Tallinn, a journey that felt like a 
pilgrimage to a mythical musical hideaway – and I found Pärt to be the exact 
opposite of the forbidding, taciturn figure that looms out of some of his 
photos. There was laughter, humour and generosity in the way he spoke about his 
compositional and existential struggles, and even his religious feelings. You 
can hear the interview onRadio 3's Music Matters 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006tnvx> on Saturday 15 January, but as a 
preview, here are a couple of things Pärt revealed about his music, especially 
from around the time of his consolidation of the technique of "tintinnabulation 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tintinnabuli>", which has defined his music from 
the mid-1970s to this day.

In one of the rooms in the house, there was a row of plant pots. It turns out 
they were more than mere decoration: they were painted by Pärt in 1977, because 
working with riotously festive colours was one of the ways he got through the 
hard years of writer's block. "You have to do something to keep your creativity 
going," he told me. But the real epiphany that set Pärt on his course of what 
sounded like a radical simplicity in the mid-70s, producing works such asTabula 
Rasa 
<http://www.ecmrecords.com/Catalogue/New_Series/1200/1275.php?stickylabel=1>, 
Fratres, andPassio 
<http://www.ecmrecords.com/Catalogue/New_Series/1300/1370.php?lvredir=712&catid=0&doctype=Catalogue&order=releasedate&we_search=%2Bpassio>
, which poured out of him later that decade, was an encounter with a street 
cleaner outside his house in Tallinn. Searching for a solution that would 
connect his emotional, musical and spiritual lives together, Pärt, at a loss 
for inspiration, went outside into the snow one morning and asked the cleaner: 
"What should a composer do?" "Well, he should love every note," was the reply. 
"No professor had ever told me something like that," Pärt said, and this single 
sentence crystallised his thinking. He realised that to really love every note, 
to really understand the connections between even a tiny handful of musical 
pitches, could be the source of lifetime of composition and contemplation.

Pärt's music is some of the most immediate and recognisable of any 
contemporary composer, and its familiarity has made some hear in it only a 
facile style of "holy minimalism," where for others, it has life-changing 
power. To meet him was to discover the deep philosophical, biographical, 
musicological and even biological roots of his music. As well as to hear the 
mathematical-musical riddle that he told me was one of the secrets to 
understanding his work: "One and one makes – one." I'll leave you to ponder 
that, before the solution is revealed on the radio next Saturday.
 