
Warning. This article contains spoilers. There are two reasons for this. 1) 
The story below could not be written without including the endings of certain 
very famous books. 2) I like spoiling things. Now to the business ...


I have a confession. It’s of the serious and shocking variety - as all good 
confessions should be. I am a wanted man. Hunted by militant librarians across 
eleven counties. I am charged with the worst sort of library crime - defacing 
books. And I am utterly guilty. But sometimes, doing something wrong is the 
only right thing to do.


Anyone but Ivy Pocket by Caleb Krisp - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/apr/09/anyone-but-ivy-pocket-caleb-krisp-review>
Allow me to explain.


This confession begins in childhood. It concerns a boy. Twelve years old. Dark 
Hair. Brown eyes. A mind sharper than a huntsman’s axe. Or at very least a new 
HB pencil. For the purposes of anonymity I will call this boy Caleb Whisk. Or 
possibly Saleb Krisp. Fine, let’s call him Orlando Pudding and be done with it.


Now young Orlando wasn’t much of a reader. He preferred to make up stories in 
his head and then act them out in the privacy of a busy supermarket or crowded 
restaurant. His mother - a nasty old bat who insisted that her son cut his own 
food simply because he had the necessary hands and utensils - was always 
shushing him and demanding he sit back down and stop pretending he was being 
chased by a brain eating four-headed fox.


Orlando liked to make up stories. He was rather good at it. His sixth grade 
teacher found Orlando a lot of hard work. He hardly ever sat still. He was 
always making things up and talking to people that weren’t there. This teacher 
decided that books were the answer. She took Orlando to the local library, got 
him a library card and filled his arms with a great pile of novels.


If the boy liked make-believe so much, then he was sure to love reading this 
collection of world famous books. So Orlando took the books home, picked the 
first one up from the pile and rather reluctantly began to read.


The book was Treasure Island by a dead fellow called Robert Louis Stevenson. 
Our young hero Jim finds himself in possession of a treasure map which points 
to the location of an island filled with loot. He sets out on a ship and every 
page is packed full of pirates, mutiny and murder.


Top 10 islands in children's fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/sep/13/top-10-islands-in-childrens-fiction>
Orlando was hooked. Reading was the best fun a boy could have sitting at the 
kitchen table. He read the book in one sitting and things were going along 
swimmingly - until the final pages. As Orlando read the last chapter his mood 
turned rather sour. His nostrils flared. He began to huff and shake his head.


Treasure Island ends (spoiler alert) with some of the treasure being found. 
Young Jim sails back to England, is given a share of the bounty and vows that 
although there is more treasure still on the island he won’t be going back for 
it. Yes, you read that correctly.More treasure to be found, more adventure to 
be had - and Jim wants to sit at home sipping tea with his mummy, counting his 
gold. It was downright insulting!


Orlando felt betrayed. Duped. Taken advantage of. As such, drastic action was 
required. He took the book to his bedroom. Tore out the last five pages. Then, 
using an old typewriter, Orlando wrote a new ending. In it, Jim comes home and 
befriends a time-travelling inventor with enormous ears and tiny teeth - as you 
do. He then uses the treasure he has gained to fund the building of a turbo 
powered pirate ship - complete with rocket launchers, weather machines and 
sails that with the flick of a button would begin to spin violently, propelling 
the boat into the air. Once back on Treasure Island, Jim fights a band of ghost 
pirates, a gigantic lobster and three villainous mermaids to get to the 
remaining treasure. Then he takes the loot and blows up the island. Now that’s 
an ending!


With the pages typed, Orlando cut them out and glued them into the back of the 
book. No one would suspect a thing. Then Orlando returned the book to the 
library, where this new and improved tale could be enjoyed by the next lucky 
reader.


I wish I could tell you that this was the end of Orlando’s book re-writing 
escapades. But it’s not. For it seemed to Orlando that every book he read 
disappointed him somehow. Usually it was the ending. So each time, he would rip 
out the pages and write a better one. The fact that he was tampering with some 
of the most beloved books ever written didn’t really occur to Orlando. He felt 
certain he was helping.


Cathy Cassidy's top 10 books with secrets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jun/26/cathy-cassidy-top-ten-books-with-secrets>
The Secret Garden came next. Again, Orlando loved the book to begin with. 
What’s not to love? You’ve got a bratty, snooty girl (Mary Lennox) whose 
parents have just died. A boy (Colin) who can’t walk, stays in bed all the time 
and has a hideous back hump. And a walled garden under lock and key that holds 
a tragic secret.


The ending was a huge blow. Mary was really rather sweet once you peeled away 
the snootiness. The garden wasn’t even a tiny bit cursed or full of goblins. 
And Colin - who had such tragic potential - wasn’t really crippled at all and 
his back hump was just a slight case of hunched shoulders. Outrageous!


So Orlando tore out the final pages and wrote the book a new ending. In it the 
garden’s plants were rather diabolical and set about eating all of the main 
characters - for being too nice and sweet and dreary for their own good. It was 
a triumph!


Jackie Morris: love for libraries – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/feb/06/jackie-morris-national-libraries-day>
Like any habit, Orlando’s began rather modestly. But in no time he had 
re-written the endings of over twenty books. The library soon caught on. 
Orlando was branded a book vandal. His library card torn up. His mother filled 
with shame. Luckily, there were other libraries in other counties. The boy went 
through a dozen of them because he could not stop. He had a mission - making 
books better.


What Orlando didn’t realise was that it wasn’t the reader in him that was 
dissatisfied, it was the writer. He loved those books so much that he wanted, 
needed, a way to get inside them and somehow make them his own. The solution to 
his problem did not come until another teacher took the book from Orlando’s 
hand and placed a stack of blank paper in its place.


This teacher told him to write. To write the book he had always wanted to 
read. And so he did. Many times. Eventually he got better and his stories were 
able to stand on their own two feet. Then he chose a perfectly ridiculous name 
for himself, found an agent and began a career as a professional writer.


He sometimes wonders if a child might one day tear out the ending of one of 
his books and re-write it. He certainly hopes so. After all, many writers begin 
their craft inside the stories of writers who have come before. It is a shared 
legacy, each book a link in the great literary chain.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Fconfessions-of-a-book-vandal-why-i-tear-the-endings-out-of-library-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa85d9a137f1eb3ce9599ea6433e9a75749387c83%2F0_0_1807_2245%2F1807.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Confessions%20of%20a%20book%20vandal%3A%20why%20I%20tear%20the%20endings%20out%20of%20library%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Fconfessions-of-a-book-vandal-why-i-tear-the-endings-out-of-library-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Confessions%20of%20a%20book%20vandal%3A%20why%20I%20tear%20the%20endings%20out%20of%20library%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Fconfessions-of-a-book-vandal-why-i-tear-the-endings-out-of-library-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa85d9a137f1eb3ce9599ea6433e9a75749387c83%2F0_0_1807_2245%2F1807.jpg>
Caleb Krisp was raised by militant librarians who fed him a constant diet of 
19th-century literature and room-temperature porridge. His childhood was cut 
tragically short after he sold his Great Aunt Mabel for a handful of perfectly 
ordinary pumpkin seeds. Caleb graduated from the University of Sufferance with 
a degree in Whimsy and set out to make his mark in the world as a writer. Years 
of toil and failure followed, until, following a brief stint working in a 
locked box, Caleb moved to an abandoned cottage deep in the woods and devoted 
himself to writing about the adventures of a 12-year-old lady’s maid of no 
importance - his Ivy Pocket series.

Buy Somebody Stop Ivy Pocket 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400448/> at the 
Guardian bookshop.
 