
The iron curtain

 Both Gerhard Richter and Arvo Pärt grew up in communist regimes. Richter’s 
home city of Dresden became the industrial centre of East Germany and he had 
worked as a social-realist mural painter before he defected to West Germany in 
1961 at the age of 29. For the Estonian Pärt, the Soviet regime first nurtured, 
then cramped, his talent. Originally touted as a rising star, his increasingly 
avant garde early experiments with dissonance met with disapproval. The 
collagist workCredo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yYWpfNi9h4c>, where a 
choir declared in Latin “I believe in Jesus Christ”, caused a furore in 1968. 
It also brought on a crisis for Pärt, who stopped composing, converted to the 
Russian Orthodox church and began painting patterns on flowerpots. An encounter 
with Gregorian chants jump-started his creative motor and after an eight-year 
block, he developed his unique “tintinnabuli” composition method in 1976, with 
Für Alina, a piano score dedicated to a friend’s absent daughter who had 
defected to the UK. Pärt emigrated in 1980.

Manchester international festival 2015: your guide to every event
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/16/manchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets>
Echoes of war

Birkenau, Richter’s latest series inspired by Pärt and unveiled at MIF, is 
based on photographs taken by a prisoner at the Auschwitz-Birkenau 
concentration camp in 1944. The second world war has long been a recurring 
subject in Richter’s career; 1965 paintings based on family snaps depicted his
Uncle Rudi 
<https://www.gerhard-richter.com/en/art/paintings/photo-paintings/death-9/uncle-rudi-5595>
 in a Wehrmacht uniform and his mentally illAunt Marianne 
<https://www.gerhard-richter.com/en/art/paintings/photo-paintings/death-9/aunt-marianne-5597>
, who was sterilised and euthanised in 1945. It’s often surmised that the 
impossibility of art adequately representing the horror of the camps (“there 
can be no poetry after Auschwitz,” runs philosopher Theodor Adorno’s famous 
pronouncement) is at the heart of the painter’s lifelong interrogation of his 
medium’s condition. Pärt’s new choral composition for Richter is Drei 
Hirtenkinder aus Fátima, or Three Little Shepherds of Fátima, to be performed 
live at the Whitworth gallery by the Estonian choir Vox Clamantis. The title 
references three Portuguese children who had visions of the Virgin Mary in 1917 
and made prophecies later interpreted as predicting the start of the second 
world war.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrqFhNnx27_o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrqFhNnx27_o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrqFhNnx27_o&media=>
Purity and unity

Richter is bringing two series dedicated to Pärt together for MIF. As well as 
Birkenau, the second, 2014’s Doppelgrau, is four large grey diptych paintings 
behind glass – a stripped-back work to match the composer’s minimalist style. 
The twinned, subtly different shades of pure grey might be a reference to 
Pärt’s tintinnabuli system, where each note is paired with a harmonising chord 
so it recalls the vibrating peal of a bell, and, as Pärt has said, “the melody 
and the accompaniment is one”. Or perhaps they’re an oblique comment on Pärt’s 
quest for oneness: “the complex and multifaceted only confuse me, and I must 
search for unity”, he has said. Richter’s glass panes conceal as much as they 
reveal, reflecting their audience back at itself. Behind the glass, the 
paintings are in a world of their own, impossible to clearly see in one look.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0BVACGWgN4U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0BVACGWgN4U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0BVACGWgN4U&media=>
Rock adoration

Art band par excellence Sonic Youth paid Richter the greatest compliment an 
artist can surely have in the field of pop. They signalled their high-culture 
credentials by using his 1983 painting Kerze (Candle) for the sleeve of their 
landmark 1988 albumDaydream Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jun/29/popandrock.shopping1>. It’s one 
of 27 sober depictions of this devotional object that the artist stripped of 
religious trappings, before photographing and then painting in his signature 
slightly blurred photorealist style. Pärt is no stranger to the love of iconic 
popsters either. He can count Björk – she did a video interview with him in 
1997, praising him in broken English for the way “[he] gives space to the 
listeners; he can go inside [the music] and live there” – as well as PJ Harvey, 
Nick Cave and Sigur Rós. REM singer Michael Stipe, another fan, famously said: 
“Arvo Pärt’s music is a house on fire and an infinite calm.”

Politics and resistance
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fgerhard-richter-arvo-part-odd-couple-manchester-international-festival-mif%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430823157550%2F9fee8700-d4ce-49fc-9c9e-d6095547d17d-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Connecting%20the%20odd%20couple%3A%20Gerhard%20Richter%20and%20Arvo%20P%C3%A4rt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fgerhard-richter-arvo-part-odd-couple-manchester-international-festival-mif%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Connecting%20the%20odd%20couple%3A%20Gerhard%20Richter%20and%20Arvo%20P%C3%A4rt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fgerhard-richter-arvo-part-odd-couple-manchester-international-festival-mif%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430823157550%2F9fee8700-d4ce-49fc-9c9e-d6095547d17d-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Gerhard Richter’s stained glass window for Cologne Cathedral, unveiled in 
2007. Photograph: HENNING KAISER/AFP/Getty Images 
Spiritual contemplation is rarely the natural ground for direct political 
statements. Pärt, though, has lately used his sacred music as a signpost to 
draw attention to human rights issues. He dedicated his 2009Symphony Number 4, 
Los Angeles <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2DJUN2M3D-E>, to the Russian 
billionaire philanthropist Mikhail Khodorkovsky, imprisoned for nine years by 
Vladimir Putin. All performances of his work between 2006 and 2007 were in 
honour of the murdered Russian investigative journalist and Putin critic Anna 
Stepanovna Politkovskaya. Richter, on the other hand, embraces political hot 
potatoes – though it’s how they’re represented and understood that’s really of 
interest. His most famous series,October 18, 1977 
<https://www.gerhard-richter.com/en/quotes/subjects-2/october-18-1977baader-meinhof-11>
, is based on police and press photos related to the German Baader-Meinhof 
terrorist group. The smudgy black-and-white paintings depict their corpses and 
personal effects in the same deliberately ambiguous style; Richter refuses to 
make sense of the events.Don DeLillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dondelillo> dramatised these problems of 
interpretation in his short story about the paintings,Looking at Meinhof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/aug/17/fiction.originalwriting>.

God

Pärt’s raison d’etre, the religious life, would seem to hold little appeal for 
Richter the atheist. When he paintedTitian’s Annunciation 
<https://www.gerhard-richter.com/en/art/paintings/photo-paintings/old-master-inspired-17/annunciation-after-titian-5996/?p=1>
, it was from a copy of a tourist postcard and he was less concerned with the 
Mother of God than the way that original import is lost when images are 
reproduced. However, in 2007, he shocked the art world – and some members of 
the church – by creating a stained glass window forCologne Cathedral 
<https://www.gerhard-richter.com/en/art/other/glass-64/cologne-cathedral-window-14890>
. What he came up with might be read as a comment on God, or religion, creating 
order from chaos, and, as the city’s Archbishop complained, it could reflect 
“any faith”. It’s a random arrangement of coloured squares which the artist has 
transformed into a pattern resembling computer pixels by repeating the 
configuration across the space. There are 11,500 hand-blown squares of 
antique-coloured glass in total.

Never explain

When quizzed on their work, Pärt and Richter espouse deceptively simple 
doctrines. Pärt’s formula for tintinnabuli harmony sounds like a mystical 
riddle: “one plus one is one, not two”. Richter’s approach to his often thorny 
subject matter is resolutely reductivist, aspiring to the point where “it is 
what it is”.

• Richter/Pärt is at The Whitworth <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/richter-part>, 
University of Manchester, 9-19 July. Box office: 0844 871 7654


• Arvo Pärt/Manchester Camerata is at The Bridgewater Hall 
<http://www.mif.co.uk/event/arvo-part>, Manchester, 12 July. Box office: 0844 
871 7654
 