
Malcolm Turnbull has told his party room the election raised “fundamental 
issues” about democracy, signalling he was looking closely at rules around 
robocalls and text messages following Labor’sMedicare advertising campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/police-to-investigate-alp-text-messages-warning-coalition-to-privatise-medicare>
.

The meeting heard a full presentation on the Liberal campaign after criticisms 
raised in the past week. But Coalition conservatives pulled their punches. Only 
one MP raised concerns oversuperannuation reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/18/superannuation-changes-coalition-urged-not-to-water-them-down>
 and just four other MPs spoke from the floor at all.


Turnbull told the partyroom the election campaign at large “raised certain 
fundamental issues about the way our democracy operates”.

Super reforms are good policy. The Coalition’s integrity is at stake if it 
rejects them | Ian Yates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/super-reforms-are-good-policy-the-coalitions-integrity-is-at-stake-if-it-rejects-them>
“For example, the issue of fundraising ... the use of newish forms of 
communication, such as robocalls and text messages without the requirement that 
other political advertising has of there being an authorisation [by a political 
party],” he said.

As a result the government could consider changes which would force political 
parties to include authorisations on texts and in robocalls – similar to the 
authorisations on television and print advertising.

Of the Medicare text sent to voters days before the election, Turnbull said 
“if it wasn’t a crime, it should be”.

In the first party room meeting since the election, the Liberal party federal 
director, Tony Nutt, and pollster Mark Textor addressed concerns that the party 
had not used enough hard-hitting negative advertising during the campaign,which 
delivered the slimmest of majorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/jul/02/live-australian-election-results-track-the-votes>
.

Nutt countered, suggesting the tradie ad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/21/fake-tradie-in-liberal-election-ad-the-real-deal-says-friend>
 had been successful as it provoked a “furious reaction” from Labor.


Nutt accepted responsibility for the campaign but attacked Labor’s strategy. 
Turnbull said the Coalition’s opponents were no longer Labor – the party of Bob 
Hawke – but a few “cashed-up militant” unions. Nutt announced there would be 
the standard full review of the Coalition’s campaign.

Explaining the party’s “jobs and growth” message, Textor said the jobs issue 
was of primary importance to voters, well beyond health and education, which in 
previous elections had been of similar importance.

When asked why the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> had lost so many 
seats in western Sydney, Textor said the redistribution of seats had caused a 
number of Liberals to lose the benefits of incumbency in sections of their 
electorate. He also named the expensive nature of Sydney television advertising 
as a cause.

Furthermore, he said due to lifestyle pressures such as mortgages and 
commuting, voters in western Sydney had a “greater level of cynicism” than 
other Australian voters.

Although conservative MPs such as Eric Abetz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/14/eric-abetz-warns-malcolm-turnbull-against-superannuation-changes>
 signalled before the meeting that there would be a full and frank discussion 
on issues including superannuation, it is understood Abetz was the only one to 
raise the issue.

Abetz told the meeting that the superannuation reforms, which wind back 
generous tax concessions, had upset the Liberal party’s supporter base. But 
Textor countered that at the very height of concerns in the election campaign, 
it only polled as a top issue for 6% of people.

Tony Abbott used the opportunity to call for the introduction of plebiscites 
into the New South Wales Liberal division to attract more members to the party. 
His comments came one day after the party’s deputy leader, Julie Bishop, 
suggested plebiscites could be a way to getmore Liberal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/17/julie-bishop-supports-rank-and-file-plebiscites-to-get-more-liberal-women-elected>
 women into parliament after the losses of the election.

Abbott told the party that the system in NSW had discouraged people from 
joining the Liberal party and Turnbull agreed members wanted to have a say.

In a meeting described by a Coalition spokesman as “happy”, Turnbull gave an 
“emotional” speech marking the 19 July anniversary of thebattle of Fromelles 
<https://www.awm.gov.au/blog/2008/07/18/the-worst-night-in-australian-military-history-fromelles/>
, in which 2,000 Australians died on the first night. He urged members to spend 
time “with the ones they love”.

But he assured MPs the 45th parliament would be the one in which the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> delivered on its 
promises.

“We won’t hit the ground reviewing, we will hit the ground doing,” Turnbull 
said.

Quotas for women: maybe the conservative side of politics is just more 
misogynist | Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/quotas-for-women-maybe-the-conservative-side-of-politics-is-just-more-misogynist>
Turnbull welcomed 15 new MPs to the party room, all of whom spoke briefly 
about their prior experience.


Bishop, who was re-endorsed as deputy leader, told the party room she would 
serve MPs. She committed to work on diversity, given the loss of women MPs but 
said diversity was not just a function of gender.


Cory Bernardi asked Bishop whether the government would endorse Kevin Rudd’s 
bid to beUnited Nations secretary general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/18/kevin-rudd-seeks-nomination-un-secretary-general>
. Bishop said a nomination was not an “endorsement” but the request from Rudd 
would be considered by cabinet.
 