
Last year the mayor of London, Boris Johnson, approved the idea of building 
two new Tube stations on London Underground's Northern line, atVauxhall and 
Nine Elms 
<http://london-underground.blogspot.com/2011/05/northern-line-extension-to-battersea.html>
, as part of the long-awaited £5.5bn redevelopment ofBattersea Power Station 
<http://www.batterseapowerstation.org.uk/> and the surrounding area. This is 
one of central London's last great wastelands. Long ripe for regeneration, 
developers have been wary of making a move in this surprisingly cut-off quarter 
of the capital despite the opportunity to build shops, offices, hotels, places 
of entertainment and up to 16,000 homes here – until the arrival, or solid 
promise, of a Tube line.

In his Autumn statement <http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/autumn-statement-2011> 
this week, Chancellor George Osborne said the government would support the 
scheme. Suddenly, it was easy to imagine two handsome new Underground stations, 
such asArnos Grove 
<http://arts.guardian.co.uk/greatbuildings/arnosgrove/0,,2183705,00.html> and 
Southgate 
<http://thedabbler.co.uk/2011/10/the-suburban-sublime-southgate-tube-station/> 
byCharles Holden <http://www.charlesholden.com> from the 1930s, or the pick of 
the fine stations along theJubilee line extension 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2000/jan/29/london.unitedkingdom> from 
Westminster to Stratford.

This week, however, the curiously named Battersea Power Station Shareholder 
Vehicle, the holding company for the forlorn former temple of power designed by
Giles Gilbert Scott <http://www.designmuseum.org/design/giles-gilbert-scott>, 
was told that itslenders intend to take the 15-hectare (38 acres) site into 
receivership 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2011/nov/30/battersea-power-station-redevelopment-collapses>
, as no progress has been made on development. This will scupper theambitious 
scheme <http://www.battersea-powerstation.com/> by Rafael Viñoly 
<http://www.rvapc.com/> to revamp the listed building. Will the chancellor and 
mayor remain keen on building a costly Tube line to Battersea Wasteland?

In Los Angeles, the site up for redevelopment around Union Station 
<http://www.american-rails.com/los-angeles-union-station.html>, an exquisite 
late-30s design by, among others,John Parkinson and Donald B Parkinson 
<http://travelphotobase.com/s/CAXPK.HTM> that oozes Hollywood (the waiting area 
was used as a police department inRidley Scott's Blade Runner 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0083658/>), is even bigger than Battersea. This 
week, theLA Transportation Authority <http://www.ladot.lacity.org/> revealed a 
shortlist of architects,one of whom will masterplan the redevelopment 
<http://www.archpaper.com/news/articles.asp?id=5537> of 17 hectares (42 acres) 
of downtown railway land. The shortlist includes Britain'sFoster and Partners 
<http://www.fosterandpartners.com/> teamed with the IBI Group 
<http://www.ibigroup.com/Pages/Home.aspx>, and Grimshaw Architects 
<http://www.grimshaw-architects.com/> with Gruen Associates 
<http://www.gruenassociates.com/>, as well as Renzo Piano Building Workshop 
<http://www.rpbw.com/> with Parsons Transportation Group 
<http://www.parsons.com/>. Architects who failed to make the list include Rem 
Koolhaas <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/rem-koolhaas>, Morphosis and 
Zaha Hadid <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/zaha-hadid>. The plan is for 
mixed-use development. Will it happen? Maybe not in the current economic 
climate, but it would be sad if the scheme were rushed. Union Station might 
seem remote, even from downtown LA, but its warm, welcoming and beautifully 
crafted architecture could yet set a tone for LA's equivalent of Battersea.
 One for the books ... Canada Water Library in London 
A more modest development at a railway station opened this week in London's 
Docklands. This is Southwark Council's £14mCanada Water Library 
<http://www.canadawater.org/library.html>. Designed by Piers Gough of CZWG 
<http://www.czwg.com/> in the guise of a half-buried upside-down pyramid clad 
in a gold anodised aluminium mesh, the library is connected directly to Canada 
Water station on London's Jubilee line.

The shape of the building is not wilful; the plot of land – part of a new 
public square – was small, so Gough came up with the idea of splaying the 
library upwards and outwards. Unveiling the new building, Veronica Ward 
(Southwark's cabinet member for culture, leisure and sport) said: "What we've 
managed to do is listen to people. Over 6,000 people said they would rather we 
did things like reduce hours or use volunteers than close libraries. That was 
enough people saying libraries were important."

If libraries remain essential for our mental health, Maggie's Cancer Care 
Centres <http://www.maggiescentres.org/> are proving to be a godsend to those 
seeking inspiration, support and companionship. Following the opening of the
Nottingham Maggie's Centre 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2011/nov/13/maggies-centre-nottingham-piers-gough>
, designed by Piers Gough and Paul Smith, the Swansea Maggie's Centre at 
Singelton Hospital is now complete. Set by woods and overlooking Swansea Bay, 
it opens officially on 9 December 2011. Designed by the lateKisho Kurokawa 
<http://www.kisho.co.jp/page.php/4%20%5B1934-2007%5D>, one of the founders of 
the Metabolist movement 
<http://outsiderjapan.pbworks.com/w/page/32006912/Architecture%20in%20Japan%3A%20The%20Metabolist%20Movement>
 in Japan, the building is based on Kurokawa's concept of a "cosmic whirlpool" 
representing "everlasting forces swirling around a still centre".
 Universal appeal ... Swansea Maggie’s Centre, designed by Kisho Kurokawa 
"The new Maggie's Centre will come out of the earth and swing around with two 
arms like a rotating galaxy," said Kurokowa. "One side will welcome the visitor 
and lead to the other side, which embraces nature – the trees, rocks and water. 
A place set apart, as Maggie[Jencks] <http://www.phillygower.info/maggie.htm> 
said of a garden. The connection to the cosmos and contacts between east and 
west – two motives that Maggie and I shared – are in the design. I hope she 
would have liked it."

Meanwhile, Quentin Blake <http://www.quentinblake.com/>, the children's 
illustrator best known for his drawings for Roald Dahl stories, won this year's
Prince Philip Designers prize <http://www.designcouncil.org.uk/ppdp>, the last 
to be judged by the Duke of Edinburgh himself. Other nominees included 
architects David Chipperfield, Chris Wilkinson and Jim Eyre, and the engineer 
Cecil Balmond, co-designer of theArcelorMittal Orbit 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2011/oct/28/arcelor-mittal-olmpic-tower-grower>
 in the grounds of the 2012 London Olympics. The structure is connected by a 
pedestrian bridge to Stratford station, where Jubilee line trains will take you 
to Canada Water, if not to Battersea.
 