
Watching the current barrage of sci-fi movie trailers, it’s hard not to let 
out a hideously outdated analogue sigh before breaking into a strobe-lit panic 
attack.

The new year offers both Jurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/nov/25/jurassic-world-trailer-dinosaur-dna-chris-pratt>
 andTerminator: Genital Synthesis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/dec/04/terminator-genisys-arnold-schwarzenegger>
 (or however you spell it), essentially making a trip to the cinema in 2015 an 
expensive resuscitation of your VHS collection. Soon you’ll be telling me the 
next big thing I should be getting excited about is a new generation of 
genetically modified Pogs.

However, there is one trip down cinematic memory lane that requires neither an 
expensive reboot nor a truly absurd storyline (sure, after three 
dino-disasters, let’s reopen that theme park anyway, only with worse dinosaurs 
we’ve invented without even the pretence of grounding them in scientific fact).

SBS is running a season 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/movies/article/2014/11/27/sbs-2-hayao-miyazaki-family-movie-season>
 of movies by Hayao Miyazaki, of Studio Ghibli fame, which is another way of 
saying it has opened the door to a dimension of pure naive wonder that will 
render all other aspects of your life drab and miserable in comparison. You 
should totally watch them.

Kicking off on Saturday night was My Neighbour Totoro 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/362507843957/my-neighbour-totoro>. As is 
often the case with Miyazaki, his protagonists are young but the themes 
decidedly adult: mortality, fear, loss, growing up, and the bond between humans 
and the natural world.


Satsuke and Mai move to a country home with their father while their sick 
mother is in hospital. Once in the countryside, the two girls befriend a series 
of mystical forest creatures at once cute and utterly terrifying. I can never 
decide if O Totoro is a giant fluffy bunny I want to snuggle into, or a hairy 
steroidal psychopath who will lure me in with the promise of snuggles, only to 
commence my disembowelment with his adorably powerful paws.

That confusing feeling – of something enormous being a fragile ally – is a 
hallmark of Miyazaki’s imagination. Enemies aren’t always dark and threatening 
and allies can often be unnerving on first meeting. When the kids need to get 
somewhere fast, for example, they climb into the friendly innards of a giant, 
nightmarish cat. I’d rather wear away the flesh from my feet, you freaky 
grinning bus from Hades.

What lends My Neighbour Totoro 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/362507843957/my-neighbour-totoro> a sense 
of giddy adventure, beyond these bestial characters, is Miyazaki’s animation. 
Shots are often framed to make you feel miniscule in a burgeoning landscape or 
drawn in such a way as to elicit a bizarre sense of nostalgia for a time and 
place you’ve never actually experienced (there must be a German word for that).

These adventures are for adults who want to recapture a childlike mindset as 
much as for children. To remember a time when things appeared huge and daunting 
and we were close enough to the natural world to see its threats – and its 
mystery. Give me that over a T rex expensively screaming into my face any day.

Today is the greatest

Another friendly face who has assumed a threatening demeanour over the past 
week is Karl Stefanovic, surely now Australia’s most viral political 
commentator. It was all rather baffling, with Stefanovic firstlaying into the 
prime minister, Tony Abbott 
<http://www.9jumpin.com.au/show/today/videos/3918100300001/>, and then the 
education minister,Christopher Pyne 
<http://www.9jumpin.com.au/show/today/videos/3920038211001/>, in an emboldened 
style that felt like Network Ten’sThe Living Room 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/the-living-room> tackling the global 
financial crisis.

It was certainly an interesting watch, though I’m not entirely sure why the 
internet decided to go into celebratory meltdown. Getting excited about a man 
on television telling another man to “man up” isn’t the mark of a society 
that’s quite made it yet.

How’s a woman supposed to get legislation through the Senate anyway? You might 
be better of sticking with Leigh Sales. I doubt she’d ever tell a female 
minister to, well, what? Womb-it through? Go lady the crap out of them?

 * My Neighbour Totoro is on SBS’s on demand service 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand> – Kiki’s Delivery Service is on 13 December.
 