 One of the most controversial public service honours goes to Assistant 
Commissioner Andy Hayman of the Metropolitan police, praised for his response 
to the July 7 terror attacks, who gets a CBE.
Mr Hayman, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terror operations, is embroiled in the 
controversy surrounding a raid on a house in east London in which a man was 
shot and injured, but later released without charge. The honour would have been 
decided upon before the Forest Gate raid.

Another controversial honour in Whitehall is the knighthood for David 
Rowlands, permanent secretary at the Department of Transport. He was embroiled 
in the furore over the renationalisation of the private company Railtrack, and 
gave crucial evidence to the courts that the company could not be saved. 
Shareholders recently lost a claim for compensation.

Less controversial public service honours go to Jim Barron, head of the 
independent offices at the Cabinet Office, who heads up the watchdogs that 
guarantee Whitehall probity, and to a number of local government leaders.

These include CBEs to Janet Wilson, leader of Sheffield city council, and 
Timothy Byles, chief executive of Norfolk county council - both seen as 
innovators in reorganising services and regeneration. Richard Leese, Labour 
leader of Manchester city council, receives a knighthood for services to local 
government.

In education, there is a knighthood for Mark Grundy, headteacher of Shireland 
language college, Smethwick, West Midlands. His is one of a group of Sandwell 
schools which have launched a pioneering Â£5.2m project to equip every pupil 
with their own home computer.

There is a damehood for Ruth Silver, principal of Lewisham College, south-east 
London, for services to further education. She has written and broadcast 
extensively on education and is committed to inclusiveness, particularly in the 
inner city.
 