
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has accused 
Labour officials of suspending members without letting them know why or giving 
them the chance to appeal, as tensions surrounding the party’s leadership 
election intensified over the weekend.

The Labour leader has written to the party’s general secretary, Iain McNicol, 
about a spate of suspensions warning: “The online and press speculation around 
the reasons for suspension and how these are being dealt with are raising 
concerns about whether members are being treated in a consistent and 
proportionate manner,” he said. “This in turn is damaging the reputation of the
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> Party.”

In the note, seen by the Guardian and which he signed off “JC”, Corbyn said he 
wanted Labour to bring forward the recommendations made by Shami Chakrabarti in 
arecent report into antisemitism and racism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/29/jeremy-corbyn-sets-up-inquiry-into-labour-antisemitism-claims>
 within the party. She called for the party to “uphold the strongest principles 
of natural justice” including giving people a timeline in which their case will 
be dealt with, offering the identity of any complainant and telling people why 
they are being suspended. Corbyn has called for a meeting of Labour’s 
equalities committee to discuss the issue in early September, before the end of 
the leadership battle.

It comes after the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, accused 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/john-mcdonnell-labour-hq-rigged-purge-jeremy-corbyn-supporters-a7209996.html>
 Labour HQ of a “rigged purge”following the decision to suspend Ronnie Draper, 
the general secretary of the Bakers Food and Allied Workers Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/25/labour-party-suspends-pro-corbyn-union-chief-ronnie-draper>
. He asked why no action had been taken against Lord David Sainsbury despite 
him donating more than £2m to the Liberal Democrats during theEU referendum 
campaign <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fcorbyn-accuses-labour-officials-of-suspending-party-members-without-explanation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34df356f98d02ace2acf7035319927eaa32221a2%2F2901_618_2198_1319%2F2198.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corbyn%20accuses%20Labour%20officials%20of%20suspending%20party%20members%20without%20explanation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fcorbyn-accuses-labour-officials-of-suspending-party-members-without-explanation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corbyn%20accuses%20Labour%20officials%20of%20suspending%20party%20members%20without%20explanation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fcorbyn-accuses-labour-officials-of-suspending-party-members-without-explanation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34df356f98d02ace2acf7035319927eaa32221a2%2F2901_618_2198_1319%2F2198.jpg>
 Ronnie Draper, General Secretary of the Bakers, Food and Allied Workers Union, 
addressing supporters of Jeremy Corbyn at a rally in London in June, before he 
was suspended from the party. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Now Alan Johnson, who chaired Labour’s campaign to stay in the European Union, 
has hit back at McDonnell.Writing in the Guardian, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/28/john-mcdonnell-attack-on-lord-sainsbury-labour-party-donations>
 Johnson said Lord Sainsbury, who is a former science minister, had provided 
money to Labour and the Lib Dems specifically to make the case ahead of the 
referendum in contributions that were “not a secret”.

“What is surprising is that John McDonnell has decided to attack Labour’s 
biggest ever donor for the ringfenced £2.1m he gave to theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> to aid the remain 
campaign – Sainsbury has given over £20m to Labour over two decades,” he wrote. 
“Not just because he is generous but also because as science minister he laid 
much of the groundwork for helping a vibrant R&D and manufacturing base 
continue in the UK.”

Johnson said Labour’s shadow chancellor should be “taking Sainsbury out to 
lunch to pick his brains, not turning to the media to pick fights”.

The row underlines the scale of tensions within Labour during the leadership 
battle, with many Corbyn supporters furious about the action that has been 
taken to suspend individuals. One member was apparently suspended after posting 
about her love for the rock band, the Foo Fighters.

Catherine Starr, a supporter of Corbyn, received a letter from McNicol telling 
her that following a vetting procedure she was being refused full membership as 
she had “shared inappropriate content on Facebook” on March 5.

That day she had shared a clip of Dave Grohl’s band and wrote “I f****** love 
the Foo Fighters” and shared a friend’s poster about animal-free cosmetics and 
a cartoon about veganism.

But it was Draper’s suspension that most infuriated senior figures and led 
directly to the row. The Guardian has seen a letter sent by lawyers on behalf 
of Draper to McNicol which calls for urgent discussions on the decision to bar 
him from party meetings, the annual conference and voting in the election.

Is Owen Smith trying to out-Jeremy Corbyn in Labour leadership race?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/27/owen-smiths-pitch-to-the-left-was-both-radical-and-conciliatory>
“The fact that the party has suspended a high profile trade union member is 
bound to have a ‘chilling effect’ on other members who may support one 
candidate or the other in the leadership contest and who may express critical 
political opinion or comments concerning one or both of the two leadership 
candidates. With this background in mind it is essential that the party acts in 
a proportionate, fair and lawful manner in dealing with our client,” writes his 
lawyer.

Draper is complaining that he does not know what he has been suspended for. 
The letter calls for Labour to reveal who made the complaint against him and 
the words used that have caused offence. It also refers to the Chakrabarti 
inquiry and claims that the suspension could be a breach of the 1998 Human 
Rights Act, including by stopping him attending party meetings and expressing a 
political choice.

The letter, also to McNicol, concludes: “In our view your decision to impose 
an interim suspension is not a proportionate response to an as yet unspecified 
complaint of comments on Twitter. We ask that you immediately lift the 
suspension and continue with an appropriate investigation that is fair, 
proportionate and is not an unlawful interference with fundamental rights.”
 