
There can’t be many issues that unite Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> and Andrew – now Lord – 
Lansley, but the impact of the private finance initiative on the NHS is one of 
them.

Corbyn has called for a fund to be established to bailout NHS trusts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/26/labour-has-duty-to-resolve-mess-of-hospital-pfi-deals-says-jeremy-corbyn>
 saddled with PFI schemes. In 2012 Lansley gave seven NHS trusts whose PFI 
deals were unaffordableaccess to a £1.5bn fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/feb/03/hospital-trusts-emergency-fund-pfi>
. All the deals had been negotiated under the Labour government.

Last year an inquiry by the public accounts committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/feb/03/hospital-trusts-emergency-fund-pfi>
 into the financial stability of NHS organisations laid bare the huge burden 
that PFI deals for building and operating NHS facilities is imposing. Almost a 
third of providers have a PFI scheme, costing the NHS a total of £1.8bn year. 
Trusts with the highest charges were most likely to have poor financial results 
– in 2013-14 four of the six trusts with deficits of more than £25m had a PFI 
scheme.

As a National Audit Office report 
<http://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/The-financial-sustainability-of-NHS-bodies.pdf>
 (pdf) on NHS finances at around the same time highlighted, one of the causes 
was overoptimistic forecasts in the business cases for the PFI schemes. They 
were being negotiated at a time of rapid NHS funding growth, when ambitious 
foundation trusts in particular identified numerous opportunities for expanding 
their income through increased activity. Excessive confidence in both the 
attractiveness of their services and their ability to grow the business was 
coupled with a poor appreciation that in a market economy there were going to 
be losers as well as winners.

Hubris played its part. Negotiating huge, expensive and complex capital and 
operational programmes and public-private partnerships was simply outside the 
ability of too many of the managers involved in drawing up the schemes. Some 
demonstrated poor commercial and financial judgement, while an adversity to 
risk perversely had the effect of locking in additional costs which exacerbated 
later problems.

These underlying weaknesses were cruelly exposed when the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> funding flatlined under the austerity 
programme and downward pressure was exerted on providers through squeezes on 
the tariffs paid for services.

 One trust which got carried away with PFI and paid a heavy price was 
Peterborough and Stamford NHS foundation trust. A coruscatingreport by the NAO 
in 2012 
<http://www.nao.org.uk/report/peterborough-and-stamford-hospitals-nhs-foundation-trust/>
 concluded that: “The trust board’s poor financial management and procurement 
of an unaffordable PFI scheme have left [it] in a critical financial position. 
The board developed and enthusiastically supported an unrealistic business case 
built on overoptimistic financial projections.”

 At completion the trust’s total liabilities were £411m. In 2011-12 it had to 
pay out £41.6m, pushing its deficit that year to a staggering £45.8m.

The Peterborough case highlights a second problem – the failure of the 
oversight system. Regulator Monitor believed there was a serious risk of the 
proposed scheme becoming unaffordable, but it lacked the power to stop the 
trust going ahead and failed to persuade the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> to block it. The treasury relied 
on the DH’s assessment, so the scheme was approved. According to the NAO, 
Monitor was then too slow to act when the trust started to slide into 
difficulties.

NHS trusts and the crippling burden of PFI | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/30/nhs-trusts-and-the-crippling-burden-of-pfi>
But it is not just the cost of PFI that is the problem; the inflexibility of 
the operating contracts makes it difficult for trusts to adapt their building 
use, just at the time when many are looking for new ways to run services. A 
decade ago Partnerships UK – the quango then responsible for furthering 
public-private partnerships – was already highlighting the problem of PFI deals 
giving hospitals and schools too little flexibility in adapting to changing 
ways of providing services and coping with technological developments.

In the search for solutions, Northumbria healthcare NHS foundation trust and 
Northumbria county council came up with the novel idea of the trust terminating 
its PFI contract by borrowing £114m from the council, which in turn got the 
money from the Public Works Loan Board. The deal is saving the trust more than 
£3m a year. Government and local authorities need to find more answers like 
this.

PFI’s critics, including Corbyn and trade unions such as Unison, have largely 
been proved right. Many of the deals would have been unsustainable even without 
austerity. They were too expensive, too inflexible and built on excessive 
optimism.

Join our network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> 
to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 