
Cornelia Parker: ‘I devoured the knowledge and use it all the time’

Who thought it would be a good idea to undermine art in the school curriculum? 
Who thought studying the history of our visual culture was a waste of time? Who 
thought that only private schools should have that privilege? Was it someone 
who said we don’t need experts? If it is good enough for Prince William and 
Kate, why is studying art history not good enough for the masses? What happened 
to Cool Britannia, aspiration, social mobility?

Last art history A-level axed after Michael Gove cull of 'soft' subjects
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/12/last-art-history-a-level-axed-after-michael-gove-cull-of-soft-subjects>
Hedgerows are being uprooted that will be virtually impossible to replace. Our 
cultural industries are our biggest export, our biggest manufacturing base. 
Every pound spent on art education brings disproportionately large returns. 
It’s the biggest bang for our buck. If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it. In fact, 
the more you put in, the greater the successes for the UK economy.


Hasn’t all the investment in the Olympics taught us a valuable lesson? It paid 
back big time in terms of our wellbeing, national pride and collective 
psychological health. At a time when teen stress levels are rocketing and one 
in four of them are self-harming, we shouldn’t be cutting back their options to 
have a visually enriched and creative future. It is mad that children at state 
schools are only going to be able to take threeA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>. Art and art history taken 
together make sense, but very able pupils are being dissuaded – or even 
prevented – from studying art and design, in order to “improve” a school’s data 
for inspection. This is an awful situation.


As a working-class girl, receiving free school dinners, I studied art history. 
Having never had the chance to visit art galleries, I devoured the knowledge 
and it has served me well as a practising artist. I can appreciate the visual 
riches our many museums are stuffed with. It has hugely enriched my life and 
career and hopefully those of countless students I passed the knowledge on to, 
during the 15 years I spent teaching at art school. I use references to art 
history all the time in my work, germs of knowledge that were planted in my 
impressionable mind at school.


Our museums are famous worldwide. They make the UK a prime cultural 
destination for tourists. Who thinks it is wise to scrap an A-level that 
encourages future homegrown experts in the field? Now more than ever, as we face
Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, we have to fully 
understand what our cultural capital is and how we can best use it. We should 
be widening our cultural knowledge not shrinking it.


Anish Kapoor: ‘It gives you a sense of citizenship’

The humanities are under assault. How can people possibly say this subject is 
less important than any other? How do they know? So much flows from a knowledge 
of art history, from such an education. It gives you a sense of citizenship, a 
sense of how we relate to the world. It can answer the great questions of 
history and consciousness. And we are letting it go. Whatever is seen as 
economically unproductive is simply dismissed.

All work is made in reference to what came before. When you think about 
19th-century art, you think of this closed, tight thing. ThenMonet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/monet> came along and everything 
suddenly exploded. His work is all about producing an amazing visual field of 
colour – it’s almost nothing to do with bloody gardens! By studying this, you 
can learn a lot about abstract expressionism. You can’t look at Monet without 
seeingPollock <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jackson-pollock>. 

You hear people talking a lot today about how great Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> is because it’s so intuitive, so 
easy to use. What they mean is it’s visual. All our language, so much of our 
culture, is visual.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fcornelia-parker-stuart-maconie-and-more-on-the-axing-of-a-level-art-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff481d11ad8c93131bda91cedff46c279476bb8c7%2F443_539_3068_3834%2F3068.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cornelia%20Parker%2C%20Stuart%20Maconie%20and%20more%20on%20the%20axing%20of%20A-level%20art%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fcornelia-parker-stuart-maconie-and-more-on-the-axing-of-a-level-art-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cornelia%20Parker%2C%20Stuart%20Maconie%20and%20more%20on%20the%20axing%20of%20A-level%20art%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fcornelia-parker-stuart-maconie-and-more-on-the-axing-of-a-level-art-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff481d11ad8c93131bda91cedff46c279476bb8c7%2F443_539_3068_3834%2F3068.jpg>
 Tremendous knowledge … Picasso’s Head of a Woman, from his African period. 
Photograph: B Christopher/Alamy 
Yinka Shonibare: ‘The young will have no grasp of their own culture’

This is a terrible, terrible, terrible, terrible idea. We are becoming a 
nation of philistines. How can we have a young generation with no grasp of 
their own culture? There will be no innovative young people coming through. You 
need to know what came before.

I wouldn’t be an artist if I hadn’t studied art history. I loved all of it, 
from medieval art to the Renaissance to modern times. It’s especially important 
to someone like me who has African roots. It connects me with my ancestors and 
has an enormous bearing on my self-esteem and on my politics.

Just take the example of Picasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pablo-picasso>. He had a tremendous 
knowledge of art history and was hugely influenced by Africansculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sculpture>. He then went on to shape 
the whole of western modern art. I get so annoyed when people say this a 
subject studied by posh people. Art is for everyone. Art history is for 
everyone. The humanities are for everyone.

Stuart Maconie: ‘It is the clearest mirror you can hold up’

I had a spat with Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> in a hotel bedroom in Leeds 
last week. He wasn’t there, I should point out. It was via social media, the 
platform via which I had angrily and, it seems, too hastily berated him for 
being responsible for the scrapping of art history A-level. He replied by 
saying that he had nothing to do with scrapping art history, indeed that he 
“hearted” art history (with an actual emoji, which was kind of apt). Well, 
whoever’s idea it is, it’s a lousy one. Art history A-level made me see the 
world differently, made me understand the world better and enjoy it more.


At the turn of the 80s, in my late teens in Wigan, I found myself briefly, 
academically becalmed before beginning my degree, and so chose to fill my time 
with two extra A-levels, chosen pretty much on a whim. One was British social 
and economic history, a subject I would now find fascinating but from which I 
carry with me little except for the pioneeringSpeenhamland benefits system 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speenhamland_system> of rural Berkshire and the 
six demands of the Chartists.


My other A-level though was art history, and almost every moment of it, every 
darkened afternoon with Keith Spruce, “Bri” Lewis and Dorothy Taylor chatting 
informally but authoritatively at the slide machine, looking atFra Filippo Lippi
 <http://www.frafilippolippi.org/> or Degas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/degas> or Kandinsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/kandinsky> or Mondrian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/piet-mondrian>, has stayed with me. 
Those long, absorbing hours taught me that the creation, appreciation and love 
of art is not just the mark of any civilised society, it is the clearest mirror 
you can hold up to that society, telling you more of its time than a thousand 
academic histories or earnest documentaries.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fcornelia-parker-stuart-maconie-and-more-on-the-axing-of-a-level-art-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe48e124df94bef01cf3c3ccbe0e8f08f5c316eef%2F3_16_2166_1300%2F2166.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cornelia%20Parker%2C%20Stuart%20Maconie%20and%20more%20on%20the%20axing%20of%20A-level%20art%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fcornelia-parker-stuart-maconie-and-more-on-the-axing-of-a-level-art-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cornelia%20Parker%2C%20Stuart%20Maconie%20and%20more%20on%20the%20axing%20of%20A-level%20art%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fcornelia-parker-stuart-maconie-and-more-on-the-axing-of-a-level-art-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe48e124df94bef01cf3c3ccbe0e8f08f5c316eef%2F3_16_2166_1300%2F2166.jpg>
 Satirising consumerism … a worker hanging Campbell’s Soup by Andy Warhol. 
Photograph: Dani Cardona/Reuters 
Sometimes that’s obvious even to the kind of churl who wants to scrap art 
history. Picasso’sGuernica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/18/dispatch-guernica-75-years-on> 
is a moment of blazing reportage, for instance, and the British war artists 
such as Nash and Nevinson evoked the dream-like horrors of the western front. 
But art also gives you the authentic flavour of its day. In the work of the 
Italian futurists, you can see all the dangerous, muscular allure of fascism 
and communism. Mondrian brings you the pulsating joys of jazz age Manhattan 
whileAndy Warhol <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> 
celebrates and satirises 50s and 60s consumerism in the same frame. It wasn’t 
prescriptive either. Keith Spruce clearly hadn’t much time forSalvador Dalí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/dali>. ( “Avida Dollars” was his 
favourite anagram for the old shyster.) But he told us all about the influence 
of Freudian psychoanalysis and dream theory in art and invited us to speculate 
on the artist as merchandise brand.


Sometimes the insights it gave me were more personal. Stanley Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2016/jun/23/stanley-spencers-art-what-is-rubbish-to-some-people-is-not-to-me-video>
’s work haunted me and shaped my views of a kind of mythic, phantasmagorical 
England where sex, nature and religion combined in works of beauty and 
strangeness such as Resurrection Cookham and Man Goeth to His Log Home.Der 
Blaue Reiter <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Der_Blaue_Reiter> and Die Brüke 
groups from Germany fed my cravings for existential darknesses where I could 
mull endlessly. (Karl Schmitt Rotluff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/jun/16/art.artsfeatures>’s Woman 
With a Bag is, essentially, The Scream for cool kids; look it up.) From
Modigliani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/10/modigliani-painting-reclining-nude-chinese-billionaire>
 I learned a lot about sex. Not the thing itself, but the nature of the thing. 
It’s not just that his nudes and portraits of women are sexy – they are 
achingly, breathtakingly so – but they tell you everything about the nature of 
longing, desire and heartbreak, as well as the myth of the doomed romantic 
genius.

More than anything, art history taught me to see the brilliance, bravery and 
sheer fun in the experimental in every medium, particularly music and film, the 
need to have art that will challenge the dreary orthodoxies of the day. Without 
the revolution in the head art history gave me, I doubt I would ever have 
loved, or “got”, free jazz, John Cage, Webern, drone, Morton Feldman, Peter 
Greenaway, Stan Brakhage or Peter Strickland.


This was not a world I was born to. But in their gentle way, my art history 
classes and teachers helped me storm a citadel I’ve lived in – and made my 
living from – ever since. As of this week, there’ll be fewer kids like me 
getting that joy, that chance, that right.

 