
A vividly told story of life in pre-revolutionary Paris on Tuesday won the 
2011 Costa book award in what turned out to be a bitterly fought two-way tussle 
between fact and fiction.

Andrew Miller was given one of the UK's most prestigious literary prizes – and 
a £30,000 cheque – at a ceremony in London forhis sixth novel, Pure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/24/pure-andrew-miller-review>.

The chairman of the judges, Geordie Greig, said "there really was a fierce 
debate" during the 90-minute judging discussion. "There was quite bitter 
dissent and argument to find the winner. The debate was prolonged with 
passionate views over two books." The books were Pure andNow All Roads Lead to 
France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/05/roads-lead-france-thomas-review>
, Matthew Hollis's gripping and moving biography of the war poet Edward Thomas.

Greig, editor of the London Evening Standard, said the prize, which chooses 
the best overall book from five categories – novel, biography, poetry, 
children's novel and first novel – was one which came "with a sense of 
impossibility about it. You're not just comparing apples and oranges, it feels 
like you're comparing bananas and chicken curry. It makes the task difficult 
and interesting." He said Pure emerged as the majority winner after 45 minutes 
of quite bitter "toing and froing, dinging and donging" – not unpleasant, he 
said, but "forthright".

He implied that he was on the side of Hollis, but said no one had argued that 
Pure was not "a book which had incredible merits". He called Pure "a rich and 
brilliant historical novel of death and superstition. It is a morality tale 
which engrosses with its vivid evocation of pre-revolutionary France."

Pure is set in 1785 and follows the story of a young engineer, Jean-Baptiste 
Baratte, – charged with demolishing Paris's oldest cemetery and removing the 
corpses.

After accepting the prize, 51-year-old Miller said he would probably spend the 
money on "living" – paying the mortgage. "It's not as if writers tend to be 
particularly wealthy people. I have a young daughter, I can feed her and dress 
her."

He was surprised and shocked at the result. His first word on winning was 
"blimey." He added: "By the time you give a book to your publisher you never 
really know what it is any more. It's a pile of paper and beyond that you're 
just glad to get you life back. I had no special sense of this one being the 
one."

Miller's first novel, Ingenious Pain, won the Impac Dublin prize and the James 
Tait Black award. In 2001,his novel Oxygen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/oct/03/bookerprize2001.thebookerprize> 
was shortlisted for the Booker and Whitbread (forerunner of the Costa) novel 
prize.

Many pundits had predicted success for the poet laureate Carol Ann Duffy. Her 
volume of poetryThe Bees  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/04/bees-carol-ann-duffy-review>
missed out, along with Moira Young's children's bookBlood Red Road  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/13/blood-red-road-young-review>and 
Christie Watson's first novelTiny Sunbirds Far Away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/06/tiny-sunbirds-far-away-review>.

Pure becomes the 10th novel to win the overall prize in 40 years of the 
various incarnations of the prize and ends the decent run of poets following 
wins forJo Shapcott last year  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/25/costa-book-award-jo-shapcott>and 
Christopher Reid in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/26/christopher-reid-costa-prize>.

Greig said the judges made their decision with criteria that included 
durability, memorability and quality. "We were looking for quality."

The prize was presented at Quaglino's restaurant in Piccadilly, London, where 
the Costa award organisers also announced a new short story prize for 2012, 
although it will not be judged alongside the other five category winners.

This year's judges were actor and comedian Hugh Dennis, broadcaster Mary 
Nightingale and authors William Fiennes, Flora Fraser, Patrick Gale, Jojo Moyes 
and Eleanor Updale.

Miller's win was welcomed by Jonathan Ruppin, web editor for Foyles bookshops 
and a judge for the 2010 Costa award. He said: "Like Hilary Mantel, who finally 
became a major name when she won the Man Booker, Miller should now gain the 
commercial success his stylish and absorbing novels have long deserved. Pure 
perfectly captures the mood of a downtrodden and angry nation, on the verge of 
overthrowing a self-serving and out-of-touch ruling class – it's very much a 
book for our time."

 