
Earlier this spring, film director Asghar Farhadi wrote an emotional open 
letter <http://sharghdaily.ir/Default.aspx?NPN_Id=374>on behalf of a woman who 
faced execution for fatally stabbing a man who had tried to rape her. 
Twenty-six-year-old Reyhaneh Jabbari has been behind bars for seven years after 
the man’s relatives demanded capital punishment under ghesas, a Sharia-based 
legal code based on reciprocal justice. Jabari’s case has stirred controversy 
at home and abroad, and has been the subject of a passionate debate in private 
discussions and the Persian-language blogosphere. Still, Farhadi had to craft 
his sentences carefully when addressing the issue in Iran’s public sphere, 
where an entirely different set of rules apply.

While Iran’s clerical establishment has been known to show a surprising level 
of leniency on a host of sensitive sociocultural topics, cornerstone Islamic 
legal principles such as ghesas present an immovable red line. One recent 
illustration is theMarch closing of the newspaper Aseman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2014/feb/21/a-leap-forward-for-iranian-journalism-nipped-in-the-bud>
, which lost its publishing license after its editors made a passing reference 
to a critical discussion about ghesas in a bank-page article. Two days earlier, 
the same newspaper had, without ramification, printed a front-page feature 
about the first domestic publication of The Colonel, a politically charged 
novel that criticizes the1979 revolution and had been banned in Iran for 
decades.

To avoid prodding the system in one of its most sensitive spots, Iranian 
intellectuals and human rights activists have only one tool at their disposal. 
Since they cannot criticize the practice of ghesas and capital punishment 
itself, they emphasize the option of mercy, or rahmat, which allows victims to 
forgive the perpetrator up to seconds before the scheduled execution. While the 
ultimate choice between punishment and forgiveness rest with the victim or the 
victim’s relatives, a combination of social pressures and the system’s own 
preference to relegate ghesas to remedial punishments, such as fines or 
imprisonment, are highly influential. This results in periodic phenomena like 
the case of Balal, a young man whose 16 Aprilexecution was halted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/16/iran-parents-halt-killer-execution>
 after the mother of the man Balal was convicted of killing relinquished her 
right to ghesas as Balal stood on the scaffold.

Unlike other categories of crimes in the Iranian penal code, which leave the 
administration of punishment in the hands of the Islamic jurisprudent, ghesas 
are crimes that involve murder and bodily injury, and thus emphasize the rights 
of the victim. In traditional Islamic societies, the families of a murder 
victim had the right to eye-for-an-eye retaliation that remains codified in the 
modern Iranian legal system. The difference is that the state - not the victims 
- are responsible for carrying out the actual punishment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F16%2Firan-capital-punishment-debate-execution-islamic-republic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F15%2F1400160412614%2F7f226e47-9b65-4134-b73f-3aeed93296eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20Iran's%20high%20profile%20executions%20change%20capital%20punishment%20laws%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F16%2Firan-capital-punishment-debate-execution-islamic-republic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20Iran%27s%20high%20profile%20executions%20change%20capital%20punishment%20laws%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F16%2Firan-capital-punishment-debate-execution-islamic-republic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F15%2F1400160412614%2F7f226e47-9b65-4134-b73f-3aeed93296eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Reyhaneh Jabbari defends herself during the first hearing of her trial in 
2008. Photograph: Golara Sajadian/AFP 
Under Iranian law, everything from sodomy to blasphemy against the Prophet 
Mohammad is subject to capital punishment, but only in the case of ghesas does 
the weight of the decision lie outside the realm of the state. Watchdog groups 
have warned of a general surge in the number of executions since the start of 
Hassan Rouhani’s presidency. However, Iranian legal scholars have alsonoted 
<http://www.restorativejustice.org/articlesdb/articles/7852> that on the whole, 
judges prefer to relegate a majority of capital and corporal punishments to 
monetary penalties, or deyet. But since the judiciary cannot directly influence 
the punishment for a ghesas case, the option of mercy and forgiveness, 
enshrined as it is in Sharia law, presents a unique opportunity for all groups 
striving to reform the system from within.

On one hand, mercy represents a lone bridge between rights advocates and 
Iran’s conservative ruling class, which has on multiple occasions demonstrated 
a willingness to reform human rights laws in the country if they are based on 
homegrown Islamic principles. International criticism of Iran’s human rights 
standards, such as the European parliament’s recentresolution 
<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=MOTION&reference=B7-2014-0279&language=EN>
, is generally poorly received by conservative political groups inside the 
country, who associate the outside pressure with colonialism and ulterior 
foreign policy motives. Still, the human rights topic presents an issue of
legitimacy 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1525/can.2006.21.4.570/abstract> for the 
clerical ruling class, whose members struggle to reconcile the traditional 
reading of Sharia with modern legal norms emphasizing reconciliation over 
retribution.

“In the context of complex political wrangling within Iran’s multifaceted 
state, hard-line state agents move toward universal human rights by actually 
reclaiming an enlightened heritage and nativizing human rights as the measure 
of Islam’s capacity for mercy,” writes University of Washington scholar Arzoo 
Oshanloo.

On the other hand, mercy and “the spectacle of the scaffold” provide the 
system with a dangerous tool that demonstrates authoritarian power to domestic 
audiences while projecting a more humanitarian image of the country to 
international critics. “The Islamic Republic ofIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> simultaneously mobilizes multiple 
modes of power in an effort to show how it is authentic and global, modern and 
Islamic, and perhaps most important, merciful and just,” Osanloo writes. “The 
spectacular performance of Islamic penal justice is an exertion of state power 
that lends greater credence to the authority of a modern state.”

The authoritarian nature of the state makes Brown University’s Mehrangiz Kar, 
a prominent human rights lawyer, skeptical about Iran’s ability to reform 
capital punishment laws according to its own rules. She points to the absence 
of an independent judiciary, as well as a highly politicized system in which 
judges and lawmakers are more concerned with preserving their own interests 
than reforming outdated laws and administering fair rulings. In addition, the 
Iranian legal system allows gender and creed-based discrimination, which is in 
direct contrast to basic human rights principles, Kar said. “One cannot be too 
hopeful about the reform of laws based on religious beliefs that assigns 
differential values to human life,” she told Tehran Bureau.

However, Kar notes that even Iran does not exist in a bubble. Since the strict 
interpretations of Shari’a were only imposed in recent decades, capital 
punishment is more controversial in Iran than elsewhere in the Middle East, as 
Iranian society “had no memory of these kinds of harsh punishments until the 
Islamic Revolution,” she said. This lack of experience means more social 
discussion and changing beliefs affected by international norms. However, 
impact on the system itself is low due to the dearth of spaces for free public 
discussion. “If we had freedom of speech, there might be hope of ghesas 
reform,” Kar said. “For now, all we have as an outlet is cyberspace, as anyone 
who criticizes the system from the outside gets accused of supporting Western 
imperialism.”

Still, the mercy concept allows a small handful of prominent figures to 
address public sentiments without falling outside the framework of 
regime-approved discourse. These includeAdel Ferdosipour 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2011/07/irans-monday-night-football.html>
, the outspoken sports commentator whose pleas for forgiveness proved 
influential in Balal’s case, as well as directorFarhadi 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2012/02/cinema-a-separation-wins-oscar-in-first-for-iranian-film.html>
, who supported Jabbari with a broad appeal for tolerance and solidarity.

“In our society, forgiving even in small doses has been forgotten,” he wrote, 
addressing the family of Jabbari’s alleged assailant on the front pages of the 
reformist daily Shargh. “Perhaps it is more meaningful for your loss to forgive 
[Jabbari] for the sake of humanity.”

The Tehran Bureau is an independent media organisation, hosted by the 
Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau <https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>. This 
article was originally published without a byline
 