
There are many things worth getting upset about in the world today: civil war 
in Syria; melting ice-caps; falling standards of living.Ben Affleck being cast 
as Batman in the new Superman movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/27/ben-affleck-signed-to-several-batman-films>
, on the other hand, not so much.

Twitter went into apoplexies last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/23/ben-affleck-batman-superman-twitter>
 when it emerged that theArgo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148728/argo> film-maker is set to pull 
on the famous cowl and cape in Zack Snyder's forthcoming sequel to this year's
Man of Steel <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148371/man-of-steel>. 
Petitions were swiftly posted on Change.org 
<http://www.change.org/petitions/warner-brothers-remove-ben-affleck-as-batman-bruce-wayne-in-the-superman-batman-movie>
 demanding studio Warner Bros change its mind or face imminent apocalypse. 
Bloggers dredged up the awfulGigli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96687/gigli> era, in which Affleck made 
terrible films with Jennifer Lopez and was pictured hanging out on swanky 
yachts in even moreterrible promotional videos for his then girlfriend's pop 
singles <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dly6p4Fu5TE>. Others recalled Daredevil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/94662/daredevil>, a shoddy pre-Marvel 
Studios comic-book movie in which Affleck offered acres of smarm but very 
little charm as a red gimp-suited blind crime-fighter who seemed to bear little 
resemblance to the much-loved silver age superhero. If the actor thought his 
superb run of movies behind the camera,Gone Baby Gone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/120869/gone.baby.gone>, The Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137789/town> and the Oscar-winning Argo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148728/argo>, had released him from 
Hollywood purgatory for good, he swiftly discovered his error.

 Since then, there has been a bounce-back of sorts. Fanboy heroes such as Joss 
Whedon, Joseph Gordon-Levitt and the actor's old comrade Kevin Smith have all 
come out in defence of Batfleck this week. Smith even revealed thatAffleck once 
had a Batcave-style entrance to a panic room at his home 
<http://metro.co.uk/2013/08/27/ben-affleck-has-a-batcave-in-his-room-3938923/>, 
a revelation perhaps less likely to induce sympathy for the star than its 
author intended. The artist otherwise known asSilent Bob 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EtBATmGZCZs>'s point, of course, was that his 
pal is a genuine, dyed-in-the-wool comic-book aficionado who will treat the 
role with the seriousness that fanboys demand.

Whether you're a fan of Affleck's casting or not, it really ought not to have 
come as a shock. The Oscar-winning film-maker was first tipped to take charge 
of Warner Bros's proposed Justice League movie, which remains on course to 
follow Superman vs Batman into cinemas,over a year ago by the Hollywood trades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/aug/10/ben-affleck-justice-league-film>
. This week they've hinted that the studio's plan to involve Affleck in its DC 
comics-based superhero universe goes way beyond merely casting him as Batman. 
If the film-maker could bring the slick, visceral verve of a movie such as The 
Town to a future Batman solo outing in which he both starred and took on 
directing duties, might he be the worthy successor to Christopher Nolan that 
everyone is hoping for?
 Not a good fit ... Ben Affleck as Daredevil. Photograph: Reuters 
 I suspect the problem with Affleck is that there is something about him that 
rather reminds people of Shannon Hamilton, the jockish manager of the 
Fashionable Male clothes store he played in Smith'sMallrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/145021/mallrats>. Yet in reality he's 
rather more like Bruce Wayne himself: a suave, rich and good-looking individual 
with an arrogant air about him, but one who nevertheless engages in 
philanthropy and appears to maintain an intelligent, caring worldview. Wayne, 
not Batman, provides the real meat of the role, at least according toMatt Damon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mattdamon>, who commented on his friend's 
casting this week. "Batman just sits there with his cowl over his head and 
whispers in a kinda gruff voice at people,"Damon told the Times of India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/29/matt-damon-interstellar-batman>. 
"Bruce Wayne is the more challenging part of the role, and Ben will be great at 
that."

Beneath Affleck's slightly macho demeanour there also resides an increasingly 
confident actor whose performances have only got better since he began to take 
charge of the cameras. DC fans with short memories should also be reminded of 
the public outrage that greeted the appointment ofHeath Ledger as the Joker 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u8PxG5zvgOM> in The Dark Knight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/122806/dark.knight>, Anne Hathaway as 
Catwoman <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GYDDBV-Cego> in its sequel, The Dark 
Knight Rises <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141046/dark-knight-rises> 
– and even Michael Keaton as Batman in Tim Burton's dim and distant origin 
movie from 1989. Had Twitter or Change.org been around back then, the latter 
would have been better off never leaving the Batcave.

I've one more reason why Batfleck just might be good news: if there was a 
major fault to Snyder's Man of Steel, it was the over-the-top ending – one 
clearly designed to compete with The Avengers's equally smashtastic denouement 
– which wiped almost everything that came before it from the memory like a 
great searing fireball of frantic, chaotic calamity. Somebody with some 
film-making nous should have told the director to tone it down a little.

Affleck is unlikely to have signed up for a Batman role where he is merely a 
combatant in a $200m non-playable shoot-em-up video game: he will want to use 
the opportunity to prove his acting chops, just as Robert Downey Jr has in the 
Iron Man movies. And if he is to continue as Gotham's saviour in future movies, 
Superman vs Batmanneeds to offer up a caped crusader that suits Affleck's more 
subtle film-making skills. The whole thing points to a Man of Steel sequel that 
may just be a more cerebral affair than previously anticipated. Have alook at 
this bravura fan-made fake trailer for the movie 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U4U4he3GgC4> (featuring Breaking Bad's Bryan 
Cranston as Lex Luthor), and tell me your tastebuds aren't even slightly 
tingling?

More on Ben Affleck as Batman

• Ben Affleck cast as Batman in Man of Steel 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/27/ben-affleck-signed-to-several-batman-films>
• The response from Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/23/ben-affleck-batman-superman-twitter>
• More Week in geek columns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/week-in-geek>
 