
Let battle commence: swishing crinolines against sleek cocktail gowns, 
herbaceous borders against snowy Alpine peaks, gun battles against venomous 
gossip over the tea tables. The struggle betweenBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and ITV for the dozy loyalty of Sunday 
night viewers looks set to break out again this weekend. .

As is traditional, the channels have programmed their most extravagant drama 
offerings directly against each other, with ITV1’s new offering from the 
Downton Abbey creator, Julian Fellowes, Doctor Thorne, doing battle in the 9pm 
slot against BBC1’s well-received adaptation of John le Carré’s spy thrillerThe 
Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/22/the-night-manager-review-bbc-le-carre>
.

Both have a powerful secret weapon – an actor of immense range, subtlety and 
charisma. Unfortunately it’s the same actor.Tom Hollander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tom-hollander>, already starring as 
the sinisterly witty sidekick in The Night Manager, will be seen for the first 
time on Sunday as the eponymous Dr Thorne.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fcountry-doctor-vies-spies-sunday-night-tv-ratings-battle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5e39b226fa10f2a964d8ab940b469d14b5ca7e5%2F0_234_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Country%20doctor%20vies%20with%20spies%20in%20Sunday%20night%20TV%20ratings%20battle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fcountry-doctor-vies-spies-sunday-night-tv-ratings-battle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Country%20doctor%20vies%20with%20spies%20in%20Sunday%20night%20TV%20ratings%20battle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fcountry-doctor-vies-spies-sunday-night-tv-ratings-battle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5e39b226fa10f2a964d8ab940b469d14b5ca7e5%2F0_234_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Tom Hollander also stars in The Night Manager alongside Tom Hiddleston. 
Photograph: BBC/The Ink Factory/Des Willie 
ITV will hope Fellowes’ adaptation of Anthony Trollope’s novel – with its plot 
of romance across the class gulf, and the precariously wealthy needing to shore 
up their fortunes through judicious marriages –fills the gap left by the final 
slamming of the green baize door onDownton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>.

Like many admirers of Trollope’s work, Hollander admitted he had not read the 
book, and did not even when he got the part, which he believes will reveal him 
in a new light. “I’ve not played this straight, heroic, leading man type 
before,” he said in an recent interview. “I’ve played a lead but often in a 
comic, undercut way, or something quirky like with In the Loop or Rev; so this 
victorious, virtuous hero is a departure for me.”

The first episodes of The Night Manager have drawn an audience of more than 6 
million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/22/bbc-the-night-manager-john-le-carre-hugh-laurie-olivia-colman>
 viewers.

 The mesmerising central performance by Tom Hiddleston as Jonathan Pine has 
won rave reviews, with fans demanding the actor be cast as the next James Bond 
when Daniel Craig hangs up his Speedos. (Apart from those demanding that his 
co-star Olivia Colman –star of that other drama hit for ITV, Broadchurch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/02/olivia-colman-baftas-broadchurch-the-accused-twenty-twelve>
 – become the next Bond). A flurry of tweets described his role as an 007 
audition.

That might be trickier to contrive for Hollander, given that his character is 
a buttoned-up country doctor.


Night Manager director Susanne Bier: 'I'm always wary of fantastic-looking 
actors'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/19/night-manager-bbc-susanne-bier-im-always-wary-of-fantastic-looking-actors-tom-hiddleston>
But while Trollope’s cosy Barsetshire setting might struggle to compete with 
the Night Manager’s cosmopolitan glamour of lakeside castles and mountain-top 
luxury hotels, it will certainly give a starring role to one of the most 
spectacular and best preserved Victorian mansions in the country. Tyntesfield 
near Bristol,now owned by the National Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/jun/19/arts.arts>, may be preparing itself 
for a flock of visitors, following theinflux of tourists at Highclere Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/19/downton-abbey-highclere-castle-tourist-cash-funds-repairs>
, the real-life Downton Abbey.


The apparently remote and bleak coastal cottage in which Pine hid from the 
world while agonising over what to do next – alone save the inevitable 
glamorous woman who made her way down the steep track and into his bed – is in 
reality a four-bedroom, 15th-centuryholiday rental  
<http://www.hartlandabbey.com/blackpool-mill/>on the privately owned Hartland 
Abbey estate in Devon, which is reporting heavy bookings. It was previously 
seen in the 2007 BBC adaptation of Sense and Sensibility, which starred 
Downton’s Dan Stevens.



 