
Ball One: The County Championship structure proves itself again

With five games to play, Yorkshire sit a fragile five points ahead of 
Nottinghamshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nottinghamshire> after 
bossing a match against Durham that eventually petered out. That was a credit 
to Paul Collingwood’s men, for whom the five points awarded for the draw were 
welcomed for altogether different reasons, as they seek to avoid the drop. 
Before the County Championship adopted its two divisions structure in 2000, a 
county in seventh place following on in a match against a county going for the 
pennant might have had their minds on the next one-dayer – not any more.

Ball Two: Chris Rogers plays a cautious hand at Uxbridge

Middlesex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> and Somerset were 
nestled just outside the top two at the start of the week and stayed there, a 
draw helping neither cause. The match was played at Uxbridge, an outground that 
offers spectators a close-up experience, but one that can offer boundaries once 
the in-field is beaten. Perhaps that prospect played a little too much on Chris 
Rogers’ mind, as he delayed the declaration until he could ask Somerset to make 
390 in 72 overs. He might have felt he was in with a sniff when Toby 
Roland-Jones snared a couple of wickets and Somerset were 61-3, but a positive 
James Hildreth and a solid Nick Compton did enough to prompt early handshakes 
and shared spoils. Was Rogers too cautious? He could have set Marcus 
Trescothick’s men 300 in 85 overs – the kind of target worth chasing even when 
61-3. If Championships are to be won, brave decisions need to be taken.

Ball Three: Time and runs running out on Northamptonshire

Sussex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sussexccc> arrested their slide 
towards the relegation slots with an overwhelming victory over surely doomed 
Northants, who are now 78 points adrift from safety having not won all season. 
After Luke Wright’s 158 had powered the home team to 405, Aussie veteran Steve 
Magoffin got to work, taking five wickets for just 12 runs to induce the 
follow-on, then picking up three more in the second innings to complete the 
win. Northants had 10 batsmen with batting averages above 18 but none with an 
average above 36. If no batsman can make a ton, then you don’t get the runs and 
it’s hard to win matches.

Ball Four: Zafar Ansari might one day be an answer for England

Surrey won again to charge into the second promotion slot (for one day, before 
Hampshire’s bonus points reclaimed it) after a batting line-up that had 
sleepwalked through the first half of the season delivered again. Zafar Ansari 
anchored the innings, batting almost seven hours as the Londoners posted 589-8 
declared, spoiling Glamorgan’s annual away-day at Colwyn Bay. Ansari has had a 
disjointed start to hisSurrey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/surrey> 
career, batting up and down the order and bowling his slow left-arm as a useful 
change option. But in his first season without the distraction of Cambridge 
studies he has played all 12 County Championship matches, amassing 718 runs at 
65 at the old-fashioned opener’s strike rate of 36, also chipping in with 20 
wickets at 32. Ansari has a long way to go before attracting the attention of 
the England selectors but the 22-year-old has time on his side.

Ball Five: Sam Northeast’s knock points to a happier future

Performance of the week in Division Two came from another young player who 
seems to have been around for a very long time. Sam Northeast made his debut 
for Kent as a 17-year-old in 2007, but has never quite kicked on as they hoped 
at Canterbury. The instability at the club in recent years can hardly have 
helped him. His first century this season – an unbeaten 112 – got Kent up to 
306-4, enough to defeat aLeicestershire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestershire> side whose second innings of 
388 had made them favourites for the win. Northeast will hope that will give 
him a run in four day cricket, Kent having six matches to mount a late, 
unlikely run for promotion.

Ball Six: Flintoff puts on a show, but he’s not just a showman

I met Freddie “Andrew” Flintoff in the departure lounge at McCarron Airport a 
few years ago (I recognised his voice when he went off for a crafty fag 
outside). He was still a little merry after a big night in Vegas and was en 
route to Canada for another stunt for one of his TV vehicles. He couldn’t have 
been nicer, was great with my kids and charmed my mother like few have over the 
years – a big, bluff Northern lad. He could play a bit though, and he still can 
as his three wickets in Lancashire’sNatWest T20 Blast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/natwest-t20-blast> win over Leicestershire 
showed. Far from the embarrassing gimmick some feared, he is putting bums on 
seats and delivering for his team. If Lancashire, already in the 
quarter-finals, make Finals Day, the big man will do something, won’t he?

Gary Naylor <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999> will be speaking at Words and 
Wickets <http://www.wordsandwickets.com/> at Wormsley on 25 July

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>
• This article first appeared on The 99.4 Cricket Blog 
<http://nestaquin.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Gary Naylor <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999> on Twitter
 