
When Andy Roddick won the US Open in 2003, hitting the ball with such brutal 
ferocity that it left altogether more talented players shaking their heads and 
ruefully wringing their wrists, he was quickly anointed the successor to Pete 
Sampras and Andre Agassi. He himself never promised he would become a 
multi-slam champion, but he had good reason to suppose he might not have to 
wait long to collect a second major.

Eight slams and nearly 2Â½ years later, he is still waiting. Nowadays the 
swagger that once imbued his every step looks more like bravado. Many still 
question his decision to dump Brad Gilbert as coach, and the flowering of Roger 
Federer has further diminished the American's status. This week the talk has 
not been about his chances of winning, rather his clandestine relationship with
Maria Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova>, whose own 
game, since her Wimbledon success in 2004, has been the subject of ever closer 
scrutiny and criticism.

Though neither will be drawn on the subject, Sharapova and Roddick have 
increasingly appeared in public together; since this tournament began the 
Russian has already spent three nights watching Roddick play poker at a local 
casino and he recently showed up for the launch of Sharapova's perfume.

Both won in straight sets yesterday on a glorious summer's day in Victoria, 
the first of the week, with Roddick beating South Africa's Wesley Moodie 7-5, 
6-3, 6-2 and Sharapova also reaching the last 32 with a 6-1, 7-5 victory over 
Ashley Harkleroad of the US. Neither was entirely convincing, although at this 
stage of a slam survival is the paramount need.

When Sharapova left Florida for Australia she was barely able to serve, but 
just before she stepped on to the plane a Canadian doctor, the fifth she had 
consulted, finally diagnosed she had a dislocated rib rather than a damaged 
shoulder. This was fixed and in the Rod Laver Arena she rushed through her 
opening set in 25 minutes, with Harkleroad unable to respond.

However, Sharapova's lack of match play caught up with her in a second set 
which lasted a minute short of an hour. Harkleroad, who in her earlier days was 
likened to Anna Kournikova and who suffered the consequent pressure, had three 
set points at 5-4, although it was then that Sharapova demonstrated her 
renowned mental toughness and produced two serves of the highest quality. The 
fourth seed therefore remained on track to play the defending champion Serena 
Williams in the fourth round, the two having met in last year's semi-final here 
which was the women's match of the tournament, Williams winning 2-6, 7-5, 8-6 
after Sharapova had passed up three match points.

For a player who has been in the top 10 for the past four years and who 
finished 2003 as the world No1, Roddick's status should be assured but, instead 
of considering him for majors, most wonder how long it will be, given the way 
he plays, before a shoulder or arm injury brings his career to a halt. The 
received wisdom remains that it is impossible to hit the ball so hard without 
paying for it later.

His current coach, Dean Goldfine, has worked hard to refine his game, urging 
him to become more patient and not attack every ball as if it was malignant. 
His double-fisted backhand has never been a stroke of beauty, and he remains 
uncomfortable at the net, but last year there were signs he was developing a 
slightly more studious approach - until the shocking defeat in the first round 
of last year's US Open by Luxembourg's Gilles Muller.

Muller successfully returned Roddick's serve and mercilessly attacked his 
backhand, the template Federer had set in the last two Wimbledon finals. Yet 
for a set and half on Centre Court in 2004 Roddick had hit the ball harder than 
anybody had ever seen on grass and Federer had all but succumbed. Last year, 
however, Roddick was nothing like as consistently powerful or effective. So had 
the clamour to make him a more all-round, reserved player essentially been a 
waste of time? It began to look that way. He has 20 career wins but the last of 
his three Masters series titles, the most prestigious outside the slams, came 
nearly two years ago in Miami. This year he has vowed to be more aggressive, 
and he needed to be yesterday against the big-hitting Moodie.

"I knew Wesley was just going to come out and take it to me, so I wasn't 
expecting a lot of rhythm out there," he said. "I put a high percentage of 
returns in the court and put pressure on him almost every service game. And if 
I can do that it will make my serve look that much better."

The Rebound Ace courts are tough on everybody and the trainers were frequently 
called to deal with blisters and sore ankles. Roddick picked up a slight ankle 
strain which needed treatment after his match. "I'm sure with a little bit of 
tender loving care it will be OK," said the No2 seed, whose main danger in the 
second week may be Croatia's Ivan Ljubicic, seeded seven, whom he should meet 
in the quarter-finals.

Ljubicic, who beat the unseeded German Philipp Kohlschreiber 7-5, 6-2, 6-1, 
needed treatment himself for a blister on his little toe at the end of the 
first set and again after the second; such problems are common on a surface 
which tends to make the soles of shoes stick. Ljubicic, who steered Croatia to 
victory in last year's Davis Cup final, reached eight finals and won two titles 
in 2005, when he also broke into the top 10, although as yet the 26-year-old, 
who lives in Monte Carlo, has never gone beyond the third round of any slam in 
31 attempts.
 