
The high court yesterday approved Abbey National's Â£9bn takeover by Banco 
Santander <https://www.theguardian.com/business/santander> Central Hispano 
after hearing complaints from four private investors about the deal.

Following a two-and-a-half-hour hearing, Mr Justice Evans-Lombe rejected the 
complaints about the way Abbey's chairman, Lord Burns, handled last month's 
"rowdy" extraordinary general meeting.

The egm was held for shareholders to vote on the takeover. A motion proposed 
by a private investor, Richard Pout, to adjourn the meeting was voted down by 
Lord Burns using proxies cast before it began.

In court yesterday, Mr Pout pressed his case that the egm should have been 
adjourned to give investors more time to learn about criminal charges facing 
some Santander executives in Spain.

The judge said he had considered five issues raised by the investors, Mr Pout, 
Michael Johnson, Roy Jasper and Douglas White: the way the motion was dealt 
with by Lord Burns, the extent to which shareholders knew about yesterday's 
court hearing, the lack of disclosure about proceedings facing some Santander 
executives, the way proxy votes were used at the egm, and allegations of 
insider dealing against Abbey chief executive Luqman Arnold.

The judge said Lord Burns had used the proxies correctly and that the criminal 
proceedings in Spain, which are more easily brought than in the UK, had not 
concerned the Financial Services Authority.

In his ruling, he said it was "unfortunate" that the insider dealing 
allegation was made in open court and that it was not relevant to yesterday's 
hearing, which was held to sanction the scheme under which the takeover is 
being arranged.

"The matters not disclosed [by the chairman] cannot be viewed as sufficiently 
serious as to change a shareholder's view," the judge said.

On Thursday, the court will consider the cancellation of Abbey's shares before 
the deal completes on Friday.
 