
The movie-star grin Cristiano Ronaldo had worn throughout became a grimace 
after 80 minutes when thePortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> captain smacked a penalty he 
had just won against Austria’s right-hand post and to safety.

Portugal 0-0 Austria: Euro 2016 – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/18/portugal-v-austria-euro-2016-live>
A later headed finish chalked off for offside emphasised this was not his 
night and this second successive draw leaves Portugal with only two points and 
needing to beat Hungary in their final group match on Wednesday.

Fernando Santos refused any questions about Ronaldo, citing the old line about 
only talking team, not individuals. But the coach said: “The players cannot be 
anxious. Of course, we’re going through a tough time right now, but we can’t 
wallow in out misery. We have a final on 22 June. This is our first of these 
Euros. We’re going to accentuate the positive, we can’t concentrate on what we 
missed, this is all football, the next match is a final for us.”
Ronaldo 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Cristiano%20Ronaldo&team=Portugal&isSimple=true>
Earning a record-breaking 128th cap, Ronaldo’s mission was simple: lead 
Portugal to a first victory in this second Group F outing to hand them control 
of their route into the last 16.Hungary’s late equaliser against Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/iceland-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
 made them leaders of the section with four points, a tally Portugal could 
match by defeating Marcel Koller’s men before facing them.

Santos made two changes from the 1-1 draw with Iceland, the nation Ronaldo 
generously described as having a “small mentality” for their perceived negative 
approach. Out went Danilo and João Mário and in came William Carvalho and, most 
interestingly, Ricardo Quaresma. Asked in the buildup if Ronaldo, Nani and the 
32-year-old could play together, Santos said it was possible, and by the first 
half’s close the decision was vindicated.

For Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> Aleksandar Dragovic 
was ruled out after he was sent off in the loss to Hungary. In came Sebastian 
Prödl in the defender’s place, the striker Marc Janko was dropped for Marcel 
Sabitzer, and Zlatko Junuzovic’s ankle injury meant a midfield berth for Stefan 
Ilsanker.

William Carvalho was an early influence for his team. A pass he sprayed on a 
left-right diagonal initiated a move that ended with Nani spooning a clear 
header high.

Quaresma was also in the match as early as Santos would have asked. The winger 
was chided when refusing to find Ronaldo when he raced down the right. But the 
one-time Chelsea loanee would be a factor all the way to the break. So, too, 
his side, as the contest’s dominant force.

What Austria did not need was their goalkeeper, Robert Almer, to concede a 
corner by whacking the ball straight into Martin Hinteregger. Ricardo Carvalho 
rose highest to its delivery but the header went wide.

Ronaldo had scored at each of his previous three European Championships for a 
tally of six. He was about to miss a golden chance to register at a fourth 
finals. William Carvalho hit Raphaël Guerreiro down the left and he engineered 
a one-two with Nani before finding Ronaldo. It seemed about to be 1-0 to 
Portugal and Euros strike No7 for the No7 but the side-boot finish missed to 
Almer’s right.

Portugal were a red torrent Austria could not stop. Nani was again the man who 
should have punished them but the former Manchester United forward crashed a 
header against the right post.

Hungary exult and Iceland only draw after Birkir Saevarsson own goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/iceland-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
As the half neared its end Ronaldo saw the ball bounce as he lurked in 
Austria’s area. The angle caused him to hop then volley, but there was no power 
in the effort, and Almer collected.

Despite their dominance, Portugal were actually lucky not to head into the 
break trailing. David Alaba smashed a free-kick past Rui Patrício towards the 
right corner and only Vieirinha’s intervention prevented a goal.

Austria started the second half in the same vein. Ilsanker punched a hole in 
midfield, roved through it, and banged in a shot that required a Patrício save 
to his left.

Ronaldo was not in the match enough so he might have dropped deep to drive at 
Austria. Perhaps, though, this element of a stellar talent is waning as time 
marches on, a player whose on-field clock shows thousands of miles.

Then came a reminder of the frightening powers Ronaldo possesses. Given a 
quarter-sight of the ball he propelled his left foot through it to Almer’s left 
and the keeper made a fine save. From the subsequent corner Ronaldo now rose 
high like a champion pole vaultersans pole and headed towards Almer, who 
thwarted him again.

Ronaldo has never scored via a free-kick at these finals and he was once more 
errant with the two he tried. The second was within 30 yards but, like the 
earlier one, that came from longer range, the ball sailed into the humid Paris 
air and did not worry Almer.

Koller’s side have only a point but a chance of qualifying, too, if they can 
beat Iceland. “We have a final on Wednesday,” he said. So, too, as Santos 
offered, do Ronaldo and his team.
 