
Americans watching television on the evening of 17 March 1970, and Australians 
viewers tuning in on 16 February 1986, are unlikely to have paid much attention 
to the closing credits of two peak-time shows. In retrospect, though, they were 
seeing the start of two great movie-making careers.


The US network ABC had a 23-year-old called Steven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> directing an episode of 
Marcus Welby MD; on Australia’s ABC, Jane Campion, an unknown young New 
Zealander, was in charge of a show called Dancing Daze. And unlike many 
directors who viewed the small screen merely as an audition for the the big 
one, both continued to keep a foot in the living room.

 Spielberg has worked on the NBC series Amazing Stories 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazing_Stories_(TV_series)> (1985-87), new CBS 
legal series Bull and HBO’s 2001 epic Band of Brothers – he was integral to 
ending the view among movie-makers that television was something directors only 
did if they were too young, old or bad to get employed in Hollywood. Campion 
made the return journey with Top of the Lake (2013), her darkly brilliant New 
Zealand detective series, the impending second run of which is among the most 
anticipated entertainments of this year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fwoody-allen-tv-sitcom-crisis-in-six-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e6e2472be00fbbc19be39403e33af4d0dd067c7%2F0_47_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crisis%20in%20Six%20Scenes%3A%20why%20Woody%20Allen's%20TV%20sitcom%20is%20a%20failure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fwoody-allen-tv-sitcom-crisis-in-six-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crisis%20in%20Six%20Scenes%3A%20why%20Woody%20Allen%27s%20TV%20sitcom%20is%20a%20failure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fwoody-allen-tv-sitcom-crisis-in-six-scenes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e6e2472be00fbbc19be39403e33af4d0dd067c7%2F0_47_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
 Elisabeth Moss in Jane Campion’s TV thriller Top Of The Lake. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
Meanwhile, A-list directors David Fincher and Baz Luhrmann made House of Cards 
and The Get Down respectively forNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix>, with Fincher now working for the 
network on an FBI-related drama called Mindhunter and Luhrmann confirming, 
after much speculation, a second season of his series set around the New York 
music scene in the 1970s.

The Get Down: an almighty let down?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/17/the-get-down-an-almighty-let-down-baz-luhrmann-netflix>
Now the cinematic diaspora in television has welcomed what is perhaps both its 
biggest catch and largest disappointment:Woody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen>. The director has flirted with 
the medium before, using it as a sort of court of appeal in 1994 to remake for 
ABC Don’t Drink The Water, a 1969 film that had apparently dissatisfied him. 
However, his Amazon series, Crisis in Six Scenes (available for the last four 
days to Prime subscribers) consists of six episodes written, directed by and 
starring Allen and so represents one of the biggest commitments to the medium 
by Tinseltown aristocracy.

 Or at least theoretically it does. Because, although Allen’s body of work has 
come to TV, his heart does not seem to have followed. Stretching a single 
narrative across six half-hour episodes, Allen’s show has the form of a 
sequential sitcom, although, unfortunately, the content of an inconsequential 
one.

 Allen and his long-time collaborator Elaine May play Sidney and Kay 
Munsinger, elderly, wealthy New Yorkers in the 1960s. The couple’s occupations 
– he an author, she a therapist – are such stereotypes of Allen 
characterisation as to suggest that he hasn’t made Amazonian stretches of the 
imagination for his new employers, although his cinematic habit of casting 
starry new talent has transferred to this line of work. He’s hired Miley Cyrus 
as a Patti Hearst-like terrorist, a member of the Constitutional Liberation 
Army, to whom the Munsingers reluctantly give sanctuary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fwoody-allen-tv-sitcom-crisis-in-six-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff37cb3869f1b20eb588b549ac030a03bcde79cb5%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crisis%20in%20Six%20Scenes%3A%20why%20Woody%20Allen's%20TV%20sitcom%20is%20a%20failure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fwoody-allen-tv-sitcom-crisis-in-six-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crisis%20in%20Six%20Scenes%3A%20why%20Woody%20Allen%27s%20TV%20sitcom%20is%20a%20failure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fwoody-allen-tv-sitcom-crisis-in-six-scenes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff37cb3869f1b20eb588b549ac030a03bcde79cb5%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Woody Allen as Sidney, and Elaine May as Kay. Photograph: Jessica 
Miglio/Amazon Prime Video 
 The basic situation of respectable Americans stumbling to the other side of 
the legal line promisingly recalls Manhattan Murder Mystery and Bullets Over 
Broadway, both high spots in Allen’s erratic backlist of films. In this case, 
though, the plot is killed by the execution.

 The director has admitted that he hasn’t watched much modern television and 
this omission is signalled in his default employment of lengthy conversations 
in interior settings: a bedroom, a kitchen, a barber’s chair. When two 
policemen call at the door in the second episode, the camera stays as tight on 
the actors as possible, recalling the grammar of old studio-based sitcoms where 
the director knew that there was nothing beyond the door frame except crew and 
cables.

Crisis in Six Scenes: Woody Allen's TV show is proof he's finally lost the plot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/28/crisis-in-six-scenes-woody-allen-miley-cyrus>
 It’s possible that Allen’s conceit was to make a show that resembled a lost 
sitcom from the 60s, but, if so, it feels like one that should have remained 
mislaid, as the project adopts neither of the attitudes towards TV of the 
period – nostalgia or satire – that might be creatively interesting. The 
writing is also often dismayingly lazy, especially in exposition: Kay, for 
instance, suddenly tells Sidney a detail of her childhood that he would surely 
have long known.

Crucially, the most successful sabbaticals of filmmakers in TV occur when the 
transplanted talent has a love of the medium and an enthusiasm for forms of 
storytelling that are impossible in film.Top of the Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-of-the-lake> and The Get Down, 
for example, tangibly delight in the options of pacing and characterisation 
that the massive canvas brings. Allen, in contrast, seems to have written a 
two-hour movie and cut it up into half a dozen chunks.

 When making Top of the Lake, Campion may have sometimes felt that she was 
bringing prestige to TV, but there is also a clear sense that the form is 
stretching her in ways that will raise her status as well. Crisis in Six Scenes 
looks like Allen accepting a compliment from television without bothering to 
return it.
 