
"While The Stranger's Child tells a very particular story – of the life and 
legacy of a war-slain Georgian poet – it simultaneously maps the thousands of 
changes to befall England, Englishness and English subjects across the past 
hundred years."Richard Canning in the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/the-strangers- 
child-by-alan-hollinghurst-2298468.html> reached into his bag of superlatives 
in reviewing Alan Hollinghurst's new book: "I would compare the novel to
Middlemarch, for its precision, pathos . . . and perfect phrasing, were Eliot 
not so underappreciated as a comic writer today. But let us set comparisons 
aside.The Stranger's Child is a remarkable, unmissable achievement, written 
with the calm authority of an author who could turn his literary gifts to just 
about anything." "It is woven with stupendous deftness," wroteNeel Mukherjee in 
the Times: "in a daring act of appropriation he has interpolated within a 
history of textual ellipses, lacunae and silences a secret history of 
homosexuality". ForKeith Miller  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/8579150/The- 
Strangers-Child-by-Alan-Hollinghurst-review.html>in the Daily Telegraph, "There 
is a huge cleverness to the book at a structural and, as it were, managerial 
level . . . Hollinghurst, as ever, is quietly brilliant about architecture 
. . . Form and content converge in the way the fate of objects and buildings is 
made to echo that of the book's human characters . . . there's also a lot that 
is purely and simply very funny."Kate Green in Country Life 
<http://www.countrylife.co.uk/culture/article/528907/Book-Review-The-Stranger-s-Child.html>
 was rather relieved: "Literary criticism . . . is a running theme, as is Mr 
Hollingshurst's regular hobby horse, gay politics. However, the latter is not 
as overwhelming – or, thankfully, nearly as graphic – as in the 2004 
Booker-winningLine of Beauty; as a result, this work has more charm."

"I had been tipped off about Chavs, and was keen to have a read, having had 
the book pitched to me as an attempt to help rehabilitate a modern class 
politics," notedJon Cruddas MP in the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/ 
books/reviews/book-of-the-week-chavs-the-demonization-of-the-working-class-by-owen- 
jones-2292230.html> about Owen Jones's book: "It does stand as a bold attempt 
to . . . reintroduce class as a political variable . . . The book is very easy 
to read; it moves in and out of postwar British history with great agility, 
weaving together complex questions of class, culture and identity".John Lloyd 
in the Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/b70d210c-92d0-11e0-bd88-00144feab49a.html#axzz1Q0R3H4KZ>
had reservations: "One of the strengths of Jones's uneven book is his 
willingness to let people describe their work themselves . . . the working 
class, in the guise of "chavs", remain a target . . . though Jones bangs the 
nail in too hard, it's worth banging." TheEvening Standard's Andrew Neather  
<http:/ 
/www.thisislondon.co.uk/lifestyle/book/article-23958506-chavs-are-an-easy-class-war- 
target.do>hailed a book that "bristles with statistics but is eloquent and 
impassioned – even relentless . . . the fact that such a straight-forwardly 
left-wing analysis as Jones's seems so arresting is a measure of how far 
British politics have slipped to the Right over the past 15 years."

"This is classic Miller territory: we're back in the filth-choked, 
scientifically-charged 18th century (a period he spent comfortably exploring in 
his first two superb novels), where the inescapable earthiness of life assails 
on all sides and in all quarters."The Independent's James Urquhart 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/pure- 
by-andrew-miller-2292231.html> thought Pure, Andrew Miller's novel about the 
clearing of a Parisian burial ground, "elegant". ForFreya Johnston in the Daily 
Telegraph <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/ 
8579229/Pure-by-Andrew-Miller-review.html>, Miller is "alive to the dramatic 
possibilities offered by late-18th-century Paris . . . Like all big clean-ups, 
the destruction of Les Innocents involved violence. Miller intimately and 
pacily imagines how it might have felt to witness it." TheExpress's Vanessa 
Berridge <http:// 
www.express.co.uk/posts/view/253174/Book-review-Pure-by-Andrew-Miller-Sceptre-17>
 was more direct: "He has written a book which is very atmospheric, if not to 
say positively creepy at times . . . If you enjoyed Patrick Süskind'sPerfume 
you'll love this."
 