
It is, it seems, becoming de rigeur to throw mud at the fledgling sharing 
economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/27/airbnb-uber-taxes-regulation>
. But not only are the dirt slingers missing the target, they've missed the 
point altogether. It's time to get a grip.

Lawbreakers, liars, thieves; facilitators of orgies, anti-social behaviour and 
exploiters of human rights…

Anyone would think the sharing economy was promoting sex trafficking. In 
recent weeks, this socio-economic ecosystem built around the sharing of human 
and physical resources (yes that's the actual definition 
<http://www.thepeoplewhoshare.com/blog/what-is-the-sharing-economy/> for those 
who are confused) has come under unwarranted attack.

So let's set a few facts straight: the founders of Airbnb, Uber and the other 
7,400 sharing economy initiatives 
<http://www.compareandshare.com/sharing-economy-directory/> around the world 
aren't building businesses based on law-breaking and tax evasion, they're 
responding to a changing landscape wherepeople no longer need to rely on big 
business for products and services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/behavioural-insights/sharing-economy-sustainable-alternative-economics>
. Now, citizens can do it for themselves. Like it or not, people are choosing 
to trade with other people. Traditional businesses can either fly the flag for 
the status quo and go down with it, or, they can be smart about it and enable 
this new way of thinking, living and doing sustainable business. Those who do 
will survive and thrive.

The very notion that Airbnb are encouraging people to break the law and evade 
tax is nonsense. To the contrary, the company has offered towork with 
authorities to find ways of collecting and remitting taxes 
<http://washpost.bloomberg.com/Story?docId=1376-N5KZTW6JTSER01-0LO6AGTLM9D4MOT2KRSLL229A9>
. Let's remember, Rome really wasn't built in a day and neither will the 
sharing economy be.

But the mud slinging doesn't stop there. Critics claim, that renting out a 
spare room isn't "sharing", it's just lining the pockets of newfound 
billionaires. Again, to clarify – we're talking about shared use of a resource; 
whether money is involved in the equation or not is irrelevant in the context 
of whether something qualifies as resource-sharing.

The sharing economy is a hybrid economy where there are a whole range of 
currencies. Sometimes goods are exchanged for other goods, sometimes 
alternative currencies are used, sometimes people pay (yes, with real cash) 
sometimes people choose just to freely share what they have.

Sharing means different things to different people. That's why it's called 
sharing – that's the beauty of it. In fact there's a whole spectrum of 
different kinds of sharing.

So, just for the record, here's a (non-exhaustive) list of different types of 
sharing: lending, borrowing, swapping, bartering, exchanging, buying pre-loved 
goods (sharing the lifecycle of the product), recycling, re-using, repairing, 
freecycling, upcycling, crowdfunding, crowdsourcing, collaborative consumption, 
collective purchasing, shared ownership, shared value, co-operatives, 
co-creation, redistribution, renting, peer-to-peer, pay-as-you-use, 
micro-financing, micro-entrepreneurship, social media, open source, open data, 
user-generated content …

That there's a danger that the sharing economy could be hijacked by those 
hell-bent on protecting self-interest, greed and maintaining inequality, I 
wouldn't dispute. But lets allow it to learn to walk before we try to run it 
over.

Although Airbnb and Uber have been the targets of most of the sharing economy 
tirades, they're not representative of this new sector. The problem is that the 
critics don't understand what the sharing economy actually is or indeed, what 
it stands for. Perhaps if they took the time to find out they'd realise that it 
might be worth slinging the mud at real villains.

The value-driven sharing economy at its core, stands for access for all, (think
Fareshare <http://www.fareshare.org.uk> who divert perfectly edible food from 
landfill to those living in food poverty) community, (think Macmillan Cancer 
Support whose projectTeamUp <http://goteamup.org.uk/> built by Compare and 
Share in collaboration with Macmillan Cancer Support connects local 
micro-volunteers to run errands for people in the community who are living with 
cancer) and sustainability (thinkLiftshare <http://www.liftshare.com> whose 
ridesharing service saves an estimated 110,000 tonnes of CO2 a year orM&S's 
Shwopping campaign <http://www.marksandspencer.com/s/plan-a-shwopping> that 
diverts tonnes of clothing from landfill). All considered – surely there are 
greater evils to hurl abuse at than that?

Any systemic change is going to hurt. In the short term there will be some 
casualties, but in the long term there'll be societal gain on a massive scale. 
A win-win system takes time and work to build.

Sex sells and although mud wrestling the advocates may seem sexier than 
nurturing the sharing economy, where will that take us? Absolutely nowhere. 
There's nothing sexy about that.

Benita Matofska is the founder and chief sharer of The People Who Share 
<http://www.thepeoplewhoshare.com> and Compare and Share. 
<http://www.compareandshare.com> She is speaking at this year's Guardian 
Activate Summit, 17 July 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox, sign up free forMedia Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> content 
is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. 
Find out morehere <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 