
Search the internet in Croatia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/croatia> for 
abortion clinics and the top result on Google appears, at first glance, to be a 
website offering information to women about the procedure.

But klinikazapobacaje.com is in reality part of a nationwide campaign aimed at 
discouraging women from terminating their pregnancies.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who abort, the website 
claims, risk depression, sexual dysfunction, cancer, drug addiction and 
suicidal thoughts.

One of the phone numbers it lists is for Meri Bilic, a woman who works at the 
Bethlehem Centre for Unborn Life, one of five facilities across Croatia 
offering refuge to pregnant women driven by family or financial circumstances 
to consider a termination. In exchange for keeping the foetus, the centres 
offer free board and lodging for a year.

Bilic and the Bethlehem centres are part of a growing movement to end abortion 
in predominantly Catholic Croatia, where the right to a termination has been 
enshrined in law for decades but increasingly difficult for women to access.

The newest member of the European Union, Croatia has one of the lowest rates 
of abortion inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. The 
numbers have fallen dramatically since the country broke away from Yugoslavia 
in the 1990s, during a war that reawakened a sense of national identity rooted 
for many Croatians in their Catholic faith.

A recent investigation suggests the official figures do not tell the whole 
story.

Fearing stigma and blocked by a large number of doctors who refuse to perform 
abortions in public hospitals on the grounds of their faith, many Croatian 
women are forced to have unregistered terminations in private clinics.

Pregnant women who seek help as a result of family or financial problems are 
often directed by the state to Catholic-run shelters, which in Bethlehem’s case 
can mix warnings of damnation with promises of salvation.

With the rise to power in 2016 of a conservative government, the legal right 
to choose abortion is now under direct threat, echoing developments in Poland 
in October where only mass protests halted parliament from instituting a 
near-total ban on the procedure.

It has parallels, too, with moves in the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia 
to restrict abortion, and in Kosovo, where social stigma is fuelling illegal 
terminations.

“The position of women in society is … under threat [and] becoming the space 
where an ideological battle is being fought for the profile of Croatian 
society,” said Croatian sociologist Valerija Barada.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcroatia-anti-abortion-lobby-new-ways-get-message-across%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9defdef49178cbd9c7820f9d510c582eff79101%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Croatia's%20anti-abortion%20lobby%20finds%20new%20ways%20to%20spread%20its%20message&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcroatia-anti-abortion-lobby-new-ways-get-message-across%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Croatia%27s%20anti-abortion%20lobby%20finds%20new%20ways%20to%20spread%20its%20message&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcroatia-anti-abortion-lobby-new-ways-get-message-across%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9defdef49178cbd9c7820f9d510c582eff79101%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 The Bethlehem Centre for Unborn Life, one of its five homes for pregnant women 
across Croatia. Photograph: Masenjka Bacic 
In 1980, according to the World Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation, there were 701 
abortions per 1,000 live births in Croatia, then part of a socialist Yugoslav 
federation where abortion rates were generally high.

The figure began falling rapidly with the outbreak of war in 1991 when Croatia 
declared independence, and by 2014 had dropped to 76 per 1,000 live births, the 
lowest rate in the Balkan region, compared with 156 in Albania, 168 in 
Montenegro, 195 in Slovenia, 201 in Macedonia, 259 in Serbia, 401 in Romania 
and 416 in Bulgaria.

A general fall in eastern Europe is partly explained by the more widespread 
use of effective contraception. But in Croatia there are other reasons too, 
rooted in a rise in “traditional values”.

Today, abortions in Croatia are allowed at public hospitals and one private 
clinic in the capital, Zagreb. But of 375 doctors certified to carry out the 
procedure, just over half refuse to do so on the basis of a 2003 law that 
introduced the right to conscientious objection, according to a 2014 report by 
the ombudsperson for gender equality.

Critics say the right to object is poorly regulated, leaving some areas of the 
country with barely any doctors prepared to carry out abortions.

The story of Sani, who asked for her surname not be used, is not unusual. When 
she became pregnant in 2011 aged 18, the public hospital in Split told her none 
of its doctors performed abortions. So Sani called her gynaecologist. “She told 
me she’s bringing babies on to the earth, not killing them,” Sani said.

Finally, Sani told her boyfriend’s parents, who arranged an abortion with a 
doctor in a private clinic. On Sani’s medical record, the termination is 
recorded as a miscarriage. She paid €340, more than twice the official average 
in public hospitals.

Such “hidden abortions” almost certainly account for the fact that while the 
number of legal abortions has fallen rapidly, the proportion of terminations 
registered as occurring for medical reasons more than doubled, from 21% to 48%, 
between 1998 and 2014, according to state statistics.

This shift tallies with a broader shift in public discourse, in which women 
who terminate a pregnancy are vilified.

In May, up to 10,000 people took part in a rally in Zagreb called March for 
Life, proclaiming the sanctity of the family. At the head of the march was the 
conservative movement’s most prominent leader, Željka Markić. Next to her was 
Sanja Orešković, the wife of the then prime minister, Tihomir Orešković.

“Every reasonable person will choose life over death, and everything else is 
just nonsense and fear,” Orešković told reporters.

It was the first march of its kind in Croatia, and a sign of the times.

In October, the Catholic anti-abortion activist group 40 Days for Life 
published on Facebook a call to prayer outside a hospital in the eastern town 
of Vukovar where, it had learned, a woman was due to have an abortion the next 
day.

The hospital ordered an internal investigation and the state attorney’s office 
ordered its own inquiry amid uproar among rights groups over the leaking of 
confidential medical details.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcroatia-anti-abortion-lobby-new-ways-get-message-across%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f3c6db899b5559e80fdf49f2ee80ae529e15d9a%2F0_246_4138_2483%2F4138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Croatia's%20anti-abortion%20lobby%20finds%20new%20ways%20to%20spread%20its%20message&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcroatia-anti-abortion-lobby-new-ways-get-message-across%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Croatia%27s%20anti-abortion%20lobby%20finds%20new%20ways%20to%20spread%20its%20message&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcroatia-anti-abortion-lobby-new-ways-get-message-across%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f3c6db899b5559e80fdf49f2ee80ae529e15d9a%2F0_246_4138_2483%2F4138.jpg>
 Thousands hold umbrellas in Warsaw during a nationwide strike to protest 
against a near total ban on abortion. Photograph: Czarek Sokolowski/AP 
Fighting ‘violence and lies’

Catholic clergyman Pater Marko Glogović opened the first Bethlehem house in 
2010 in the town of Karlovac. The organisation now offers accommodation for 19 
women and their children for up to a year.

Glogović said Karlovac centre alone had given shelter to 70 pregnant women who 
had agreed to go through with their pregnancy. It has received more than 
€300,000 from unspecified donors over the past three years, according to 
financial reports filed at the ministry of finance.

The separation of religious principles from the state … is extremely 
important, but it’s not happening in this case
Silvija Stanić 
“In general we are always full, but since mothers sometimes stay only a short 
time, we can always take in new ones,” Glogović said.

He added that he had nothing to do with the abortion clinic website, but 
supported its intentions. “I did not encourage or create, nor am I the editor 
of this site, but I certainly give them my blessing as they are a symbol of the 
David versus Goliath fight against lies and violence towards women and 
children,” he said.

Silvija Stanić, who runs an organisation called Step by Step, which offers 
counselling and psychological support to young pregnant women, said she did not 
have any direct experience with Bethlehem but had reservations about its 
message.

“What I have heard about Bethlehem is that it’s a house for women to give 
birth in. If the alternative to sleeping under a bridge is an institution where 
she has a roof over her head, of course it is a rescue. But I wonder, at what 
price?

“The separation of religious principles from the state … is extremely 
important, but it’s not happening in this case. This is experimentation with a 
person’s life,” Stanić said.

Nevertheless, Bethlehem says it regularly receives referrals from the 
authorities. “Doctors and nurses will let us know if a girl needs help,” said 
Blaženka Bakula, the head of the Bethlehem house in Zagreb. The house she runs, 
she added, had “wonderful cooperation” with the Centre for Social Welfare, the 
main state welfare body.

The ministry of social policy and youth declined to comment.

The authorities have so far rejected criminal complaints about the abortion 
clinic website. In response to a complaint by the ombudsperson for gender 
equality, Višnja Ljubičić, the interior ministry said in early 2016 that it had 
found no criminal wrongdoing.

Masenjka Bacic is a freelance print and broadcast journalist from Split. This 
article was produced as part of the Balkan Fellowship for Journalistic 
Excellence, supported by the ERSTE Foundation and Open Society Foundations, in 
cooperation with the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network.




 