
Equity crowdfunding in the UK has exploded. According to Nesta, equity-based 
crowdfunding grew by more than 600% between 2012–13, from just under £4m to 
over £28m 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/the_rise_of_future_finance.pdf>.

A new generation of investors is willing to get behind Britain's great startups
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate> and support the brightest 
and best entrepreneurs in the hope that they will be the nextFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> or Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>. For those early-stage 
businesses harbouring hopes of a future market listing, crowdfunding offers the 
opportunity to raise finance, grow sustainably and gain valuable experience of 
working with shareholders which will enable a smoother, more successful, 
transition to IPO in the long-term.

So what are the key factors that your company must consider in order to use 
equity crowdfunding successfully to navigate the journey to a potential market 
listing?

Donation versus equity crowdfunding?
The phenomena surrounding crowdfunding has blurred the lines between donation 
platforms and equity crowdfunding. For many early-stage ventures, reward and 
donation platforms should be a starting point to test the market and gain 
initial support for an idea. Donations sites can be a great way of introducing 
an idea to the market and, executed well, could even unleash latent demand for 
a product or service.

Funds raised on reward or donation platforms are typically used to develop the 
product further or determine market entry. In contrast, equity crowdfunding 
should be used when your business is ready to start looking for investors that 
can back the company and help it grow in the long term.

Focus on attracting the right kind of investors
Once you have decided to use equity-crowdfunding the next step is to attract 
the support of a few quality investors. What you need are sympathetic investors 
that understand startups, which often require larger funding requirements but 
have longer time scales to market and the potential to generate high returns.

However, to attract investors you need to create a robust, well-written 
business plan that includes detailed financials and assumptions. This 
information can then be used to create a sensible valuation and share structure 
that takes into account how much money your company will need to raise to meet 
objectives and how many shares you are willing to sell. We often work with 
companies that are wary of adopting shareholders. However, by drafting a strong 
business plan, your company will be more successful in attracting the support 
of investors who can provide sound advice on achieving future growth and add 
real value to your business.

Think about the future
By raising money on an equity platform, your business is essentially exposing 
itself to the market and increasing awareness for your brand in the public 
domain, laying the foundations for a successful market listing. As a result, 
you need to be serious about growing the business and recognise your 
responsibility to deliver a return to stakeholders.

It's also important to remember that your company will probably need another 
round of follow-on funding or growth capital at a later stage. As a result, 
good corporate governance is key. Once you have raised finance, keep investors 
updated on your performance by regularly communicating how the company is 
performing and any revisions to your company's financials or assumptions.

Ultimately, equity is serious finance. Executed properly through a 
professional crowdfunding platform it should take your business through a 
process that helps you learn how to create a compelling pitch so that you can 
benefit from the experience of sophisticated investors.

It should also help you lay the groundwork to create good corporate governance 
structures that help your company transition from focusing on growing revenues 
to forming the basis of durable business models capable of supporting a 
transition to IPO in the future.

Jean Miller is the CEO of InvestingZone <https://www.investingzone.com/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 