
Alan Pardew hopes Crystal Palace will use the money raised through Yannick 
Bolasie’s £25m sale to Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/15/yannick-bolasie-signs-everton-crystal-palace>
 to reunite him with Moussa Sissoko, who is keen to leave Newcastle United 
before the end of the transfer window.

Bolasie, who came off the bench in Palace’s opening-day defeat by West 
Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/crystal-palace-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
, signed a five-year contract at Goodison Park on Monday having passed a 
medical over the weekend. The deal for the 27-year-old could potentially rise 
as high as £30m with Bristol City, who had inserted a sell-on clause into the 
winger’s £350,000 switch to Selhurst Park four years ago, due a sizeable 
tranche of the fee.

While Palace are well stocked in wide areas with Andros Townsend, Wilfried 
Zaha and Bakary Sako already at the club, Pardew had made clear to his 
chairman, Steve Parish, that he expects to be able to sign a like-for-like 
replacement for both Bolasie and Mile Jedinak, who will join Aston Villa this 
week. Palace were already seeking to sign two strikers, withLiverpool’s 
Christian Benteke a priority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/liverpool-christian-benteke-close-crystal-palace-move>
, and expect to be very active before the transfer window closes on 31 August.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fcrystal-palace-target-moussa-sissoko-newcastle-yannick-bolasie-sale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e6e0c60ae140ddb1a50319ba92d8648ced1b67b%2F0_68_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crystal%20Palace%20to%20target%20Moussa%20Sissoko%20with%20money%20from%20Yannick%20Bolasie%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fcrystal-palace-target-moussa-sissoko-newcastle-yannick-bolasie-sale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crystal%20Palace%20to%20target%20Moussa%20Sissoko%20with%20money%20from%20Yannick%20Bolasie%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fcrystal-palace-target-moussa-sissoko-newcastle-yannick-bolasie-sale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e6e0c60ae140ddb1a50319ba92d8648ced1b67b%2F0_68_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Liverpool’s Christian Benteke remains a priority for Palace. Photograph: Matt 
Dunham/AP 
Sissoko, who has three years left on his deal at St James’ Park, was a regular 
under Pardew at Newcastle after joining from Toulouse in January 2013 and has 
played 133 games for the club, captaining the side under Rafael Benítez earlier 
this year. While the 26-year-old’s form was inconsistent at best last season, 
Pardew retains faith in his ability and believes he would offer Palace an 
upgrade on the departing Bolasie whether employed wide or through the middle.

The France international, whose performance caught the eye in the final of 
Euro 2016, would prefer to join a club competing in the Champions League and 
had been alerted to possible interest from the reigning European champions, 
Real Madrid, in taking him to the Bernabéu. But that has yet to be followed up 
and, as the transfer deadline approaches, he is anxious to return to top-flight 
competition and Palace is an option he would consider. He has yet to feature in 
the Championship this season after his exertions over the summer but attended 
Saturday’sdefeat by Huddersfield Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/newcastle-huddersfield-championship-match-report>
 in the stands.

Benítez, while sympathetic to Sissoko’s desire to play at the higher level, is 
under no pressure to sell the player but, if he is to leave, would prefer a 
deal to be concluded sooner rather than later to allow further reinforcements 
to be made with the influx of funds over the remainder of the month. “We can’t 
wait until the end [of the window] so we have to be sure he is training well 
and he’s ready,” said the Spaniard on Saturday. “If somebody comes in with the 
right offer for us and for everybody, fine. If not he has to carry on. He is a 
professional and he has a contract.”

Palace had not originally anticipated pursuing Sissoko and it remains to be 
seen whether they can match Newcastle’s valuation of the player but Bolasie’s 
desire to move on after four years at Selhurst Park has now forced them to 
consider all options in the market. Contact was made with Manchester United 
over a potential loan deal for Ashley Young but the former England 
international is apparently available only for a permanent departure and Pardew 
has now made clear to the board his desire to secure the Frenchman.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fcrystal-palace-target-moussa-sissoko-newcastle-yannick-bolasie-sale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa14332fc146d12d45aa9be567b1286aaf7562a3c%2F0_82_1658_995%2F1658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crystal%20Palace%20to%20target%20Moussa%20Sissoko%20with%20money%20from%20Yannick%20Bolasie%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fcrystal-palace-target-moussa-sissoko-newcastle-yannick-bolasie-sale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crystal%20Palace%20to%20target%20Moussa%20Sissoko%20with%20money%20from%20Yannick%20Bolasie%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fcrystal-palace-target-moussa-sissoko-newcastle-yannick-bolasie-sale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa14332fc146d12d45aa9be567b1286aaf7562a3c%2F0_82_1658_995%2F1658.jpg>
 An inquiry has been lodged with Chelsea over the availability of Loïc Rémy. 
Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP 
The manager’s eagerness to sign two strikers – Palace sold Dwight Gayle to 
Newcastle earlier this summer for £10m and released Marouane Chamakh and 
Emmanuel Adebayor in June – was already well established and they remain 
hopeful a deal will eventually be struck for Benteke. The Belgium forward has 
also attracted interest from West Bromwich Albion, though it is understood he 
would prefer a move to London.

There is interest in West Brom’s Saido Berahino, who has entered the final 
year of his contract at The Hawthorns, and an inquiry has been lodged with 
Chelsea over the availability of Loïc Rémy, another player who featured under 
Pardew at Newcastle. The disaffected Everton forward, Oumar Niasse, may also be 
considered for a loan move though both Hull City and West Brom have also 
inquired after a player who made only two Premier League starts for the 
Merseyside club afterjoining from Lokomotiv Moscow for £13.5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/01/everton-oumar-niasse-lokomotiv-moscow>
 in January.

Jedinak, who had entered the final 12 months of his contract and lost the 
captaincy to Scott Dann this summer, is expected to leave Palace after five 
years this week to drop into the second tier with Villa in a £4m move. Pardew 
may well attempt to secure another of his former Newcastle players, Cheick 
Tioté, as a replacement for the Australian.

Yannick Bolasie signs for Everton from Crystal Palace for £25m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/15/yannick-bolasie-signs-everton-crystal-palace>
The likes of Joe Ledley, Lee Chung-yong – both the subject of interest from 
Burnley this summer – and Jordon Mutch will remain at the club as squad 
players. The Wales international, Jonathan Williams, has been ruled out for up 
to 10 weeks with an ankle injury sustained in a friendly win at Farnborough 
Town.

Bolasie, who scored 13 goals in 144 appearances in all competitions for 
Palace, cited Everton’s ambition as his motivation in moving to Merseyside. 
“This is a big club and I know all about it from having played against them 
over the years,” the DR Congo wingertold the club’s official website 
<http://www.evertonfc.com/news/2016/08/15/bolasie-is-a-blue>. “For me, it was a 
no-brainer to come here. But now that I’ve come to Everton, the job is not 
done. I’ve got to work hard and feel my way in. I’m ready and up for the 
challenge.

“It’s not about the money for me. It’s about looking at the ambition of the 
club and where they are trying to get to. I just like to play football. I just 
like to play football and it’s going to be really interesting to learn from 
someone like Ronald Koeman, who was obviously a top centre-back as a player and 
he played with some of the best players in the world.”
 