
Crystal Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> are to 
include Christian Benteke’s younger brother, Jonathan, in their squad for 
Saturday’s trip to Middlesbrough, with the forward having moved up the pecking 
order at Selhurst Park after Loïc Rémy succumbed to injury.

While Palace paid a club record £27m to secure Christian Benteke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/crystal-palace-sign-christian-benteke-liverpool>
 from Liverpool this summer, his 21-year-old sibling joined for a nominal fee 
from the Belgian club Zulte Waregem, for whom he had scored twice in 21 league 
matches. The presumption was he would link up with the development squad and 
continue his progress in youth football, but the torn thigh that has ruled Rémy 
out for up to two months has left Alan Pardew short in attacking options.

Crystal Palace’s Loïc Rémy out for up to two months after fresh injury blow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/08/crystal-palace-loic-remy-injury-thigh>
The younger Benteke will therefore travel to Teesside hoping to enjoy some 
involvement in the first team as Palace, who also have Connor Wickham and Kwesi 
Appiah available up front, seek a first win of the season. “He is a young 
striker with natural talent, and they are not easy to find,” Pardew said. “This 
one was because of Christian, really. He highlighted him to us.

“We checked him out and liked the look of him. It was not a big fee so he 
comes here under no pressure. He is not up to his brother’s level yet, he would 
readily admit that, because Christian is a top-line player. But Jonathan is 
very enthusiastic and has settled in very well. Hopefully, he might surprise 
one or two.”

Palace will be without Yohan Cabaye at Boro as the Frenchman continues his 
recovery from a groin injury that ruled him out of the France squad over the 
recent international window. James McArthur and Bakary Sako will also need to 
be checked before the game at the Riverside stadium, while Mathieu Flamini,
signed this week on a free transfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/08/mathieu-flamini-joins-crystal-palace-free-transfer>
, has lacked game-time over pre-season. “Physically, Mathieu is ready,” Pardew 
said. “He is very fit but whether he is up to game speed, I do not know. I am 
going to take him because his knowledge, and having him around, will be like 
having another coach.”

Rémy will undergo treatment back at Chelsea on his thigh tear before rejoining 
Palace as he approaches fitness. “It is a tear in his thigh in an area where 
recovery is difficult, affecting his shooting,” Pardew said. “We have to be 
careful with him. We are so disappointed because he’d looked great, and it was 
a very innocuous moment on the training ground. Sadly that happens. Fortunately 
we have enough cover to cope without him for this period.”
 