
Crystal Palace have confirmed the signing of Christian Benteke from Liverpool. 
The 25-year-old Belgium striker signed a four-year contract on Saturday for an 
undisclosed feethought to be in the region of £27m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/19/christian-benteke-crystal-palace-liverpool-medical>
.

Benteke, who joined Liverpool from Aston Villa for £32.5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/22/liverpool-christian-benteke-transfer-aston-villa>
 little more than a year ago, had a difficult first season at Anfield and it 
became clear he did not fit into Jürgen Klopp’s plans after hereplaced Brendan 
Rodgers as the manager in October last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/jurgen-klopp-confirmed-liverpool-manager>
.

Despite impressing in a dismal Aston Villa side, scoring 42 league goals in 
four seasons, Benteke looked out of place for large parts of his debut season 
at Anfield and managed only 10 goals in 43 appearances in all competitions.

Jürgen Klopp says guts are key to a title challenge from Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/19/jurgen-klopp-guts-key-to-liverpool-title-challenge>
He was part of Belgium’s squad for Euro 2016 but played second fiddle to 
Everton’s Romelu Lukaku and failed to score in his two appearances at the 
tournament.

Benteke is Alan Pardew’s fourth signing of the summer, joining Steve Mandanda, 
Andros Townsend and James Tomkins in arriving at Selhurst Park. The striker 
told the club’s website: “I’m very happy to commit my future toCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> and I’m looking forward to 
meeting the manager, the players and the staff. I feel really happy the deal 
has been done and now I can look forward.”

Pardew said: “It’s important when you lose iconic players to try to replace 
them with iconic players. We’ve lost two this week, Mile Jedinak and Yannick 
Bolasie. Both were massive figures and we will need to replace them with big 
figures.

“That’s something that didn’t always happen at [his former club] Newcastle, 
unfortunately, so I’m pleased the board have been brave with this move.

“He’s someone I know very well because I wanted to take him to Newcastle. I 
thought he’d be a fantastic fit for that club. He got the move toLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> and it hasn’t quite worked 
out. For us, we need to get him back to doing what he does best. His style of 
play, the way he feeds off crosses. He’ll enjoy that with the wide players we 
have.”

There was, however, embarrassment for both player and club when the striker 
updated his Twitter profile to say he played for Burnley. Benteke has 
apologised for the mistake.
VICE Sports (@VICESports) 
Benteke’s Twitter accidentally reads that he went to Burnley, not Crystal 
Palacehttps://t.co/pKld3Si2ZQ <https://t.co/pKld3Si2ZQ> 
pic.twitter.com/KSaYOGuggT <https://t.co/KSaYOGuggT>
 <https://twitter.com/VICESports/status/766977212969091072> August 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/VICESports/status/766977212969091072> Christian Benteke 
(@chrisbenteke) 
Oops my bad lol Yes I signed for cpfc and not burnley. Sorry for the little 
mistake the person that manages my Twitter got a little confused
 <https://twitter.com/chrisbenteke/status/766967260120543232> August 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/chrisbenteke/status/766967260120543232>  