
"Images don't talk to me as much as things that are invisible," says Gabriel 
Yared. "What I like are invisible things. What I like is fog." Fog may sound 
like a strange focal point for a composer who has made his name writing music 
for movies. But Yared is adamant the success of his scores for such films as 
Betty Blue, The English Patient and The Talented Mr Ripley comes from his 
insistence on concentrating on something other than the image on screen.

"You can get a feeling for this invisible thing, this fog, from reading the 
script and talking to the director. For me, the important thing is to be 
involved on the film from the beginning, so I have time to grow alongside the 
characters and the script."

Yared is scathing about directors who think film scoring is a matter of 
matching music to the final cut. "Synching is the simplest thing in the film 
business," he says. "It takes a day to learn. But you shouldn't have a 
shot-by-shot approach. You should start at the beginning, to catch the spirit 
of the writing. The script contains in it everything that is coming later."

When the score is recorded, Yared likes to conduct the orchestra while 
watching the relevant scenes of the film on a giant screen. The orchestra can 
also see the shots they are playing to. "It's better when the musicians aren't 
playing blind," he says. "Even though they have to follow the lead of the 
printed music and the conductor, it changes their performance completely."

Too often directors don't take the music seriously. "Many composers work on a 
month-to-month basis," says Yared. "They get called and told the film's coming 
out in three months, and that's how long they have to do all the music. Maybe 
I'm a slow composer, but I find that very short.

"Running from one film to another means you don't improve as a composer. The 
divine angel of music will be looking down at you, saying: 'What have you done 
with your gifts?'"
 