
Andrew Cuomo <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo>, the governor 
of New York state, has ordered emergency regulations to curb exploitative 
practices in the burgeoning nail salon business that can leave workers without 
pay and suffering health problems.

Cuomo announced the measures on Sunday, to go into effect immediately. The 
measures seek to improve working conditions for manicurists and are accompanied 
by the threat of forced closure for businesses that do not comply.

Cuomo created a taskforce drawn from several state government agencies. It 
will go salon to salon across the state, investigating the environment and pay 
regime for workers responsible for providing manicures and pedicures, often at 
bargain prices in a highly competitive industry.

I won't get my nails painted at the salon again | Steven W Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/10/nail-salons-exploit-workers-stay-profitable-theyve-lost-my-business>
Salons will be required to pay back wages and install ventilation systems 
where necessary, among measures aimed at preventing exploitation and health 
risks,according to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/11/nyregion/cuomo-orders-emergency-measures-to-protect-workers-at-nail-salons.html?_r=0>
. The newspaper spurred the action from Cuomo after publishing an in-depth
investigation into harsh conditions 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/10/nyregion/at-nail-salons-in-nyc-manicurists-are-underpaid-and-unprotected.html?_r=0>
 in the industry.

“New York state has a long history of confronting wage theft and unfair labor 
practices head on, and today, with the formation of this new Enforcement Task 
Force, we are aggressively following in that tradition,” Cuomo said in a 
statement.

“We will not stand idly by as workers are deprived of their hard-earned wages 
and robbed of their most basic rights.”

Businesses will be required to post signs in six languages, informing workers 
of their rights.

It is not uncommon for manicurists to be asked to work for no pay for several 
months when they first join a business, or to pay a joining fee, the Times 
reported. Both are illegal practices. Workers routinely work long shifts on 
very low pay and are exposed to harmful chemicals that can cause illnesses.

With the number of nail salons in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City tripling in the last 15 
years to around 2,000, and with a “mani-pedi” costing $25 or less in many 
shops, the highly competitive business takes on thousands of recent immigrants 
for daily pay as low as $30 or even $10, the report said.

The new emergency rules will go into force ahead of more detailed work in the 
state capital Albany to make them permanent, Cuomo’s office said on Sunday.
 