
The television food personality and chef Angela Hartnett, formerly best 
remembered as the Rod Hull to Gordon Ramsay’s Emu, is curating something called 
Kitchen Tales at the Chipping Norton Set’s cheese and music festival,Wilderness 
<https://www.wildernessfestival.com/>. But I can’t work out from the blurb if 
it is an exhibition, an event, a shop, or just some ingredients lying on the 
floor that you can look at. Nonetheless, it is reassuring to know that it has 
been curated, whatever it is.

My grandad was a sales rep for Colman’s Mustard. I expect today he would have 
to say he was a mustard plant compound retail opportunity curator! And he 
wouldn’t be able to say what colour the mustard was, in case it offended people 
with jaundice!! It’s political correctness gone mad!!! It’s worse than that!!!! 
It’s political correctness gone sanity challenged!!!!! And they’ve banned 
Christmas!!!!!! The cattery wouldn’t take Robin’s cat because they said it 
looked like Hitler!!!!!!!

This morning I heard a radio interview with the British Dental Association’s 
curator of dental history, Dr Margaret Wilson, her suspicious job title alone 
suggesting a whitewash is in progress. Perhaps it will turn out that teeth 
never occur naturally in humans, and are inserted at birth to generate 
dentistry revenue.

Fictional bands 'curated' by a fictional 'curator' who doesn't exist! It's 
time to take 'curating' to the next level

And yet I recognise Curator Wilson as part of the International Curatorship of 
Curators, of which I am the acting curator. For, in my capacity as an E-list 
celebrity comedian, writer, and broadcaster, I have curated over six things, 
from a weekend at the Southbank Centre to the order of all the pens on my desk, 
and if I get it wrong, all the women in the world will die. Most imminently, I 
am the curator of the boutique music festivalAll Tomorrow’s Parties 
<http://www.atpfestival.com/events/atp042016/view/eventinfo>, at Prestatyn 
Pontins, on the weekend of 15 April.

Ian Hislop’s satirical news magazine Private Eye ran a sympathetic piece on 
the problems of staging such ambitious events without sponsorship or funding, 
but in describing me, the word curator was placed in inverted commas, ie 
“curator”, as if there were some doubt that I had “curated” the festival at 
all; or as if the very idea of a “curator” was so ridiculous it was suspect in 
some way. Let me assure you, I am a “curator”, and I have personally “curated” 
the living fuck out of this event until I am blue in the face.

But what is a “curator”? Hans-Ulrich Obrist, “curator” of the Serpentine 
gallery, wrote the book on “curating”, literally. It is calledWays of Curating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/23/hans-ulrich-obrist-art-curator>
 and is, in my professional “curatorial” opinion, naive at best. Indeed, Angela 
Hartnett, Dr Margaret Wilson and I were all laughing on www.curator.net the 
other day about what a tool Obrist is when it comes to “curating”. Margaret 
Wilson said Obrist “couldn’t curate his way out of an elephant’s ballsack”, 
which seemed unnecessary.

All Tomorrow’s Parties weekend events inevitably exploit the dramatic contrast 
of the familiar British holiday camp and the unpredictable artists they 
showcase. Should my “curatorship” embody the radical history of the British 
holiday camp as an abstract ideal? J Fletcher Dodd’s Socialist Holiday Camp in 
Great Yarmouth was the interwar pioneer of the holiday-as-political-statement 
model. The booking of bands like Dutch anarcho-punks the Ex, and Nottingham 
ranters Sleaford Mods, might reflect this self-improving strain, just as the 
inclusion of a Saturday small hours set by Charlotte Church echoes Fred 
Pontin’s and Billy Butlin’s subsequent re-pointing of the instructive blueprint 
towards utilitarian notions of entertainment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fi-am-the-curator-stewart-lee-all-tomorrows-parties%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb698c247d16735f0bde3f32fd4f2cef18f6e4142%2F0_1141_2418_1678%2F2418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Curating%E2%80%A6%20you%20are%20the%20disease%2C%20I%20am%20the%20curator%20%7C%20Stewart%20Lee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fi-am-the-curator-stewart-lee-all-tomorrows-parties%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Curating%E2%80%A6%20you%20are%20the%20disease%2C%20I%20am%20the%20curator%20%7C%20Stewart%20Lee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fi-am-the-curator-stewart-lee-all-tomorrows-parties%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb698c247d16735f0bde3f32fd4f2cef18f6e4142%2F0_1141_2418_1678%2F2418.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Obrist’s book told me nothing, as usual. I rang Hartnett, but she was busy 
stuffing a platypus’s egg with marinated quail’s feet. Dr Wilson was lying 
about teeth, through her teeth, as usual. And so, in preparing the Prestatyn 
Pontins ATP “curation”, I undressed, lay on the floor, went into a kind of 
trance and attempted to visualise the whole history of human sound, while 
twisting my hips to a rhythm only I could hear, which was embarrassing, as I 
was waiting to pick up my daughter in her school playground at the time. 
Luckily, she is 28 years old. And so are all her classmates. And everyone who 
exists.

“Curating” myself into a visionary state, I saw the Prestatyn event as a 
pyramid-shaped sonic universe with new acts like Shopping, Trash Kit and 
Ex-Easter Island Head orbiting its tip, unfamiliar free jazz and folk artists 
floating in random gyratories, and the whole thing balanced on the back of a 
huge four-legged turtle, the legs representing musicians whose works are 
supporting pillars of postwar contemporary music; John Cale; the 13 Floor 
Elevators; Sun Ra Arkestra; and Giant Sand, wellspring of alt-country. A 
mysterious fifth vestigial leg is in the form of the proto-alternative comedian 
Ted Chippington, though its exact function is uncertain. This, my friends, is 
what “curating” means.

On a related note, I am currently “curating” a radio show called Global 
Globules <https://resonancefm.com/programmes/56cf413050000b8cac000001> on 
Resonance 104.4FM in the character of the disfigured 80s Canadian comedian and 
“curator” Baconface, who wears a mask of bacon, and plays lengthy selections 
from his late brother’s collection of obscure 60s and 70s experimental music, 
in an attempt to deal with his sibling’s death in a bacon-aggravated bear 
mauling for which Baconface feels responsible. I record the shows alone in a 
very small room near London Bridge, wearing Baconface’s stinking bacon-covered 
clothes and wrestling mask. I receive no payment for this work.

Introducing the band: Mogwai's Stuart Braithwaite interviews Wu-Tang's GZA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jun/19/mogwai-stuart-braithwaite-interviews-wu-tang-clan-gza-atp>
The next logical step of course is to “curate” a festival as Baconface, and 
indeed the simplicity of his backstory makes it obvious to me who he would 
book, while my own “curatorial” parameters remain blurred. Has Hans-Ulrich 
Obrist thought of “curating” something while pretending to be someone else and 
wearing a mask of cured meat, even while alone? No. Who is the best “curator”? 
It is me.

Baconface’s Festival of Forgotten Sound would ideally include the Irish 
minimalist Sr Anselme O’Ceallaigh, two Sardinian 70s acts in the shape of 
Urthona and Vesuvio, Italian horror soundtrack maestros Hymenoptera, Swindon 
psychedelic 60s band the Dukes of the Stratosphear, and Martin Zeichnete, who 
was forced by the Stasi in the early 80s to compose inspiring electronica for 
the East German Olympic team. All these artists are fictional historical 
constructs that allow the real musicians behind them creative freedom.

Fictional bands “curated” by a fictional “curator” who doesn’t exist! It’s 
time to take “curating” to the next level, where the act of “curating” becomes 
a comment on the very idea of “curating”. We haven’t even begun to explore what 
“curating” could mean. “Curating” will eat itself! Then, and only then, you may 
use your inverted commas.

Stewart Lee’s All Tomorrow’s Parties 
<http://www.atpfestival.com/events/atp042016/view/eventinfo> weekend is at 
Prestatyn Pontins, 15–17 April.Stewart Lee’s Comedy Vehicle 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0112b65> is currently on BBC2 at 10pm on 
Thursdays.Baconface’s Global Globules 
<https://resonancefm.com/programmes/56cf413050000b8cac000001> is available at 
11pm on Wednesdays on Resonance 104.4FM, or on the website anytime at 
mixcloud.com/resonance
 