
Dunbar’s Number suggests that 150 is around the maximum that it is possible, 
for the average person,to have as friends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/apr/25/few-people-dunbars-number>. 
For some reason, the businessman formerly known as Sir Philip Green has always 
seemed to be on a mission to disprove it. Phil’s Number, as we might call it, 
appears to be more likeJay Gatsby’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/03/what-makes-great-gatsby>: 
limitless. As with his acquisition of shops and yachts, there really is no end, 
Green has repeatedly demonstrated, to the number of brand-new friends available 
to a determined person with a sufficiently attractive and compelling 
personality.

Photographs of the businessman, perhaps by design, tend to show him surrounded 
by friends, as impressive in quality as in quantity, and plainly thrilled, from 
their body language, to be in his company: there is a lot of hugging. In and 
around a Topshop show, for example, we might find Greenpressed against 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3242141/Cressida-Bonas-lovely-lace-hobnobs-Anna-Wintour-Alexa-Chung-Suki-Waterhouse-Topshop-Unique-s-fashion-week-row.html>
 Cressida Bonas, aged 26, the actress and former girlfriend of Prince Harry, 
prior to nestling alongside an old friend, Anna Wintour.

Ms Bonas has a career to think of, but I have often wondered, studying this 
annual outrage, just what makes the fabulously demanding Wintour willing to rub 
thighs with the world’s foremost manspreader. His signature look, a shirt 
unbuttoned to expose luxuriant chest hair, is not, perhaps, one calculated to 
impress the Vogue editor, even if it suggests one supremely comfortable in his 
own skin. On the other hand, the two share an interest in party-giving.

Wintour’s dedication to making her annual Met Gala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/28/five-things-we-learned-from-the-first-monday-in-may>
 an unmissable event – for anyone lucky enough to be sent an invitation and the 
accompanying rulebook – is matched only by Green’s determination to make his 
birthday celebrations so magnificent that famous nameswill criss-cross the world
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2012/mar/22/guests-philip-green-6m-party>
 for a chance to help magnify his social credentials and hence, it has turned 
out, his business reputation. If his friends’ discretion has allowed some 
mystery to develop around the precise nature of Green’s appeal, the gossip 
columns attest to an ever more fabulous, as well as expanding, circle as the 
tycoon has grown older and, presumably, yet more amusing.

A flavour of his table talk may, in fact, have emerged, in a recorded 
exchange, during which Green refused to talk to theGuardian’s then financial 
editor. “He can’t read English,”Green objected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2003/mar/05/2>. “Mind you, he is a 
fucking Irishman.”

At Green’s son’s barmitzvah in 2005, £4m bought a three-day party in the 
Riviera for, it was reported, 300 –pace Dunbar – friends and family. Another 
200 attended his 50th, which required them, as if to prove that these were all 
top-notch, genuine friendships, not only to be in Cyprus for the standard three 
days but to wear togas. For his 55th, loyalty was established by relocation to 
the Maldives, around 5,000 miles away from London.

By the time of his 60th birthday party, four days in Cancun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2012/mar/22/guests-philip-green-6m-party>
, at a reported cost of £6.5m, friends included a range of new Hollywood 
acquisitions, such as Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Hudson and Gwyneth Paltrow, along 
with trusted intimates – Simon Cowell, Ronnie Wood and Kate Moss – and others 
of uncertain friendship status: Tess Daly, Mohamed Al Fayed. An admiringMirror 
report <http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/topshop-tycoon-philip-green-spends-765243> 
noted a special Phil touch: “luxury black toilet paper”.

Knowledge of the close bonds inevitably formed amid this sort of generosity 
must have sustained Green last week as his reputationcame under attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/28/philip-green-knighthood-integrity-bhs-john-collins-forfeiture-committee>
, following the destruction of BHS. With friends like the above, and so many of 
them, it could only be a matter of time before, one by one, they came forward, 
to pledge that the Phil they love is just not the sort of person who would 
ever, as alleged, leave former staff struggling in retirement. No way would the 
provider of luxury black toilet paper in Cancun have paid for it with 
pensioners’ money, channelled through his Monaco-resident wife, Tina.

Kate Moss famously does not say much in public, other than “basic bitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/23/basic-insult-kate-moss-lil-wayne-sylvia-plath>
”, so maybe her reticence is understandable. The silence of Green’s other 300 
or so friends: not so much. Come in, Tess? Leonardo? Gwyneth? Hello? Perhaps, 
given the star count, showbusiness omerta explains the absence of testimonials 
from friends who must have felt quite sure, when they accepted return flights 
to the Maldives, that, however repulsively it was spent, Green’s vast fortune 
was nothing untoward for “an ordinary person with a seriously strong work 
ethic”. As Green’s wife puts it.

And not only Green’s wife, they might add. It is no time since Francis Maude, 
the Cabinet Office minister, was as captivated as any supermodel, by Green’s 
person and talents; more so, actually, since he asked the great party-giver to 
write an“efficiency review” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61014/sirphilipgreenreview.pdf>
. “We are extremely fortunate,”Maude oozed 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/sir-philip-green-to-lead-government-efficiency-review>
, “to have Sir Philip, with his immense commercial experience and of course his 
fantastic track record at managing large organisations, on board.” Presumably 
he, like Michael Gove, had concluded that anyone who could appear so often in 
gossip columns must be possessed of some special genius. “He’s the only person 
I know who has both Tony Blair and Kate Moss on speed dial,” a worshipful Gove
told 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2583835/Kate-Moss-shows-energetic-dance-moves-board-Sir-Philip-Greens-yacht.html>
 an audience of schoolchildren, at a kind of Green-centred rally.

Where the pointless excess of Gatsby’s parties engendered suspicion – 
“Somebody told me they thought he killed a man once” – Green’s seem only to 
have inspired respect. And the yachts helped. It is easy to argue, now, that 
absurdly ostentatious boats may be handy indicators of their owners’ values; in 
Blairite as well as Conservative circles, they have long, regardless of Robert 
Maxwell and Fayed, been accepted as unparalleled causes for reverence.

For instance, Green’s fellow skipper Len Blavatnik, Putin associate and owner 
of a gin-palace as big as the moon, is a cherished donor, not just to the 
Tories but to the artistic and academic worlds, his benevolence immortalised in 
the V&A’s forthcoming Blavatnik Hall and – despiteobjections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/03/oxford-university-accused-over-oligarch-len-blavatnik-75m-donation>
 – Oxford’s Blavatnik School of Government.

As for Green, the Monaco-based finance expert couldn’t get over public sector 
waste. “The process is shocking. There’s no reporting. There’s no 
accountability.” He assured 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/thereporters/robertpeston/2010/10/green_id_be_bust_if_i_ran_my_b.html>
 Robert Peston: “You could not be in business if you operated like this.”

In fairness, this was years before Green sold BHS for £1, to a 
twice-bankrupted entrepreneur with no retail experience, Green’s family having
previously extracted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/25/bhs-pension-regulator-sir-philip-green-analysis>
 £580m in dividends, etc, pre-departure. And the BHS pension fund having 
somehow acquired a deficit of £571m. Any minute now, one of those people on 
Green’s speed dial is sure to come along and explain, to the financially 
illiterate, how utterly irrelevant are these two unrelated numbers.

Until then, Green’s challenge to Dunbar’s Number can remain only that. We 
can’t be sure, in the light of the past week, that his countless friends will 
not, like Gatsby’s, attach to new buyers, to the point that someone, maybe the 
loyal Gove, will mutter “the poor son of a bitch”. Perhaps it’s time, to be on 
the safe side, for Tina and Phil to throw another party.

 * Lawyers for Mr Blavatnik contacted us after publication, in May 2016, 
stating that Mr Blavatnik is not an associate of Vladimir Putin, with whom he 
has had no personal contact since 2000. Mr Blavatnik’s lawyers also stated that 
he is a strong believer in encouraging democracy and freedom throughout the 
world and that he had no involvement whatsoever in any alleged state-sponsored 
campaign of harassment against BP in Russia.
 