
The widespread practice of students pursuing four AS-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aslevels> before dropping their weakest 
subject for the final year is to be phased out, a report has claimed, as 
funding pressures on sixth-form colleges see new pupils offered just three 
qualifications from the outset.

 In recent years, students have been encouraged to enrol in four AS-levels in 
their first year in sixth form, then to abandon their weakest subject in their 
second and pursue their three best to A2-level.

'It's a crying shame': teachers on scrapped A-level subjects
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/21/its-a-crying-shame-teachers-on-scrapped-a-level-subjects>
But a survey by the Sixth Form Colleges Association 
<http://www.sixthformcolleges.org/> (SFCA) found that just 10% of colleges are 
planning to offer the traditional four subjects in lower sixth and three in 
upper from September 2017. The rest will offer three A-levels as standard in 
both years, with only the higher-achieving students considered for four, 
raising concerns that the curriculum will become narrow for the majority of 
pupils.

The cut in A-levels is part of a wider picture of cutbacks in the sixth-form 
sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/13/sixth-form-colleges-we-are-an-endangered-species>
, which has been particularly hard hit by funding constraints in recent years. 
The SFCA report, published on Thursday, also reveals that two-thirds of 
sixth-form colleges have had to drop courses to reduce expenditure.

Over a third of colleges (39%) have axed courses in modern foreign languages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/31/schools-languages-universities-courses-from-scratch>
, including A-levels in German, French and Italian. And almost six out of 10 
colleges (58%) have reduced extracurricular activities including educational 
visits, music, drama, Duke of Edinburgh award schemes and sport – or cut them 
altogether.

Bill Watkin, SFCA chief executive, said: “A combination of funding pressures 
and cost increases is forcing more and more colleges to offer only three 
subjects at A-level, instead of the established four. This narrowing of the 
post-16 learning experience is at odds with the government’s principle of 
establishing a broad and balanced GCSE curriculum at 16. It is also out of step 
with what is happening in other high-performing education systems around the 
world.”


The Guardian view on A-level changes: loss of civilisation | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/18/the-guardian-view-on-a-level-changes-loss-of-civilisation>
The government’s decision to “uncouple” AS levels from A-levels, so that they 
no longer contribute to the final mark, has also played a part in the trend 
towards threeA-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> 
throughout sixth form.

Daveth Frost, principal of Holy Cross, a high-performing sixth-form college in 
Bury, Lancashire, said that of his 2,100 students, only few would now be 
allowed to study four A-levels in their first year – those who needed to in 
order to be considered for particular university courses.

“Over the last two years, we’ve been gradually bringing it down. Generally 
people are going to start with three now,” he said. The risk is that students 
decide that they don’t like one of their choices and drop from three to two, 
then have to find a speedy alternative for their final year.

But the cut in the number of A-levels has saved Frost money and he has been 
able as a result to protect minority subjects – including German and dance – as 
well as extracurricular enrichment activities, which many other sixth forms 
have had to cut. Class sizes, however, have had to increase.

Goodbye art history A-level, you served the elite well | Jonathan Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/art-history-a-level-subject-private-schools-kenneth-clark>
Since he started at Holy Cross eight years ago, Frost says he has seen a 20% 
decline in funding. Sixth-form pupils attract less funding than those in 
secondary school, and recently sixth forms have struggled with the same rise in 
pension and national insurance contributions as secondary schools.

According to the SFCA funding impact survey, 84% of colleges are teaching 
students in larger class sizes, while nine out of 10 colleges are concerned 
about the financial health of their college, with just under a third (31%) 
reporting that it is likely their college will cease to be financially viable 
in the next three years.

Bill Watkin said the report was a wake-up call to government. “More investment 
from government is essential if sixth-form colleges, school and academy sixth 
forms are to continue providing young people with the high-quality education 
they need to progress to higher education and employment.

 “A review of sixth-form funding is urgently required to ensure it is linked 
to the realistic costs of delivering a rounded, high-quality curriculum. 
Failure to do this risks turning sixth-form education into a narrow and 
part-time experience. That would be bad for students, bad for society and bad 
for the economy.”

The SFCA represents 90 sixth-form colleges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/29/school-sixth-forms-outdated-colleges-comprehensive-education>
 in England, educating 160,000 16-18-year-olds who sit more than 20% of the 
A-levels taken in England each year. But the financial plight of stand-alone 
sixth form colleges is similarly evident in school sixth forms.

When exams are part of a rigged system, financial rewards can work | Deborah 
Orr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/22/exams-system-financial-rewards-cash-gcse-grades>
Malcolm Trobe, interim general secretary of the Association of School and 
College Leaders, said: “The level of funding provided by the government is 
simply inadequate and the situation is dire. Sixth forms and colleges have no 
alternative other than to cut courses and scale back enrichment activities. We 
are already hearing of school sixth forms being closed and unless funding is 
increased, several further closures will follow.

“This is a critical time in the lives of young people which determines their 
higher education and career options and thus their life chances. This report 
should serve as a wake-up call to government. The price of austerity is too 
high.”

Research commissioned by the SFCA from UCL Institute of Education 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/ioe> describes sixth-form education in England as 
“uniquely narrow and short”, with 15-17 hours of tuition per week, compared 
with the 30-plus hours received by students in Shanghai.

A Department for Education spokesperson said the government had protected the 
base rate of funding for all post-16 students until 2020. “On top of this, we 
are providing more than half a billion pounds this year alone to help post-16 
institutions support students from disadvantaged backgrounds or with low prior 
attainment.”
 