
Ten years ago I studied for a masters in peace and development in Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds>. I used to rejoice as I walked through 
the municipal gardens near my home as we learned about the need for “capacity 
building” in the developing world. How grateful I was for all the local 
municipal provision that we lived with here: the parks, halls, toilets, youth 
centres, libraries.

With central-government austerity policies (Cuts at catastrophic level, says 
Birmingham council chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/birmingham-council-chief-years-of-cuts-could-have-catastrophic-consequences>
, 13 December), they are now all vanishing, or hard-pressed local volunteers 
are struggling to deal with community-asset transfer, taking over the running 
and the management of such amenities, if they are not sold off to unaccountable 
private companies.

The latest proposal from Bradford <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bradford> 
metropolitan district council is to pass many of its local halls over to local 
groups, should they be willing and able to take on this community-asset 
transfer. Our Silsden town hall is on the list.

We will fight to retain it as it has been run over the past two years: with a 
local volunteer Friends group working hard to encourage use of the town hall 
(which is a fine, historic building in the heart of the former mill town), but 
with the council paying for the upkeep and staffing. This arrangement has been 
working very satisfactorily, the hall almost cost-neutral.

I rejoice much less now as I go through the local park. This has happened in 
the last few years. What will life be like if this hacking away of local state 
provision continues?
Anna Young
Silsden, West Yorkshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 