
Now that everyone has woken up to the genius that is Jeff Bridges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeff-bridges>, perhaps it's time to give John 
Heard <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001334/> his due. By the mid-1980s, after 
starring in a brace of films byJoan Micklin Silver 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joan_Micklin_Silver>, Paul Schrader's Cat People 
remake <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-gku3bkFl0> and pulp horror C.H.U.D 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WqDToaLuJ7I>, he looked all set for leading man 
status. But it never happened; instead he turned into one of those character 
actors whose presence never fails to cheer you up. It didn't help that the 
release ofCutter's Way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90062/cutter-s-way>, which gave him the 
role of his career, was bungled by United Artists, which saw it as a failed 
thriller instead of the noirish character study it was. It faded into 
obscurity, trailing a few rave reviews and fond film-buff memories behind it.

One-eyed, one-legged, alcoholic Vietnam veteran Alex Cutter is the sort of 
avenging obsessive who, by rights, belongs up there in the pantheon alongside
Travis Bickle <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4e9CkhBb18E>, Sam Quint 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=91KeLe9zKWo> or Khan Noonien Singh 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8LzssTELgzQ>. In fact, I'd argue that Cutter 
outcools them all because he has something the rest of them don't – an 
eyepatch. Not to be outdone, Bridges recently sported one too, as Rooster 
Cogburn in the Coen brothers' True Grit. Cutter lost his eye in 'Nam, Cogburn 
in the American civil war. Both men are shambolic boozers. But, as the 
eyepatches indicate, they're also extreme badasses.

Eyepatches are a handy symbol of tunnel vision, of the kind that's necessary 
if you're going to consecrate your life to a heroic yet ultimately futile quest 
for vengeance. But strangely, while they're often associated with pirates, 
they're scarcely to be glimpsed in the four Pirates of the Caribbean films, and 
the only patch-wearing movie pirate I can think of offhand is One-Eyed Willie 
fromThe Goonies <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xlGVDe4lPes>. It's said that 
sailors wore a patch even when they had two good eyes, so that when they went 
below deck they could switch from one eye to the other and immediately see in 
the dark.

But it's true a patch does bestow a buccaneering air on, for example, Snake 
Plissken <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ed6Yr81jZ6g>, or Bond villain Emilio 
Largo <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_B20JnEhfyk>, or Les Amants du 
Pont-Neuf's Michèle (Juliet Binoche) who goes one-eyed water-skiing down the 
Seine. What's the betting the main attraction forTom Cruise in playing Colonel 
Claus von Stauffenberg <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=weUbf9NR9kY> was that he 
got to wear an eyepatch that made him look a bit roguish? Watching him in 
Valkyrie, it's hard not to be reminded of Tom DiCillo's indie satireLiving in 
Oblivion <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0113677/>, in which doofus actor Chad 
Palamino (James LeGros playing a character not at all based on Brad Pitt, whom 
DiCillo had directed in Johnny Suede) steals the cameraman's eyepatch to wear 
with his tuxedo. "It just feels right! I've got this guy now!"

Traditionally, an eyepatch signifies wisdom – Odin sacrificed an eye at the 
Well of Mimir in exchange for knowledge – though not inThor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/139926/thor>, where he's played by 
Anthony Hopkins, who loses his in an argy-bargy with the Frost Giants. Of 
course, an eyepatch also indicates the wearer has been in the wars, like 
Cutter, or at the very least has had his eye pecked out by a hawk, likeKirk 
Douglas in The Vikings <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1wcD8RW6Leo>, who 
doesn't allow it to curtail his axe-hurling.

The one-eyed have no depth perception, though André de Toth 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0211964/>, director of one the first 3D movies, the 
1953 House of Wax, was monocular, and he wasn't the only one-eyed director; 
Samuel Fuller, Nicholas Ray, Raoul Walsh and John Ford all sported eyepatches 
at one time or another – all of them (pace the screamingly camp Johnny Guitar) 
the sort of heavy-drinking he-men you don't often see coming out of film 
schools these days.

Novelty eyepatches include Darryl Hannah's Red Cross-themed dressing 
<http://www.metacafe.com/watch/3478631/daryl_hannah_kill_bill/> in Kill Bill 
and Brendan Gleeson's magic eyeball strap-on in the Harry Potter films. But top 
hardman honours go to Christopher Plummer, asGeneral Chang 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BL5A_ptYQxQ> in Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered 
Country, who evidently decided elastic is for pussies. Instead, he nails his 
eyepatch directly on to his skull.
 