
Too hot for Maria as mercury goes north

The tennis has been hot, but not nearly as hot as the weather. The heat has 
raised real concerns about players becoming seriously ill. Most tennis players 
sweat at more than two-and-a-half litres per hour when the mercury gets into 
the high 30s and yet it is difficult for them to drink even half this amount. 
Listening to what France's Julien Benneteau had to say after his five-set 
defeat was frightening: 'Several times I thought about quitting but I pushed 
myself to the limits. When I went into the dressing room, the tournament doctor 
used a drip to try to hydrate me. I was tired, I fell asleep, but the doctor 
shook me and said, "Stay with us". He was quite scared.' Top seeds Maria 
Sharapova and Roger Federer sympathise with those calling for action. Sharapova 
says conditions are inhuman. The trouble is Federer sweats as freely as he 
gives away points. 'Some times you've got to bite the bullet,' he says.

Small talk costs Nikolay

With all the sledging going on unadmonished in the cricket in Australia, 
Russia's Nikolay Davydenko may feel a little aggrieved that he was slapped with 
a fine for a fairly harmless slight aimed at the warm-up tournament played in 
Sydney. After he pulled out of the event with an injury, the number-three seed 
in Melbourne described the Sydney International as 'small' - and it cost him 
Â£4,000. If he had been an Aussie cricketer, he would probably have been fined 
for daring to mouth a complaint without using a single expletive. Davydenko 
apologised and offered the classic, foreigner-abroad excuse by way of 
explanation: 'My English is not very good and I didn't mean to say anything bad 
about the tournament.' He should have stopped there rather than keep going with 
a long-winded clarification of what he had meant to say, perfectly reasoned and 
delivered in the sort of well constructed English that you don't often hear in 
these parts.

Roger and out - or was it in?

The Hawkeye line-judging system that may be coming to Wimbldeon was about the 
only thing that ruffled Roger Federer during the first week of the 
championships. Federer has never been a huge fan of the system, the invention 
of an English sports fan, Paul Hawkins, who is in Melbourne to oversee its 
operation. Players are allowed to challenge two line calls per set with 
Hawkeye, which tracks the flight and bounce of the ball, being the final 
arbiter. 'Yeah, right,' sneered Federer when he lost a point on Hawkeye's 
say-so during his straight sets win over Jonas Bjorkman. He kept up his moan 
afterwards, claiming its role was to embarrass the players. He was speaking 
from bitter experience. During the 2006 US Open, when he first encountered 
Hawkeye, Federer made 17 challenges - and was wrong 10 times. Andy Roddick 
disagrees with Federer. 'I think it's fair,' he says. 'You're not going to have 
a match decided on an opinion call.'

Andy misses his tricycle

Andy Murray had the statisticians diving for their record books after he won 
the first 17 games against the Spaniard Alberto Martin only to lose the next 
one and have to settle for a 6-0 6-0 6-1 victory. It was widely reported that 
it would have been the first whitewash - or triple bagel or tricycle - in a 
grand slam since the 1993 French Open when Sergi Bruguera thrashed Thierry 
Champion. What seems to have been missed is that there has been one at 
Wimbledon since then, but only in the qualifying competition - in 2001 when 
Australia's Todd Woodbridge routed Sweden's Johan Ortegren. One reason for the 
extreme rarity of this feat may be that once upon a time a whitewash was 
reckoned to be bad manners. You slipped an opponent a consolation game towards 
the end to avoid inflicting complete humiliation.

Serena: 'I wasn't cheating'

Serena Williams's dazzling dress - it was diffcult to know whether it was 
green or yellow it was so luminescent - prompted one journalist to wonder 
whether she had chosen it so that it would be difficult for opponents to see 
the ball against it. 'Yeah, I thought about that the whole time I was designing 
the dress,' said Serena, a little huffily. 'I thought, "I can't beat these 
girls. I've got to think of every way to cheat".' In fact, if Serena had chosen 
the colour to camouflage the ball she would have been imitating a ploy used by 
Fred Perry, who, in the days of white balls and clothes, often stepped behind 
the ball to make it hard to pick up. The Englishman who won three Wimbledons in 
the 1930s said he was rumbled by only one of his opponents, the American Bill 
Tilden, who was as crafty as... well, Perry.

jon.henderson@observer.co.uk <mailto:jon.henderson@observer.co.uk>
 