
There are the books we take on journeys, and the journeys we take through 
books. It is a long time since I’ve been to the shores of Lake Huron, Ontario; 
specifically to my grandparents’ cottage in Inverhuron, where we used to go 
every summer. I remember driving for hours through farmland, passing Amish 
families in buggies, seeing the water appear on the horizon, watching our dog 
twitch his nose and sit up as we turned down the bumpy dirt road that led to 
the cottage.


This is Alice Munro country, although I didn’t know it then. I discovered her 
stories at university, and became obsessed withLives of Girls and Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/24/lives-of-girls-and-women-by-alice-munro-review>
,Something I’ve Been Meaning to Tell You 
<http://mookseandgripes.com/reviews/2014/03/05/alice-munro-something-ive-been-meaning-to-tell-you-2/>
,Who Do You Think You Are? 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2009/dec/03/who-do-you-think-you-are/>
 – all published before I was born. Why had she not been required reading in 
high school, alongside other Canadian titans of letters – Margaret Atwood, 
Robertson Davies, Margaret Laurence? Her first collection,Dance of the Happy 
Shades 
<http://www.theshortreview.com/reviews/AliceMunroDanceoftheHappyShades.htm>, 
always takes me back to my grandparents’ cottage by the lake.


My grandmother, who was born in the 1920s, and Munro, who was born in the 
early 30s, grew up in nearby towns, and I sometimes imagine they shared the 
same experiences, the same ideas about the world. In Dance of the Happy Shades, 
small-town Ontario is a coded, rigid place, with expectations about what is 
proper for a woman to do, think and feel. The language can seem dated, the 
setting slightly foreign. Even Munro’s characters have old-fashioned names: 
Gladys, Myra, Flora. But her girls and women are wholly modern. They are 
passionate, jealous, clever and ambitious, oppressed by what is expected of 
them, and what is denied.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F12%2Fdance-of-the-happy-shades-by-alice-munro-a-place-familiar-but-out-of-reach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439380103576%2Fe93ddecd-4944-4b93-acf7-a3335924cb6b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dance%20of%20the%20Happy%20Shades%20by%20Alice%20Munro%20%E2%80%93%20a%20place%20familiar%20but%20out%20of%20reach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F12%2Fdance-of-the-happy-shades-by-alice-munro-a-place-familiar-but-out-of-reach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dance%20of%20the%20Happy%20Shades%20by%20Alice%20Munro%20%E2%80%93%20a%20place%20familiar%20but%20out%20of%20reach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F12%2Fdance-of-the-happy-shades-by-alice-munro-a-place-familiar-but-out-of-reach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439380103576%2Fe93ddecd-4944-4b93-acf7-a3335924cb6b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An abandoned farm on the Bruce peninsula, Ontario, Canada. Photograph: Ethan 
Meleg/All Canada Photos/Corbis 
In the story Sunday Afternoon, a 17-year-old country girl named Alva goes to 
work for Mrs Gannett, an affluent lady who never fails to make it clear where 
Alva’s place is. “Mrs Gannett had a look of being made of entirely synthetic 
and superior substances,” and she struggles to maintain an imperiousness that 
is becoming outdated. “There was often in Alva’s tone an affected ease, a note 
of exaggerated carelessness and agreeability that was all the more irritating 
because Mrs Gannett could not think of any way to object to it.”


Alice Munro immortalised on Canadian currency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/25/books-alice-munro-canadian-currency>
The narrative hinges on an alcohol-soaked summer afternoon. After lunch, the 
household filters out to the garden while pale Alva is left inside:

That was one of her difficulties on Sundays, when they were all drinking, and 
becoming relaxed and excited; she had to remember that it was not permissible 
for her to show a little relaxation and excitement too. Of course, she was not 
drinking, except out of the bottoms of glasses when they were brought back to 
the kitchen – and only then if it was gin, cold, and sweetened.”

I love this last detail because it captures Alva’s naughtiness and her taste 
for a life that is different to the one she has. She can sense there is more to 
existence – more fulfilment, more excitement, more adventure – and wishes that 
one day she will be one of the women out on the patio, drinking gin rather than 
trapped inside in the service of others.

Margaret Atwood hangs out with Alice Munro – video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/23/margaret-atwood-alice-munro-video>
She is growing up, discovering new things to desire. When Mr Gannett’s cousin 
– “or whoever he was” – comes into the kitchen on the pretence of delivering 
one last dirty glass, he holds her lightly, “as in a familiar game, and spent 
some time kissing her mouth”, then moves back out to the patio.

This stranger’s touch had eased her; her body was simply grateful and 
expectant, and she felt a lightness and confidence she had not known in this 
house. So there were things she had not taken into account, about herself, 
about them, and ways of living with them that were not so unreal.”

These early stories seem simpler to me than Munro’s later work. Her characters 
have aged with the author, and the pieces become longer, more complex, less 
about one event one Sunday afternoon and not as fixed on an ending with a twist 
or the kind of insight Alva has.


My Life As an Explorer by Sven Hedin - the great unknown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/aug/11/my-life-as-an-explorer-by-sven-hedin-the-great-unknown>
In Walker Brothers Country, which opens Dance of the Happy Shades, a young, 
unnamed girl sees a glimpse of the life that her door-to-door salesman father 
led before he met her mother. With her brother, they visit his old flame Nora, 
a spinster who has settled into a lonely middle age, taking care of her elderly 
mother in a secluded farmhouse. This visit by the father sparks a longing that 
Nora might have repressed, and the children she finds in her sitting room are 
evidence of the life she will not have. The girl’s understanding of what she 
sees pass between her father and Nora is what I find so intriguing and true. As 
they travel home down dusty country roads, she thinks about her father’s life 
“darkening and turning strange, like the landscape that has an enchantment on 
it, making it kindly, ordinary and familiar while you are looking at it, but 
changing it, once your back is turned, into something you will never know”.


My grandparents’ cottage was sold when they became too frail to drive, and I 
haven’t returned to Lake Huron in almost 15 years, except through these 
stories. In Dance of the Happy Shades, Munro takes me to the proximate past. I 
see flashes of myself in these characters, but the stories themselves are a 
journey to my grandparents’ time. They make me think of dusty roads and rural 
life, of a place that is very familiar but just out of reach – and of sweetened 
gin in the bottom of a glass on a summer afternoon.

 