
George Graham – 1 Oct 1998 to 16 March 2001

Despite being in charge for three years and leading Spurs to their first 
trophy in eight years, the 1999 League Cup, Graham departed within a month of 
Levy taking over as chairman.

Glenn Hoddle – 2 April 2001 to 21 Sept 2003

The former midfielder had more than 100 games in charge but could do no better 
than a ninth-placed finish in his first full season. Had a poor start to the 
03-04 season and, with no wins in four games, a 3-1 defeat to Southampton 
proved too much for Levy's patience.

David Pleat – 21 Sept 2003 to 3 June 2004

Briefly caretaker between Graham and Hoddle (to add to a spell in 1998 and his 
own managership in the 1980s), he returned to steady the ship until the end of 
the season. With a fairly even record, winning 16, losing 16 and drawing seven, 
a 14th-place finish meant he was never likely to regain the job permanently.

Jacques Santini – 3 June 2003 5 Nov 2004

Santini's reign at White Hart Lane is the shortest in the club's history. The 
Frenchman lasted 13 games and left citing personal problems despite sitting 
pretty in fourth position after an unbeaten start to the campaign.

Martin Jol – 5 Nov 2004 to 26 Oct 2007

Jol managed just shy of 150 games, winning 45% of them. Secured European 
football in consecutive seasons but just missed out on Champions League 
qualification. He lost his grip on the job after a disappointing start to the 
2007-08 season, winning only one out of 10.

Juande Ramos – 29 Oct 2007 to 25 Oct 2008 

After clawing Spurs out of their slump, Ramos won the Carling Cup final 
against Chelsea and secured 11th place. But a poor start the following season 
followed and eight games without a win concreted his side at the bottom, the 
last a 2-1 defeat at Stoke.

Harry Redknapp – 25 Oct 2008 to 15 June 2012 

From bottom place with two points after eight games, Redknapp led Tottenham to 
eighth in the table with 51 points and a year later Spurs reached fourth spot 
and qualified for the Champions League. But despite reaching the 2010-11 
quarter-finals they failed to requalify. In early 2012 a title challenge was 
possible and he was linked with the England job but that job went to Roy 
Hodgson while Spurs slipped to fourth; Chelsea's Champions League win elbowed 
Tottenham into the Europa League and Redknapp got the push.

André Villas-Boas – 3 July 2012 to 16 Dec 2013 

After failing at Chelsea, Villas-Boas was given a second chance in London by 
Spurs. Despite having the best win percentage, 55%, for Tottenham in the 
Premier League era and winning all six of his Europa League games, heavy 
defeats in big matches in his second season led to his three-year deal being 
cut short by "mutual consent".

Tim Sherwood – 16 Dec 2013 to 13 May 2014

Sherwood, having stepped up from the youth academy following AVB's demise, won 
an impressive 50% of games in his short time as manager. Humiliating defeats by 
Liverpool, Manchester City, Chelsea and West Ham meant Sherwood's tenure was 
always likely to be short.
 