
It must have seemed like a surefire method of attracting new visitors to your 
website: take the year's most heavily anticipated movie, and post a negative 
review linked to the popular aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes. The only problem 
forUS blogger Eric D Snider 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_dark_knight_rises/news/1925558/the_dark_knight_rises_--_this_is_why_we_cant_have_nice_things/>
 of the Snide Remarks site is that he had not seen The Dark Knight Rises, and 
was therefore in no position to comment on it.

Rotten Tomatoes yesterday took the rare step of banning Snider from the list 
of critics 
<http://www.bleedingcool.com/2012/07/17/how-the-dark-knight-rises-got-a-critic-banned-from-rotten-tomatoes/>
 whose reviews contribute to its aggregator scores for forthcoming movies. His 
crime has since been referred to elsewhere in the blogosphere as a form of 
"countertrolling" because the critic knew full well his verdict would cause 
consternation among vocal fans of film-maker Christopher Nolan who use the 
site. Rotten Tomatoes was later forced to temporarily disable comments on all 
The Dark Knight Rises reviews due to fan ire – though not as a direct result of 
Snider's verdict.

Snider's felony was compounded by the fact that he used his Rotten Tomatoes 
critic's login to suggest his review was being hosted on the website film.com, 
whereas it was actually linked to his own site 
<http://www.ericdsnider.com/index.php>.

"In our opinion, by knowingly posting a link that isn't a review (and he 
hadn't seen the movie), Snider has abused our trust, and therefore, his reviews 
will no longer apply to the Tomatometer," wrote Rotten Tomatoes editor-in-chief 
Matt Atchity in a blogpost explaining the decision to ban the critic. "If a 
critic abuses our trust by linking to something that's not a review, we will 
take action up to and including removing them from the Tomatometer. If a critic 
doesn't take their reputation seriously, then neither will we."

Snider had initially posted: "The Dark Knight Rises is easily the most 
disappointing Batman film so far – and I'm including [Joel] Schumacher's Batman 
and Robin in that statement. Nolan has finally lost his touch."

When readers clicked the link to view the full review, they were informed: 
"Just kidding! I haven't seenThe Dark Knight Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-dark-knight-rises> yet. It's probably 
very good! I just wanted to post a negative quote on Rotten Tomatoes and see 
how many idiots would type angry words at me without actually clicking the link 
to read the review. 'You ruined this movie's RT score!' is a dumb complaint 
that is only made by dumb people."

Snider later removed the offending review, but not before Rotten Tomatoes and 
other sites had screengrabbed it as evidence. He has since tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/EricDSnider>: "I apologise to those I offended who like to 
respond angrily to reviews they've only read one sentence of, of movies they 
haven't seen."

The critic can, at least, take solace in the fact that his verdict would not – 
after all – have singlehandedly ruinedThe Dark Knight Rises' 100% "fresh" 
rating on the site <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_dark_knight_rises/>. So 
far, three critics out of a total of 35 have now given the final instalment in 
Nolan's Batman trilogy a negative review: Christy Lemire of the Associated 
Press, Chris Tookey of the Daily Mail and Marshall Fine of the Hollywood & Fine 
blog.
 