
Fresh claims that the Lockerbie bomber was released to avoid violent Libyan 
reprisals against the UK have been dismissed by the former chancellorAlistair 
Darling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling> as "nonsense".

Darling said the allegations that Abdelbaset al-Megrahi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi> was freed early 
because Britain was frightened about the "dire consequences" it faced if he 
died in custody showed a fundamental misunderstanding of the relationship 
between the UK and Scottish governments.

The allegations have resurfaced after copies of diplomatic memos about Megrahi 
were recovered from the British embassy in Tripoli andpublished in the Mail on 
Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2033493/Gaddafi-wants-costs-Embassy-documents-revealed-tyrant-vowed-holy-war-mass-killer-died-Scottish-prison.html?ito=feeds-newsxml>
. The memos are similar to papers alreadyreleased by WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/07/wikileaks-gaddafi-britain-lockerbie-bomber>
 and by the UK government.

One memo, from Robert Dixon, head of the Foreign Office's north Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> team, said: "We believe Libya might 
seek to exact vengeance."

The repeated disclosures again raise questions about whether UK ministers and 
officials influenced or forced the Scottish government to free Megrahi on 
compassionate grounds to suit the UK's political and commercial interests in
Libya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>.

Other disclosures to emerge from the documents relate to the former prime 
minister, Tony Blair, and his attempts to help one of Colonel Gaddafi's sons 
with his PhD. While studying at the LSE, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi wrote a 429-page 
thesis on The Role of Civil Society in the Democratisation of Global Governance 
Institutions.

Blair, it seemed, thought he could help. In a letter addressed to "Engineer 
Saif", the former prime minister gave Gaddafi three examples of collaboration 
between government and civil society that "might help you with your studies".

Darling, in an interview with BBC1's Andrew Marr Show, confirmed that there 
was "no doubt" the then Labour government wanted to bring Gaddafi "in from the 
cold".

He said there was also no doubt Gaddafi wanted Megrahi released and that Alex 
Salmond, Scotland's first minister, "probably fancied a wander out on to the 
international stage".

But the theory that this meant Salmond's Scottish National party government 
had agreed to free Megrahi was untenable, Darling said.

"All this hangs on the willingness of the British Labour government doing a 
deal with a Scottish nationalist government, and anyone who knows anything about
Scottish politics <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scotland> knows there 
is such a visceral dislike between the two the idea there was some kind of 
collaboration between the two just seems to be nonsense," he told Marr.

A spokesman for Kenny MacAskill, the Scottish justice secretary who released 
Megrahi in August 2009, when the Libyan was dying of inoperable prostate 
cancer, said he was freed "on compassionate grounds alone" and "without any 
consideration of the economic, political and diplomatic factors that the UK 
Labour government based their hypocritical position on."

The decision was based on Scottish law and the recommendations of the Scottish 
parole board and the advice of the Scottish prison service's director of health 
and care, Andrew Fraser.

"Opinion poll evidence now shows a majority of people supporting the Scottish 
government's decision â€“ but whether people support or oppose the decision, it 
was made following the due process of Scots law, we stand by it, and Megrahi is 
dying of terminal prostate cancer," the spokesman said.
 