
Of all the big firms in Silicon Valley, Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> had the most to lose from 
Donald Trump’s presidency. And lose it did, albeit briefly, its share price 
dropping 5% shortly after the election.

During the campaign, Trump warned that Amazon had a “huge antitrust problem” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/13/amazon-getting-away-with-on-tax-says-donald-trump>
 – a reasonable stance for the populist that he once aspired to be. Most 
likely, though, his animosity had more to do with the fact Amazon’s founder, 
Jeff Bezos, also owns theWashington Post, an influential newspaper that took an 
early strong dislike of Trump. By the time ofAmazon’s massive cloud-computing 
conference <https://reinvent.awsevents.com/>, which kicked off in Las Vegas at 
the end of November, such squabbles seem to have been forgotten. Amazon went on 
to wow the audience with impressive gimmicks. Did you knowit has a truck – yes, 
a real truck – to drive your data to the cloud 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/amazon-extends-web-based-artificial-intelligence-1480529802>
? Apparently, it’s much faster than using networks.

Amazon also unveiled its cloud-based artificial intelligence services, 
including systems for recognising objects in images, processing speech 
commands, and operating chatbot applications. Thus, it’s joiningGoogle, 
Microsoft, Facebook, and IBM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/28/google-facebook-amazon-ibm-microsoft-partnership-on-ai-tech-firms>
 in the already crowded field of advanced AI.

For Amazon, this is hardly new territory. By now, it must have built a robust 
AI operation for its own use, what with all the data it has amassed on its 
users (it’s precisely the troves of such data that explain recent breakthroughs 
in one of the most promising strands of contemporary AI –deep learning 
<http://deeplearning.net/>).

Now, Amazon wants to make money by letting others tap into its existing AI 
infrastructure. It did something similar a decade ago, when it realised it had 
a lot of spare server infrastructure it could lend out to others. A clever 
move: today Amazon’s cloud services often generate more profits than its retail 
operations in North America.

Its nascent AI operation is likely to rely on a similar model: clients will 
pay to tap into Amazon’s ability to recognise images or voices and insert such 
magic into their app or service. The other four AI giants are also unlikely to 
settle on a charity model. As they integrate AI products into healthcare, 
education, energy and transport, they will eventually pass on the bill to 
citizens – either directly, as usage fees, or indirectly, through lucrative 
contracts with institutions such as the NHS.

The political implications are mind-boggling. Five American firms – China’s 
Baidu being the only significant foreign contender – have already extracted, 
processed and digested much of the world’s data. This has given them advanced 
AI capabilities, helping to secure control over a crucial part of the global 
digital infrastructure. Immense power has been shifted to just one sector of 
society as a result.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fdata-populists-must-seize-information-for-benefit-of-all-evgeny-morozov%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8588681646d6a008f46a7206adaa21738685f54%2F0_50_4140_2485%2F4140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Data%20populists%20must%20seize%20our%20information%20%E2%80%93%20for%20the%20benefit%20of%20us%20all%20%7C%20Evgeny%20Morozov&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fdata-populists-must-seize-information-for-benefit-of-all-evgeny-morozov%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Data%20populists%20must%20seize%20our%20information%20%E2%80%93%20for%20the%20benefit%20of%20us%20all%20%7C%20Evgeny%20Morozov&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fdata-populists-must-seize-information-for-benefit-of-all-evgeny-morozov%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8588681646d6a008f46a7206adaa21738685f54%2F0_50_4140_2485%2F4140.jpg>
 Jeff Bezos, chief executive and founder of Amazon. Photograph: Joe 
Klamar/AFP/Getty Images 
Imagine, for a moment, that all the world’s land suddenly became the property 
of just five big banks or property developers, with the rest of us having to 
pay a fee whenever our feet touched the ground. This wouldn’t be unprecedented. 
Such efforts of aristocratic and financial elites to snatch up and profit from 
land spawned new economic philosophies, like georgism, and boosted policy 
interventions, like the land value tax. But what to do about similar efforts to 
snatch up data?

Two approaches have proven particularly popular. One celebrates alternative 
models of economic organisation – for example, cooperatives that are less 
exploitative than platforms such as Amazon or Microsoft. Such efforts at 
platform cooperativism are worthwhile; occasionally, they do produce impressive 
and ethical local projects.

There is no reason why a cooperative of drivers in a small town cannot build 
an app to help them beat Uber locally. But there is also no good reason to 
believe that this local cooperative can actually build a self-driving car: this 
requires massive investment and a dedicated infrastructure to harvest and 
analyse all of the data. One can, of course, also create data ownership 
cooperatives but it’s unlikely they will scale to a point of competing with 
Google or Amazon.

Click here for the AI apocalypse (brought to you by Facebook) | Robert Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/ai-apocalypse-facebook-algorithms>
Another approach – simply to break up or shrink big technology firms – is also 
problematic. It assumes that data is simply like any other product, like, say, 
oil or widgets. Such a view, however, is inaccurate. Oil doesn’t become better 
or more valuable simply because you store more of it in your warehouse. Data, 
however, does: the more of it you harvest, the better the insights – and the 
higher the savings you can pass on to citizens. Today’s advances in AI were 
possible only because a handful of companies have, in fact, enjoyed the status 
of quasi monopolies. Ten thousand startups, each owning a tiny piece of 
Google’s data empire, would never produce a self-driving car either.

Leftwing populists, such as Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, do not seem 
to realise that data has its own properties, insisting, instead, that giant 
tech platforms harm competition. One fights this threat by limiting the size of 
these firms and ensuring they don’t extend their tentacles into too many 
sectors and technologies. In other words, the goal is to make the marketplace 
more competitive.

However, in the absence of active government policy on AI, a truly competitive 
marketplace will never deliver on the massive expectations, as it will be too 
fragmented to create value from all the data. Nor will it deliver the cheap 
goods that consumers – faced with falling incomes – have come to depend upon. 
The rhetoric of improving competition cannot lie at the heart of economic 
populism in the 21st century. A much better agenda for left-leaning populists 
would be to insist that data is an essential, infrastructural good that should 
belong to all of us; it should not be claimed, owned, or managed by 
corporations. Enterprises should, of course, be allowed to build their services 
around it but only once they pay their dues. The ownership of this data – and 
the advanced AI built on it – should always remain with the public. This way, 
citizens and popular institutions can ensure that companies do not hold us 
hostage, imposing fees for using services that we ourselves have helped to 
produce. Instead of us paying Amazon a fee to use its AI capabilities – built 
with our data – Amazon should be required to pay that fee to us.

This points to a broader deficiency with most populist projects of the left: 
all they can promise is just more of the same but done better, utopia be 
damned. So, antitrust regulations will get tougher; jobs will magically come 
back; the welfare state will once again be as generous as it was in the 1960s.

However, the jobs won’t come back because they never really left: they were 
simply automated out of existence. Making big data firms smaller is not a 
programme that will excite anyone with even a rudimentary understanding of what 
makes these firms so effective and their products so affordable. Waxing 
nostalgic about the highly intrusive welfare state – while Silicon Valley 
elites cheerlead for the creative flexibility of basic income – also seems 
suicidal.

The left’s inability to master this new populist language is all the more 
puzzling, given that technology is one issue where rightwing populists such as 
Trump and Ukip have little to offer. It’s even hard to imagine what the 
rightwing version of data populism would be like, other than to say that we 
have been living and breathing such populism, albeit in a polished, neoliberal 
version of Barack Obama or David Cameron, for the last decade.

Data populism, in other words, is one issue on which the populist left does 
have a genuine advantage, but only if it understands that the traditional 
progressive agenda, like everything else these days, has been utterly disrupted 
by digital technology. Instead of denying it, progressive populists should use 
the data debate as an opportunity to re-establish their relevance to the 
crucial economic debates of today.

Amazon v Donald Trump? Jeff Bezos may soon face his biggest challenge yet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/18/amazon-jeff-bezos-donald-trump-challenge>
A Prehistory of the Cloud by Tung-Hui Hu review – the reality behind virtual 
storage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/16/prehistory-of-the-cloud-tung-hui-hu-review-reality-virtual-storage> 