
I suggested earlier today 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/wintour-and-watt/2011/aug/03/edmiliband-labour>
, perhaps a little unfairly, that David Cameron would be taking the collected 
works of Jeremy Clarkson on holiday with him to Italy.

It is true that the prime minister, who regularly breaks bread with his 
"Chipping Norton set" near neighbour, loves Clarkson's column in the Sunday 
Times.

But Cameron appears not to have taken any Clarkson books with him. He has 
instead taken Skippy. Top of his summer reading is the novel Skippy Dies, a 
comic account of life at a Dublin Catholic public school. The prime minister 
has also taken a heavy tome – Simon Sebag Montefiore's Jerusalem: The Biography.

This is what the prime minister wrote for the Spectator's summer reading list  
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/books/blog/7141258/the-spectators-summer-reading-list.thtml>
published this afternoon:

I've been reading a book called Skippy Dies by Paul Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/paul-murray>, an Irish writer. I read it 
when I was in Ibiza and I haven't managed to finish it, so I've picked it up 
again. What else have I got? I tend to have a pile of books that I dip into. 
For instance, I've got Simon Sebag Montefiore's Jerusalem. I've been reading 
that from the end backwards, which is a slightly strange approach.

Skippy Dies received a rave review in the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/feb/06/skippy-dies-paul-murray> by 
Patrick Ness who wrote of its "661 glorious pages". This is what Ness wrote:

Skippy is Daniel "Skippy" Juster, so nicknamed because of his unfortunate 
resemblance to a certain TV kangaroo. He's a boarder at Seabrook College, an 
expensive Catholic school in Dublin, and is at that unfortunate age where 
"suddenly everyone was tall and gangling and talking about drinking and sperm. 
Walking among them is like ­being in a BO-smelling forest."

So we now know the differences between Britain's main party leaders. The prime 
minister will be laughing in the grounds of his Tuscan villa about Howard the 
Coward, the history master who sleeps with Miss McIntyre, a substitute teacher. 
Ed Miliband will, asI blogged 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/wintour-and-watt/2011/aug/03/edmiliband-labour>
 earlier, be reading some serious tomes about political leadership and the 
economy. Benedict Brogan hasposted a nice blog 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/benedictbrogan/100099536/dave-v-ed-the-summer-read-off/>
 about this.

If Skippy Dies appear a trifle light for a prime minister, then his inclusion 
ofJerusalem: The Biography 
<http://www.simonsebagmontefiore.com/jerusalem_acclaim.aspx> shows that Cameron 
has a serious side. This was probably recommended by Michael Gove, one of the 
few genuine intellectuals around the cabinet table, who hailed it in the Times 
as "supremely ambitious".

Cameron's former tutors at Oxford, where he took a first in PPE, may be sad to 
learn from their former star pupil that he appears to have trouble in finishing 
books. He read, but didn't finish, Ian McEwan's novel Solar earlier this year.

Perhaps Cameron should follow the example of Harold Macmillan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/harold-macmillan>, the last Etonian to 
serve as prime minister for more than a year. Macmillan used to shoo ministers 
away while he was reading Trollope.
 