
For music fans of David Cameron's age, a mix tape was traditionally a 
cassette-based assemblage, painstakingly compiled to persuade a love interest 
of your innate good taste and quietly sensitive romantic compatibility.

Traditionalists will thus be aghast at the prime minister's adaptation of the 
medium: a slightly soulless, industry-compiled rundown of popular British acts, 
presented as a gift to world leaders at theG8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g8> summit in Northern Ireland last month. 
If that wasn't enough, the means of storage was a USB stick.

The lucky recipients – Barack Obama, Vladimir Putin and Angela Merkel among 
them – were presented with a 10-song compilation, put together for Cameron by 
the BPI, which represents the recorded music industry. The collection was 
described by the BPI as "a bespoke creation for the leaders" that was not 
"available for reproduction". However,a freedom of information request 
<https://twitter.com/iamdanw/status/362150150170361857> has revealed the full 
selection, which is now available asa Spotify playlist <https://t.co/urk8En9Qw5>
.

World leaders bold enough to insert the USB in a laptop will gain the 
impression – and a not entirely inaccurate one – that British popular music is 
currently dominated by well-scrubbed young men and woman peddling polished but 
largely derivative takes on folk and soul, with a sideline in tastefully 
bleeping electronica.

Among the acts featured are the Mercury prize-winning Alt-J, teenage Bob 
Dylan-botherer Jake Bugg, and Birmingham retro-soulsterLaura Mvula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/laura-mvula>. The youngest of a generally 
youthful crop is Birdy, the Anglo-Belgian 17-year-old whose lounge pianist 
rendition of Bon Iver's Skinny Love has been played on YouTube nearly 50m times.

As a collection it is unlikely to scare the horses, let alone prompt a fellow 
G8 leader to look at Cameron in a different, more interested way. The one note 
of possible controversy is the inclusion of an expletive in the offering from 
Tom Odell, Another Love.

This is, however, likely to be good news for the prime minister, even if the 
collection is some way from his own tastes,as revealed on Desert Island Discs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/features/desert-island-discs/castaway/8d5bcfbc>, 
which stretches more towards early REM, Radiohead and The Smiths.

Revelation of his love for the latter group brought trouble for Cameron after 
estranged Smiths songwriters and lynchpins Morrissey and Johnny Marrmanaged a 
rare moment of agreement to tell the prime minister that he was forbidden to be 
a fan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/dec/06/morrissey-johnny-marr-david-cameron>
.

The full playlist:


Alt-J <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alt-j> – Tessellate

Jake Bugg <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jake-bugg> – Lightning Bolt

Laura Mvula – Green Garden

Lianne La Havas <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lianne-la-havas> – Is Your 
Love Big Enough?

Ben Howard <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ben-howard> – Only Love

Gabrielle Aplin – Home

Tom Odell – Another Love

Rudimental ft John Newman – Feel the Love

Birdy – Skinny Love

Conor Maynard <https://www.theguardian.com/music/conor-maynard> – Can't Say No
 