
The Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> 
captain, Steven Davis, felt his side deserved to be celebrating a crucial 
three-point World Cup qualifying victory against Azerbaijan after creating 
enough chances to win "two or three games".

Michael O'Neill's side spurned at least half a dozen glorious chances to 
cancel out Rauf Aliyev's stunning first-half strike forAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> before finding the back of 
the net when David Healy scored deep into stoppage time.

Craig Cathcart and Chris Baird wasted four of the best between them. With nine 
minutes remaining of normal time the hosts' frustrations were apparent after 
every unsuccessful move and O'Neill played his final card by sending on Healy 
for Cathcart. It took Healy's first goal in four years, five minutes beyond the 
90-minute mark, to avert what would have been an embarrassing defeat. Healy's 
role as the fans' favourite was only reinforced by the manner of his equaliser, 
a dramatic free-kick from outside the 18-yard area.

But there was no time left for Northern Ireland to find a winner and the 1-1 
draw was a huge setback to their World Cup qualifying campaign. The result 
leaves them with three points from four games in Group F and all but out of the 
reckoning, as well as consigning last month's heroic draw in Portugal firmly to 
the history books.

Davis said of a match in which the home side enjoyed plenty of time on the 
ball but struggled to make the final pass count: "We created enough chances to 
win two or three games but we simply couldn't find the net and when we did it 
was too late. I don't think I've played in a Northern Ireland performance where 
we've created so much, so many clear-cut chances. I thought the performance 
merited the win but it wasn't to be."

Davis said of his side's chances: "It's going to make it really difficult â€¦ I 
thought if we won tonight it would put us in a position with three home games 
to come where we might have had a chance of doing something but obviously this 
is a major blow. But we'll keep going."

O'Neill also felt his side deserved more and praised the "fantastic" character 
of his players.

He said: "The early goal obviously wasn't in the plan and knocked us a bit but 
I felt from that moment forward we basically dominated the game. We missed 
countless chances but the character the players showed was fantastic and I 
can't ask any more of them.

"They went right to the death. We saw players playing the last few minutes 
with knocks and injuries. We get the very least we deserved and we deserved a 
lot more than that. I'm obviously disappointed for the players but I couldn't 
ask any more of them."

When asked if he felt there was blatant time wasting from Azerbaijan at the 
end, O'Neill said: "I don't think you will have to have been to too many 
football matches to work that out. I thought some of the behaviour was not 
really something you want to see at a game."

Northern Ireland were on the back foot as early as the fifth minute when Javid 
Huseynov won the ball in midfield and laid it off to Aliyev, who bent in a 
stunning shot from 30 yards.
 