
David Byrne and Alicia Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aliciakeys> are 
to collaborate at an upcoming charity concert in New York. The Talking Heads 
frontman and the bestselling R&B singer will perform together at Keys’ annual 
Black Ball fundraiser for Keep a Child Alive.

Byrne “immediately said yes”, he told Billboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/6281604/alicia-keys-david-byrne-black-ball-2014>
, when organisers asked if he would be involved. “I’m flattered and excited,” 
he said.

Keys claims to have long been a fan of Byrne’s, calling the team-up “an 
honour”. “I’ve always been inspired byDavid Byrne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/david-byrne> and his ability to combine 
music and art,” she said. “[We] have been talking about his new music and what 
we’re going to perform and just the thought of it is amazing!”

As co-founder of Keep A Child Alive, Keys has participated in each of the 10 
prior Black Balls, including three galas in London. Past events have hosted 
performances by Bono, Jay Z, Baaba Maal and Sade, while Keys has performed on 
stage with artists such asDavid Bowie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vq6mKkdIoQA>, Adele 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ImHrvAhWYU> and Pharrell Williams 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v-FgF_K0I9I>. Over the past decade, Keys’ 
charity has raised more than $18 million for children and families affected by 
Africa’s HIV/Aids epidemic.

While Byrne released six solo albums between 1989 and 2004, recent years have 
seen him become more active as a collaborator. Besides records with Brian Eno 
and St Vincent, the 62-year-old wrote a stage musical with Fatboy Slim’s Norman 
Cook and contributed to two songs on a recent EP by Anna Calvi.

As a member of the Talking Heads, Byrne was inducted into the Rock and Roll 
Hall of Fame in 2002.
 