
David Walsh <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/david-walsh> is not a 
man to do things by halves.

Most people already know this, of course; read anything written about the 
gambler-cum-art collector and you’ll find no shortage of excess. But staring 
with the gallery owner at one of his latest acquisitions – a lifesize 
fibreglass sculpture of a blue-haired anime boy, who wears nothing but a 
triumphant expression as he grasps his penis,TA-DA!, with a spiralling torrent 
of semen frozen in the air around him – the point is really driven home.

Walsh brought me into the room to admire this piece: My Lonesome Cowboy by 
Takashi Murakami (1998) 
<https://www.wikiart.org/en/takashi-murakami/my-lonesome-cowboy-1998>. The 
artwork is worth $20m, making it the most valuable object in the newest 
exhibition at Hobart’s Museum of Old and New Art – the largest privately funded 
museum in the country.

Is this your favourite piece, I ask? “Only because it’s worth $20m,” Walsh 
answers. “Collectors can pretend they collected it because of ‘the infinite 
irony of Murakami’, but they didn’t. They collected it because he’s got a big 
dick.”

Walsh – scruffy haired and brightly shod – is a fan of declarative statements, 
particularly ones that undercut the entire industry he bought into. He delivers 
these statements slowly, after long pauses that could signify thoughtfulness, 
or boredom, or both.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22d7ed7301f02ad0771feaf5e3358b95ca0682b9%2F0_843_2731_3253%2F2731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Walsh%20of%20Mona%3A%20on%20art%2C%20sex%20and%20why%20(gallery)%20size%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Walsh%20of%20Mona%3A%20on%20art%2C%20sex%20and%20why%20%28gallery%29%20size%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22d7ed7301f02ad0771feaf5e3358b95ca0682b9%2F0_843_2731_3253%2F2731.jpg>
 ‘There I am, in the editorials in the Mercury, having been a great contributor 
to the community that I hadn’t revisited since I was able to leave.’ 
Photograph: Leigh Carmichael 
Opened in 2011, Mona – also known as “the museum of sex and death” – was 
bankrolled by the fortune Walsh made from a gambling system he developed. Now 
the beneficiary of generous funding from the Tasmanian government for its 
associated festivals, Dark Mofo and Mona Foma, the museum has been credited with
reinventing the cultural landscape of Hobart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/14/monas-david-walsh-now-im-the-arbiter-of-good-taste-the-thing-i-abhor>
 andinjecting millions 
<https://www.crikey.com.au/2012/06/08/tasmanian-recession-not-at-david-walshs-bizarre-world-of-art/>
 into its tourism industry.

Walsh received an Order of Australia this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/26/david-walsh-on-australia-day-honour-an-officer-yes-but-not-a-gentleman>
 for his service to the visual arts, allowing him to sign his name, finally, 
with “AO”. (“If my life were a movie I’d like to think that it would be rated 
Adults Only,”he wrote at the time <https://monablog.net/category/david-walsh/>
.) His gallery has been almost unanimously praised for reanimating the global 
conversation about what art is and why we make it.

But don’t call him a hero.

“If I said, ‘I did this for the good of mankind,’ or, ‘I really wanted to help 
the local community’ – I think I can feel, because I’m concentrating on it, I 
can feel my blood flow change saying that,” he says, of his motives. “This 
community has probably benefited somewhat as a side-effect, and people keep 
saying, ‘It’s so great that you did this in the place where you were born’ – 
but I couldn’t give a fuck about where I was born.”

He bought the property, he says, because he saw the vineyard from his house 
across the river (“where the rich fuckers live”), fancied the pinot (he now 
also owns the winery), and needed a new place to put his art.

“And there I am, in the editorials in the Mercury, having been a great 
contributor to the community that I hadn’t revisited since I was able to leave 
when I was 18.”

Dark Mofo: making a strangely beautiful town seem deliciously deranged | Steph 
Harmon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/24/dark-mofo-a-strangely-beautiful-town-becomes-deliciously-deranged>
Mona’s latest exhibition is the gallery’s most ambitious yet, and it deals 
specifically with a question Walsh has long sought to answer: why do humans 
make art? On the Origin ofArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> – 
which opened at the weekend with a Gatsby-ish private party even more lavish 
than the museum’s official launch – is the culmination of five years of 
planning and decades of fascination for Walsh and his team. And tens of 
millions of dollars, too.


The show works from Walsh’s thesis that art is not purely a cultural project 
but one that has its basis in biology. “It’s part of the real world that almost 
everyone ignores,” he says. “There are tens of thousands of art exhibitions at 
any given time around the world and all of them are inadvertently based on the 
premise that art is a cultural phenomenon. And that’s both unquestioned and 
likely to be wrong.”


The exhibition begins in a foyer space on the underground floor known as “the 
void”, with four identical doors leading to four very different spaces. Four 
experts in science, psychology and language – four men who, in line with Mona’s 
philosophy of rethinking how we understand art, are outsiders to the art world 
– have curated their own exhibitions to present their theories of where art 
comes from.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e1e1f28be7eb0db07efdb97774ad73968192408%2F0_515_1365_1040%2F1365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Walsh%20of%20Mona%3A%20on%20art%2C%20sex%20and%20why%20(gallery)%20size%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Walsh%20of%20Mona%3A%20on%20art%2C%20sex%20and%20why%20%28gallery%29%20size%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e1e1f28be7eb0db07efdb97774ad73968192408%2F0_515_1365_1040%2F1365.jpg>
 Dots Obsession – Tasmania (2016) by the Japanese artist Yayoi Kusama, 
commissioned for Brian Boyd’s room in On the Origin of Art at Mona. Photograph: 
Rémi Chauvin/Mona 
The exhibition comprises 234 objects from 35 countries spanning millennia; 
some are drawn from the gallery’s collection, others are loans, acquisitions 
and original commissions. Taken as a jumbled collection of art to spend an 
afternoon in – featuring such names asPierre-Auguste Renoir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pierre-auguste-renoir>, Brett 
Whiteley, Cindy Sherman, Bill Henson, Fiona Hall – it is extravagant enough: in 
literary professor Brian Boyd’s exhibition, for instance, you’ll find a 
retrospective of Art Spiegelman’s comics, a dazzling melting rug from 
Azerbaijan’s Faig Ahmed, ancient patterned pottery from central America, and a 
bright yellow polka dotted mirror room by Yayoi Kusama, commissioned for this 
exhibition.

But through their curation, and in the accompanying audio tours and essays, it 
becomes so much more. Each expert asks and answers a different question about 
art, science and evolution – some more successfully than others, and some in 
direct opposition to others – for an overall experience that’s as fun to think 
about as it is to look at.

Stephen Pinker, cognitive scientist, linguist and popular science author, 
makes perhaps the most compelling argument. He believes artistic drive has not 
evolved as a trait but arrived as a byproduct, piggy-backing on other adaptive 
aesthetics – our appreciation of “good” bodies (for reproduction), high status 
(for security) and pretty landscapes (for safety).

Brian Boyd, by contrast, homes in on patterns – in nature, in Shakespeare, in 
Indigenous art, in comics – which help humans make sense of, and play with, the 
information around them.

The US evolutionary neurobiologist Mark Changizi brings us art that resembles 
the natural world – evocative but also grotesque “uncanny valley” sculptures by 
Patricia Piccinini, a commissioned installation by Brigita Ozolins exploring 
the resemblance of alphabet letters to the contours of nature – to show us that 
art is shaped to fit preferences our brains have already developed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ce167e6559137910abc2053a6f65468fca8fb49%2F0_0_6400_4267%2F6400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Walsh%20of%20Mona%3A%20on%20art%2C%20sex%20and%20why%20(gallery)%20size%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Walsh%20of%20Mona%3A%20on%20art%2C%20sex%20and%20why%20%28gallery%29%20size%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ce167e6559137910abc2053a6f65468fca8fb49%2F0_0_6400_4267%2F6400.jpg>
 Sphinx (2012) by the Australian artist Patricia Piccinini, with more of her 
works in the background. Photograph: Rémi Chauvin/Mona 
The rooms Walsh and I are standing in, though, are the gallerist’s favourite. 
In them, the evolutionary psychologist Geoffrey Miller aims to show us that art 
is merely another method of sexual selection: a mechanism for attracting mates 
that has evolved over millennia.

Mona's David Walsh: 'Now I’m the arbiter of good taste. The thing I abhor'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/14/monas-david-walsh-now-im-the-arbiter-of-good-taste-the-thing-i-abhor>
We turn from Murakami’s semen lasso to find Manet (1991): a large-scale print 
ofJeff Koons <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/koons> performing 
cunnilingus on his then wife, porn star and politician Ilona “Cicciolina” 
Staller. On the walls opposite is a series of erotic art by Torii Kiyonaga 
(1752) and from the ceiling above us screens Pickelporno, a closely shot erotic 
film by Pipilotti Rist.

On my first viewing, I spent the smallest amount of time in this room. I left 
quickly, Walsh says, because it made me uncomfortable. “It’s all porn. Makes 
you uncomfortable because it’s changing your blood flow,” he tells me.

“It’s unfortunate in a sense, because it looks like that’s [Miller’s] entire 
argument – but his argument is deeper, it’s about the displays in the art [and 
their role in sexual selection].”


Indeed, if you don’t read his essays or listen to the audio tour through 
Mona’s iPod app “The O” – which you absolutely must, particularly for this 
exhibition – Miller’s curation seems less interested in proving that art is a 
process of sexual selection and more interested in fleshy genitalia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b4a90d612e97dfbaaa5d2c8b1c4cca86c56a6df%2F0_0_2048_1365%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Walsh%20of%20Mona%3A%20on%20art%2C%20sex%20and%20why%20(gallery)%20size%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Walsh%20of%20Mona%3A%20on%20art%2C%20sex%20and%20why%20%28gallery%29%20size%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b4a90d612e97dfbaaa5d2c8b1c4cca86c56a6df%2F0_0_2048_1365%2F2048.jpg>
 India (Frost) (2013), Anne Marie (Iguana) (2012) and Albino (Milky) (2012), by 
the US photographer Ryan McGinley, in Geoffrey Miller’s exhibition for On the 
Origin of Art. Photograph: Rémi Chauvin/Mona 
But engage with the supporting material, and Miller explains that his theory 
about art derives from Darwin’s: art emerged before humans did as a means “to 
attract sexual partners, by showing conspicuous beauty, skill and creativity”.

“It’s a funny theory because it sounds very reductionist, and creepy, and 
pervy – but for me to say that art evolved because our ancestors were attracted 
to people who are good at art is actuallyun-reductionist,” Miller tells me. 
“We’re saying the smartest animals that ever existed, our ancestors ... are 
what shaped our ability to do art. And that to me is the most respectful and 
psychological way to think about the origin or art.


“If you say it’s for survival, or it’s just for play, or it’s a side-effect of 
other [adaptive] abilities, thenthat is a reductive explanation,” he continues, 
condensing the other three curations into refutable bites.

He could have curated his exhibition without any sexual content, he says, but 
that would have missed the point. “The sexual content is partly just to remind 
the art critic people that they’ve systematically excluded sexuality from the 
history of art for centuries … The point is that sexuality is central to human 
nature.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb02124830996646fb60deef38e8517a4f644fe6%2F0_0_1530_2048%2F1530.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Walsh%20of%20Mona%3A%20on%20art%2C%20sex%20and%20why%20(gallery)%20size%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Walsh%20of%20Mona%3A%20on%20art%2C%20sex%20and%20why%20%28gallery%29%20size%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fon-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb02124830996646fb60deef38e8517a4f644fe6%2F0_0_1530_2048%2F1530.jpg>
 ‘The point is that sexuality is central to human nature’: Untitled (2006) by 
Balint Zsako, curated by Geoffrey Miller for On the Origin of Art at Mona. 
Photograph: Balint Zsako/Mona 
It’s no surprise to find that Miller’s understanding and curation of art is 
the one Walsh most subscribes to. This is, after all, a man so invested in the 
demystification of bodies and sex that he has in his art collection 150 vulvas, 
individually sculpted from live models, and a toilet that doubles as a viewing 
station to watch your own anus as you defecate. Walsh’s aim has always been to 
“democratise art”, using science, philosophy and agitprop to disrupt the art 
world.

It’s a world Walsh is particularly scathing about: “The most honest statement 
of what the art community believes, particularly the academic art community, 
is, ‘We’ve never thought about it and God willing,inshallah, we never will. 
Don’t make us think about things that actually require the acquisition of 
expertise. We want to spend five minutes getting our degree and then 
essentially do nothing, make a good income, and get laid for the rest of our 
lives because of it.’”

For Walsh, this exhibition represents the next stage in his “voyage of 
discovery”. “I own an art gallery and I know almost nothing about art,” he 
says. It was one of Walsh’s main reasons for openingMona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mona> in the first place: to start 
and learn from a conversation about what art is.

The other motive behind opening Mona? Well, that should be obvious by now. 

“Let me ask you, if there’s someone who owns a gallery of this scale, compared 
with someone that doesn’t, which do you think is more likely to get laid?”

I answer the question with a pointed finger.

“Well, see, there’s the biological advantage,” he says.


• Mona’s new exhibition, On the Origin of Art <https://mona.net.au/ooa/>, is 
open until 17 April. The Guardian travelled to Hobart as a guest of Mona.

• This story was amended on 9 November to correct an error by the writer; 
David Walsh and Mona do not own Murakami’s My Lonesome Cowboy
 