
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is preparing 
to back the introduction of term limits for peers following a deluge of 
criticism on Thursday over the rising number of peerages handed out to his 
close associates.

The move comes as the new honours list showed that the Lords are to receive 
another 45 peers. These include party donors, MPs and special advisers.

Douglas Hogg, who claimed more than £2,000 in MPs’ expenses to clean the moat 
on his country estate and employ a mole catcher, is among 26 Tories who 
dominate the list of peers.

Distaste for David Cameron’s new appointments to the House of Lords | Letters 
from Natalie Bennett, Tony Greaves and others
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/31/distaste-for-david-camerons-new-appointments-to-the-house-of-lords>
They also include a city banker who has given millions to the party, a chief 
executive of a company criticised earlier this year for failing to pay the 
minimum wage and the high-profile founder of a lingerie firm.

Public anger over growing costs during an austerity programme forced the prime 
minister topromise to tackle the size of the upper chamber 
<https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/manifesto2015/ConservativeManifesto2015.pdf>
 and the costs of politics during this year’s general election. Instead he has 
appointed new members to the Lords at a faster rate than any prime minister 
since life peerages began in 1958. These include 102 Tory peerages since he 
took office.

Questioned over the apparently broken general election promise, a source close 
to the prime minister disclosed that Cameron was now willing to support changes 
which would limit the number of years peers were able to sit in the house and 
vote on legislation.

“The PM is not going to attempt to go down the route of changing the 
constitution again. But he would be open to changes such as setting time limits 
if they are put forward through theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> in the Lords,” he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fdavid-camerons-reckless-creation-life-peers-damages-house-of-lords-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron's%20life%20peerages%20damage%20House%20of%20Lords%2C%20says%20academic%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fdavid-camerons-reckless-creation-life-peers-damages-house-of-lords-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%27s%20life%20peerages%20damage%20House%20of%20Lords%2C%20says%20academic%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fdavid-camerons-reckless-creation-life-peers-damages-house-of-lords-video&media=>
 ‘David Cameron’s life peerages damage House of Lords’, says university 
academic Meg Russell.Link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/aug/27/david-camerons-reckless-creation-life-peers-damages-house-of-lords-video>
Cameron would also support further encouragement of peers to stand down, the 
source said. “More than 20 peers have stood down this year, but there is 
certainly room for finding ways of encouraging more to do so,” he added.

At present there is no limit to the number of life peers, no set retirement 
age and no tenure. Many senior figures,including Lord O’Donnell 
<http://www.globalgovernmentforum.com/interview-gus-odonnell-former-uk-cabinet-secretary/>
, the former cabinet secretary, have called for a limit on the number of years 
that a peer can remain in the Lords.

The new peerages and the new House of Lords – full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/27/the-new-peerages-and-the-new-house-of-lords-full-list>
The government has previously tried to encourage peers to retire. The House of 
Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> Reform Act, which came into 
force on 17 May 2014, gave peers the right to retire and a right to give a 
valedictory speech.

The new act made “provision for resignation from the House of Lords and to 
make provision for the expulsion of members of the House of Lords in specified 
circumstances”.

According to the Electoral Reform Society the influx of new peers – which 
takes the total active membership to 826, making it the second most populous 
legislative chamber in the world – will cost the British taxpayer at least an 
extra £1.2m a year.

Katie Ghose, the society’s chief executive, said: “At a time when the 
government is talking about reducing the cost of politics, this announcement is 
an expensive insult to the public.”

Before the election Cameron had talked about “cutting the cost of politics” 
<http://www.conservatives.com/News/Speeches/2009/09/David_Cameron_Cutting_the_Cost_of_Politics.aspx>
 and said that too much public money was being spent on staff. But since then 
the government has has been defeated in the Lords over devolution, the EU 
referendum and English votes for English laws, prompting a rush for more 
reliable supporters on the red benches.








Donors who have been ennobled include James Lupton, a financier who has given 
£2.8m to the party and is its co-treasurer. Ruby McGregor-Smith, chief 
executive of Mitie Group, will join him in the Lords, months after signing a 
letter backing George Osborne’s economic programme. The outsourcing company 
MiHomecare, which is part of the group, has faced criticism this year for 
failing to pay care workers the minimum wage.

Also lined up by the Tories to become a peer is Michelle Mone, founder of the 
Ultimo lingerie brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/11/ultimo-lingerie-michelle-mone-david-camerons-entrepreneurship-tsar>
, just weeks after she was appointed as the government’s new entrepreneurship 
tsar for areas of high unemployment.

Revealed: the link between life peerages and party donations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/21/revealed-link-life-peerages-party-donations>
Cameron has also been accused of attempting to pack the Lords with “cronies” 
willing to vote for his programme. They include Kate Fall, his deputy chief of 
staff, James O’Shaughnessy, a former head of policy at No 10, and Simone Finn, 
Francis Maude’s former special adviser.

Andrew Lansley <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley>, the 
architect of controversial NHS reforms in the early phase of the coalition 
government, William Hague, the former foreign secretary, and Sir George Young, 
the former Tory chief whip, are among other ministers.

Anne McIntosh, the former Tory MP for Thirsk and Malton, who was deselected 
before the general election, will become a peer, as will the former minister 
David Willetts.

The Liberal Democrats have been given 11 more peers despite a poor showing in 
the general election and a commitment to scrap the present second chamber. They 
include two former MPs rejected by voters three months ago: Lynn Featherstone, 
the former Home Office minister, and Lorely Burt, former MP for Solihull. The 
party now has just eight MPs but more than 112 peers.

Anthony Ullmann, a businessman and one of the Lib Dems’ most generous donors, 
gets a knighthood. Ullmann has donated a total of £98,500 to the party, 
according to the Electoral Commission. His gifts include £30,000 in the run-up 
to the general election to Nick Clegg’s constituency party in Sheffield, where 
the former Liberal Democrat leader faced a struggle to retain his seat.

Eight Labour peers will also sit in the Lords, including Tessa Jowell, the 
former culture minister who is standing for the post of London mayor. She will 
be joined by David Blunkett, the former education secretary, Peter Hain, the 
former Welsh secretary, the former chancellorAlistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling> and Ed Miliband’s former 
campaign director, Spencer Livermore.

A slew of past and present Tory aides and advisers have been rewarded for 
their service with other honours. Oliver Dowden, a former Downing Street 
adviser and now MP, will be a CBE, as will Cameron’s operations chief, Liz 
Sugg, and George Osborne’s former chief of staff, Rupert Harrison.

The lowest form of honour handed out by Cameron on Thursday, the British 
Empire Medal, has been given to other No 10 staff, in sharp contrast the higher 
awards handed to his political assistants.

Alison Depass and Marjorie Wallace, two catering assistants, and Paul 
Schooling, a gardener, all work in No 10 and will receive their medals for 
public service.

According to the latest House of Lords Annual Report 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/house-lords-administration/how-the-lords-is-run/business-and-financial-information/business-plans-annual-reports-and-accounts/>
, net operating costs for the chamber totalled £94.4m for 2014/15; of this 
£20.7m was spent on members’ allowances and expenses. This is a drop from £112m 
the previous year.


Members who can show that they have carried out “appropriate parliamentary 
work” in Westminster are entitled to claim a tax-free daily allowance of £300, 
or £150 if they are away from Westminster on official visits.

• This article was amended on 31 August 2015. An earlier version quoted a 
Downing Street source as saying that more than 120 peers had stood down this 
year. That figure has been corrected to “more than 20”.
 