
Actor David Hasselhoff and comedian Michael McIntyre and are joining the 
judging panel for next year's series ofBritain's Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent> on ITV1.

They will join Amanda Holden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/amanda-holden> on the 2011 series, 
with Simon Cowell joining the judging lineup during the live stage of the 
talent competition.

For the last four series Piers Morgan has been a judge, but he is taking over 
Larry King's daily show <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-11948095> 
on US news channel CNN in January and have no time to do Britain's Got Talent. 
He is also a judge on America's Got Talent.

The ITV director of entertainment and comedy, Elaine Bedell, [said: "Britain's 
Got Talent is one of the UK's biggest entertainment shows and I'm delighted to 
unveil Michael McIntyre andDavid Hasselhoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-hasselhoff> alongside Simon 
Cowell and Amanda Holden in a stellar new lineup of judges."

Presenting duo Anthony McPartlin and Declan Donnelly will continue to front 
the show that propelled singerSusan Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/apr/18/susan-boyle-britains-got-talent> 
to global fame last year.

Ant and Dec signed a new two-year "golden handcuffs" deal <> with ITV last 
year.

McIntyre has been signed on a non-exclusive deal so will continue to front 
shows for the BBC.

He said: "I'm a massive fan of Britain's Got Talent and am extremely excited 
to be a judge on the new series. I was so thrilled whenSimon Cowell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell> asked me that I immediately 
wanted to run in to Ant and Dec's arms to celebrate."

Like Morgan, Baywatch actor and singer Hasselhoff has been a judge on 
America's Got Talent, which is broadcast on NBC.

Potential BGT contestants may want to note Hasselhoff is currently starring in 
pantomime as Captain Hook at the New Wimbledon theatre in London.

ITV announced in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/18/itv-x-factor-britains-got-talent-cowell?INTCMP=SRCH>
 that it had signed a deal with Cowell's Syco Entertainment and FremantleMedia 
to secure Britain's Got Talent and The X Factor on ITV1 until 2013.

The winner of the show gets to perform at the Royal Variety Performance. The 
series began in 2007 and has been won by singer Paul Potts, dancer George 
Sampson, dance group Diversity and gymnasts Spellbound.

The 2010 Britain's Got Talent final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/07/britain-got-talent-tv-ratings> 
attracted an average of 12.3 million viewers.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 