
He was an Oxford-educated African king, while she was a white Englishwoman 
working as a clerk at Lloyd’s of London. Now their 1948 marriage, which caused 
scandal in Apartheid-stricken South Africa and the British protectorate of 
Bechuanaland (later Botswana),is to be the subject of a new period drama 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/belle-filmmaker-direct-david-oyelowo-797981>
 starring Britain’s David Oyelowo and Rosamund Pike.

Oyelowo is in talks to play Seretse Khama, who in 1965 became independent 
Botswana’s first president. He was alsokgosi (king) of the Bamangwato people, 
having been crowned at the age of four in 1925. Pike is in line to star as Ruth 
Williams, who would go on to be the first lady ofBotswana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/botswana> between 1966 and 1980.


The marriage was vehemently opposed by the racist South African government, 
which bullied Britain’s ruling Labour party into exiling the royal couple from 
Bechuanaland in 1951. The king’s uncle and sometime regent, Tshekedi Khama, 
also tried and failed to have his nephew deposed. Williams, meanwhile, proved 
suprisingly popular inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

Titled A United Kingdom, the film has secured up-and-coming British film-maker 
Amma Asante to direct. The London-born director and screenwriter is known for 
the much-praied 2013 dramaBelle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/belle>, 
starring Gugu Mbatha-Raw, Tom Wilkinson and Matthew Goode, which details the 
life of a mixed-race daughter of a British Royal Navy officer living in 
18th-century England. She will work from a screenplay by Five Minutes of 
Heaven’s Guy Hibbert.

Belle review – a ripe costume drama with teeth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/15/belle-review-costume-drama-teeth-slavery>
“Amma and Rosamund are two of the most exciting talents working in film 
today,” said Oyelowo, also a producer on the drama. “I’ve worked with both of 
them before and so my excitement about them joiningA United Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-united-kingdom> stems from a knowledge of 
just how inspiring they are to work with and how much daring and beauty they 
will bring to this epic love story.”

Both Oyelowo and Pike are coming off awards season buzz for their films Selma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/selma> and Gone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl>, respectively. Pike was nominated 
in the best supporting actress category for her turn as a missing woman in 
David Fincher’s adaptation of the bestsellingGillian Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gillian-flynn> novel, while Oyelowo was 
considered unfortunate to miss out on an acting nod for his turn as Martin 
Luther King Jr in Ava DuVernay’s historical drama.

• This article was amended on 29 May 2015. An earlier version said Seretse 
Khama was “independent Botswana’s first black president” and “the country’skgosi
 (king)”.
 