
It’s no coincidence both David Oyelowo’s two films premiering at the Toronto 
film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival> – A United 
Kingdom and Queen of Katwe – were directed by women.

A United Kingdom review: Rosamund Pike and David Oyelowo in fine romance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/09/a-united-kingdom-review-rosamund-pike-david-oyelowo-toronto>
The former, in which he stars as Prince Seretse Khama of Botswana, who caused 
an international stir for marrying a white woman from London in the late 1940s, 
comes fromAmma Asante <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amma-asante>, whose 
mixed-race period romance Belle also debuted at Toronto. Monsoon Wedding 
directpr Mira Nair is behind Queen of Katwe, about a missionary (Oyelowo) who 
coaches a young chess prodigy in the slums of Uganda.

During a discussion about A United Kingdom at the festival on Friday, 
co-hosted by the Guardian, Oyelowo said that since first collaborating with Ava 
DuVernay on the Sundance award-winning dramaMiddle of Nowhere 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jT19sV9CkGQ>, he’s made it his mission to work 
with more women behind the lens.

“I watched how perspective from your own racial bias can impact a film,” 
Oyelowo said of making the film. “Working with Ava was definitely the moment 
where something I knew to be true was manifested in reality.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDWNXy4EtZ9c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDWNXy4EtZ9c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDWNXy4EtZ9c&media=>
Oyelowo reunited with DuVernay for the Oscar-winning Martin Luther King Jr 
biopic Selma, since which he’s made good on his word, also starring in the 
indie dramaFive Nights in Maine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/04/five-nights-in-maine-review-david-oyelowo-dianne-wiest>
 from film-maker Maris Curran.

“I am richer as an artist for my journey with these women,” said Oyelowo. 


It was in fact Oyelowo who brought Asante on to A United Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-united-kingdom>, after being impressed by 
Belle and eager see the project – to which he’d been attached to since 2010 – 
finally take shape. Oyelowo is a producer on the film.

David Oyelowo calls for radical reform of the Oscars to tackle diversity 
deficit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/19/david-oyelowo-oscars-so-white-radical-reform-diversity>
“I very keenly wanted a woman to direct this film,” said Oyelowo. “I just feel 
like if God, in his divine plan, made it that pretty much the population is 
50/50 of men and women, why it should be below 10% of women behind the screen, 
when we have this cultural medium that is so influential, so impacting, so 
educational, so inspiring. Why the female voice is actively, intentionally 
being dumbed down and marginalised. It’s absolutely inexcusable. We are all the 
richer when we decide, ‘You know what? Not on my watch.’ I will till the day I 
die be an advocate for the d-word: diversity.”

Elsewhere during the conversation, Oyelowo said the chance to make a period 
film featuring a black protagonist was one of the “primary motivations” for 
making A United Kingdom.

“That’s one of our big imports, is a good period drama,” said Oyelowo, who was 
born in Oxford, England to Nigerian parents. “But growing up in the 70s, 80s 
and 90s in the UK, when a lot of those films were having their heyday, we would 
watch avidly and never be represented. To be perfectly honest, when I was 
younger, it was just a given – OK, I’m not there represented, but I love these 
movies. I was force-fed them because they were on the TV all the time.”

Hidden Figures trailer: Nasa's overlooked black female mathematicians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/15/hidden-figures-trailer-octavia-spencer-janelle-monae>
A United Kingdom joins a number of recent films to examine racial prejudice 
from a historical perspective, including Nate Parker’s controversy plagued The 
Birth of Nation, centered on Nat Turner, the Virginia slave who led a violent 
rebellion in 183 – and, of course, Oscar winner 12 Years a Slave. This December 
meanwhile sees the release of Hidden Figures, which stars Taraji P Henson, 
Octavia Spencer and Janelle Monae as African-American mathematicians, who in 
the 60s overcame racism to make an impact at NASA.

Commenting on the popular trend, Oyelowo said: “As artists, our primary 
function is not to be educators – but we are at a time in history, where for 
us, our history needs to give context for stories that we hope to tell down the 
road. I can’t wait to do my Hunger Games.”

 