
When David Thewlis records a voiceover – chirpy earthworm 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ba7IDOMHo9g>, drumming aardvark 
<http://www.videodetective.com/movies/hamilton-mattress/838452>, ads for 
Sainsbury’s <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CQ4L6j6yMTY> – he generally gets 
the same feedback. “They say: ‘You sound quite angry, David’ or ‘You sound 
quite cynical. Can you do it with more of a smile in your voice?’” He grins. 
Now he can tell when others use the same tactic. “Estate agents, particularly.”

No such notes were necessary for Anomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa>, in which he voices a customer 
service guru calledMichael Stone <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qhq7ytw9kmo>, 
spending the night in Cincinnati ahead of a telesales lecture: “Don’t forget to 
smile. Makes a person’s day. What does it cost you? Smile’s free!”

Anomalisa review: a masterpiece about the human condition – with puppets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/anomalisa-review-charlie-kaufman-puppet-masterpiece-about-the-human-condition>
Stone is wildly depressed. He shuffles through the airport, the hotel lobby, 
the bar, his room, with a thousand-yard stare, grey hair, stubble and a tum. 
Resemblance to the actor – leggy blond in a natty hat, face all crag and 
twinkle – is minimal. That’s a good thing, Thewlis thinks. “Usually, people 
ask: ‘What did you think of the film?’ And you’re like: ‘Well, my nose was very 
big.’”

Still, Stone looks better than most. Everyone else in Anomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa> – bellhops, cabbies, 
ex-girlfriends – not only share the same bland features, but are voiced, 
without modulation, by the same man. Save one: Lisa (Jennifer Jason Leigh), 
also staying at the hotel, and whose difference Michael is smitten by.

What first floors you about Anomalisa is its extraordinary visualisation of 
what it means to fall in love, and then to watch the connection crumble. It 
vindicates the search for someone special – and warns that it’s loopy. (Sample 
lyric from theend credits song <http://www.paramountguilds.com/anomalisa/score/>
: “I’ll turn the corner and we’ll meet / And I will be no longer dead.”)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c8311f17f3e8258321793337c97def65c1cc013%2F277_0_1954_1172%2F1954.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Thewlis%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20enormously%20dangerous%20and%20scary'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Thewlis%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20enormously%20dangerous%20and%20scary%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c8311f17f3e8258321793337c97def65c1cc013%2F277_0_1954_1172%2F1954.jpg>
 Thewlis voices Michael Stone and Jennifer Jason Leigh Lisa in Anomalisa 
“I’m optimistic,” says Thewlis. “I believe it’s absolutely possible, but it 
might be or it might not have been in my own personal life.” He’s wary, 
understandably. Thewlis splits his time between houses in London, Paris – where 
his girlfriend lives just round the corner from the Bataclan – and Windsor, 
where his ex, Anna Friel, and their 10-year-old daughter, Gracie, are based. 
(The breakup was tabloid catnip; Thewlis has strong words for gossip reporters.)

“But if it’s the object of people’s lives, it can lead to enormous 
disappointment. I see people around me with very unhappy love lives, who may 
have held out for that perfect somebody. And the failure to achieve that brings 
along a lot of bitterness which is very unattractive; therefore they’re 
probably less likely to achieve it.”

In fact, Stone’s isolation is an illness, the Fregoli delusion 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fregoli_delusion> (Fregoli is also the name of 
the hotel), which means the sufferer cannot distinguish between people. But the 
film has the audience in its crosshairs, too. Maybe modern life is making us 
all Fregoli-susceptible.

Oh yes, says Thewlis, absolutely. “I share with Michael an intolerance of that 
drone of platitudes. At times I’ve been that stressed out, that solipsistic, 
that disappointed, that lonely.” He likes that the hero is so awful: “That’s 
why he’s a bearable protagonist.”

More than bearable: Thewlis has never before been in a film with such rave 
reviews. Few actors have. Watching it premiere to five-star reviews atTelluride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/anomalisa-review-sex-and-depression-in-charlie-kaufmans-superb-stop-motion-breakdown>
, Venice and Toronto was “slightly bizarre for a while”. That audience reaction 
was more mixed when it opened in the US was almost a relief, he says. “I 
noticed on IMDb that a few people were like: ‘What the hell’s this boring shit? 
He’s not a nice guy! This isn’t a feminist film! It’s not even a good Charlie 
Kaufman film!’”

Thewlis grimaces. He hates himself for even looking online. “I feel worse when 
I attend to it. I feel very Americanised because everything I’m reading is 
trivial stuff I think I’m too old to be concerned about. I’ve got a personal 
aversion to it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11d8a9a50f0273df1204f9221f094364b81099ee%2F0_8_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Thewlis%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20enormously%20dangerous%20and%20scary'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Thewlis%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20enormously%20dangerous%20and%20scary%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11d8a9a50f0273df1204f9221f094364b81099ee%2F0_8_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
 Thewlis as Lupin in the Prisoner of Azkaban, 2004. Photograph: Allstar/WARNER 
BROS 
Ditto Kaufman, whose disquiet about the internet in part prompted Anomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/mar/08/charlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview>
. Thewlis, who owns 30 typewriters and has never used Twitter, agrees. “We 
didn’t need the internet for Nazi Germany to happen. But I feel like there’s 
this lack of humanity because of it.” He frets about climate change, terrorism, 
economics and antibiotic resistance. “The world is enormously dangerous and 
scary. I worry very much for my daughter. I’m not sure we’re in control any 
more, and I think the internet is partly responsible for that.”

Yesterday, he says, he was on a train, and everyone else was looking at their 
phones, rather than out of the window. “It was a nice day! That’s terrible. 
What have we become? This can’t be good for humanity. But then I thought: I 
don’t know what they’re looking at, actually. They could be reading Keats. 
Doing a thesis.” Plus, he did check his own email and was pleased he did. “And 
it’s quite a nice day – but it’s not that nice. And we’re going through 
Osterley, so …”

Thewlis was born in Blackpool 53 years ago. He writes about the town with 
skill and salty affection in his one novel,The Late Hector Kipling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/23/fiction.features1> (2007). He 
went to thelocal comprehensive 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Highfield_Humanities_College>, disliked it for 
the same reason he didn’t want to follow in his father’s footsteps: repetition. 
“Dad worked in the same shop, behind the same counter, five or six days a week, 
for 38 years, and hated it.” So Thewlis fronted a punk band,Door66 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DJr4MiuT7Gk>, who all enrolled at drama school 
as a way to get to London.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fcharlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F8%2F1457440237667%2FKP_1823535_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20'The%20internet%20is%20a%20terrible%20danger'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fcharlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20%27The%20internet%20is%20a%20terrible%20danger%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fcharlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F8%2F1457440237667%2FKP_1823535_crop_640x360.jpg>
Discovering he was good at acting, Thewlis switched careers, popping up as 
Rodney’scool muso pal on Only Fools and Horses 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vz1VzqRptQY>, before his breakthrough in Mike 
Leigh’sNaked <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/18/how-we-made-naked> 
in 1993 as the jabbering, damaged, brilliant Johnny. He won best actor at 
Cannes and has worked solidly ever since, often accessorised with scrubby 
moustache to play gruff, possibly trusty coppers (Damage, Legend, Basic 
Instinct 2, An Inspector Calls), or, standing up slightly straighter, soldiers 
(War Horse, Resurrected, The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas, Kingdom of Heaven).

That Thewlis can carry off an overcoat has also led to a lot of poets 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0114702/reference>, priests, olde worlde monarchs 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0116136/reference> and dishevelled professor types 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2980516/reference> – most lucratively Lupin 
<http://harrypotter.wikia.com/wiki/Remus_Lupin>, the teacher with a hairy secret
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-agTClDfpcQ> in the Harry Potter films, who 
Thewlisplayed as a gay junkie  
<http://www.queerty.com/david-thewlis-accidentally-made-harry-potter-professor-lupin-a-gay-crackhead-20110404>
until JK Rowling told him he wasn’t, actually.

“Harry Potter is very nice because it’s very easy to make children happy,” he 
says. “All you have to do is have your photograph taken with them.” It’s upped 
his visibility a lot, especially in Istanbul, where he reports the worst 
mobbing. Not that it’s ever that bad. “In London, people don’t really look at a 
50-year-old man for more than a few seconds, if they look at all.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a74725851ec953fb6c99b423f21efb654fa5a96%2F0_108_2613_1569%2F2613.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Thewlis%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20enormously%20dangerous%20and%20scary'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Thewlis%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20enormously%20dangerous%20and%20scary%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a74725851ec953fb6c99b423f21efb654fa5a96%2F0_108_2613_1569%2F2613.jpg>
 Mike Leigh’s Naked, 1993. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/CHANNEL FOUR 
He shared his final day of filming on Harry Potter 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ANJCPMTMwRo> with Alan Rickman, whom he first 
met in 1992, when Rickman filmed Thewlis’s wedding to Sara Sugarman, with whom 
Rickman was friends. “More than most actors he was very, very popular among 
other actors. Everyone had a lot of love.” He’s still shocked by his death; 
maybe even more traumatising was David Bowie’s.

“I found that surprisingly upsetting. I was driving my daughter to school five 
days after and a Bowie song came on the radio and I got all teary. She said: 
‘Are you all right, Dad?’ And it was really hard to explain. As far as she 
could see I was crying over a pop star.” He mock-sobs: “‘I’m sort of crying for 
my own mortality really, darling.’”

No, there’s nothing in wait for us afterwards, he believes; that’s why 
researching religious roles was always the hardest: “I find real faith 
extraordinary. I can’t imagine what that must be like.” The point, he thinks, 
is just to be as good and truthful as possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F064c7da3006066f60a4b4e329dec23ae45abc382%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Thewlis%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20enormously%20dangerous%20and%20scary'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Thewlis%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20enormously%20dangerous%20and%20scary%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fdavid-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F064c7da3006066f60a4b4e329dec23ae45abc382%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Thewlis in The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas, 2008. Photograph: Allstar/MIRAMAX 
FILMS 
“That’s one of the main things I’ve learned: honesty is paramount. The biggest 
thing I try and instil in my daughter. My deepest regrets have been to do with 
times that I’ve been dishonest. There’s nothing worse than getting caught out 
in a lie. It’s excruciatingly embarrassing. I’ve done that enough times to say: 
right, pack that in. It’s just a horrible thing.”

Charlie Kaufman on weirdness, failure and his new puppet noir
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/15/charlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview>
Now, he errs the other way, “almost obsessively checking myself at every 
point”. If he doesn’t want to do something, he doesn’t allow himself to pull a 
sickie. “Say you don’t want to! I find I always feel better for it.”

Thewlis looks well, less weathered than you would expect. For someone so 
strict about frankness, he’s mild, untroubling company. Any nerves seem borne 
of sensitivity for others, not his own eggshells. Unlike when he’s taping a 
cartoon, he never sounds angry or cynical. “I’m actually in a good mood today,” 
he says. “Life is perfectly fine and lovely.”

If it weren’t, he wouldn’t mask it? He couldn’t, he says. “If I’m sulking and 
you’re in my company you’d probably know about it, because I’m not very good at 
lifting myself out of the doldrums.”

But a smile makes someone’s day, right? Free, isn’t it? He shakes his head. It 
still costs you. A movie is one thing. A voiceover another. Putting a face to 
it is different. “Go to an event and smile and then cry afterwards? I’d rather 
not go.”

Anomalisa opens in the UK on 11 March
 