
The unseeded Frenchman Jo-Wilfried Tsonga today reached the final of the 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> after 
thrashing the No2 seed Rafael Nadal in straight sets in Melbourne today, 
winning 6-2, 6-3, 6-2.

The 22-year-old Tsonga blew the Spaniard off the court in under two hours with 
a succession of thumping base-line strokes, not to mention a powerful first 
serve which brought him 17 aces to Nadal's two. He will now meet the winner of 
the second semi-final between Roger Federer and the Serbian Novak Djokovic, 
which takes place tomorrow.

Tsonga has been the surprise package of the tournament, knocking out Andy 
Murray, Richard Gasquet and Mikhail Youzhny in earlier rounds. And he made 
another flying start today, breaking Nadal in the second game with a crosscourt 
backhand. A further break followed in game eight as Tsonga wrapped up the 
opening set in just 32 minutes, and he continued to rule the roost in the 
second set, securing another break in the eighth game before serving out to 
take a two-set lead.

Nadal found himself with three break points in game two of the third set, but 
Tsonga saved all of them before breaking his opponent again in the very next 
game. The Spaniard was unable to find a response, and an unforced error allowed 
the Frenchman to break again in the seventh game before sealing the win with an 
ace.

"I don't quite realise what I've achieved," said Tsonga, ranked 38th in the 
world. "I was just hitting everything I could. I tried to hurt him. I just 
don't have words to describe what I've done. It was an enormous match in every 
area of my game. He couldn't stop me and I'm in the final."
 