
In 2006, in an interview with the journal of a North African terrorist faction 
operating at the time,Mokhtar Belmokhtar said 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/al-qaida/article/2015/06/18/le-barbare-du-desert_4656815_1667095.html#JHBvGTgFYpMPfyLT.99>
: “I dream of only one thing: to die a martyr.” A decade later, he may have 
achieved his goal. Or, judging by the number of times he has been reported dead 
in the meantime, he may not have done. At the time of writing, we don’t know.

Such is – or was – the life of one of the world’s most-wanted terrorists, an 
Algerian-born shopkeeper’s son and veteran of the Afghan civil war, who 
returned to NorthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> to wage 
jihadism in the name of al-Qaida. He called his son Osama and has himself been 
variously nicknamed the Uncatchable, the Unkillable and, thanks to his 
purported involvement in cigarette smuggling, Marlboro Man.

There have been more reports this week that Belmokhtar is now dead 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-french-operation-targeted-elusive-north-african-militant-u-s-says-1480276417?mod=e2tw>
, after a strike in southern Libya by French aircraft using US intelligence. 
Neither the Pentagon nor the French ministry of defence has commented on the 
claims, but unnamed US officials “expressed greater confidence” that this 
attempt had been successful.

The militant’s last reported death came in June 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/14/us-counterterrorism-strike-al-qaida-libya>
, after a US strike. Belmokhtar has been a US target for more than a decade and 
has been blamed or claimed responsibility for several attacks, including the
2013 siege 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/26/in-amenas-murders-coroner-finds-algerian-gas-plant-had-security-flaws>
 at a BP gas plant in Algeria in which 39 foreign hostages were killed, 
including six Britons and three Americans.

“He was not only Marlboro Man but also Mr Kalashnikov and Mr RPG,” says 
François Margolin, a French film-maker who directedSalafistes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/french-documentary-jihadis-salafistes-released-18-certificate>
, which explores the ultra-conservative Islamic Salafist movement in North 
Africa. Margolin interviewed associates of Belmokhtar, who ran an extensive 
weapons smuggling network. He said the militant had been protected by 
challenging geography, as well as fleet-footedness and a steady supply of sim 
cards.

Raffaello Pantucci, a counter-terrorism researcher at the Royal United 
Services Institute, and the author of“We Love Death as You Love Life”: 
Britain’s Suburban Terrorists 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Love-Death-You-Life-Terrorists/dp/1849041652>, says 
figures such as Belmokhtar use reports of their deaths as propaganda. “It 
increases the mythology around a character, a warrior able to sneak in and out 
and evade the world’s intelligence services,” he says. “And when you look at 
the narratives of people who go out to fight, we often see that those 
charismatic individuals are crucial.”

Reported hits can also be useful to intelligence agencies, Pantucci adds. 
“Leaking a report puts an element of uncertainty around that individual,” he 
explains. “That can force others into the open or the individual to expose 
themselves by making a video to prove they are alive.” Even if the latest 
reports are true, Margolin warns, “the problem is that for many of these 
people, the border between life and death is not so important; there are a lot 
of other jihadists.”
 