
The attorney general of New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>
 state is taking over an investigation into the case of a black woman who was 
found dead in a jail cell last month.

Raynette Turner, 42, was arrested for shoplifting on 25 July and was found 
dead two days later in her cell at Mount Vernon police headquarters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fraynette-turner-investigation-new-york-attorney-general%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a5c3994cd9830b2a0b3e6442368aea2cabbe50c%2F0_113_1239_743%2F1239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20of%20woman%20in%20New%20York%20jail%20sparks%20investigation%20by%20attorney%20general&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fraynette-turner-investigation-new-york-attorney-general%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20of%20woman%20in%20New%20York%20jail%20sparks%20investigation%20by%20attorney%20general&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fraynette-turner-investigation-new-york-attorney-general%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a5c3994cd9830b2a0b3e6442368aea2cabbe50c%2F0_113_1239_743%2F1239.jpg>
 Raynette Turner was found dead in a cell at Mount Vernon police headquarters. 
Photograph: Courtesy of Turner family 
The mother of eight was arrested on a Saturday, reported feeling ill on Sunday 
and was taken to an area hospital that night. She was brought back to the jail 
around 10pm that night, and found dead at 2pm the next day, when corrections 
officers came to collect her for her arraignment.

State attorney general Eric Schneiderman is operating for the first time under 
a new executive order signed into law in July 
<https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/governor-cuomo-signs-executive-order-appointing-nys-attorney-general-special-prosecutor-cases>
 by governor Andrew Cuomo. It requires the attorney general to be a special 
prosecutor in cases where an unarmed civilian death was caused by law 
enforcement.

Cuomo said in a statement that this case is exemplary of why he signed the 
executive order into law. “Ms Turner’s death is a tragedy for her loved ones, 
and it raises questions not just from her family, but from her neighbors, 
elected officials, community members and the media – questions that deserve 
answers,” Cuomo said.

Turner’s autopsy is pending. She had a history of hypertension and gastric 
bypass surgery, Mount Vernon deputy police commissioner Richard Burke told
lohud.com 
<http://www.lohud.com/story/news/2015/07/28/woman-dies-mount-vernon-holding-cell/30773979/>
.

The incident has also raised questions about why Turner was kept in police 
custody over the weekend over a minor charge instead of being released and 
summoned to court at a later date.

Her death has drawn comparisons to that of Sandra Bland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sandra-bland>, a woman who was found dead 
in a Texas jail cell after being arrested for a minor traffic violation. An 
autopsy said that Bland killed herself,an assessment that many are skeptical of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/25/sandra-bland-suspicion-mistrust-official-inconsistencies>
 – including her family and civil rights advocates.

Three other black women have died in police custody in the past month. Kindra 
Chapman 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2015/7/27/At-Kindra-Chapman-vigil-questions-over-her-death-remain.html>
, 18, was found dead in an Alabama police holding cell, where she was being 
held after the attempted robbery of a cell phone.Joyce Curnell 
<http://counton2.com/2015/07/24/sled-investigating-following-inmate-death-at-detention-center/>
, 50, was found dead at a South Carolina detention center after being detained 
for an outstanding warrant for shoplifting. AndRalkina Jones 
<http://www.cleveland.com/cleveland-heights/index.ssf/2015/08/cleveland_heights_police_relea_1.html>
, 37, was found dead in a Cleveland jail where she was being held after her 
ex-husband called police to say that she was attacking him.
 