
Mark Harper, the minister for disabled people, will appear in front of the 
work and pensions select committee on Wednesday today to defend the 
government’s troubled record on implementation of the new disability benefit, 
the personal independence payment (PIP).

He will be hoping that the session goes more smoothly than last June’s hearing 
on the same subject by the public accounts committee when its chair, Margaret 
Hodge, said the launch of the new assessment system had been“nothing short of a 
fiasco” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/20/watchdog-attacks-atos-disability-payouts-fiasco>
 and accused the government of letting down “some of the most vulnerable in 
society”.

Over the past year, charities have highlighted the enormous distress 
experienced by people who have faced serious delays in being assessed, with 
some facing waits of up to 14 months for the benefit to be paid. New statistics 
detailing whether the Department for Work and Pensions has been successful in 
meeting a 16-week target for the benefit to be assessed will be released on 
Wednesday today.

The problems with processing the benefit, which replaces the old disability 
living allowance (DLA), echo ongoing issues with the rollout of employment and 
support allowance (ESA), which have also provoked profound unhappiness from 
disability groups. Harper is the fourth minister for disabled people in this 
parliament – a troubled brief, presiding over some of the most controversial 
coalition policies; like his predecessors he can expect to face tough questions 
from MPs on the committee.

An independent review of PIP 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/387981/pip-assessment-first-independent-review.pdf>
 by Paul Gray, chair of the social security advisory committee, published 
before Christmas, described the process of introducing the benefit as “a major 
delivery challenge”. The review heard from many people who had claimed PIP, and 
the overwhelming theme was “the impact of delays and backlogs”.

The assessment is not a “precise science”, the report said, adding that 
“accurately and consistently assessing several million awards in this way is a 
formidable undertaking”, and concluding that the current process is 
“disjointed”.

PIP is intended to provide financial support for disabled people with the 
greatest challenges to remaining independent and is paid to people in and out 
of work, aged between 16 and 64, to help with some of the extra costs caused by 
long-term ill-health or disability.Payment ranges from £21.55 to £138.05 a week 
depending on how the condition affects the claimant 
<https://www.gov.uk/pip/overview>. Assessments have been outsourced to Atos, 
the IT firm that is ending prematurely its parallel contract for assessing ESA 
claims this spring, and outsourcing giant Capita. The select committee will 
also scrutinise their performance today.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fdelays-disability-benefit-pip-claimants-mps-scrutiny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422299218213%2F01384371-e745-45e7-b425-349639f57e23-1355x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delays%20and%20disarray%20shatter%20lives%20of%20new%20disability%20claimants%20%7C%20Amelia%20Gentleman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fdelays-disability-benefit-pip-claimants-mps-scrutiny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delays%20and%20disarray%20shatter%20lives%20of%20new%20disability%20claimants%20%7C%20Amelia%20Gentleman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fdelays-disability-benefit-pip-claimants-mps-scrutiny%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422299218213%2F01384371-e745-45e7-b425-349639f57e23-1355x2040.jpeg>
 Disabled woman protesting against Atos assessments. Photograph: Julian 
Makey/Rex Features 
A spokesman for the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) says improvements 
to PIP had already been made, adding: “Between January and October 2014, the 
number of claims processed increased fourfold to 66,000 per month, and we are 
working hard to continue to make further improvements.” The independent review 
also noted that improvements had been made to speed up the processing of claims 
for people who are terminally ill.

But charities have opposed the DWP’s decision to continue rolling out the 
benefit, after pilots around the country, despite the fact that the current 
system has built up a huge backlog of claims and left many disabled people 
waiting for over six months, and in some cases a year, for their claims to be 
processed. Earlier this month,Citizens Advice in Scotland called on the 
government to halt the introduction of PIP there 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-30889253>.

The delays are categorised by the MS Society as unacceptable. “People with 
disabilities have found themselves in extreme financial hardship as a result of 
the delays; isolated and unable to access the support they need, like transport 
to hospital appointments, or help around the home. Not having an answer on PIP 
makes it much harder to claim other important benefits like carers’ allowance, 
the blue badge, disability premiums on means-tested benefits and working tax 
credit,” says a MS Society spokeswoman. “We have been shocked to find that 
despite the delays, some disabled people could be forced to go through another 
assessment for the benefit years before they were originally told they would 
have to reapply.”

Macmillan Cancer Support describes the system as “riddled with delays”, and 
said in December, in response to the independent review, that it was “a 
disgrace that thousands of people with cancer have been forced to wait six 
months or more just to find out whether they were even eligible for the 
disability benefit… What we are seeing is failure in the system that is having 
a very real and shattering impact on the lives of people with cancer”. A recent 
survey of Macmillan benefits advisers revealed that30% knew of someone who had 
died waiting for benefits to be processed 
<http://www.macmillan.org.uk/Aboutus/News/Latest_News/MacmillanrespondstoPIPIndependentReviewandquarterlystatistics.aspx>
.

The most challenging phase of reassessment of most current DLA recipients is 
scheduled to begin from October.

In April 2013, the DWP predicted it would take around two and a half months to 
reach a decision for non-terminally ill people and 10 days for people with a 
terminal illness. Last year,the National Audit Office noted  
<http://www.nao.org.uk/report/personal-independence-payments-pip-2/#>that the 
time for making a decision was 28 days for claims by the terminally ill and 
around three and a half months (107 days) for everyone else. These times have 
improved, but there is concern from Labour that the government has shifted the 
goalposts, in its 16-week target for an assessment(ie not a decision or a 
payment); an earlier target said it should take 12–16 weeks for a decision to 
be made.

The benefit was designed to cut costs, but the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
calculated last year that “significant delays” in the replacement of DLA with 
the “less generous”PIP had led to a £1.6bn increase in spending 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7447>, rather than a £1.2bn cut. However, 
the DWP says it is now on course to make “significant long-term savings” of an 
estimated £2.5bn, against previous predictions. It also said that nearly 22% of 
applicants are now getting the highest level of support under PIP, compared to 
16% under the previous DLA system.

Kate Green, Labour’s shadow minister for disabled people, says the policy was 
“costing more, damaging people’s lives and not delivering what the government 
claimed it would. The impact on disabled people is acute with families left for 
months without support. The DWP have continually shifted the goalposts and it 
remains far from clear whether the new 16 week deadline to get a PIP assessment 
has been met. Disabled people, families, carers and welfare advisers in touch 
with my office say people are still waiting for longer than 16 weeks.”

Lawyers at Irwin Mitchell Solicitors have been applying for a judicial review 
into PIP delays, acting on behalf of six clients who had been waiting between 
seven and 14 months when they approached the firm for help. The application for 
judicial review was refused last week, on the grounds that the application was 
“academic”, because the benefit had already been approved. The firm notes that 
the DWP resolved these cases very swiftly once the application for judicial 
review was received, making it impossible for the case to proceed.

Anne-Marie Irwin, a lawyer at Irwin Mitchell says: “We are concerned with the 
delays in dealing with PIP applications and are worried that DWPs approach in 
fast-tracking our clients that are taking legal action is ignoring the 
thousands of others who are awaiting a decision on their payments.

“PIP was created to ensure that the thousands of vulnerable people across the 
UK are able to get support for extra costs caused by long-term ill health or 
disability. We hope that the select committee makes clear recommendations to 
ensure that decisions are made by the DWP in a reasonable time. Too many people 
are experiencing unnecessary and unacceptable delays as they need this support 
to be able to meet the additional costs which arise as a result of their 
disability. This issue has left our clients struggling to cope financially, 
with the strain and stress of these issues also having a significant impact on 
their health and wellbeing.”Duringan adjournment debate on PIP last week 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmhansrd/cm150121/halltext/150121h0001.htm>
, MPs detailed the unhappy experiences of some of their constituents, as they 
have waited for their claims to be processed.

They heard about a student nurse who works part time as a chef, who said she 
had been forced to sell her house as a result of the PIP assessment waiting 
time, expected to be around 26 weeks. They also heard about Malcolm, who 
applied for PIP in March 2014 when he was diagnosed with cancer, but who has 
still not had an assessment; the delays have affected his ability even to 
travel to and from hospital for appointments.

Claimants report feeling confused about who is responsible for the process, 
being told by the assessor (Atos or Capita) to contact the DWP, and vice-versa 
– a confusion that echoes the ongoing muddle over ESA. Internally, there are 
reports of similar attempts to pass the buck between the ministry and the 
companies, when attempts are made to analyse who is responsible for the delays.

In a written statement, Stephen Duckworth, head of Capita’s PIP programme, 
said he “wholeheartedly apologised to those who experienced delays”.

“PIP was an entirely new benefit and with that comes a number of unknowns. 
Capita <https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> and the DWP now have 
a better insight into what is required and, as such, have made significant 
changes across PIP – increasing the number of assessments carried out and not 
compromising on quality,” he said.

Atos <https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> said it did not wish to 
comment about its performance in implementing PIP assessments.

‘As a benefit claimant, you are presumed guilty of fraud
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fdelays-disability-benefit-pip-claimants-mps-scrutiny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422298973422%2Fedcebf04-b4b9-40fa-9d5e-43348b85fc1e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delays%20and%20disarray%20shatter%20lives%20of%20new%20disability%20claimants%20%7C%20Amelia%20Gentleman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fdelays-disability-benefit-pip-claimants-mps-scrutiny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delays%20and%20disarray%20shatter%20lives%20of%20new%20disability%20claimants%20%7C%20Amelia%20Gentleman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fdelays-disability-benefit-pip-claimants-mps-scrutiny%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422298973422%2Fedcebf04-b4b9-40fa-9d5e-43348b85fc1e-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Penny Tyas, 57, who has multiple sclerosis, faced delays in payments that led 
to her being evicted and being declared bankrupt Photograph: Roddy Grimes-Graeme
Penny Tyas, 57, a former accountant from Lymington, Hampshire, was diagnosed 
with multiple sclerosis in the summer of 2013 and applied for PIP immediately. 
She filled in the form for the benefit in June, but did not receive her first 
payment until January 2014. In the intervening period she had been rejected for 
the benefit by Atos assessors, and the long delay contributed to a serious 
decline in her financial situation; she got into debt, was evicted and declared 
herself bankrupt.

At her lowest point, she and her 14-year-old son were surviving on food bank 
parcels and she was left with just 22p. She has kept those remaining coins and 
plans to turn them into jewellery to remind her of that “dire” time. “2013 was 
not a good year,” she says. She found the process of applying for the benefit 
exceptionally stressful, which caused a decline in her health. “You have to 
describe in detail the effect of your incurable, degenerative disease, and you 
know how much rests on the decision,” she says. She was asked if she could walk 
50m. “I have been known to walk 100m, but I can’t walk that distance quickly, 
safely or as often as necessary,” she says. After the assessment, she was 
puzzled to discover that she had been judged capable of walking 200m, although 
no one had asked her to walk at all. She was refused the benefit. “In the UK 
you are meant to be innocent until proven guilty, but as a benefit claimant, 
you are presumed to be guilty of benefit fraud until you have proven over and 
over again that you really are a genuine case”, she says.

“Personal independence payment is not meant to be used to live on but to 
retain some independence,” she says – helping to pay for taxis, for shopping 
deliveries, for help at home. Without it, she was ineligible for other related 
benefits – discount railcards, free road tax, shopmobility services. Although 
it isn’t meant to be for living expenses, at the time her basic benefits were 
swallowed repaying debt she had got into when her condition was diagnosed, so 
the absence of the money was felt acutely.

While she waited her situation worsened. She wasn’t paying rent, got an 
eviction notice, and faced homelessness until she and her son were rehoused by 
the council. When she (repeatedly) rang Atos to ask when she was going to be 
assessed, she was told they couldn’t say.

She is angry that the diagnosis by neurologists of her incurable condition was 
not considered sufficient evidence for Atos to grant her the payments, until 
she launched tribunal proceedings. When they were finally granted, her payments 
were backdated, but she points out that retrospective payments aren’t very 
helpful if you don’t have anything to live on in the meantime. Her award was 
meant to continue until September 2016, but in August she was told she must 
reapply and was forced to go through the bureaucratic process again in order to 
secure her payments.
 