
Mainstream Australian political leaders need to denounce divisive and racist 
rhetoric, particularly from members of their own parties, aUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> expert has said.

The UN special rapporteur on racism, Mutuma Ruteere, made the comments on 
Monday while releasing a preliminary report on racism in Australia that called 
for better treatment of Indigenous people in the justice system and retention 
of race speech laws.

Ruteere said he was “concerned about some remarks made by elected politicians 
about newly arrived migrants, and in particular against Muslims”.

He said xenophobic hate speech was on the rise, leading to negative 
perceptions of Muslims, people of African descent and Jews.

Peter Dutton did not appear out of thin air. He represents consistent 
Australian policy | Omar Bensaidi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/peter-dutton-did-not-appear-out-of-thin-air-he-represents-consistent-australian-poli>
Earlier this year One Nation senator Pauline Hanson warned in her maiden speech
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/pauline-hanson-first-speech-senate-calls-for-immigration-ban>
 to parliament that Australia was “in danger of being swamped by Muslims”, and 
the immigration minister, Peter Dutton,said mistakes had been made in bringing 
some migrants to Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/australia-paying-for-immigration-mistakes-made-by-malcolm-fraser-says-peter-dutton>
 during the 1970s, noting that22 out of 33 people charged with terrorism 
offences were of Lebanese Muslim background 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/peter-dutton-most-terrorism-charges-lebanese-muslims>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fpauline-hanson-australia-in-danger-of-being-swamped-by-muslims-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pauline%20Hanson%3A%20Australia%20%E2%80%98in%20danger%20of%20being%20swamped%20by%20Muslims%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fpauline-hanson-australia-in-danger-of-being-swamped-by-muslims-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pauline%20Hanson%3A%20Australia%20%E2%80%98in%20danger%20of%20being%20swamped%20by%20Muslims%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fpauline-hanson-australia-in-danger-of-being-swamped-by-muslims-video&media=>
Pauline Hanson: Australia ‘in danger of being swamped by Muslims’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/sep/14/pauline-hanson-australia-in-danger-of-being-swamped-by-muslims-video>
Ruteere applauded Malcolm Turnbull’s “unequivocal statement against racism” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/10/turnbull-and-shorten-denounce-racial-intolerance-in-any-form-in-immigration-policy>
, but noted some “populist politicians” continued to fan hostility.

“I call upon mainstream political leaders to denounce and censure this kind of 
divisive and racist rhetoric particularly when made by members of their own 
political parties and urge those sections of the media to resist the tempting 
descent into racist and xenophobic stereotyping rhetoric and scapegoating.”

Ruteere said most racist political speech came “from the margins” but warned 
of the danger that those attitudes “keep moving to the mainstream”.

Ruteere called for the retention of section 18C of the Racial Discrimination 
Act, which prohibits speech that insults, offends, humiliates or intimidates 
people based on their race but is subject to fair comment defences in section 
18D. The sections arecurrently under review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/government-to-launch-free-speech-inquiry-into-section-18c-of-the-racial-discrimination-act>
.

He said removing the provision would “undermine the efforts undertaken by the 
various levels of governments for an inclusive Australia and open the door to 
racist and xenophobic hate speech which has been quite limited thanks to this 
provision”.

Ruteere said the law provided a “useful balance of freedom of speech” with the 
need to protect racial minorities. He said it was the role of courts to 
interpret the law, warning against trial by public opinion that would produce 
“no consensus” about the balance of rights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdenounce-racism-in-your-parties-un-rapporteur-urges-australian-leaders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9386387997c3554db7121b557e77c58acf046d54%2F0_49_3427_2057%2F3427.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Denounce%20racism%20in%20your%20parties%2C%20UN%20rapporteur%20urges%20Australian%20leaders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdenounce-racism-in-your-parties-un-rapporteur-urges-australian-leaders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Denounce%20racism%20in%20your%20parties%2C%20UN%20rapporteur%20urges%20Australian%20leaders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdenounce-racism-in-your-parties-un-rapporteur-urges-australian-leaders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9386387997c3554db7121b557e77c58acf046d54%2F0_49_3427_2057%2F3427.jpg>
 Anti-Islam protesters hold a rally and barbecue in Melton, Melbourne, in 
August. Photograph: Tracey Nearmy/AAP 
The rapporteur said he was “particularly concerned about attacks made by some 
politicians against the Australian Human Rights Commission” and its president,
Gillian Triggs <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gillian-triggs>.

Triggs, who will leave her post when her term expires in mid 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/gillian-triggs-to-go-as-human-rights-chief-turnbull-confirms>
, has beenheavily criticised by Coalition MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/coalition-mps-attack-gillian-triggs-over-allegations-she-misled-senate-committee>
 who questioned her independence over comments she made in a Senate committee 
about being misquoted in an interview, then subsequently retracted.

Triggs and the Coalition government have had a fraught relationship over the 
commission’s handling of section 18C complaints, the release in 2015 of a report
critical of treatment of children in detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/11/children-in-detention-scathing-criticism-in-human-rights-commission-report>
 and an incident in which she wasasked to resign by a government official 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/13/brandis-asked-gillian-triggs-to-resign-before-critical-child-detention-report>
 on behalf of the attorney general, George Brandis.

Ruteere noted the commission dealt with more than 20,000 inquiries and 2,000 
complaints ever year, the “vast majority” of which were resolved successfully.

The rapporteur said he was concerned about high rates of Indigenous 
incarceration, and welcomed theroyal commission into youth detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>
 sparked byrevelations of abuse at the Don Dale detention centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/northern-territory-royal-commission-turnbull-urges-speed-but-labor-backs-full-inquiry>
.

He recommended governments “avoid mandatory sentences” and set justice targets 
where Indigenous people are most disproportionately represented in 
incarceration.

Jewish community leader says removing 18C would send 'worst possible message'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/17/cory-bernardi-vows-new-bid-to-change-orwellian-section-18c-of-race-act>
Ruteere called on the Australian government to constitutionally recognise the 
“role and rights of its Indigenous peoples ... and to seize this unique 
opportunity of reconciliation to consider a broader human rights bill”.

He said such a bill need not be decided at the same time as constitutional 
recognition, but said a “comprehensive act of parliament ... would go a long 
way in addressing the problems of human rights and discrimination”.

Despite the criticisms, Ruteere acknowledged Australia had a diverse people, a 
strong commitment by the government to multiculturalism and achieved relatively 
good integration of migrants into society.

The preliminary findings will be followed by a report to the UN Human Rights 
Council in 2017.
 