
Is it finally time to (finally) leave Phoenix (finally)?

The dream of desert hockey might finally be dead. Greg Jamison, the man trying 
to keep the Coyotes in Phoenix was able to guarantee a $300-odd million, 
20-year lease with the city of Glendale, if he could agree to buy the team by 
last Thursday.He missed that deadline 
<http://www.cbc.ca/sports/hockey/nhl/story/2013/01/30/sp-nhl-greg-jamison-phoenix-coyotes-bid-falls-apart.html>
. So now, as we have time and time again over the last few years, we will 
discuss What's To Be Done With The Phoenix Coyotes.

The general feeling seems to now be to cut the cord entirely, move the team to 
another city, chalk the whole thing up as one big, giant (sort of) loss, and 
one day look back fondly onthe days of the White Out 
<http://coyotes.nhl.com/club/news.htm?id=627442> and Jeremy Roenick wearing 
that hideous jersey 
<http://cdn.bleacherreport.net/images_root/slides/photos/001/286/584/72481489_display_image.jpg?1315840097>
 (though we will not look back fondly at the jersey itself). At least one of 
the reasons everyone seems to think it's just time to pack it in is that the 
city doesn't even seem willing to extend the same deal it was to give Jamison 
to anyone else, even if anyone else was interested. There are other things to 
worry about, after all.

From the Arizona Republic 
<http://www.azcentral.com/community/glendale/articles/20130201sale-effortscontinuefor-coyotes.html?nclick_check=1>
:

[Glendale city Mayor, Jerry] Weiers, who was sworn in last month along with 
three other City Council members, said the deal was too costly for the city 
that is considering layoffs of police, fire and other employees.

"When someone calls 911, they don't want a Zamboni to show up; they want a 
firetruck or a police car to show up," he said.

OK, well arguably, that depends on what kind of emergency they're having, but 
Weiers' point is duly noted. Things like police and firefighters cost a lot of 
money, and when times are tight it's difficult to justify – especially as a new 
legislator – pouring copious vats of cash straight into a financially cratering 
hockey franchise.

All of which means the questions are again coming in about where the team 
would (will) go when the time is right.On CBC over the weekend 
<http://www.cbc.ca/player/Sports/CBC%27s+Hockey+Night+in+Canada/Hotstove/ID/2331657620/>
, Elliotte Friedman (whopoints out in a column here 
<http://www.cbc.ca/sports/hockey/opinion/2013/02/keeping-coyotes-in-phoenix-is-proving-tough-sell.html>
 that there are only nine events scheduled for all of 2013 at Glendale's 
Jobing.com Arena), was adamant that the team will not end up in the Toronto 
area. Yet. "If, and I stress if, this team has to move... to Canada, it's not 
going to Toronto next year," Friedman said. "There will not be a second team in 
Toronto next year, I'm hearing. And if it has to go to Canada, that is, there's 
only one more place it could go."

That place is Quebec City, which is in the process of a $7 million renovation 
of a rather large arena that, by virtue of being the home rink for the QMJHL's 
Quebec Ramparts, seems just about perfectly designed for anNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> team.

But Quebec City is not the only name on the list of potential homes for the 
Coyotes. Seattle, also potentially the next home of the Sacramento Kings, is a 
possible spot. That's certainlythe speculation from Forbes.com 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/mikeozanian/2013/01/31/bet-on-coyotes-moving-to-seattle-as-sale-to-jamison-falls-apart/>
, anyway, where Mike Ozanian tells us that two sports teams occupying a new 
arena in Seattle is "better economics" than just one. Butover at the Seattle 
Times, Geoff Baker disputes 
<http://seattletimes.com/html/hockey/2020268888_hockey04.html> the idea for two 
reasons: First, that NBA sale would have to go through, and second, Quebec City 
is just better equipped.

"It's doubtful the NHL would give the go-ahead for the Coyotes to relocate to 
Seattle without assurances that an NBA team is, in fact, coming and that 
construction on the new arena can begin...the 15,177-seat (for hockey) KeyArena 
has never been used for NHL games and hasn't played host to hockey of any kind 
since the WHL Thunderbirds left after 2009. That's an obstacle that could be 
overcome, but the reality is, there still is not any firmly established 
ownership group in Seattle that appears ready to take over a hockey team right 
away."

Indeed. 

But could there be another option in the Pacific Northwest? Maybe. Last week, 
as the Phoenix deal fell through,the Toronto Sun reported 
<http://www.torontosun.com/2013/02/02/nhl-notes-portland-poised-for-nhl-bid> 
that Bill Gallacher, owner of the WHL's Portland Winter Hawks, might be 
interested in bringing the team there and setting them up at the Rose Garden 
Arena, currently home to the NBA's Portland Trail Blazers and which can seat 
just over 18,000 for a hockey game – not to mention owned by billionaire 
Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen who came close to grabbing the Penguins when 
things were looking rough in Pittsburgh a few years ago. Gallacher – man ofa 
massive corporate resume 
<http://investing.businessweek.com/research/stocks/people/person.asp?personId=4816547&ticker=AVF:CN>
 – was also for a time rumoured to be part of the bid Jamison was assembling in 
Phoenix. So, is this for real? It sounds real enough. But then again, in the 
ongoing saga of the Phoenix Coyotes, everything sounds real enough – 
particularly money.At the Orgenonian (or OregonLive.com) 
<http://www.oregonlive.com/hawks/index.ssf/2013/02/nhl_and_portland_the_old_story.html>
, the whole thing is deemed totally bunk for one simple fact: Allen has a 
"longstanding view that bringing in another professional team that would 
compete for dollars with his basketball team makes no sense." Yes, good point. 
Nobody from Microsoft has ever made a poor competitive decision.

Any of these cities would probably prove to be a more lucrative spot for an 
NHL franchise in the long run than Phoenix really ever had the chance of being. 
They could even relocate and get expansion money too,Ken Campbell at the Hockey 
News says 
<http://www.thehockeynews.com/articles/49824-How-the-NHL-can-relocate-the-Coyotes-and-get-its-expansion-money-too.html>
. It's unlikely that Commissioner Gary Bettman would very seriously enjoy 
moving another franchise to Canada, rather than somewhere else in the U.S. 
based on potential TV revenue alone, but there's a guaranteed market in Quebec. 
You can't beat that. It's – what's the phrase? – good economics.

A bit of mayhem in Anaheim

In this video <http://youtu.be/L8rSixlAIGI>, you'll see Jordan Nolan and Bryan 
Allen fight, but what's more important is what happens in the background (and 
that eventually becomes the focus of the clip):
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FL8rSixlAIGI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FL8rSixlAIGI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FL8rSixlAIGI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
As you can see way off behind the fight, L.A. Kings forward Jarret Stoll rams 
Cam Fowler's head into the glass/boards in the corner as they both challenge 
for the puck. Stoll got away with the whole thing cleanly, despite it being 
very, very obvious in the replay exactly what kind of horsecollar he gave 
Fowler. On Monday, the Ducks announced Fowler would miss a game with – get this 
– a head injury!

Should Stoll have been suspended? Where's Brendan Shanahan? (See below.) 

John Erskine's elbow vs. Wayne Simmonds' head

This is where Shanahan was, apparently – evaluating a brutal hit from 
Washington's John Erskine on Philadelphia's Wayne Simmonds 
<http://youtu.be/C7Gjy61B9m4> during last Friday's game in DC. As they both go 
for the puck near the blue line, Erskine looks up and, noticing he'll lose the 
race, raises his elbow directly into Simmonds' head. There was no call on the 
play at the time.

Simmonds will be gone indefinitely after suffering a concussion on the play. 
On review, Erskine got three games for the move, explained in painful montone 
by Shanahan's robot voice here.

Should it have been more?

Time for a shakeup in Calgary?

Short answer: God, yes. Even before the Flames threw away probably their most 
promising game of the season Saturday night, the Hockey News was already 
speculating that it's probably time for some changes in Calgary – a lot of 
them, even. For those of you that missed it, the Flames held Chicago at bay, 
outplaying the Hawks for most of Saturday night's game. Tied 1-1 with about 34 
seconds left to go in the third, the Flames jumped ahead. Spectacularly. 
Unexpectedly. Deservedly. And then... Patrick Kane scored with three seconds 
left in regulation to tie it 2-2. The Flames lost in the ensuing shootout.

All of this played into Adam Proteau's lengthy lament 
<http://www.thehockeynews.com/articles/49734-Calgary-Flames-rebuild-long-overdue.html>
 stating the obvious: Calgary has done little to shake things up in years, and 
the result is a bottom-feeding club destined for more of the same.

"There is really no choice for the Flames anymore. Iginla can be an 
unrestricted free agent this summer. Kiprusoff will gain his freedom a year 
after that," Proteau writes. "Off-season additions Jiri Hudler and Dennis 
Wideman aren't making a measurable difference. Meanwhile, their scouting and 
development staff has not provided the Flames with enough up-and-coming young 
talent to offset their fading collection of veterans."

Sad, but true. The problems (as he goes on to note) are more numerous than 
that. One he mostly leaves out is the fact that behind Kiprusoff, there is 
nobody. Calgary has gone years without developing a decent backup goalie, and 
when the time comes to replace Kipper, the only choice will be to buy, rather 
than look internally for new talent. That won't come cheap. Time to start 
selling.

Goals of the week
 