
Dan Bejar, the creative linchpin of Destroyer 
<http://www.mergerecords.com/artists/destroyer>, is surprised. "I've been 
making records for a long time," he says. "So it's strange to get swept up with 
some zeitgeist after doing this for over 15 years." The reason for this 
surprise is the fact that his ninth album, Kaputt, has inadvertently become the 
final corner of an indie soft-rock triumvirate, in the wake of last year's 
efforts fromGayngs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/dec/09/gayngs-related-cd-review> and 
Ariel Pink's Haunted Graffiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/dec/13/ariel-pink-haunted-graffiti-before-today>
. There's no community or geographic connection to bind the three, yet each 
bears the hallmarks of a sound that was, until recently, revisited only through 
irony-tinted lenses: brittle, 80s drum machines, languorous sax and a louche 
smoothness akin to sporting a silk thong under velvet pyjamas.

Each of the three albums is executed with a romantic loyalty to the source 
material that inspired it, but simultaneously kicks against the mould. Gayngs's 
Relayted dripped with a fascination for decadence – their logo is a marijuana 
leaf crossed with a vagina and a peace sign – whereas Ariel Pink's ninth album, 
Before Today, continued his fascination with bastardising the intricate 
production of pop eras past, notably theAlan Parsons Project 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Alan_Parsons_Project>'s slinky, bizarre 
catalogue.

For Bejar, though, Kaputt was an exercise in sincerity. "I don't use music for 
jokes, but as a life or death kind of milieu. I'm old, so I can't really 
romanticise or go digging through the vaults for exotic sounds, because I grew 
up with that," he says. "Even if I were younger, I would know better than to do 
that – it never works." Bejar points out more than once that he's due to turn 
39 in a few months – he would have been the perfect age to share awkward first 
kisses to the sound ofHall & Oates <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fAaFt7_6qvk>
, but this was not the sound he was drawn to as a teeanger in Vancouver: "Where 
I came in as a fan was withshoegaze <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shoegazing>. 
I was into David Sylvian, but I kept that secret because it's not really 
teenager's music."

Rather than using Kaputt to recreate his own youth, or an idealised version 
thereof, Bejar returned to sounds he had actively rejected at the time – the 
David Bowie ofThis Is Not America <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MJRF8xGzvj4>, 
from 1985, orlate Roxy Music <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bpA_5a0miWk>. This 
was music from the periphery of his awareness, an idea he tried to recreate. 
"For me, Kaputt evokes public spaces. I thought I would try and make a record 
that could exist in the background and not interrupt."

On one hand, this willingness to let his music become part of the everyday 
is a far cry from his original aim for Destroyer, which was "to combat forces 
of low art in rock music" (he chuckles as he says that, aware of the 
statement's pomposity). However, he admits a fascination with "the choices 
older artists start to make once they become severely divorced from the reality 
around them", and this is an artistic conceit that bolsters Kaputt. Bejar has 
not had heady, plot-losing success, but he calls his latest record "the biggest 
work of fiction I've ever written; like coming to a lost diary with every four 
pages torn out". Its excess lies in the notion of artistic excess itself, 
interweaving the imagined sleaze of "chasing cocaine in the back rooms of the 
world" with characteristic non-sequiturs and rich, period-specific backing.

Bejar, then, isn't in a position to talk on behalf of his soft-rocking 
compatriots about the sound's renaissance, but his surprise at the reaction to 
Kaputt does the job for him. "I wasn't prepared for young people to like the 
record, or for those who previously hated Destroyer to come around to it via 
this kind of music. Perhaps it pushes memory buttons for people; or a younger 
person who didn't live through it, who doesn't have those hang-ups about genre 
and the politics of the time, might find it interesting."

• Kaputt is out now on Dead Oceans.
 