
On 9 September 2014, in a converted multiplex cinema in Bellevue Washington, a 
team of over 200 people launched a brand new kind of video game. They had spent 
four years preparing for this moment; among their ranks were some of the most 
experienced software engineers in the industry. But they had no idea what would 
happen next.

Months later, David “Deej” Dague, the community manager at Bungie Software 
looks puzzled when asked about that night. “I’m not sure I have any memories of 
the first two weeks after launch,” he says, sitting in the darkened entrance 
hall to the company’s vast office, surrounded by cabinets hosting dozens of 
awards. “All I know is, the game was pretty stable.”

That game, of course, was Destiny, an online sci-fi adventure set in Earth’s 
distant future. Combining the fast-paced action of a first-person shooter (FPS) 
with the in-depth progression systems of a massively multiplayer role-playing 
game (MMORPG), the title effectively sought to unite two very different 
audiences: gamers who just wanted to shoot at stuff and gamers who liked to 
build characters, explore worlds and level up to access increasingly potent 
equipment.

Certainly, these two genres have been borrowing ideas from each other for 
years. Shooters such as Call of Duty and Borderlands have taken the exhaustive 
character progression and loot-collecting concepts of the role-playing sector, 
while RPGs like Mass Effect and Fallout have in turn become more dynamic and 
action-orientated. But with Destiny, Bungie wanted to bring all of this into a 
seamless experience where players could easily migrate from hit-and-run 
“strike” missions to demanding co-operative raids and arena-based competitive 
shoot-outs. And it wanted all this to happen online, without any sort of server 
partitioning between different play types.

The preparations were exhaustive. Years before launch, Bungie built a large 
in-house user testing laboratory where it hosted dozens of volunteer gamers, 
watching how they played, even monitoring their eye movements to help design 
the onscreen displays. “We knew Destiny would have a much more complex UI than 
any game we’d ever made before,” says head of user research John Hopson. “A lot 
of shooter players have never experienced mechanics like gear and talent 
points. If they weren’t using those elements during play-testing we needed to 
know why: was it because they’d seen them and didn’t care, or was it that they 
hadn’t noticed them at all. By analysing where they looked on screen we could 
say, OK, yes they read the help window and closed it – it just wasn’t telling 
them what they needed to know.”
 At his Game Developers Conference talk earlier this year Bungie head of 
research John Hopson talked about the company’s extensive user-testing. Players 
were invited into the studio and given a simple button-input system to show how 
they felt at different points in a game. Photograph: John Hopson 
On the technical side, there was a simple aim: avoid the sort of total 
infrastructure collapse that had plagued other big online releases likeSimCity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/mar/15/simcity-video-game-review>
 and Battlefield 4. For Destiny, a game selling itself as a new type of 
connected experience, that would be a disaster. Bungie built a state-of-the-art 
data operations centre (DOC), a control room filled with screens showing stats 
and metrics from the vast global server infrastructure that would run the game. 
The company employed a 24-hour hit squad of systems engineers, capable of 
reacting to server shutdowns and overloads whenever and wherever they happened.
Reportedly 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2014/07/24/inside-destinys-secret-nerve-center-a-ign-first>
, some of the staff had previously worked on the Large Hadron Collider project 
at Cern.

According to Bungie, over a million players hit the game on day one. The 
traffic was managed through a server bunker in Las Vegas, as well as rented 
data centres all over the world. It held up. However, what the studio quickly 
realised was, this was just the beginning. “The DOC did incredibly well to 
respond to that demand,” says Dague. “But the real learning happened 
afterwards, in the months that followed, when we were able to identify how 
players felt about the story arc, the narrative of their own character, the end 
game content, and about approaching the rank cap. We had to prove to players 
that we understand our own game, that we played it, that we knew who they were 
and what was important to them.”

Peter Parson, Bungie’s chief operating officer, concurs. “Certainly, on the 
positive side, people were playing the game; and the way they were playing – 
the core investment loop – was really smooth. But there were questions about 
the story ...”

Indeed, many players felt the story was fragmented and unclear. What was the 
vastTraveller <http://www.destinypedia.com/Traveler> satellite that was 
protecting humanity? What was the dark enemy that had followed it across the 
cosmos? Why were alien races attacking Earth? There were rumours a lot of 
content had been cut in the run up to launch so that the team could concentrate 
on other technical challenges. “We’d tried to do something different,” says 
Parsons. “The story wasn’t about a fictional character you’d created, it was 
about you and your journey as a player, your own personal narrative. But we 
definitely didn’t get that right.”
 Accessing new weapons and armour is a key element of Destiny, but the game 
originally failed to make the progression system clear. Photograph: Bungie 
Another problem was the unclear character progression at the end of the story 
missions. Suddenly, players had to start collecting exotic armour that added a 
value named Light – but it wasn’t clear how to find it, or how this related to 
levelling up. “What we really did not do a good job of was sending players off 
to the end game,” says Parsons. “It wasn’t just the raids, it was starting to 
use the bounties, doing the high-level strikes – that’s something we learned a 
lot about. The community really helped, not just by providing feedback, but by 
assisting other players across that bridge.”

Bungie knew it had to react – but a video-game studio with over 200 staff is 
like an oil tanker: it doesn’t turn fast

Bungie knew it had to react – but a video-game studio with over 200 staff, in 
a huge variety of disciplines, is like an oil tanker: it doesn’t turn fast. To 
cope with the constant influx of feedback from players, the company totally 
restructured its development team. While small dedicated groups were tasked 
with designing each of the incoming expansion packs, a large new “live team” 
was formed – a group of 20 or so senior staff with a specific focus on 
listening to and implementing player feedback.

“They’re the operations team,” explains Parsons. “They manage and monitor the 
game around the clock to ensure we’re always up and running, and making the 
experience better. Although the group is usually about 20 people, they flex 
much larger when we’re getting ready to ship new content or need the support of 
extra engineers. We also allow the group to tap in to other specialists across 
the studio, providing everything from bug fixes to new content. We’re 
continually pulling people into that vortex, then pushing them back out. The 
fun part of that is even if someone’s working on something that’s far down the 
road, they can feel part of the process along the way.”

Alongside the Live team, Bungie has also organised a handful of its most 
senior team leaders into a special triage unit. This is effectively a sort of 
development tribunal: when bugs or gameplay problems are encountered, they 
decide what gets fixed first. “At any given point in time there are thousands 
of things in the world of Destiny that we’d like to make better but there are 
only so many resources,” says Parsons. “That team is constantly deciding what 
are we going to fix and what are we not going to fix – it has it’s fingers on 
everything in the game world. It’s all about managing development priorities, 
and they’re constantly changing. They’re free to bring in other team leaders to 
bring them up to speed. It’s not uncommon to get an invitation from triage to 
come up and explain what it is your trying to fix and why it shouldn’t be 
pushed to a later date.”

Hopson and his user research team soon became heavily involved in this 
process, analysing the live data and using it to guide decisions. “Mostly what 
we do is prioritise,” he says. “Very few things that fans suggest are bad ideas 
- it’s usually, that’s awesome we should do that, but is it more important than 
the 50 other things we wish we could get into the game? If three million people 
are having a problem then yes we should fix that now, but if it’s 500 people 
that need the fix? The design team have to set priorities.”

There have been occasions, for example, where a particular weapon has appeared 
over-powered, and the immediate goal is to work out how many people are being 
affected. One example involved the Vex Mythoclast, an exotic fusion rifle. “In 
its heyday, people were posting videos on youtube just completely dominating 
the crucible,” says Hopson. “So we asked, okay, how bad is this? How many 
people are actually running around with this thing? And we found that there 
were only 600 people with this gun. We didn’t have to panic and do a next day 
patch - we could leave it a little bit.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX6GHVqIWsas&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX6GHVqIWsas>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX6GHVqIWsas&media=>
“We also look at which weapons people actually use. There are some we thought 
would be really popular but weren’t. I mean, I don’t think anyone thought that 
the No Land Beyond sniper rifle would besuper popular but we had a role for 
that weapon and people didn’t pick up on it in the way we planned. A lot of it 
is analysing the live data. We’re saying, okay, how are people actually 
playing? Destiny is a really complex game there are a lot of different ways to 
do it. Players have certainly surprised us in a bunch of ways -the loot cave 
<http://www.polygon.com/2015/3/6/8152719/destiny-loot-cave-omnivore-bungie-gdc-2015>
 being the most prominent example. We never thought people would just sit there 
doing that.”

But Bungie isn’t totally indulging players with however they want to play: it 
has a plan for them. As the game was being developed, the company worked out 
that player retention was going to depend on getting as many newcomers as 
possible to try all the different experiences from co-op strikes to 
single-player patrols to competitive multiplayer death matches. In his GDC talk 
on user research earlier this year Hopson, who has a PhD in behavioural 
psychology, talked about the buffet effect – a phenomenon in which people will 
eat more if they are presented with greater variety. Destiny, with its array of 
game types and events, is the digital equivalent. For the game to remain 
successful, goes the thinking, it needs ‘omnivores’ – players who’ll try a bit 
of everything.

Right now, Destiny does allow people to have preferences for co-op gameplay 
(strikes, raids, etc) or competitive (The crucible) – but to unlock the best 
new kit, they have to occasionally switch over. To make sure no one was being 
alienated by this structure, Hopson formulated 15 different types of Destiny 
participant, based on phases of the player lifecycle and different types of 
preferred engagement. The team then began to compare proposed new features 
against those profiles to work out how they’d be affected.

“You do a bunch of analysis,” says Hopson. “You say, okay, how does each 
player type engage with the game and what can we do for them? We’ve actually 
been amazingly successful in creating omnivores – pretty much anyone who gets 
to level 20 or beyond is playing like an omnivore. Even when we talk about 
someone as being a raider – raiding still ends up being only 40% of their time 
so they’re spending a lot of time in patrol or PvsP - even when we talk about 
PvP people, they’re spending a lot of time in raids to get the gear they need 
to do well in the Crucible. So the game design is working amazingly well in 
terms of encouraging omnivores.”

 Destiny 
According to Parsons, Bungie also looked to seduce shooter fanatics by making 
Destiny’s more in-depth, grind-heavy gameplay work within their usual 
timeframes. The team knew that people who like to play Call of Duty online for 
an hour, level up once or twice and then log off, may be intimidated by an RPG 
that was going to demand hours of their time in order to complete epic missions 
and progress. So the team designed the short Strike and Patrol missions, which 
both provide plenty of loot potential, so that the game could be played for an 
hour in an evening. As Parsons explains, “If you provide people with multiple 
ways to engage with the universe – even if the core mechanic is just building 
and growing your guardian - they can have a rewarding experience. People say 
that for a console game Destiny is very grindy, but you can get a reward in 
less than an hour by knocking off a couple of bounties.”

Destiny also makes clever use of what psychologists call variable-ratio 
reinforcement schedules. Whenever a quest is completed, there’s a chance that a 
boss will drop valuableexotic armour or weapons 
<http://www.polygon.com/2015/9/15/9328027/destiny-exotic-weapons-armor-list-year-two-upgrades>
, but it’s never certain. Indeed, in the current form of Destiny, every single 
piece of gear you’ve earned by the time you run your first raid will have come 
though a double stack of randomised rewards: first, you have repeatedly killed 
high-level bosses waiting for them to drop a legendary engram (random chance), 
then you will have repeatedly decrypted that engram waiting for an item of a 
high-enough level to take on the raid; or you will have taken a low-level 
legendary item, and then used high-level rare items (which are also dropped 
randomly) to “infuse” it and boost its level.

However complex the system, the hope is always that the next drop will be the 
big one – it’s this variable schedule that compels players. In this sense, 
Destiny has been darkly compared to a slot machine, and the analogy is pretty 
accurate: both tap into that “the next one is the big one” compulsion loop. At 
the same time Bungie has learned from the ‘appointment gaming’ phenomenon we 
saw in the social space. Facebook titles like Farmville succeeded because they 
were designed to allow players to keep dropping in and finding new stuff to do. 
Destiny mimics this with its daily and weekly challenges, as well as having 
vendor characters who’ll often arrive unexpectedly in the world with rare goods 
to sell.

“We planned these calendar rituals,” says Parsons. “If you type ‘where is’ 
into a Google search, [the name of a vendor] Xur comes up as the third or 
fourth search. These rituals of ‘I can’t wait for the next Iron Banner 
tournament’ or ‘what will Xur have when he comes back?’, even the more regular 
public events – people look forward to the surprises.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fdestiny-one-year-bungie-final-frontier-of-gaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443013006038%2F13af85ce-9576-42a0-82b7-95882d715fca-2060x1236.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Destiny%20one%20year%20on%3A%20Bungie's%2012%20months%20at%20the%20final%20frontier%20of%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fdestiny-one-year-bungie-final-frontier-of-gaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Destiny%20one%20year%20on%3A%20Bungie%27s%2012%20months%20at%20the%20final%20frontier%20of%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fdestiny-one-year-bungie-final-frontier-of-gaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443013006038%2F13af85ce-9576-42a0-82b7-95882d715fca-2060x1236.png>
 The Taken are the new antagonists from the latest Destiny expansion, The Taken 
King Photograph: Activision 
What the team seems very keen to stress however, is that everyone at Bungie is 
a player of Destiny, not just a developer. “I see people playing this game 
every single night,” says Dague. “They are as deeply invested as the people who 
bought the product – that’s a wonderful thing. We have our own email debates 
that rage over our server about what Destiny is or what it should be or what we 
need to do to fully realise the potential. Everybody at Bungie has an opinion 
about Destiny – if they don’t they shouldn’t be here.”

According to Parsons, the studio has its own elite team of Destiny players, 
called the Tiger Corps, who will dive straight into new updates and expansions 
as soon as they’re on the company intranet, and start testing them. “They’re on 
the frontline because they act and react as an even more sensitive and 
opinionated version of our larger community,” he says. “We actively challenge 
them to provide feedback and, man, they do not hold back.”


A year after launch, the latest expansion, The Taken King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/22/destiny-taken-king-review-finally-good-game>
, is out and getting good reviews. People are saying that this is what Destiny 
should always have been. The progression system has been ironed out, it’s 
clearer, it’s more logical, and it’s easier to get into co-op gaming sessions. 
But the thing is, it’s taken a year of experience to get here. “I don’t think I 
can stress how much of a shock to the system this has been to Bungie,” says 
Hopson. “I mean, we used to take pride in the fact that our games didn’t 
require updates – it was lesser studios that did that. We were shipping these 
perfect shiny things that were perfectly balanced.

“Destiny is just not that kind of game and we really didn’t know what the 
reception was going to be. We’d worked really hard, we were proud of it, but 
last summer there was a lot of tension, a lot of worry. Is anyone going to 
play? The answer, clearly, was yes.”

Destiny forsaken: the three stages that Bungie lost players

Head of research John Hopson has spent the year analysing player data. Here he 
explains the points where people tended to leave the game during the first 12 
months, and why.

Almost immediately: “The first place we lose people is right away. There’s a 
certain number of people who rent the game or borrow it from a friend - they 
play a few levels and it just wasn’t the experience they were looking for, 
that’s cool – not every game is for every player.

Level 18-21: “There are people who finish the story and never make that jump 
to the mid-game. They never quite realise that they need to be running strikes 
and upgrading their gear by collecting Light, they just don’t step into that 
section of the game.”

“We knew that was going to be a problem – we tried to make the transition as 
smooth as we could, but we did lose a few people there. It was a bad problem by 
our standards, it was a rough patch, but we were only losing something like 4% 
of the players – by the general standards of video games, that’s not a whole 
lot. We learned that we were too abrupt in that transition.”

Level 26-28: “These are the people who never quite tap into a social group in 
order to take on that hard endgame content: all of that requires you to have 
friends or people you can call on. You could get to level 27 totally solo and 
then you sort of hit a wall where you suddenly needed friends to be playing as 
well. One of my favourite things that came out of the community was all the 
solutions for finding groups - the Destiny LFGs, the Hundred – all these 
wonderful systems for matching you with other players.”
 