
In an Aventis prize shortlist of books whose authors cover the gamut of 
scientific concerns, from the meaning of life to why we get spots, one author 
is attracting unprecendented attention.

Jared Diamond, the only author in the prize's history to have won the award 
twice, is in the running to win the prize for a third time with his account of 
the collapse of previous civilisations, How Societies Choose to Fail to 
Succeed. Diamond previously won the prize in 1998 with Guns, Germs and Steel 
and in 1992 with The Rise and Fall of the Third Chimpanzee. In his latest book, 
he examines societies ranging from Easter Islanders to the Mayans and analyses 
what it was that caused them to self-destruct.

He is joined on the shortlist by five authors who have never previously won 
the prize, which is worth Â£10,000. Michael Bodanis is in the running with his 
history of electricity, Electric Universe; Michio Kaku examines alternative 
universes and our cosmic future in Parallel Worlds; and Nick Lane tackles 
cellular biology in Power, Sex, Suicide - Mitochondria and the Meaning of Life. 
They are joined by Arthur I Miller and his history of 20th-century 
astrophysics, Empire of the Stars, and Vivienne Parry, the former presenter of 
Tomorrow's World, whose book attempts to explain those things that rule our 
internal world in The Truth About Hormones: What's Going On When We're Tetchy, 
Spotty, Fearful, Tearful or Just Plain Awful.

The broadcaster Nick Ross, who chairs this year's general prize judging panel, 
said: "These books are really mind-opening - each in its own way brings things 
to life that are profoundly important to all our lives. The standard of writing 
and accessibility in science has improved enormously."

He added, "It was hard to choose a longlist of 13, and bringing that longlist 
down to just six books was a hugely difficult task. But each of the six 
finalists embodies the aims of the award - to attract more people to get real 
pleasure as well as real insights out of popular science. The problem for us 
now is that picking the eventual winner will be even tougher."

The other judges on this year's panel are Johnny Ball, the television 
presenter best-known for his science programmes for children, Steve Jones, 
winner of the Aventis prize in 1994, Fiammetta Rocco, the literary editor of 
the Economist, and Anjula Mutanda, consultant psychologist on ITV's This 
Morning.

Now in their 18th year, the Aventis prizes - consisting of the general prize 
and the junior prize, for the best book written for under-14s - are managed by 
the Royal Society, the UK national academy of science, and supported by German 
charitable trust the Aventis Foundation. They were established to encourage the 
writing, publishing and reading of good popular science books. Previous winners 
have included Bill Bryson, Stephen Hawking and, last year, Philip Ball for 
Critical Mass: How One Thing Leads to Another.

The winner will be announced at a ceremony on May 16.

The shortlist

Electric Universe - How Electricity Switched on the Modern World by David 
Bodanis (Little, Brown Book Group)

Collapse - How Societies Choose to Fail or Survive by Jared Diamond (Penguin 
Allen Lane)

Parallel Worlds - The Science of Alternative Universes and our Future in the 
Cosmos by Michio Kaku (Penguin)

Power, Sex, Suicide - Mitochondria and the Meaning of Life by Nick 
Lane(OxfordUniversityPress)

Empire of the Stars - Friendship, Obsession and Betrayal in the Quest for 
Black Holes by Arthur I Miller (Little, Brown Book Group)

The Truth About Hormones - What's Going on when we're Tetchy, Spotty, Fearful, 
Tearful or Just Plain Awful by Vivienne Parry (Atlantic Books)
 