
This is a photo of Movses Haneshyan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/24/armenian-genocide-survivor-turkey-recognition>
, seeing a picture of his former home for the first time in a century. He 
started to cry and then sing: “My home. My Armenia.” He touched the image as he 
sang, then kissed his hands, as if it might take him back.

Movses last saw his home in 1915, when he was five. When soldiers entered his 
village, he escaped with his father holding his hand. “Half the road was 
covered with dead people,” he told me. This marked the beginning of what 
Armenians refer to as the “great crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/23/armenians-want-acknowledgment-that-1915-massacre-was-crime-geoffrey-robertson>
” – the genocide of the Armenian people in their homeland, now part of 
modern-day Turkey.

During the first world war, the Ottoman empire initiated a policy of 
deportations, mass murder and rape to destroy the Armenian presence within its 
borders. By the war’s end, more than one million people had been killed. To 
date, 29 countries have officially recognised the killings as genocide, but the 
Ottomans’ heirs in the Turkish government don’t fully acknowledge it.

Yepraksia watched as Armenians were killed and thrown into the water. It was 
'red, full of blood', she told me

In 2013, I travelled to Armenia to meet Movses and nine other survivors to ask 
them about those distant days. They were all frail and elderly. Three were 
willing to help me: Movses,Yepraksia Barseghyan-Gevorgyan 
<https://auroraprize.com/en/stories/detail/regular/7197/yepraksia-barseghyan-gevorgyan>
 andMariam Sahakyan 
<https://auroraprize.com/en/stories/detail/regular/7211/mariam-sahakyan>. We 
established the exact coordinates of the villages they’d left behind. I then 
set out to find them. Movses, who is 105, gave me a map, and I followed it as 
closely as I could, finding everything he had described: the sea, the tree with 
the fruit he remembered eating, the goats he shepherded, even the rubble of 
what was once his church.

Yepraksia, now 108, had escaped her village by crossing a river nearby. She 
watched as Armenians were killed and thrown into the water. It was “red, full 
of blood”, she told me. Mariam, 102, escaped to Syria with her mother and older 
brother, whom they dressed as a girl for safety. They hid in the grass when the 
soldiers came. They walked at night for three days and hid during the day. But 
once they got to Syria, she was separated from her family.


I took a picture of what remained in each village, and last year I brought 
each one back for the survivors. They grabbed at them, as if by holding them 
close they could be transported back there.

I am Armenian, but I was born in Moscow and raised in America. This is a part 
of my history, which I knew about but never fully embraced. My 
great-grandfather survived the genocide because his neighbours, who were 
Turkish, hid him. So this series was personal, a way of trying to understand 
that part of myself.

I had asked each of the survivors what I could do for them. Movses asked me to 
find his church, which was now a ruin, and leave his portrait there. Yepraksia 
asked me to find her lost brother, even though all she had of him was a 
drawing. “He liked to put me on his shoulders and play with me at the 
orphanage,” she said. “I don’t remember much else about him except he has blue 
eyes, like mine.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fdiana-markosian-best-photograph-movses-haneshyan-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a46675ce6d3d18de11ecf83ebd59282ab4f426e%2F0_297_3118_3894%2F3118.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diana%20Markosian's%20best%20photograph%3A%20the%20105-year-old%20Armenian%20who%20escaped%20genocide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fdiana-markosian-best-photograph-movses-haneshyan-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diana%20Markosian%27s%20best%20photograph%3A%20the%20105-year-old%20Armenian%20who%20escaped%20genocide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fdiana-markosian-best-photograph-movses-haneshyan-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a46675ce6d3d18de11ecf83ebd59282ab4f426e%2F0_297_3118_3894%2F3118.jpg>
 Diana Markosian 
Mariam asked me to go to her village and bring some soil. She wanted to be 
buried in it. When I did so, she opened the package and said: “You’ve brought 
the smell of my village to me.”

Diana Markosian’s CV

Born: Moscow, 1989

Studied: Columbia University, New York

Influences: Sophie Calle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sophie-calle> and Andrei Tarkovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky>

High point: “Making my own art.”

Low point: “Never being satisfied with myself, or my work.”

Top tip: “Stay humble.”

 