
Earlier today I set you the following puzzles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/15/can-you-solve-it-are-you-a-puzzle-olympian>
:

1) The 100m final

Early this morning Usain Bolt won gold in the 100m.

Let’s assume that Bolt won the race by 10m from the second placed runner, 
Justin Gatlin. And now let’s run the final again, but this time Bolt will start 
10m behind the start line. If both Bolt and Gatlin run at the same constant 
speed in the second race as they did in the first, who wins?

Solution

Bolt wins the second race. 

When Bolt has run 100m, Gatlin has run 90m, so the men are in level positions 
10m from the finish line. Since Bolt has a higher speed, he will run that final 
10m quicker than his rival.

2) The mystery games

(For the purposes of this puzzle, any resemblance to real persons, living or 
dead, and Olympic sports, actual or obsolete, is purely coincidental.)

Nafissatou, Jessica, and Brianne are taking part in an athletics competition 
that involves at least two events. In each event the winner gets G points, 
second placed gets S points and third place gets B points, where G, S and B are 
whole numbers, nonzero, and G> S>B. No event is tied. Nafissatou scores 22 
points in total. Jessica and Brianne score 9 points each in total. Jessica wins 
the 100m hurdles. Who is second in the javelin? How many events are there?

Solution

To solve this puzzle we need to write down clearly what we know and then 
gradually deduce the answer.

We know that the number of points awarded at each event is G + S + B, and we 
know the total number of points given out is 22 + 9 + 9 = 40. We also know that 
the smallest possible number of points awarded at each event is when G = 3, S = 
2 and B = 1, in which case G + S + B = 6.

G + S + B cannot be exactly 6, since 6 does not divide into 40, the total 
number of points. So G + S + B must be either 8, 10, 20 or 40, since these are 
the only numbers greater than 6 that do divide 40. Which means that there are 
either 5, 4, 2 or 1 events, since 40/8 = 5, 40/10 = 4, 40/20 = 2 and 40/40 = 1.

Jessica wins the hurdles, and has a total score of 9, so G is at most 9. 
Nafissatou scores 22 points, so there must be more than two events since 
otherwise how could she possibly reach that number? So, we know that either 
there are 5 events and G + S + B = 8, or there are are 4 events and G + S + B = 
10.

Let’s suppose that there are 4 events. G must be 6 or more, since if it was 5 
or below Nafissatou would never reach 22. The only way Jessica, who wins the 
hurdles, and has a total score of 9, could reach that number is if G = 6, B = 
1, and she is third in each of the other three events. So, S = 3. However, even 
if Nafissatou is second in the hurdles but wins all the other events, her total 
is 6 + 6 + 6 + 3 = 21. Which contradicts the statement of the question.

So, there must be 5 events, and G + S + B = 8. G must be 5 or more, since if 
it was 4 or below Nafissatou would never reach 22. If G = 5, then the only way 
Jessica, who wins the hurdles, and has a total score of 9, could reach that 
number is if G = 5, B = 1, and she is third in each of the other four events. 
So, S = 2. The only way for Nafissatou to make up 22 is for her to win every 
event but place second in the hurdles, since 5 + 5 + 5 + 5 + 2 = 22. SoBrienne 
is last in the hurdles, but second in all other events, including the javelin. 

These two puzzles were adapted from problems in My Best Mathematical and Logic 
Puzzles by Martin Gardner, and Which Way did the Bicycle Go? By Joseph D.E. 
Konhauser, Dan Velleman and Stan Wagon.

I post a puzzle here on a Monday every two weeks. If you want to propose a 
puzzle for this column, pleaseemail me <mailto:bellospuzzle@gmail.com> I’d love 
to hear it.

I’m the author of three popular maths books including Alex’s Adventures in 
Numberland <http://amzn.to/24xBFW0>. My new book Football School: Where 
Football Explains the World <http://amzn.to/2bqxfYt> is for children and out on 
Sept 1.You can check me out on Twitter <https://twitter.com/alexbellos>, 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Alex-Bellos/326738482347?ref=bookmarks>
,Google+ <https://plus.google.com/u/0/100349853927591455618/posts>, my personal 
website <http://www.alexbellos.com/> or my Guardian maths blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland>.

 