
Microsoft is right to warn about the danger of a serious monopoly in search 
because of Google's dominance. Its own revamped search engine, Bing, is a 
welcome addition and has some interesting features that should earn it more 
followers. Maybe it is time to apply Microsoft's enlightened approach to 
monopolies to what is happening in its own backyard where, amazingly, it still 
has almost 95% of the global market for PC operating systems (Windows), word 
processing (Word) and spreadsheets (Excel). Last year, a new generation of 
"netbooks" running the open-source Linux operating system seemed set to capture 
the bottom end of the market. I boughta $199 Asus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/may/15/computing.linux>, which I 
thought would be my dream machine as it weighed barely 1kg and came with the 
freeOpenOffice.org <http://www.openoffice.org> word-processor, Linux operating 
system, Skype, educational and arts programs and Google documents. It didn't 
turn out so well: the screen was too small, wireless links flaky and battery 
life poor. But hell, the potential was there, so when Asus recently released 
its beautiful Eee Seashell with a bigger screen and six hours of battery life, 
I bought one on impulse.

The problem was that Asus had not only adopted Windows and jettisoned Linux 
(which I knew), but the computer didn't even come with the free services that 
came with the $199 model. I know there are millions who love Windows. That is 
their human right. But it fails completely - for me - on usability. So, the 
Seashell ends up not as a next-generation netbook, but as a Microsoft-occupied 
computer and all the simplicity of the earlier Asus machines has gone out of 
the Windows. Every time I open it, I am assailed with stuff I don't want - 
Windows Live this, Norton that, Phishing this, Works that - with no obvious way 
of switching some of them off. When I simply wanted to write a note there was 
no Open Office and when I tried Word inMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> Works it kept asking me to 
sign up for another 45 days (or whatever) after inputting a key number I was 
supposed to have but didn't.

How did this happen? There are various versions. One is that Microsoft 
suddenly woke up to a serious threat to its market share and became Microhard. 
It gave Asus a package it couldn't refuse - a cheap version of Windows as long 
as it tossed the upstart Linux overboard. True or not, Asus has changed from 
being a successful proponent of Linux to an evangelist forWindows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows>. The second version is that 
Asus, seeking a cheap web book to sell globally, used free Linux as a lever to 
force Microsoft to give it a cheap deal it wouldn't otherwise have got. A third 
version is that Linux wasn't yet up to the job as there were so many different 
versions and users had difficulty linking with devices such as printers. This 
theory was given support when Wal-Mart dropped the Taiwanese $199 Green gPC 
because of poor sales. But it doesn't explain why the Linux Asus Eee PC was 
such a roaring success.

What cannot be denied is that there is a huge potential demand for cheap 
devices of this kind - not just for those wanting to simplify their lives but 
for the billions who don't have a computer at all. Fortunately, help may be at 
hand, as there are numerous affordable models in the pipeline. Whether the 
successful ones will beLinux <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/linux>, 
Windows, Google's Android, Symbian or even ARM remains to be seen. I am told 
there is an impressive web book running the Linux-based Ubuntu in the pipeline. 
Microsoft has already disproved the axiom of the great management guru Peter 
Drucker, who claimed that no non-governmental monopoly had ever lasted more 
than 15 years. The prospect of serious competition in operating systems can 
only be good not just for consumers all over the world but for Microsoft as 
well. But whether it can be dislodged from its entrenched position remains an 
open question.

â€¢ victorkeegan.com <http://www.victorkeegan.com>

* This article was amended on 8 July 2009. The headline was changed.
 