
Earlier today I set you the following puzzles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/26/can-you-solve-it-are-you-smarter-than-the-gogglebox-brainbox>
, each penned by William Hartston, aka Bill off Gogglebox:

1) What is the next number in the following series?


23, 9, 20, 14, 14, 9, 20, 6, ...

2) Mary I; George III, Henry III, James II, George IV, Charles I, ...


Why might Henry I be an appropriate way to end the series?

3) What comes next in the following series?


2.1, 3.5, 3.3, 2.3, 1.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 1.8 ...

4) What comes next in this series: 


1, 2, 9, 12, 70, 89, 97, 102 ...

Solutions

1) 19 – the numbers are the alphabet positions of the first letters of the 
words in the question.

2) The code is that Mary I is taken to mean the first letter of Mary, George 
III is the third letter in George, and so on. The whole series, including a 
final Henry I, therefre spells out the word “monarch”.


3) 2.7 They are the row and column positions on a QWERTY keyboard of the 
letters in alphabetical order. (2.1 means second row, first letter; 3.5 is 
third row, fifth letter, etc.)


4) 112: Subtract 1 from each number and you get the numbers that are the same 
upside down: 0, 1, 8, 11, 69, 88, 96, 101, 111, 181...

Don’t feel too bad if you did’t get that last one. Says Bill: “I came up with 
it many years ago when talking to a Cambridge mathematician who was about to 
compete in a puzzle-solving competition against Oxford. He told me that at the 
end of the formal part of the contest, they had an informal bit where the teams 
set each other original puzzles and he asked if I could come up with something. 
The above question was the result. Nobody solved it, though everyone agrees it 
is completely fair and logical.”


Thanks again to Bill for letting me use these puzzles. Don’t forget to check 
out his recent bookEven More Things That Nobody Knows: 501 Further Mysteries of 
Life, the Universe and Everything <http://amzn.to/2dd3zTp>, which is out in 
paperback in November.

I post a puzzle here on a Monday every two weeks. If you want to propose a 
puzzle for this column, pleaseemail me <mailto:bellospuzzle@gmail.com> I’d love 
to hear it.

I’m the author of several books on maths, as well as the kids book Football 
School: Where Football Explains the World <http://amzn.to/2bqxfYt> which tells 
you loads of amazing stuff parents don’t tell you such as when exactly 
footballers poo, why eagles are the most common mascot for football teams and 
how to play football on Mars

You can check me out on Twitter <https://twitter.com/alexbellos>, Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Alex-Bellos/326738482347?ref=bookmarks>, Google+
 <https://plus.google.com/u/0/100349853927591455618/posts>, my personal website 
<http://www.alexbellos.com/> or my Guardian maths blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland>.
 