
Earlier today I set you the following three puzzles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/20/can-you-solve-it-are-you-smarter-than-andy-murray>
:

 * The men’s singles event at Wimbledon is a knockout tournament with 128 
players. Without doing any arithmetic - i.e adding up the number of matches in 
every round - can you work out how many matches are there in total?

 * What is the minimum number of times you need to hit the ball with your 
racket in order to win a set? 
 * Goode, who is a good tennis player, and Poor, who isn’t, will take turns as 
your opponent over three sets of tennis. The order for sets 1-2-3 will be 
either Goode-Poor-Goode, or Poor-Goode-Poor? Which order of opponent do you 
choose to maximise your chances of winning two sets in a row? 
Question 1

The answer is 127.

What I didn’t want you to do was to add the 64 first round matches to the 32 
second round matches, to the 16 third round matches, and so on, which is 64 + 
32 + 16 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1 = 127.

Not only is this laborious but it is inelegant. 

This way is neater: at the end of each match one player is the winner and one 
is the loser. At the end of the tournament, every player has lost a matchexcept 
the champion. So there must be one less match than there are players. There are 
128 players so there must be 127 matches.

Question 2

The answer is once.

Imagine if every time you serve you swing at the ball and miss. This is a 
fault. Do this twice in a row and you lose the point. Do it eight times in a 
row and you lose the game.

Now imagine you do this for your six service games and that your opponent also 
double faults on every serve. The score after 12 games will be 6-6 and the set 
will enter the tiebreak.

If you continue to swing at the ball and miss, and your opponent double 
faults, neither of you will be able to win the tie-break. But depending on who 
serves first you will either get to 6-5, or 7-6 ahead. When you you do, ace 
that serve and you will have won the set with your racket hitting the ball only 
once.

This question may seem familiar to many of you since it is similar to one of 
the most controversial moments on the quiz show Who Wants to be A Millionaire. 
In an episode in 1999, a contestant was asked:

Theoretically, what is the minimum number of strokes with which a tennis 
player can win a set?

His four choices were 12, 24, 36 and 48. He replied 24, was told it was 
correct, and won that question, worth £64,000.

The correct answer was 12 - four aces on each of his serves for 3 games, and 
his opponent double faulting all his serves in 3 games. Later the programme 
makers admitted they had made a mistake but let the contestant keep his 
winnings.

If by a ‘stroke’ we mean the racket hitting the ball, however, even 12 is 11 
too many.

Question 3

The answer is Goode-Poor-Goode

I love the counter-intuitive nature of the answer: in order to have the best 
chance of winning two sets in a row you need to play the best player twice!


This is because in order to win two sets in a row you must win the middle 
game. You have a better chance of winning the middle set against Poor than you 
do against Goode, so with Goode-Poor-Goode you get an easier middle set and two 
shots at beating Goode. If you went with Poor-Goode-Poore, you only get one 
shot at beating Goode.

The insight here is to realise that even though the chances of winning any two 
sets is better with Poor-Goode-Poor, the chance of winningtwo sets in a row is 
better with Goode-Poor-Goode.

For those who are familiar with basic probability theory, we can prove the 
result more formally. If the probability of beating Poor isp, and the 
probability of beating Goode isg, then the probability of two wins in a row 
facing Goode-Poore-Goode are the sum of:

win-win-win: gpg

win-win-lose: gp(1 – g)

lose-win-win: (1 – g)gp

TOTAL: 2gp – ggp = gp(2 – g)

Using a similar table for Poor-Goode-Poor, the probability of two wins in a 
row works out asgp(2 – p).

Goode is better than Poor, so the probability of beating Poor is greater than 
the probability of beating Goode, i.ep > g.

Therefore (2 – g) > (2 – p)

And thus gp(2 – g) > gp(2 – p)

So the chances of two wins in a row against Goode-Poor-Goode is greater than 
the chances in a row against Poor-Goode-Poor.

Sources: 1. of unknown origin. 2. Dick Hess: Number Crunching Math Puzzles 
<http://amzn.to/1Y0uNNl>. 3. Frederick Mosteller: Fifty Challenging Problems in 
Probability <http://amzn.to/1YyhOBf>.

I post a puzzle here on a Monday every two weeks. If you are reading this on 
the Guardian app, click where it says ‘Follow Alex Bellos’ and you’ll get an 
alert when the next puzzle appears.


If you want to propose a puzzle for this column, please email me 
<mailto:bellospuzzle@gmail.com> I’d love to hear it.

I’m the author of three popular maths books including Alex’s Adventures in 
Numberland <http://amzn.to/24xBFW0> and the maths colouring book Snowflake 
Seashell Star 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/1782117881/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1634&creative=19450&creativeASIN=1782117881&linkCode=as2&tag=alebel-21>
.

You can check me out on Twitter <https://twitter.com/alexbellos>, Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Alex-Bellos/326738482347?ref=bookmarks>, Google+
 <https://plus.google.com/u/0/100349853927591455618/posts>, my personal website 
<http://www.alexbellos.com/> or my Guardian maths blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland>.
 