
The popular link-sharing website Digg <http://digg.com/> is investigating 
claims that a group of the site's "influential conservative" members are 
systematically downgrading thousands of stories deemed to be "liberal".

Online magazine AlterNet claimed 
<http://blogs.alternet.org/oleoleolson/2010/08/05/massive-censorship-of-digg-uncovered/>
 to have uncovered a group of Digg members – dubbed "Digg Patriots" – who have 
"censored hundreds of users, dozens of websites, and thousands of stories" from 
the site. Alternet alleged that the Digg Patriots, thought to number nearly 100 
members, are "able to bury over 90% of articles by certain users and websites 
submitted within 1-3 hours".

Kevin Rose, founder of Digg, said via Twitter 
<http://twitter.com/kevinrose/status/20425643104>: "We're looking into this."

The six-year-old social bookmarking website ranks submitted web content by the 
number of times they are ranked up or down. Popular items, those receiving the 
most "Diggs" and least attempts to "Bury", are voted onto the Digg homepage, 
and can generate significant amounts of traffic for external websites. Digg had 
7.6 million unique visitors in June this year,according to figures 
<http://siteanalytics.compete.com/digg.com/> from analytics firm Compete.

AlterNet claimed the group of Digg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/digg> Patriots, whose political 
affiliations are described as "conservative", work to "censor" the prominence 
of articles "even slightly critical of the GOP/Tea Party/FoxNews/corporations".

A posting said by AlterNet to be by the alleged founder of the Digg Patriots, 
"phoenixtx", reads:
 "The more liberal stories that were buried the better chance conservative 
stories have to get to the front page. I'll continue to bury their submissions 
until they change their ways and become conservatives." 
An AlterNet investigation alleged that the Digg Patriots discussed censorship 
strategies at a Yahoo group which hassince been removed 
<http://groups.yahoo.com/group/DiggPatriots/>. A posting said to be by one of 
the group's senior strategists, said:
 "To all of our new group members: We are really happy you have joined us at 
DiggPatriots! Please remember this is a group that we are trying to keep below 
the radar. Please do not disclose this group's existence to anyone outside the 
group on Digg or elsewhere. The longer we can keep this group on the down low, 
the better. I know you probably already knew that, but I wanted to make sure we 
are all on the same page as far as the keeping this group from being exposed to 
the public." 
AlterNet also claimed "dozens of duplicate or previously banned" Digg users 
have set up alternate accounts.

Digg, currently undergoing a transition to a new website <http://digg.com/new>
, may be free from the coercion of groups of users when it launches its next 
version, a preliminary analysis by AlterNet is said to have shown.
 