
Motor insurers are accelerating after signs of an increase in rates.

Bad news for drivers of course, but the latest AA insurance index showed a 
2.8% quarter-on-quarter rise in comprehensive rates and a 6.6% increase in 
third party rates, the first rises for two years.

This has helped Direct Line climb 8.2p to 279.3p, Admiral add 28p to £12.71 and
esure rise 11.1p to 233p. But Eamonn Flanagan at Shore Capital was still 
negative on the companies:

On the face of it, the latest AA Insurance Index, for the third quarter of 
2014, offers a potential glimmer of hope for the beleaguered UK personal motor 
insurance, with both comprehensive and third party rates reporting a quarterly 
increase for the first time in two years. However, this glimmer is quickly 
extinguished, to us, on reading the commentary from AA Insurance which states 
that “claims pressure is pushing premiums up”. The report goes on to indicate 
that claims farmers and law firms are finding ways to get around the LASPO 
[legal aid, sentencing and punishment of offenders act] measures whilst many 
insurers have reported a “surge” in the number of lower-value ‘cash for crash’ 
claims which has led to an increase in whiplash and other soft tissue claims.

This confirms our view that the increase in motor rates is actually a lag 
indicator of claims experience, with the third quarter 2014 rate increase 
necessary to begin to compensate for adverse trends developing in both claims 
frequency and average claims amounts. As a consequence, although the initial 
positive stock reaction of the quoted motor insurers to this news... may be 
understandable, we believe it to be premature. The worsening claims data (both 
frequency and amounts) can only depress margins, whilst we remind readers of 
the ongoing FCA review of add-ons. As a result, we reiterate our sell 
recommendations on each ofAdmiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup>, esure and Direct Line.
 