
Workers with a disability who were paid as little as 99c an hour under an 
Australian government policy will receive thousands of dollars in back pay 
thanks to a settlement worth more than $100m.

The federal court on Friday approved the class action settlement between 
workers and the commonwealth over its wages policy for employees with a 
disability. Thesettlement was reached in December 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/18/government-to-pay-disabled-workers-70-of-back-wages-as-class-action-ends>
 but was subject to court approval.

“This brings to an end a very long-running battle,” a Maurice Blackburn 
Lawyers principal, Josh Bornstein, told reporters outside court.

Government to pay disabled workers 70% of back wages as class action ends
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/18/government-to-pay-disabled-workers-70-of-back-wages-as-class-action-ends>
The battle against the federal government’s discriminatory wages policy began 
more than a decade ago. It was a fight that had taken place in court, in 
parliament and in the public sphere, Bornstein said on Friday.

“It’s been a David and Goliath battle ... and the most unusual battle I’ve 
ever been involved with,” he said.

Friday’s federal court ruling ends a class action launched in 2013 on behalf 
of the lead plaintiff, Tyson Duval-Comrie.

In the lawsuit Maurice Blackburn argued that the assessment tool used to set 
the wages of workers at AustralianDisability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> Enterprises – which are funded 
by the federal government – discriminated against people with intellectual 
disabilities.

The underpayment was happening despite a federal court ruling in another case 
in 2012, which found that the business services wage assessment tool was 
discriminatory and contravened the Disability Discrimination Act.

A disability advocate, Kairsty Wilson, says some government-funded disability 
enterprises had opposed the class action and instigated a scare campaign that 
claimed workers would lose their jobs.

“The viability of the Australian Disability Enterprises is not an issue at 
all,” she told reporters.

About 10,000 affected workers will be compensated as a result of Friday’s 
settlement. The wage assessment tool was amended in March to increase payments 
to disabled workers.
 