
The government's controversial system for assessing whether hundreds of 
thousands of benefit claimants with a disability or long term illness are "fit 
for work" is so flawed that it should be scrapped and completely redesigned,a 
committee of MPs has said 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmworpen/302/30202.htm>
.

The employment and support allowance (ESA) system is crude, simplistic and 
failing to fulfil its intended purpose of helping claimants back into work, the 
commons work and pensions select committee said on Wednesday.

It describes the test used to determine ESA eligibility – the work capability 
assessment (WCA) – as frequently inaccurate, and notes that many claimants who 
undergo it report it as a "stressful and anxiety-provoking experience."

The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) this year negotiated an early exit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/27/atos-quite-work-capability-assessment-contract-early>
from the existing WCA contract with the private firm, Atos, after raising 
concerns about the quality of its work. But the committee says that simply 
changing the provider will not in itself lead to improvements in the system.

Its report says: "The flaws in the existing ESA system are so grave that 
simply 'rebranding' the WCA by taking on a new provider will not solve the 
problems: a fundamental redesign of the ESA end-to-end process is required."

The committee acknowledges the scale and complexity of determining eligibility 
for an incapacity benefit claimed by millions of people but urges ministers to 
put a redesigned system in place by 2018, when a completely new delivery 
contract is introduced.

The current system is too simplistic, and too often fails to recognise the 
complex health barriers to work faced by claimants, the report says. There have 
been hundreds of thousands of appeals against WCA decisions in recent years, 
clogging up tribunals at a cost of £60m a year. At least four out of 10 appeals 
succeed.

It adds: "This redesign needs to focus on what the purpose of ESA is – helping 
people back to work".

The disability minister Mark Harper said that the government was currently 
undertaking the fifth review of the WCA since it was introduced in 2008, during 
which time "numerous improvements" to the test had been made.

He added: "We are bringing in a new provider and a new contract for work 
capability assessments to deliver the best possible service for claimants, 
increase the number of assessments and reduce waiting times."

The ESA system has become increasingly controversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/joepublic/2011/jan/31/kettling-disabled-protesters-welfare-reform?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 in recent years, generating a groundswell of public concern about its accuracy 
and effectiveness that ministers largely ignored until this year whentensions 
between the DWP and Atos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/17/atos-fit-for-work-tests-contract>
 – which had come to see the £100m a year contract as a poisoned chalice –came 
to a head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/27/atos-contract-end-relief-campaigners>
.

The committee took evidence from a large number of ESA claimants about their 
experiences. "Many reported feeling dehumanised, ignored or questioned 
inappropriately. Some felt that the progress they were making towards recovery, 
and then moving back into work, was hampered rather than aided by the anxiety 
caused in facing the WCA."

Rosanna Singler, co-chair of the Disability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> Benefits Consortium, said the 
committee was "absolutely right" to call for a fundamental overhaul of WCA, 
which she described as "unfit for purpose".

Mark Winstanley, the chief executive of charity Rethink Mental Illness, said 
ministers had to stop "dragging their heels" over reforming the system. "This 
report represents yet another blow to the failing assessment process. It comes 
after repeated independent reviews have exposed huge flaws in the system and a
court ruling 
<http://www.rethink.org/get-involved/campaigns/unfair-wca/wca-judicial-review-faq>
 last year found that the current assessment is unfair for people with mental 
health problems.""
 