
I have to say my recent experiences with English conveyancing have made it 
much clearer why all of you English persons have seemed historically happy to 
live in a country run by posh boy sociopaths and to have an established church 
which appears to embrace praying for people in order of social importance as a 
virtue. Your spirits have been broken by conveyancing. I understand.Ned Ludd 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ned_Ludd>, Wat Tyler 
<http://www.wga.hu/tours/gothic/history/wattyler.html> and the Levellers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/civil_war_revolution/benn_levellers_01.shtml>
 were worthy exceptions, but mainly you just want to join queues, invent
regional dishes <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_cuisine#Sausages> and be 
left alone. Really, I do understand.

I am currently typing in Borrowed Flat Number 5, having lost the flat I was 
supposedly buying – the owners didn't own it, the solicitors didn't notice – 
and I am now perhaps almost near owning another, but I hold out no great hopes. 
I rely on the kindness of strangers – and friends – and cannot overstate how 
much support and talking-down-off-the-roof that has involved. My faith in human 
nature is all silky and shiny and may never quite collapse again. And I would 
recommend to anyone the experience of flat hunting during something of a heat 
wave and two consecutive major sporting events in an already crowded city. At 
least, I would recommend it to anyone I didn't like at all in any way.

Having spent my last blog extolling the virtues of focus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2012/jul/31/al-kennedy-still-writing>
 and of somehow maintaining a tiny eye of peace in life's storms, I have had to 
live up to my pronouncements while a fair amount of sand has been blown into my 
tiny eye and it has occasionally been poked with a stick. I've tried to keep 
on, but serious writing has slowed. I've managed one short story since we last 
spoke. Among other things, this has reminded me again how much I genuinely, 
deep-down enjoy writing fiction. I not only miss it when circumstances prevent 
me from accessing the keyboard in a meaningful way, I actually start to feel 
quite peculiar as a result. I think this stems from a blend of frustration and 
professional/financial anxiety and something rather more profound: a sense that 
without writing, I am mainly at the mercy of my often toxic interior monologue. 
Writing creatively is so intensely involving that for hour after hour it can 
completely remove the standard torrent of doubts, fears, gripes, resentments 
and rubbish which my unattended subconscious delights in manufacturing. After 
only a few days, I really do long for the kind of meditative absence of self 
that building fiction can provide.

But I've had more than that to remember and prise me out of my own head. Like 
many others, I had all kinds of ethical reservations about the Olympics: the 
sometimes graceless behaviour ofLocog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/london-organising-committee-olympic-paralympic-games>
, the associated social cleansing of Newham and a number ofthe Games' chosen 
sponsors 
<http://www.london2012.com/about-us/the-people-delivering-the-games/olympic-partners/>
. I watched a little on telly and was only delighted that the multiple, firm 
decisions of people largely held in contempt by our politicians and large 
corporations transformed something grasping, paranoid and shoddy into a 
generous joy. I was shown the effect of excellence, something we're rarely 
allowed to associate with everyday people, or long-term effort – and, of 
course, always kept as far as possible from the arts. Then, despitethe vilely 
inappropriate intrusion of Atos 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/aug/28/atos-paraylmpic-involvement-brings-protests>
, I spent rather more time watching the Paralympics. Many commentators have 
mentioned how exciting and beautiful it was to see dedicated sportsmen and 
sportswomen with disabilities being treated like dedicated sportsmen and 
sportswomen. Which is to say, how great and surprising it was to see our media 
treating human beings as human beings and allowing them dignity. And how lovely 
it was to see a new generation of sensible, enthusiastic, well-informed and 
un-self-obsessed presenters with disabilities appearing in an environment which 
generally has a problem with such deviations from "normality" as mild 
cellulite, humility and being over 30.

More specifically, I remembered the first 10 years of my career as a writer, 
during which I earned my living by working with writers who had what were 
termed "special needs". As I tried to wrestle my own words on to paper in the 
evenings and at weekends, I spent my days with human beings who were elderly, 
who had mobility difficulties, learning difficulties, or visual impairments, 
who had physical and mental illnesses, who were very young, who were addicts, 
or who were very poor. At that point, all of them were being punished for their 
vulnerabilities by the government they could not, in some cases, even have a 
say in electing. They were often housed in horrible environments with poor 
resources; they were patronised, ignored and sometimes abused. And yet all of 
them had – among many other qualities – depths of understanding and words to 
say: beautiful, funny, troubling, wonderful things to create and offer others. 
I was young, self-obsessed as only a budding writer can be, and generally 
panicked about running effective workshops, or trying to overcome the technical 
difficulties of people with varying barriers between them and the wider 
expression of themselves. Even so, it was impossible not to notice that 
something as simple as being heard, being respected, could change someone's 
life. It was impossible not to realise how much I was being taught while I 
flailed my way through "teaching". It was impossible not to realise how very 
tenuous anyone's grip is on "normality" and how briefly any of us will be 
considered as fully human by the authorities and individuals who are supposed 
to serve the public. It was impossible not to be disgusted by how often I 
couldn't really talk about what I did for a living because even the idea of a 
disabled person troubled those listeners who believed themselves to be without 
significant handicaps. And it was impossible not to be electrified by how 
quickly and beautifully writing and the arts in general could release power and 
status for those who were meant to be kept very far from both.

I'm glad if the Paralympics coverage and its athletes have changed perceptions 
of people with disabilities. That it was necessary to change those perceptions 
is profoundly disappointing. And I'm happy to say here – and anywhere else – 
that disabled writers made me the writer I am today and gave me a faith in 
words and their potential which doesn't shake, even when everything else is in 
disarray. They are a way to change worlds. Onwards.
 