
I received a press release for a screening of Spike Lee’s Chi-Raq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/25/chi-raq-review-spike-lees-urgent-angry-and-very-sexy-midlife-masterpiece>
 yesterday, an astonishing reworking ofAristophanes’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aristophanes> Lysistrata set among the 
modern-day gangs of Chicago (the death toll is so high that the residents name 
their city “Chi-Raq”, as though it were a warzone). It is certainly the best 
adaptation of Aristophanes I’ve ever seen, largely because of Lee’s obvious 
passion for the text, and his desire to make it accessible to a new audience.

The press release arrived in my inbox just before one announcing a Harry 
Potter Latin day in Oxford, where students in years 3 and 4 can study the Latin 
roots of Harry’s spells. And it arrived just after one about the exam board 
AQA, which has announced that it is abandoning classical civilisation, 
archaeology and history of art A-levels. Sir Tony Robinsonhas denounced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/17/scrapping-archeology-classics-a-levels-barbaric-tony-robinson>
 AQA’s decision as “a barbaric act”.

From Harry Potter Latin to Hunger Games Rome: the classical jokes hiding in 
your favourite children's books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/19/greek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books>
No matter where we are or what we study, classics is part of our past: 
screenwriters learn from Sophocles, politicians echo Cicero, and doctors take 
theHippocratic oath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/notesandqueries/query/0,5753,-19454,00.html>. 
Eighteen months ago, I stood under a tree outside the medical school in 
Dunedin, having flown for 26 hours and not yet been to bed. I was in New 
Zealand to give a series of talks on the ancient world. But not before I had 
been photographed beneath this tree, which (so the story goes) is a direct 
descendant of a tree beneath which Hippocrates, the father of medicine, once 
sat. In other words, the medical school was connected, by means of this tree 
and its quasi-mythical history, to the very beginnings of medicine.

As an old boss of mine used to say, the house of western thought has many 
rooms, but only one basement.Classics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/classics> underpins so much of the modern 
world, surely all children should have the chance to study it in some form or 
another. It isn’t a problem if you go to a fee-paying school, of course: 
private schools have always been staunch defenders of Latin, Greek, and 
classical civilisation. But 93% of children go to state schools. And while some 
of those state schools are doing an astonishing job, providing their students 
with the opportunity to study the ancient world, things have just become a 
little bit harder. Now there is only one exam board offering an A-level in 
classical civilisation.

I’m not arguing that studying classics should be compulsory. Obviously, the 
curriculum is full to bursting, and not everyone has an interest in the past. 
But there is something grubbily elitist about restricting classics to those who 
can afford to pay for it. This is our shared history, and it belongs to us all. 
It isn’t ancient history for all of us, either: 16th- and 17th-century Scotland 
was a hive of neo-Latinism, which means that huge quantities of poetry from 
that period was written in Latin.

Of course, critics will point out that art history and classical civilisation 
aren’t useful subjects, so don’t matter. And certainly I wouldn’t suggest that 
the ability to read Galen, or appreciate the anatomical drawings of Leonardo, 
is as useful as studying medicine if you’re looking to become a doctor. But at 
the end of a long shift, even a doctor might fancy going to the cinema 
(screenwriters are passionate students ofAristotle’s Poetics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/10/summer-blockbuster-aristotle-suicide-squad-bourne-star-trek-exercise-peppa-pig>
, even when it’s repackaged as a modern writing course) or slumping in front of
EastEnders <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders> (whose new 
executive producer,Sean O’Connor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/07/archers-editor-sean-oconnor-helen-is-the-victim-but-she-shouldnt-have-stabbed-him>
, is an Aeschylus fan).

Others may note that plenty of people have gone to university to study 
subjects that they couldn’t do at A-level. But it was a great deal easier to 
take a risk on a subject you hadn’t studied before when a university education 
was free. It’s a lot harder now that you’re asked to pay £9,000 a year. Most of 
us wouldn’t buy a car without road-testing it, or a house without looking 
around once or twice. Why would we expect students to make the biggest 
financial commitment of their lives to a subject they haven’t yet experienced? 
Almost 1,000 students took archaeology A-level last summer. That’s a lot of 
interest to quash.

AQA says that the decision to shut down these courses isn’t a financial one. 
Rather, the problem is with the complexity of the course itself: “Our number 
one priority is making sure every student gets the result they deserve – and 
unfortunately the number of very specialist options we have to offer in this 
subject’s exams creates too many risks on that front. That’s why we’ve taken 
the difficult decision not to continue our work creating a new AS and A-level.”

It’s a shame it didn’t pause for a moment to think about the message that 
sends out to the students who are studying for one of their qualifications 
right now: doing this is hard, so we’ve given up.
 