
Screen Forever – an annual industry event presented by Screen Producers 
Australia – enjoyed its fair share of back-slapping along with no small amount 
of hand-wringing this week, as screen content professionals wondered how to 
position themselves for the next stage of the national industry.

Here are five takeaways from the annual three-day Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> conference, which 
wrapped up on Thursday.

The industry is spooked by Trump

The orange spectre of the US president-elect haunted proceedings, as the 
industry sought to understand the uncertainties of the new Trump era.

Speaking with US producer Graham Yost – writer of Speed, Justified, and The 
Pacific – ABC Radio’s Virginia Trioli indulged in the age-old journalistic 
error of prosecuting a foreign nation’s political follies against a single 
helpless resident of that country. (Yost protested that he is actually 
Canadian, but that didn’t help him.)

The amount of times the issue arose spoke to broader industry anxieties, not 
just about the international mood for storytelling (in the US, the producer of 
Quanticohas suggested a more “hopeful” direction 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/11/quantico-changes-direction-with-trumps-election.html>
 for the show in the aftermath of the election), but about possible changes to 
the terms of trade between Australia and the rest of the world.

The media is in an existential panic

The Trump effect has also made itself felt in the media’s general identity 
crisis. After traditional and mainstream news outlets (and pollsters) in 
America and the UK failed to accurately predict the outcome of Brexit and the 
US election, many in theAustralian media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/australia-media> are also wondering whether 
they really understand – and effectively communicate to – their audience.

Speaking on 7:30 recently, the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, insinuated 
that the ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/14/malcolm-turnbull-trump-election-jobs-growth-mantra-right>
, and an “elite media”, spends too much attention on narrow issues rather than 
those of broader concern to the electorate.

ABC chief Michelle Guthrie: women should demand equal pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/abc-chief-michelle-guthrie-women-should-demand-equal-pay>
The recently appointed managing director of the ABC, Michelle Guthrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/michelle-guthrie>, rejected that 
characterisation, in a session with the Australian’s media editor on Wednesday. 
Acknowledging the existential crisis in journalism “is an issue”, she suggested 
the problem affects the ABC less than commercial media, which may be under 
economic pressure to withdraw from regional areas.

Guthrie has been visiting regional ABC centres as part of her orientation, and 
praised the public broadcaster’s “depth and breadth” of coverage and its 
ability to focus on “bread and butter issues” in a range of communities.

Producers love diversity, but aren’t yet sure how to get it

The challenge of reflecting the Australian community on-screen aligned with a 
broader conversation weaving through the conference: the issue of diversity.

In a week that saw Screen NSW announce a Diversity Action Plan, debate at the 
conference touched on the economic incentives for diverse productions – not 
just from funding bodies but from advertisers and audiences. It suggested a new 
understanding that the issue is not only morally worthy, but financially 
beneficial.

At a panel discussion on Wednesday, some speakers seemed firmer on the notion 
that lack of diversity is a problem than on any practical solutions. Foxtel CEO 
Peter Tonagh spoke persuasively about the responsibility of businesses to take 
a lead in diversity issues – the pay TV broadcaster internally advocates for 
marriage equality, for instance – but he was conspicuously silent on what 
concrete measures could be pursued to ensure that screen productions are 
diversely staffed and cast. Co-panellist Courtney Gibson, chief executive at 
Screen NSW, later won applause for her organisation’srefusal to fund projects 
that lack women in key creative roles 
<http://if.com.au/2016/07/25/article/TV-drama-backed-by-Screen-NSW-must-now-include-female-key-creatives/UVLZDJMRPK.html>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdiversity-millennials-trump-dominate-australia-screen-forever-conference%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57032a0a13c34e12ff2691474248481f743312cb%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diversity%2C%20millennials%20and%20Trump%3A%20big%20issues%20dominate%20Australia%E2%80%99s%20screen%20conference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdiversity-millennials-trump-dominate-australia-screen-forever-conference%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diversity%2C%20millennials%20and%20Trump%3A%20big%20issues%20dominate%20Australia%E2%80%99s%20screen%20conference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdiversity-millennials-trump-dominate-australia-screen-forever-conference%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57032a0a13c34e12ff2691474248481f743312cb%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
 Darren Dale (Blackfella Films managing director), Peter Tonagh (Foxtel CEO), 
Helen Kellie (SBS chief content officer) and Graeme Mason (Screen Australia 
CEO) at the Screen Forever conference in Melbourne. Photograph: Jim Lee 
Panellist Keli Lee, a managing director at the ABC Television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> Group in the US, and moderator 
Darren Dale, managing director of Blackfella Films, both said internships 
offered key opportunities for them early in their careers. But the Australian 
screen industry is marked by competition and precariousness, with creators 
often working project to project and fighting for limited funding. A foot in 
the door becomes less appealing if it’s followed by a long solitary climb to a 
glass ceiling – particularly for those from low socioeconomic backgrounds.

The Australian Film and Radio School (AFTRS) used the panel as an opportunity 
tolaunch a new study <https://www.aftrs.edu.au/publications/inclusive-pathways>
, which outlines some steps that might be taken towards maintaining a diverse 
screen industry.

But a glance at the delegates at the conference suggests real change will only 
happen when current screen professionals admit they need to make sacrifices.

Millennials are feared, misunderstood and needed 

This theme cropped up in the head-scratcher event of the week, a panel titled 
The Millennials – WTF Do They Want and HTF Do We Work With Them?

At one point in the discussion, moderator Paul Walton from Princess Pictures 
(the company behind much of Chris Lilley’s TV work) remarked that the industry 
needs a diversity initiative for millennial talent. Facetious or not, the 
suggestion reflects a growing awareness that employment structures have 
hardened not just against marginalised groups, but against a new generation of 
creatives with a surfeit of ambition and no clear pathways for advancement.

Australian TV is not diverse enough. For screenwriters like me, it's a relief 
to have proof | Niki Aken
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/25/australian-tv-is-not-diverse-enough-for-screenwriters-like-me-its-a-relief-to-have-proof>
There’s a sense older workers don’t even know how to talk to young employees, 
much less capitalise on their skills. Karla Burt, a producer at Princess, 
described a lucky intuition she had about one young production assistant. “Are 
you any good at making memes?” she asked – and on learning that the woman had a 
successful blog, promptly transferred her from dishwashing duties to meme 
production.

Toward the end of the panel, a young producer from Vice Media stood up from 
the audience and explained that respect is a two-way street, and that older 
workers need to break down their own culture of entitlement – but it’s unclear 
whether anybody really listened.

Local creators are getting rorted

The minister for communication and the arts, Mitch Fifield, launched the 
Screen Currency 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/sa/newsroom/news/2016/mr-161115-screen-currency>
 report at the conference on Tuesday. The research from Screen Australia 
highlights the economic benefits the screen industry brings to the country, 
including a $3bn contribution to the GDP, 25,000 jobs, and 230,000 tourists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdiversity-millennials-trump-dominate-australia-screen-forever-conference%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67a1b29fceb98f333c0f85a7b9e05675d5e50262%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diversity%2C%20millennials%20and%20Trump%3A%20big%20issues%20dominate%20Australia%E2%80%99s%20screen%20conference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdiversity-millennials-trump-dominate-australia-screen-forever-conference%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diversity%2C%20millennials%20and%20Trump%3A%20big%20issues%20dominate%20Australia%E2%80%99s%20screen%20conference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdiversity-millennials-trump-dominate-australia-screen-forever-conference%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67a1b29fceb98f333c0f85a7b9e05675d5e50262%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
 Jude Troy from eOne Films and writer Benjamin Law (The Family Law) in a panel 
hosted by Virginia Trioli. Photograph: Jim Lee 
Screen Australia CEO Graeme Mason, speaking to a roomful of producers on 
Wednesday, praised the high quality of Australian screen content, and called it 
“arguably our best soft diplomacy tool internationally”. But he had harder 
words for this audience of professionals, and in a sometimescombative address 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/getmedia/aa9d4041-f0fd-45d2-8764-633d44d930d4/SPA-2016-speech.pdf>
 seemed frustrated at the number of times Screen Australia has been expected to 
lend a hand to projects that are doomed to creatively disappoint.

“Poor content doesn’t work on any meaningful level,” Mason said. “Especially 
in today’s funding and viewing environment.”

Chief among his concerns was an the quantity of disadvantageous deals being 
presented to Screen Australia. Referencing some of the arcane procedures of 
Australian screen funding, Mason claimed that a few local producers, in their 
quest for funding, are letting international screen financiers muscle in on 
income from Australian productions, which should properly be kept within the 
local screen economy. “[A] lot of money is flowing in from international,” 
Mason said. “But please don’t sell the farm to get it.”

That’s one of several ways in which Mason said local creators are allowing 
themselves and their local industry to get rorted, and putting well-established 
funding mechanisms such as theProducers Offset 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/funding-and-support/producer-offset> at risk 
through misuse. It’s also suggestive of the broader tensions in the local 
landscape.

In an era marked by a glut of screen content and production – and more 
distribution channels than a consumer can shake a stick at – Australia still 
needs a “giant market manipulator” like Screen Australia to keep the industry 
on its feet, one whose focus on the national interest often overrides the needs 
of individual makers, the audience heard.


But Screen Australia now has less money for more funding requests, and 
producers are abandoning opportunities to build a firmer economic foundation 
for their work – one of several ways in which this industry is lurching towards 
a future full of discomforting changes.
 