
A monitoring service that will assess how the major broadcasters are 
performing against their diversity targets 
<http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/home/diversify/tv-admits-diversity-failures/5065971.article>
– and each other – is about to be launched by theCreative Diversity Network 
<http://creativediversitynetwork.com/>.

The aim is that the initiative will become a permanent benchmark to track the 
industry's successes and failures, holding its key players to account. A pilot 
is set to launch in the spring, featuring the BBC, ITV, Sky andChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>. However, it is not clear how much 
of the data will be shared publicly.

Metadata system Silvermouse will be used to monitor workforces and on-screen 
representation in five key areas: ethnicity, disability, gender, age and 
sexuality.

Broadcasters currently monitor diversity stats independently, but 
representatives on the CDN chief executive group have agreed to producea 
standardised set of figures 
<http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/comment/pressing-need-for-diversity-data/5065947.article#.UupK6wuE61M.twitter>
on a quarterly basis.

The pilot has been signed off at CDN board level, but the final costs for the 
initiative will not be revealed until the end of February.

The creative industries are facing greater political pressure to get their 
house in order on diversity issues after culture ministerEd Vaizey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-vaizey> held a roundtable with key 
figures to discuss the steep decline in black, Asian and minority ethnic – BAME 
– representation, as reported by Creative Skillset.

Broadcast  <http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/>attended the House of Commons event 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/22/lenny-henry-broadcasters-employ-more-black-asian-people>
alongside 40 leaders in TV, film and theatre, including BBC director of 
television Danny Cohen, Sky managing director of content Sophie Turner Laing, 
the actor Lenny Henry, and senior execs from Directors UK, the BFI and Pact.

The consensus was that diversity monitoring is irregular, in effective and 
lacks accountability. Vaizey said he welcomed the CDN initiative and that there 
was "an accountability role for government to play".

The CDN has also restructured with the launch of three working groups in news, 
commissioning and production. The groups will be headed by ITV director of news 
and current affairs Michael Jermey, BBC head of religion and ethics Aaqil Ahmed 
and Pact chief executiveJohn McVay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/john-mcvay> respectively.

The plan is for programme-makers rather than diversity execs to set 
priorities. ITV chief executiveAdam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier> said: "Getting senior people 
around the table who have the authority to make change happen is an important 
step forward."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 