
Good morning and welcome to the first grand slam final to feature neither of 
Roger Federer or Rafael Nadal since the dawn of time (OK, the 2005Australian 
Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final). In the blue 
corner we have third seed Novak Djokovic - yet to drop a set this tournament 
despite having played Federer in the semi-final - and in the red we have 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, conqueror of second seed Rafael Nadal, eighth seed Richard 
Gasquet, and... eh... some Scot called Murray.

Happy days I'm in an unreasonably good mood for so early on a Sunday morning. 
The good news is that you can help maintain this mood by sending me lots of 
emails. Go on, you know you want to.

Get the De Lorean Mats Wilander has just promised us "tennis from the future" 
on Eurosport. No word yet on whether this will feature robots and/or 
hoverboards.

First-time fun These two have actually never played each other before, but it 
should be a fascinating match-up. Djokovic has the lightness on his feet and 
the finesse; Tsonga has the athleticism and brute force. Both have a serve that 
borders on violent. Mats Wilander is backing Tsonga, but I'm going with 
Djokovic - anyone who can take outFederer in straight sets 
<http://sport.theguardian.com/australianopen2008/story/0,,2246813,00.html>, at 
a grand slam not held in France, deserves to be backed.

First set: Djokovic 1-0 Tsonga* First point of the game is Djokovic's, as he 
ends a long rally with a topspin forehand to the back of the court which Tsonga 
can't control at full stretch. Djokovic sends a similar shot long on the next 
point though, then fails to control Tsonga's next serve to bring up 30-15. 
Tsonga makes a very sloppy mistake on the next point - forcing Djokovic off 
balance with his serve again, but then wellying his forehand long with the 
whole court at his mercy. Another error brings up break point, then Djokovic 
once again over-stretches his opponent with another vicious forehand drive to 
the baseline to take the game. That's quite the statement of intent from 
Djokovic.

First set: Djokovic* 1-1 Tsonga "Am I the first email of the day," enquires 
Alex Banks in the first email of the day. "I think Tsonga is just too good on 
this surface, and, as Djokovic pointed out in the pre-match interviews, he 
doesn't have anything to lose." Well, they're both looking pretty tense at the 
moment, Alex. Djokovic hits three unforced errors on his forehand - twice 
playing into the net under no pressure and once into the tramlines in-between, 
on the way to dropping his first service game.

First set: Djokovic 1-2 Tsonga* Better from Tsonga - who looked below his 
high-tempo best during his first service game. Djokovic sends another meek 
forehand into the middle of the net under no pressure, then barely gets a sniff 
in the rest of the game anyway as Tsonga holds to 15.

First set: Djokovic* 2-2 Tsonga And now Djokovic ups his own game - dragging 
Tsonga back and forth across the baseline with some booming ground strokes on 
the first point before slamming a cross-court forehand out of his opponent's 
reach. Once again he dominates the rally on the next point before Tsonga nets 
and it's 30-0. A double fault lets Tsonga back in though, and then a perfectly 
weighted drop-shot from Tsonga makes it 30-30. Djokovic underhits another 
forehand into the net, and it's 30-40, but this time his first serve - flat and 
fierce down the centre - gives him deuce. Both players waste an advantage, but 
Djokovic holds at the second attempt after Tsonga wafts a looping backhand into 
the tramlines.

First set: Djokovic 2-3 Tsonga* Glorious rally to open the game - Djokovic 
adjusted well after Tsonga's ground strokes ricocheted up off the net cord on 
consecutive shots, recovered to return a Tsonga smash, but then just couldn't 
get his racket to another smash on the next shot. Tsonga romps on to 40-15, but 
Djokovic is getting his two-handed backhand going, and forces deuce after 
Tsonga half volleys - a little lazily - into the net. Tsonga fails to convert 
his first advantage, but brings up another with a 213km/h serve before Djokovic 
flicks a wristy backhand into the tramlines.

First set: Djokovic* 3-3 Tsonga "This new surface isn't particularly easy on 
the eye, but its pace is excellent," offers Gary Naylor. "Once the 
administrators experiment with a slightly higher net (to address the fact that 
players are taller and racquets much more powerful), we'll see the volley 
return to the game on all but clay. A lot of these guys are only playing half 
the game of a McEnroe or a Laver and that's a shame." Good to have you with us 
Gary; Alex Banks has been asking after you. Djokovic holds to 15.

First set: Djokovic 3-4 Tsonga* Some sloppiness from Tsonga - who plays a 
loose forehand across Djokovic's face and into the tramlines, then flicks 
another into the net to bring up 15-30. Back-to-back aces give him game point, 
but then Tsonga has a lapse of judgement - leaving an inch-perfect forehand 
down the lines from Djokovic to land inside the court and the game goes to 
deuce. Djokovic plays long on the next two points though - the first time at 
full-stretch as he reaches for another big forehand from Tsonga, then the 
second under no pressure whatsoever. He's made 11 unforced errors already so 
far.

First set: Djokovic* 4-4 Tsonga Djokovic really needs his first serve to come 
through for him today - firstly because it's a brutal, violent beast of a 
service and secondly because Tsonga is showing him absolutely no mercy on his 
second - thrashing it back across his face twice on the way to earning deuce. 
Tsonga nets on the next point though, and another ace down the middle from 
Djokovic - his second of the game, levels things up.

First set: Djokovic 4-5 Tsonga* Tsonga bangs in three consecutive aces on the 
way to a very comfortable hold, and now Djokovic will serve to stay in the set.

First set: Djokovic* 4-6 Tsonga "Tsonga's forehand really is filthy," offers 
Kai MacMahon - who is somewhat less impressed with umpire Carlos Ramos, a man 
who does seem to like the sound of his own voice rather more than you'd like. 
"Also, if you squint Djokovic looks like a thin Tim Henman. Except for the part 
where he's in the final of a grand slam." Well, there was certainly something 
of Tiger Timmy in the way Djokovic bottled that game, Kai. Having recovered 
from 0-30 to 30-30, Djokovic dominates a rally, forces Tsonga to lump a 
forehand skyward from the baseline, but then completely fails to put away his 
smash, allowing Tsonga to recover and pass him with a text-book forehand. On 
the next point Tsonga is once again under pressure, but - off-balance and at 
full-stretch - summons up a perfectly weighted lob from behind the baseline, 
and that's the set.

Second set: Tsonga* leads Djokovic 6-4, 1-0 Right then, Djokovic has now 
dropped his first set of the 2008 Australian Open, so the question is - how 
does he respond from here? The initial answer is not well - delivering another 
unforced error on his forehand as Tsonga holds to 15.

Second set: Tsonga leads Djokovic* 6-4, 1-1 Djokovic has to switch rackets 
after breaking a string on the first point, but the change doesn't look to do 
him any good as he wings a wild forehand straight out into the right-hand 
tramlines. Once again he needs his first serve to dig him out, and this time it 
does - as Tsonga fails to return at 15-30 and then fails to even get his racket 
to the ball on the next point. at 40-30 Djokovic draws Tsonga to the net with a 
drop-shot, then passes him comfortably.

Second set: Tsonga* leads Djokovic 6-4, 2-1 Tsonga's service game - yet again 
- is far more routine. He holds to 15 and responds with a typically ferocious 
fist pump. Even Tiger Tim himself could have learnt something from this man in 
that department.

Second set: Tsonga leads Djokovic* 6-4, 2-2 "Is it just me and you watching 
this," wonders Kai MacMahon. "Brilliant final so far. Tsonga's two points to 
close out the first were just brilliant." Certainly were, Kai, but you can rest 
assured we're not alone. Alex Banks has just sent a particularly smug email to 
let us know he had Â£2 on Tsonga to win that first set 6-4 at 20-1. Djokovic 
holds to 30.

Second set: Tsonga* leads Djokovic 6-4, 3-2 There have been quite a lot of 
successful challenges already today - not sure what that says about our 
officiating team, but Djokovic uses one to deny Tsonga what had been called an 
ace at 15-15. No matter, Tsonga takes the point anyway, then, after dropping 
the next point, moves to 40-30 with another ace. Djokovic forces deuce with a 
tidy backhand volley to end a measured rally, but Tsonga remains absolutely 
relentless with these ground strokes, and takes the game on his first advantage 
after Djokovic sends his forehand into the net from the baseline.

Second set: Tsonga leads Djokovic* 6-4, 3-3 A much needed hold to love for 
Djokovic, though even then not delivered with the conviction of most of 
Tsonga's service games thus far. Still, at least this time when he was 
presented with an opportunity for a smash, he put it away without any fuss.

Second set: Tsonga* leads Djokovic 6-4, 3-4 It's already been said by a 
certain Kai MacMahon, but "filthy" really is the only word for Tsonga's 
forehand. After a lengthy rally at 0-15 down, Tsonga once again hammers the 
ball right across his opponent's face, and there really is nothing Djokovic can 
do about it - he can barely even move. Nevertheless, it's Djokovic who is 
suddenly in control of the game - killing another smash to make it 15-30, and 
then passing Tsonga with a violent backhand of his own to earn two break 
points. Tsonga then slips as he chases a forehand behind the baseline on the 
next point and sends it wide. Completely against the run of this set, Djokovic 
has the break.

Second set: Tsonga leads Djokovic* 6-4, 3-5 Djokovic's dad Srdan made for the 
exit at the end of that last game; presumably in pursuit of a toilet break 
and/or meat pie. Either way he misses his son making a crucial recovery from 
15-30 down to hold, and also an absolutely absurd forehand from Tsonga (which 
Djokovic returned) on the fourth point, that looked to be flying wide but then 
swerved backwards in mid-air to land inside the court.

Second set: Tsonga* leads Djokovic 6-4, 4-5 Tsonga actually looked a little 
vulnerable there - slipping 15-30 down before two overhit forehands from his 
opponent, then another into the net, allowed him to hold. Djokovic will serve 
for the set.

Second set: Tsonga 6-4, 4-6 Djokovic*  That's the way to do it. Djokovic slams 
unreturnable serves down the centre for 15-0, and then for 30-0, before Tsonga 
sends a backhand long to give him three game points. He only needs the one - 
Switching things up with a sliding serve out wide that goes for an ace. We've 
just seen the second set stats - the most telling of which was Tsonga's 11 
unforced errors to Djokovic's five - a complete turnaround from the first set. 
Still, if Djokovic plans to win this he's really going to have to improve the 
consistency of his first serve. Less than half went in during the last set.

Third set: Tsonga* 6-4, 4-6, 1-0 Djokovic "What's the story with that group of 
French fans behind the Djokovic family," asks Kai MacMahon as Tsonga returns 
from a toilet break to hold to love. "Something very strange was going on there 
earlier; Mama D did not look happy at all and even looked to storm off at one 
point." I've got to be honest Kai, I've completely missed this, though I have 
seen the face-painted mob in question. Anybody else got any light to shed on 
the situation?

Third set: Tsonga 6-4, 4-6, 1-1 Djokovic* And Djokovic responds with a love 
service game of his own. As our BBC commentary team have just mooted - he may 
not be playing his best tennis, but Djokovic is at least playing a smart game 
here, keeping Tsonga at the back of the court with deep ground strokes, whereas 
Youzhny and Nadal left too many short, allowing Tsonga to come forward and 
attack.

Third set: Tsonga* 6-4, 4-6, 1-2 Djokovic Well, I say he's not playing his 
best, but that was some very tidy tennis indeed from Djokovic as he breaks 
Tsonga again. He makes it 15-40 with exactly the sort of controlled backhand 
down the line that he used so often in his win over Federer. Tsonga saves both 
break points, but then snatches at his backhand on deuce and plays it just too 
long. It's a huge rally on the next point, but Djokovic just stays under 
control and waits for Tsonga to go chasing a winner, which he eventually does, 
thrashing the ball just into the left-hand tramlines as he moves up the court.

Third set: Tsonga 6-4, 4-6, 1-3 Djokovic* The crowd keep chanting something 
that sounds closer to "Goran" than the names of either of these two players to 
me, but I'm fairly sure they're on Djokovic's side, as they don't seem too 
displeased when he holds to 15.

Third set: Tsonga* 6-4, 4-6, 2-3 Djokovic Honestly, are there any better 
reasons to drag oneself out of bed on a Sunday morning than this (that aren't 
totally sordid and/or featuring bacon)? Tsonga comes roaring back with another 
series of devastating ground strokes a hold to 15.

Third set: Tsonga 6-4, 4-6, 2-4 Djokovic* Just when Tsonga looks to have 
bullied his way in on Djokovic's serve, he gets a little over-eager - attacking 
a second serve too early on his backhand and crashing it into the net. On the 
next point Djokovic puts away an absolutely emphatic smash, then Tsonga's can't 
tame the next serve and it's game to the Serb. Not for the first time, Tsonga 
is letting umpire Ramos know he's not happy about how many times Djokovic is 
bouncing the ball before serving.

Third set: Tsonga* 6-4, 4-6, 3-4 Djokovic Staying on the topic of Djokovic's 
serve, even though we're now on Tsonga's, I have to say I really don't think 
all the ball bouncing is gamesmanship. Almost the opposite, I think it's a sign 
of Djokovic's own nerves - an OCD itch that he has to scratch to compose 
himself before serving when he gets tense. Nevertheless it does unsettle his 
opponents - and Tsonga's frustration is clearly carrying over here as he 
batters a few loose shots wayward on the way to 30-30. Eventually he does hold 
to 30 though.

Third set: Tsonga 6-4, 4-6, 3-5 Djokovic* Djokovic has this set exactly where 
he wants it at the moment - the break is in hand and he's looking comfortable 
on serve. After attacking the net and dispatching a cool backhand down the line 
to make it 30-15, he profits from a loose Tsonga backhand that flies well wide 
on the next point, then passes Tsonga on his own backhand again for the game.

Third set: Djokovic leads Tsonga* 4-6, 6-4, 6-3 In the first set and a half it 
was Tsonga inciting the crowd with his fist-pumping fury, but now it's Djokovic 
wagging his finger in delight after killing the first point of the game with 
another smash. There's a controversial moment at 0-30, when a Tsonga lob is 
called out but the Frenchman challenges. It initially looks to have gone in - 
much to Djokovic's chagrin, as he had dispatched it with another smash that 
would never have been returned, but the replay shows the ball did indeed fall 
outside the court. From 0-40, Tsonga saves all three set points, but then gives 
up another when he can only get his frame to Djokovic's passing backhand. Once 
again Tsonga saves - leaping like a salmon at the net to smash away his 
Djokovic's underhit lob. Djokovic forces a fifth, then a sixth set point, 
before finally taking the set at the seventh attempt, when Tsonga volleys his 
passing forehand into the net.

Fourth set: Djokovic* leads Tsonga 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 1-0 We talked about the 
importance of Djokovic upping his first serve percentage after the second set, 
and he certainly did in the third, nailing an impressive 70%. He's firing them 
in just fine at the beginning of the fourth too, and he makes short work of 
holding his first game of the set to love.

Fourth set: Djokovic leads Tsonga* 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 1-1 "I'm watching the game 
in America and wanted to pass on something the broadcasters here have been 
saying to someone who might appreciate how completely stupid it is," chips in 
Andrew Elliott. "According to these guys, Aussies hate arrogance, hence their 
love of Rafter, Cash, Laver, etc. and relative dislike of Hewitt. Clearly, 
they've never heard of this sport called "cricket" that they happen to be quite 
good at Down Under." I'm lost for words. Tsonga holds to 15.

Fourth set: Djokovic* leads Tsonga 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 2-1 Djokovic holds to 30 
without too much trouble, but only after slicing a one-handed backhand into the 
net from half-way up the court for something like the 2,000th time this 
tournament. That really has to be the single weakest shot in his arsenal. 
Heaven knows why he persists in using it.

Fourth set: Djokovic leads Tsonga* 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 2-2 Two absolutely huge 
rallies to open the game, and Tsonga takes both of them as Djokovic plays 
forehands wide to his left and then to the right of the court. He slumps to the 
ground exhausted after the second, and it's plain sailing to a love service 
game for Tsonga after that.

Fourth set: Djokovic* leads Tsonga 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 3-2 It's looking routine for 
Djokovic as Tsonga's cross-court forehand takes a hop off the net cord and into 
the tramlines to make it 40-15, but Tsonga has his tail up, and takes advantage 
of Djokovic's keenness to get to the net with a fine passing forehand. Djokovic 
nets on the next point to make it deuce, but then whips a deliciously clean 
backhand winner across Tsonga for the advantage. Tsonga batters Djokovic's 
second serve wide, and that's the game.

Fourth set: Djokovic leads Tsonga* 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 3-3 Djokovic did himself a 
mischief during the second of those two huge rallies at the beginning of 
Tsonga's last service game, and he takes a medical time out to receive 
treatment before the start of this one. The initial speculation was that it 
would be cramp, but from the replays and the treatment he's getting, it looks a 
lot more likely to be some form of hamstring-knack. The break seems to have 
done him some harm though - Djokovic plays long under no pressure on the first 
two points, and then can only stand and watch aces fly past him on the next two.

Fourth set: Djokovic* leads Tsonga 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 4-3 It's that one-handed 
backhand slice again from Djokovic on the first point, only this time it works, 
dropping just over the net and bouncing twice before Tsonga can get within 
lunging distance. He repeats the trick on the last point too - only this time 
playing a volley with exactly the same weighting and slice to seal the game to 
love.

Fourth set: Djokovic leads Tsonga* 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 4-4 Djokovic seems to go to 
sleep at the beginning of Tsonga's service game - netting on the first two 
points with lazy forehands, but wakes up to drive home a backhand winner and 
then a smash to make it 30-30. After working hard to stay in the following 
point he can't quite clear the net with another forehand at full stretch, and 
Tsonga finds an unreturnable serve on the next point to hold.

Fourth set: Djokovic* leads Tsonga 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 5-4 Tsonga has crept up some 
way inside the baseline as he attacks Djokovic's second serve at 15-0, but his 
backhand is once again struck with too much aggression and not enough control, 
flying comfortably long. Djokovic digs out an impressive backhand half-volley 
from underneath his feet on the next point, which Tsonga returns well wide, and 
Djokovic goes on to hold to love. Tsonga will serve to stay in the match.

Fourth set: Djokovic leads Tsonga* 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 5-5 Tsonga judges Djokovic's 
backhand perfectly on the first point, leaving it to sail long even though he 
had to make the judgement half-way up the court. Djokovic pulls back to 15-15, 
but despite a vastly impressive return of serve from the Serb at full stretch, 
Tsonga thrashes home a sensational passing shot on the next point, then drops a 
short backhand volley on the next to make it 40-15, before sealing the game on 
the next point.

Fourth set: Djokovic* leads Tsonga 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 6-5 Tsonga's mum is 
absolutely in bits in the stands screeching her support for her son and 
imploring the fans around her to lend their support. He makes it to 30-30 when 
Djokovic puts a bit too much on a cross-court forehand, then has break point 
when Djokovic jabs a two-handed backhand into the net from the baseline. But 
Djokovic digs himself out with an exceptionally composed backhand volley - 
contemptuously flicking the ball across Tsonga as he charged forward after his 
attempted a forehand pass. Djokovic earns the advantage, then holds at the 
first attempt with an ace.

Fourth set: Djokovic leads Tsonga* 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 6-6 After working the crowd 
up with some dramatic pre-game gesturing, Tsonga sees Djokovic play into the 
net once more for 15-0. He sends his own backhand long for 15-15 on the next 
point, but then thunders home an absolutely huge forehand winner which flies 
right to the baseline on the next point. At 40-15 he produces his first double 
fault of the evening, but Djokovic can't control his backhand return of the 
ensuing serve, and we'll have a tie-break.

Fourth set tie-break Djokovic* 1-0 Tsonga Tsonga slices his backhand volley 
into the net as he charges in to give Djokovic the first point.

Fourth set tie-break Djokovic 2-1 Tsonga* The first mini-break goes to 
Djokovic as Tsonga nets a forehand under no pressure, but a smash brings him 
back within a point.

Fourth set tie-break Djokovic* 4-1 Tsonga Djokovic puts away another smash 
with total composure after a brief rally, and then Tsonga wallops a backhand 
into the net after a slightly longer one on the next point.

Fourth set tie-break Djokovic 5-2 Tsonga* A double fault from Tsonga gives 
Djokovic two mini-breaks at the changeover. But Tsonga claws something back 
with a fierce serve down the middle that Djokovic can barely get his racket to.

Djokovic beats Tsonga* 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 7-6 (7-2) It's another huge rally on the 
first point, Djokovic eventually taking it as Tsonga plays his forehand passing 
shot just long and wide. On the next point Tsonga attempts to play across 
Djokovic again, opening up his body to thrash a forehand across the court, but 
there's too much on it, and it sails wide. With that Djokovic claims his first 
ever grand slam title. A gripping final to set up an enthralling year, one in 
which it appears the Federer-Nadal duopoly over men's tennis may just be 
broken. Thanks for all your emails, sorry I couldn't use them all.
 