
They have called him the Djoker, principally because from time to time he has 
entertained tennis crowds with his mimed imitations of other players, notably 
Maria Sharapova, the newly crownedAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> women's champion. But Novak 
Djokovic is deadly serious.

He wants to be the world No1 and over the last year he has staked his claim 
with increasing sureness of purpose, culminating in his 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 7-6 
victory over the unseeded Frenchman Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the men's final. So 
for the first time in more than two yearsRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> and Rafael Nadal have good 
cause to look over their shoulders. Djokovic is coming.

It is less than 12 months ago that the Serbian youngster was vying shoulder to 
shoulder with Andy Murray for a place in the top 10. Djokovic, just one week 
younger, talked enthusiastically of their joint rise, and how they might 
spearhead the new generation of youngsters who had the confidence and the 
ability to challenge for the very top. They were frequently mentioned in the 
same breath by commentators and players alike, notably Federer, though he 
always tended to say nicer things about Murray, just as Pete Sampras used to 
about Tim Henman.

Federer was a little less generous towards Djokovic, perhaps because the Serb 
never minced his words, and was always prepared to say that he had the Swiss in 
his sights. Here at the Australian Open he beat the world No1 for the second 
time in their last three meetings, and suddenly the plinth that Federer has 
stood on for three years has begun to show signs of cracks. Djokovic is now the 
undisputed world No3, and his victory here may be the beginning of a concerted 
attack on Federer and Nadal.

"It's not possible one tournament will change history," Djokovic said. "I 
played amazing tennis here, so I think I absolutely deserved to win, even 
against Roger in the semi-finals. You know, he accepted in the right way. But 
for sure, he's going to come back in a big style. He's still planning to be the 
best player in the world, and we all know how good he is. We are going to see a 
lot of him, of course, this year." And a lot of me, he might have added.

Murray has a lot of catching up to do. At this time last year both of them 
reached the last 16 of the Australian Open, with Murray making the greater 
splash after pushing Nadal close. Since then Djokovic has reached the 
semi-finals at both Roland Garros and Wimbledon, lost to Federer in the final 
of the US Open, and now won his first slam. Murray continues to be talked of as 
a possible top-five player, capable of winning a slam. By contrast Djokovic has 
now done it. He has arrived.

Some remain a little dazed as to precisely how he has rushed up through the 
rankings so quickly, winning five titles last year, including two Masters 
Series events, the top titles outside the slams. He does not play the brand of 
explosive tennis that so endeared Tsonga to the Melbourne crowds. Neither has 
he any one particular shot to make you gasp. There is no Sampras serve, or 
Federer forehand. Rather he does everything to an extremely high standard, and 
has a tennis brain as acute as anyone's. In this respect he can get inside his 
opponent's head, as was apparent when he played an admittedly out-of-form 
Federer in the semi-finals.

"I love his head," said Martina Navratilova. "He's such a smart guy out there 
and I like his attitude on and off the court." It is an attitude, occasionally 
bordering on the arrogant, that has upset his opponents, although in these days 
of PR spin and gloss, it is refreshing to have a little needle injected into 
the proceedings.

He was perhaps unfortunate that the crowd in the Rod Laver arena were very 
much on the side of both Federer and then Tsonga and this clearly rankled with 
Djokovic. Coming from Serbia, so often the pariah state, it is not surprising 
he is a little sensitive, although now he is their champion such matters may 
change. Perhaps he should take some lessons from his fellow Serb Ana Ivanovic, 
who had the fans eating out of the palms of her hands.

There is no obvious reason why Serbia has produced a clutch of world-class 
players. "I think everybody has been really surprised by the amount of players 
we have produced from such a small country with no tennis tradition. It's 
unexplainable, because there was no system whatsoever in our country for tennis 
and we didn't get much support," said Djokovic. "But we always had strong 
support from our parents. And I think this hunger for success and the times and 
things we went through made us stronger. I think so."

As for Tsonga, he must use his extra-ordinary success here, which has lifted 
him into the top 20, to start to impose himself on lesser tournaments and win 
them. This was his first singles final on the main tour and the first time in 
his injury-truncated career that he had won more than three successive matches 
at tour level. On his Wimbledon debut last year he reached the last 16, and has 
the game to do exceptionally well on grass - even reviving serve and volley. 
What he now needs is a period of injury-free consolidation. He thrilled many 
but without a doubt the fortnight belonged to Djokovic.

Belgrade to Melbourne The rise of a champion

1987 Born on May 22 in Belgrade.

2003 Turns professional and wins first Futures title in Serbia.

2004 Wins first Davis Cup tie, a dead rubber against Janis Skroderis of 
Latvia. Wins first Challenger Tour title, beating Daniele Bracciali 6-1, 6-2 in 
the final in Budapest. Qualifies for first ATP Tour event, losing 7-6, 6-1 to 
Filippo Volandri in Umag.

2005 Loses grand slam debut 6-0, 6-2, 6-1 to Marat Safin in Australia. 
Finishes year as youngest player in top 100.

2006 Wins two ATP titles. Reaches French Open quarter-finals. Wins five out of 
six Davis Cup matches, losing only to Roger Federer. Ends season as youngest 
player in top 20.

2007 Wins first Masters Series title, beating Guillermo Ca√±as 6-3, 6-2, 6-4 in 
Miami. Reaches semi-finals at Wimbledon and French Open, losing both to Rafael 
Nadal. Loses US Open final to Roger Federer 7-6, 7-6, 6-4.

2008 Wins first grand slam title, beating Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in Melbourne
 