
Hallelujah. According to a new Ipsos Mori poll, the public now consider 
politicians to be the group ofprofessionals they most distrust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/sep/27/trust-politicians-all-time-low>
, even more than last year's least-trusted people – journalists. Embarrassing 
incidents in the world of journalism – from the News of the Worldphone-tapping 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/09/newsoftheworld-newsinternational>
 to the BBC "Sachsgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/sep/08/bbc-trust-examine-sachsgate-response>
" row and thesuspension of Jonathan Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/29/jonathan-ross-russell-brand-suspended>
 – have been collectively overshadowed by stunning revelations – via the 
Telegraph – ofpoliticians using taxpayers' cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses> to pay for their moats, 
helipads, tampons and porn. The expenses scandal has left only 13% of the 
British public willing to trust politicians to tell the truth – the worst score 
MPs have received in the poll's 26-year history.

So how bad is it for politicians? If we can't trust them, should we continue 
to vote for them? And do politicians, severely lacking in credibility and moral 
authority, still matter? These were the questions posed at the New Statesman 
debate I chaired at theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party conference in Brighton, which pitted international development secretary 
Douglas Alexander and Olympics minister Tessa Jowell against the Mail on 
Sunday's Peter Hitchens and human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell.

MPs' expenses aside, in recent years there has been a real sense across the 
political spectrum that national politicians have been rendered powerless and 
even irrelevant. On the right, there is the constant complaint that membership 
of the European Union has irrevocably diminished the influence of individual 
legislators in individual parliaments, as sovereignty is pooled and shared. In 
the debate, Hitchens echoed the standard Eurosceptic line that "80% of our laws 
are passed by the European commission". So why bother, he asked, voting Labour 
or Tory?

On the left, especially in the wake of the financial crisis, there is the 
familiar accusation that politicians have been in hock to big business, 
catering to the preferences of the markets rather than the voters. It was 
President Bill Clinton's adviser,James Carville <http://www.carville.info/>, 
who memorably declared that, if reincarnated, he would want to come back as the 
bond market because then he could "intimidate everybody". Depressingly, more 
than a year on from the banking crash, the question as to whether or not 
politicians can stand up to the demands and the diktats of the financial 
markets remains unanswered.

In my view, however, two key points emerged from yesterday's debate. The first 
is that politicians cannot "matter" if they are not accountable – and they 
cannot be held accountable under a voting system that does not require them to 
win a majority of votes in their constituencies to be elected to parliament, 
and which breeds so-called "safe seats". In a genuine democracy, the concept of 
a "safe" seat should be nothing short of oxymoronic.

Electoral reform, as Tatchell passionately and rightly argued, remains the key 
to restoring faith in politics and politicians. So it was a real pleasure to 
hear Jowell, for the first time, come out in favour of theAV-plus system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2000/sep/01/uk.pr> of proportional 
representation, as advocated by the Jenkins commission 11 years ago, and lend 
her support to a referendum on electoral reform, as promised in the Labour 
manifesto more than 12 years ago. She adds her name to those of Alan Johnson, 
John Denham, Ben Bradshaw and others in the cabinet who recognise the vital 
importance of introducing PR if politicians are to have any hope of 
reconnecting with apathetic or disillusioned voters. Sadly, Alexander seemed 
less keen on electoral reform – as didthe prime minister 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/uk-politics/2009/09/brown-labour-mehdi-hasan>, in 
our interview with him for this week's relaunched New Statesman, in which he 
told my colleague James Macintyre and I only that he was "prepared to consider 
proposals for reform".

The second key point, forcefully expressed by Hitchens, with his typical habit 
for verbal pyrotechnics, is that British politicians have colluded in the 
narrowing of the ideological gap between the main parties – "the inch of 
difference in which we all live" – and reached a soggy and self-destructive 
consensus on critical issues like public spending cuts and the war in 
Afghanistan. Voters will remain alienated and apathetic – and turnout will 
continue to decline – if they believe there is not much difference, or clear 
blue water, between the two main parties. It is perhaps this factor, more than 
any other, that has led Labour strategists to brand next year's contest as "the 
big choice election".

Will it make a difference? The audience at the debate reluctantly concluded 
that politicians do matter and always will. How much they matter, however, 
depends on our elected representatives' level of zeal for genuine reform of a 
broken and discredited political system, and their ability to represent, 
express and defend the multiplicity of views in our society. Only then will 
voters at the next election have both a clear choice on offer and the 
democratic and proportional mechanism for expressing their preferences. And 
only then – when the alarmingly large gap between the elected and the electors 
is narrowed – will our political classes truly matter again, in a significant 
and substantive sense, and halt their self-imposed descent into obscurity and 
irrelevance.
 