
I had an awkward moment during this year's deliberations over the Man Booker 
prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize>. We had just trudged 
through 151 novels (I actually read a few more than that – 183 in all to be 
precise – but that's a tale for a different time) and we began the process of 
re-reading the longlist. As I re-cracked a spine, like some kind of literary 
Bane, it struck me that I don't re-read that often. I re-read classics most: 
Scott and Dickens, Eliot and Woolf, Melville and Zola most often. I've read 
Ulysses more times than I can remember (but sometimes just sections), and 
Perec's Life: A User's Manual certainly more than thrice. But contemporary 
novels? It was an embarrassing blank. I've certainly read Midnight's Children 
more than once, and I've read Golding's Rites Of Passage and Byatt's Possession 
twice. Occasionally, with a cold, I've re-read The Mouse And His Child by 
Russell Hoban. I've dipped back into many books, from Finnegans Wake to The 
Recognitions by William Gaddis to Christine Brooke-Rose's Textermination. But 
actually re-reading? Less than a handful of modern novels.

The Man Booker judges are always in a strange situation, provided they do the 
work as assigned. We will have read the winner more frequently and more 
stringently than the so-called average reader. I should, for the record, say 
that no reader is average. Each has a unique engagement with a text, and every 
one of those responses is valid, if not right. But let's face it, not many of 
the slightly fictitious reading public are going to read any Man Booker winner 
three times.

When we came to re-re-read the shortlist, certain things became evident. A 
crime novel would have to be more than just a crime novel to survive the second 
"re". It might be impressive first time round, and the second time one could be 
impressed by the precision with which the solution had been placed and 
patterned. Third time? A comic novel will struggle too: is there any joke 
that's funny the third time you hear or read it? I lovedSteve Toltz's A 
Fraction of the Whole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141031828/a-fraction-of-the-whole>
, and have recommended it to many people, but haven't actually re-read it (even 
though bits of it, in memory alone, make me laugh).

Re-re-reading is odd: a book has to have a certain depth to survive multiple 
readings. That is not to say that a book which one races through, enjoys, and 
wouldn't return to is not without merit. There are pleasures other than 
profundity. A significant reason why the prize went to Eleanor Catton was that
The Luminaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781847084316/the-luminaries>
 can, I think, be enjoyed on the surface level as a gripping story, a homage to 
Victorian sensation fiction, with opium dens, murders, extortion plots, séances 
and a supernatural vision. But every time, I re-read it (I'm on four now), I 
found more and more in it. Its elaborate, astrological structure asks 
purposeful questions about destiny and character. The halving is both an image 
of perfection (the Golden Section) and the law of diminishing returns, fitting 
neatly with the book's exploration of greed, accumulation and capital.

Serendipitously, I hared back to Scotland from the Guildhall for the Scottish 
Mental Health Association book festival which, in my capacity as creative 
programmer forGlasgow's Aye Write! book festival 
<http://www.ayewrite.com/Pages/default.aspx>, I'd been asked to deliver. One of 
our guests was Ella Berthould, the co-author ofThe Novel Cure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780857864208/the-novel-cure-an-a-to-z-of-literary-remedies>
, an ingenious set of literary diagnoses for ailments. We got talking about 
re-reading, and she made the smart point that re-reading doesn't just take us 
back to the book, it creates a link with the person we were when we read the 
book before. It made me slightly melancholy to think of all those lost links to 
my own history I was missing by always looking to read the next, new thing.

I've only experienced this in a small way: reading books as an undergraduate 
I'd read as a schoolboy, and then dipping into them for reviews or books I was 
writing later on. Re-reading Moby-Dick or Middlemarch in my 40s is a far deeper 
experience than reading it as a callow youth. On the other hand, I'm fearful 
that re-reading some old favourites from that time of my life – Flann O'Brien, 
for example, or Anthony Burgess – might be dispiriting. What if it's not as 
good as I thought? Worse: what if it showed my earlier critical capacity to be 
gauche and easily-impressed by trickery? I think I might prefer for some books 
to be the memories of themselves, not a repeat performance.

That said, I have decided to make this my year of re-reading. Or if my 
reviewer's itch gets unbearable, to at least read minor works by the classic 
authors I've already read (I did binge on Trollope –Anthony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/anthony-trollope>, not Joanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/joanna-trollope> - after the 
shortlist meeting. The Fixed Period and Ralph The Heir were very interesting 
indeed). I'm curious to hear readers' experiences of re-reading, re-re-reading, 
and indeed, whether or not there are many Man Booker winners they have gone 
back to time and again.
 