
I keep hearing that the boom in popular science books is over. But the runners 
for this year's science book prize look as healthy as ever. The 13 titles on 
the long list covered an amazing range of subjects. Regulars such as evolution 
and the mind are there, as well as novelties such as brainwashing, how status 
affects your health, the prospects for marrying physics and social sciences as 
well as the secrets of autobiographical memory.

What none of them do is declare that they will answer all your questions about 
life, the universe, and everything. This was pretty much the pitch publishers 
were making at the height of the pop-science boom a few years ago. If you 
wanted to know why people do the things they do, understand the mind of God, or 
even fathom the meaning of it all, scientists were supposed to be able to tell 
you. Some became brand names. The publisher of Stephen Pinker's last book put 
out a poster declaring excitedly that "the man with the answers is back", 
without even saying what the question was.

Oracular science was always going to disappoint. Science is about scepticism, 
tentative theories and unanswered questions, not about the meaning of life. If 
some of the excitement around popular science has faded, it is mainly because 
the press has caught on that readers were promised things that science cannot 
deliver. But that does not mean an end to popular science. Publishers might be 
looking for the "next big thing", but those are usually largely imaginary in 
any case. Publishing consists of a series of small things, individual books 
that are good and bad. Popular science books will take their chances in that 
enjoyable gamble. But there are plenty of possibilities left for good ones.

The best of the books already out there add up to a lasting legacy. Never has 
so much been explained so well. But their reach is still limited. Exceptions 
include Bill Bryson, this year's chair of the Aventis judges, who is well on 
the way to selling a million paperback copies of A Brief History of Nearly 
Everything. Read it, and it is obvious he could not have written it without 
close study of other popular science books. He just tells the story better.

But there is far more still to write than skilful retellings of the big story. 
Science is a moving target. Although the best books have long shelf-lives, many 
quickly go out of date. No book about human evolution is now complete without 
an account of Homo floresiensis, and whole books about the little humans found 
last year in Indonesia are sure to appear soon.

Then there are entire areas of science that have been overlooked in the 
fixation on big questions. There are hardly any decent books about solid state 
physics or on cell biology. Plenty of stories about the immune system or 
oceanography remain untold. New social issues abound in sciences that spawn new 
technologies, from neuroscience to nanotechnology. Large parts of the history 
and philosophy of science are so far untouched by the popularisers. And there 
are still few books that capture the reality, or the variety, of scientific 
work. The Double Helix is still the most read book on what it is like to do 
science, but a few things have changed in 50 years.

James Watson's memoir does hint at another path to take, though. He tried to 
depict science as though he were writing a novel. Others have claimed that as 
their goal since, but few have really followed through. In fact, most science 
books still settle for straight exposition. Although Richard Dawkins takes 
great pains to reverse the evolutionary narrative in The Ancestor's Tale, this 
is true of all the final six on the Aventis shortlist. The work of most science 
authors now actively reads as if the new journalism, with its immersion in real 
detail and interest in dramatic technique, had never happened.

Taking up just a few of these possibilities will mean that science books 
become more diverse, and continue to reach new readers. They may not answer the 
ultimate questions of existence, but popular science books do testify to the 
fact that we live in an infinitely interesting universe. And they offer an 
inexhaustible supply of things we have figured out about that universe, most of 
them even true. That should be enough to be going on with. Jon Turney will be 
course leader for the new MSc in creative non-fiction writing at Imperial 
College London

The shortlist

Critical Mass: How one thing leads to another Philip Ball (Heineman)

The Ancestor's Tale Richard Dawkins (Weidenfeld & Nicholson)

Why Life Speeds Up As You Get Older Douwe Draaisma (Cambridge)

Matters of Substance: Drugs â€“ and why everyone's a user Griffith Edwards 
(Allen Lane)

The Earth: An intimate history Richard Fortey (HarperCollins)

The Human Mind Robert Winston (Bantam/Transworld)
 