 Lord Darzi, the surgeon and health minister, comes striding out of his 
operating theatre at St Mary's Hospital in London wearing full blue scrubs and 
a face mask, his white surgical clogs spattered with blood. These are troubled 
times for Gordon Brown's "government of all the talents", but Ara Darzi is as 
good an advert for the idea as Downing Street could dream of: here, his whole 
bearing seems to say, is a doctor-politician who really knows the health 
service he has been charged with reimagining. A cynic might suspect stage 
management; after all, he could just as easily conduct interviews at the 
ministry. Then again, a less cynical observer might respond by recalling the 
moment when the Labour peer Lord Brennan collapsed in the House of Lords during 
a debate, and Darzi performed heart massage until a first aid crew arrived. 
Hero Health Minister "Saved Labour Peer's Life" is how Sky News reported the 
story on its website, and how often do the first and third words of that 
headline appear in the same sentence?
To be fair to his less-admired Westminster colleagues, the cancer specialist 
has not yet had to make many unpopular political decisions. It was only in July 
that Darzi was recruited to conduct a "once in a generation" year-long review 
of the NHS in England. So far, he has been able to announce a swath of 
innovations - more money for developing new technology, more screening for 
MRSA, 150 new health centres, and a review of the troubled Â£12bn update of the
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> computer system - without having 
to specify the hospital closures that will be the inevitable flipside of his 
reorganisation.

Darzi has his critics, but up to now they have been largely confined to the 
ranks of NHS professionals.Doctors <https://www.theguardian.com/society/doctors>
 responded lukewarmly at best to his plans for a network of "polyclinics" to 
provide routine treatment locally, along with a handful of specialist 
super-hospitals. Politically speaking, there is a big difference between 
disagreeing with NHS insiders and telling the public that keeping a hospital 
open no longer makes sense. The time for that has yet to come.

We are crammed into a tiny coffee room outside the operating theatre, and 
Darzi, an affable 47-year-old, is explaining another tactic for keeping out of 
trouble. "I know what I'm there to do, and everyone around me knows what I'm 
there to do," he says. (Darzi is an Iraqi-born Armenian, but his accent is pure 
Irish, the result of having been raised there.) "If you're going to ask me my 
views about the war in Afghanistan, I'll tell you you're wasting your time. 
Even if you ask me a very specific question about a [health] policy idea that 
belongs in the portfolio of one of my colleagues, I'm not going to get into 
that. One thing I know, being a clinician and a scientist - I only talk about 
things I know about." Perhaps as a result, he has escaped being publicly 
brought into line by No 10, which has been the humiliating fate of his fellow 
"outsider" ministers, Admiral Lord West and Lord Malloch Brown.

The essential problem with the NHS, Darzi argues, is not a lack of funding or 
expertise, but the way different parts connect. Patients in search of treatment 
must navigate a maze - and may not end up at the door of those best equipped to 
treat them. "Take the example of a patient in London who develops abdominal 
pains in the evening," he says. "They tolerate the pain overnight, then they go 
to see their GP, who says they need to see a consultant..." What follows is a 
time-consuming and costly back-and-forth: to the consultant, to the hospital 
for an ultrasound scan, to the consultant to discuss the results, to the 
hospital for a surgery pre-assessment, to the hospital again for an operation, 
back to the GP with a wound problem. "I mean, if you did your shopping this 
way... If Tesco provided you with that service, you wouldn't go there. If you 
booked your flights that way you'd be all over the place."

The NHS may even need to appoint "navigators", he says, whose job would be to 
"navigate you through the system". The prime minister is so taken with this 
view that, when challenged about the need for reform, he recites Darzi's 
example.

Maybe worse, though, is that what Darzi refers to as the "one size fits all" 
district hospitals system means that when patients do receive treatment, it may 
not be anywhere near the best available. "Because I'm a professional who works 
in the health service, if I had a car crash I know exactly where I would want 
to go. I know if I had a cancer of the rectum where I'd want to go. No question 
about that... But the patient doesn't know. If I could just say something about 
the failings of people like me, it's that we've never stood up and said to our 
public: 'If you have this condition, which is complex, this is where you should 
be going.'" Take emergency care. Ambulances are no longer just "fast-moving 
vans"; crews are equipped to make relatively precise diagnoses on the spot. In 
Darzi's ideal NHS, a patient in an ambulance might even "pass by the local 
hospital - you know, and wave from the window - because you're actually going 
to the right place".

If Gordon Brown thought appointing a senior medic would win doctors over, it 
hasn't worked yet. Quite apart from the row prompted by his interim 
recommendation that GP opening hours be extended, the British Medical 
Association notes that centralising specialist care doesn't always lead to 
better outcomes. NHS workers suspect that "rationalisation" will inevitably 
mean centralisation, and the role of the private sector in all this remains 
unclear. And though he uses the Brownite language of "empowering the patient", 
it is not certain that Darzi really wants individuals to know which hospital 
teams have the best results so that they can choose between them. "To be fair, 
it's not for the patient to know where these places [are], but for the people 
who place them," he says. And, of course, we don't yet know which hospitals 
will have to close.

Darzi says he never planned to be grappling with these issues at all. "I've 
planned a few things in my career - I wanted to become an academic, I wanted to 
lead a big department. But this wasn't part of it," he says. "I got the phone 
call, and I was, as they say in Ireland, gobsmacked." Even so, he had fashioned 
himself into a prime candidate for the job, thanks to his rapid and relatively 
youthful rise to the three positions he now holds: professor of surgery at 
Imperial College, honorary consultant surgeon at St Mary's, and chair of 
surgery at the Royal Marsden. He currently combines his government job with two 
days of operations per week.

Darzi was born in Iraq, to Armenian parents displaced by the 1915 genocide. 
(His pointed references to it as a "genocide" are a rare example of him 
diverging from the Downing Street line, since the British government has 
resisted calls to recognise it as such.) The family later emigrated to Ireland. 
"In Ireland, in those days, looking like me... people couldn't pronounce my 
name, and so I used to be called 'Dara Darcy the dark Paddy,'" he says. Did he 
mind? "No, it was quite fun." He came to Britain for a year's medical training, 
never left, and is now married with two children. His father would have 
preferred him to become an engineer, in the family tradition. It is to this he 
attributes his focus on "minimally invasive" surgery techniques involving 
robotics: "I describe myself as a failed engineer," he says.

These are early days for Darzi in his incarnation as a politician. His ideas 
may yet herald the end of the 20th century hospital system, but for now they 
remain only theories. On controversial, concrete matters of day-to-day health 
policy - doctors' pay, or fighting hospital infections - his comments are 
cautious. He doesn't believe GPs are overpaid, he says, but does think there's 
a problem with "the continuity of care", a benign-sounding phrase that may yet 
herald much more fraught negotiation with the BMA and others.

This approach has allowed him, for now, to attract respect across party lines: 
Andrew Lansley, the shadow health secretary, has called him "an honest man set 
among thieves". The obvious risk is that he might get sucked so deeply into 
Brown's agenda that politics, rather than his perspective as a clinician, 
becomes the sole influence on his decision making.

One thing that seems to bode well, in this respect, is his attitude to 
meetings at Downing Street. "I had an appointment there on a Tuesday afternoon 
to brief them on the review, and at two o'clock I got a call from one of my 
colleagues saying that one of our registrars wasn't well," he says. "He came in 
with abdominal pains and had a scan, and he had peritonitis, and I wanted to 
take him into theatre... So I cancelled the thing at No 10.

You could get all, 'Oh Christ, who am I going to piss off now - No 10?' But 
you've just got to make a decision," he says, with characteristic aplomb. "From 
day one, I told them: if one of my patients [needs attention], that comes 
first."
 