

On Tuesday, for the second time this season 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/apr/18/matt-harvey-tom-seaver-mets-dodgers-angels>
, Vin Scully was providing us with a masterful play-by-play of a major in-game 
altercation, and once again, Zack Greinke was in the middle of it. Tempers 
began flaring in earnest during the Dodgers 5-3 victory over the Arizona 
Diamondbacks after Ian Kennedy's fastballwound up on the nose 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3kXISdN1bII> of Yasiel Puig, LA's rookie 
phenom, in the bottom of the sixth inning. Generally speaking, Puig's brand of
showmanship isn't admired by big league players 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/los-angeles/dodger-report/post/_/id/5713/does-yasiel-puigs-exuberance-make-him-a-target>
, meaning that the Cuban is likely to draw special attention from time to time 
from opposing pitchers.

Dodgers catcher Tim Federowicz said after the game: 

"We knew at some point somebody was going to try to knock [Puig] down. They 
say it wasn't intentional. You hit a guy in the face, we take it personally."

In the top of the seventh, Greinke avenged Puig's beaning, throwing behind 
Arizona catcher Miguel Montero, and predictably, benches cleared. Order was 
restored momentarily before Kennedy hit Greinke, who recently returned from 
collar bone surgery resulting from an early seasonDodgers brawl with the Padres 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-DZwHbYcQlk>, in the bottom half of the inning. 
Next thing you knew, the teams were at each others throats, with D'Backs 
assistant hitting coach Turner Ward getting hurled into the camera pit padding, 
while several old timers, including managers Don Mattingly, Kirk Gibson, Matt 
Williams, Mark McGwire, Alan Trammell and Don Baylor (one heck of a group 
actually) exchanged words and shoves in heated encounters that led to several 
ejections - Gibson, Kennedy, Ward, McGwire and Puig were tossed by home plate 
umpire Clint Fagan, who had the pleasure of dealing with no fewer than five 
batters being plunked on the night. To watch it play out before your eyes 
alongside baseball's most sacred voiceclick here.  
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2013_06_11_arimlb_lanmlb_1&mode=video&content_id=27951177&tcid=vpp_copy_27951177>
Orturn up at the Sydney Cricket Ground in 2014 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jun/12/dodgers-diamonbacks-sydney-cricket-ground>
.

Friday update: Eight suspensions and a dozen fines were handed down as 
punishment for the brawl.

Arizona pitcher Ian Kennedy was suspended for 10 games and infielder Eric 
Hinske five for their roles in Tuesday's fight.

Dodgers reliever Ronald Belisario said afterwards 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/9387158/los-angeles-dodgers-arizona-diamondbacks-brawl-fallout-8-suspended-mlb>
: "No, it's not over yet, not at all. I don't think anybody thinks it's over."

Ryan Mad-son

On the sidelines for more than 14 months following Tommy John surgery, Ryan 
Madson toldAlden Gonzalez of MLB.com 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article.jsp?ymd=20130611&content_id=50329972&vkey=news_mlb&c_id=mlb>
 that he's losing his patience with the recovery process, wondering aloud if he 
would be helped by taking HGH:

If HGH were legal just in the process of healing, under a doctor's 
recommendation, in the right dosage, while you're on the [disabled list], I 
don't think that's such a bad idea -- as long as it doesn't have any lasting 
side effects, negative side effects.

Madson signed a $6m deal deal with the Cincinnati Reds before the 2012 season, 
only to hurt himself in Spring Training, an injury thatultimately shifted 
Aroldis Chapman to the bullpen 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/reds/2013/02/16/reds-giving-aroldis-chapman-a-chance-to-start/1925397/>
. Thinking Madson had a chance to comeback at some point this season and be 
effective, the Angels gambled on the reliever who made his name in 
Philadelphia, signing him to a deal of more than $3m. However, the recovery has 
not gone as planned and the "frustrated" 32-year-old sounded off on Tuesday, 
also saying:

"...Fans want to see the best players play, and they want to see the players 
that they watch come back from injury and stay back. I think it would be a good 
thing."

Madson made it clear that he would never consider taking human growth hormone 
because of the drugs legal status, and also stated that he doesn't feel the 
same way about steroids. Whether or not you agree or disagree with Madson, 
there's certainly nothing wrong with his remarks, or having a healthy debate 
about the possible "legitimate and strictly administered" use of HGH. Judging 
on the way baseball is pursuing those who they believe violated MLB's policies, 
I don't expect he'll garner much support in the Commissioners office.

Injury updates

Bryce Harper visited Dr James Andrews and reportedly, "no operative 
procedures" transpired during his trip to his Georgia office. Regardless, 
Washington Nats fans could not have enjoyed the twitter photo that showed the 
all-star outfielderwearing a rather large knee brace. 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/dc-sports-bog/wp/2013/06/11/bryce-harper-wearing-a-knee-brace/>
 Harper was eligible to come off the DL on Tuesday, but obviously, that wasn't 
on the cards, and so the jury is still out on his possible return to the 
struggling Nationals lineup.

The Giants' Pablo Sandoval is back on the DL with a left foot foot strain  
<http://blog.sfgate.com/giants/2013/06/11/noonan-on-his-way-back-to-sf-giants/>
(whatever that is) after aggravating the injury over the weekend in Arizona. 
Now Kung-Fu Panda is rocking a walking boot and set to add to the close to 100 
games he's missed in 2011-2012 seasons.

We learn three things about the Yankees this week. Firstly, on the more 
amusing side is the story that theFukuoka Soft Bank Hawks 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/east-intrigue-a-rod-article-1.1368831>
 were actually interested in bringing Alex Rodriugez to Japan. According to the 
New York Times, the unofficial inquiry did not garner a response from the 
Yankees, perhaps because they knew the extent of his hip injury following his 
horrendous October playoff performance, nevermind the complexities of a 
potential move from a MLB team to an NPB franchise. Meanwhile, Derek Jeter is 
on the verge of resuming baseball activities in recovering from his ankle 
injuries. According to the Bronx Bombers'manager Joe Girardi 
<http://www.nypost.com/p/sports/yankees/jeter_inching_toward_return_817maYjEZEtm5I0qy2NuXP>
, A-Rod is currently ahead of Jeter as far as a timetable for return as the 
embattled Yankees third baseman is currently participating in baseball 
workouts, the extent of which are unknown. When it's all said and done, perhaps 
the most significant pinstriped player to return from injury in 2013 could be
Michael Pineda 
<http://www.sbnation.com/mlb/2013/6/11/4419462/michael-pineda-injury-yankees-rehab-start>
, who has yet to throw a pitch for New York since being acquired by the Yankees 
in January of 2012. The 22-year-old has been recovering slowly from labrum 
surgery, and pitched 4 â…” innings on Sunday for the Yankees Class A team Tampa - 
he could find himself in AA making his next rehab start on Friday.

In yet even more injury news, the Dallas Morning News says that Texas Rangers 
second Baseman Ian Kinsler isat least ten days away 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/dallas/texas-rangers/post/_/id/4900541/buzz-ian-kinsler-works-out-again>
 from recovering from "stress reaction in a rib" while Detroit's Austin Jackson 
could beback in the lineup this weekend 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/article/20130612/SPORTS0104/306120037/1004/SPORTS/Tigers-monitor-Austin-Jackson-s-performance-at-the-plate>
 after recovering from a hamstring injury that's shelved the outfielder since 
May 14th. MLB.com reports thatJose Reyes could be back in Toronto 
<http://www.kffl.com/gnews.php?id=856824-blue-jays-jose-reyes-to-play-in-sim-games>
 by the end of the month if he does not suffer any setbacks from the ankle 
injury he suffered in April.

Drink up

Readers of the Guardian's baseball coverage 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/series/mlb-five-things-we-learned> know that 
every now and then we like to jump into the sea of baseball statistics and 
explore the games past via its vast catalog of data, mostly for no reason 
whatsoever other than the pure fun of it.

Many baseball fans are familiar with the term "a cup of coffee" as in "he had 
a cup of coffee in the big leagues" a phrase which describes a player that 
spent a very short time on a Major League roster who spent most of their career 
playing on the minor league level. The popular websitebaseball-reference.com 
narrows the term further <http://www.baseball-reference.com/friv/coffee.shtml>, 
defining it as a batter or a pitcher who has appereard in exactly one game. 
There are 984 fielders and or batters and 519 pitchers of this kind according 
to baseball-reference.com, and the other night, just for fun, I took a peek at 
some of the names - much to my surprise, some of them were recognizable.

Of all those who enjoyed a single day in the sun, the most well known has to 
be Archibald Graham, better known by his nickname, "Moonlight". The former New 
York Giants outfielder was made famous over 30 years after his death in the1989 
film Field of Dreams <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y9yrupye7B0> - Graham took 
to the field in the eighth inning in Brooklyn at old Washington Park on June 
29th 1905, never once getting a turn at bat. Burt Lancaster, playing Graham in 
the film said:

...I'd of like to have that chance, just once. To stare down a big league 
pitcher, to stare him down and just as he goes into his windup, wink, and let 
him think you know something he doesn't - that's what I wish about. A chance to 
squint at a sky so blue that it hurts your eyes just to look at it, to feel the 
tingle in your arms as you connect with the ball. To run the bases, stretch a 
double into a triple, and flop face first into third, wrap your arms around the 
bag. That's my wish Ray Kinsella, that's my wish.

Most of these men got their wish (or at least made it to the Majors), but one 
didn't even get as far as Moonlight Graham.

Walter Alston managed the Brooklyn Dodgers to their only World Series title in 
the borough back in 1955. He's also known forsigning 23 one-year deals 
<http://voices.yahoo.com/the-dodgers-walter-alston-one-year-time-85729.html>, 
never enjoying security as a skipper despite the success he had both in 
Brooklyn and Los Angeles. Before managing, Alston never had much of a 
professional playing career, playing in exactly one big league game for the St 
Louis Cardinals back in 1936, striking out against the Cubs' Lon Warneke in his 
only plate appearance. Alston, who won seven pennants and four World Series 
titles while managing, was inducted in the Hall-of-Fame in 1983, a little over 
a year before his death.

Then there's Stephen Larkin, whose last name is a household one. His brother 
Barry is a Hall-of-Fame shortstop <http://baseballhall.org/hof/larkin-barry>, 
but his younger sibling never enjoyed anything approaching that sort of 
success. Stephen did manage a hit on September 27th 1998, but his career 
highlight had to be playing alongside Barry in the infield for the Reds, in the
very same game <http://www.baseball-reference.com/boxes/CIN/CIN199809270.shtml> 
that brothers Brett and Aaron Boone also appeared in the infield, the only time 
two sets of siblings were on the field at the same time.

The most successful one game appearance for a batter belongs to John Paciorek, 
whose last name is also recognizable to baseball fans - his brother Tom enjoyed 
an 18-year career on six teams. John came up on the last game of the season in 
1963 for the then Houston Colt 45's, who were playing the Mets. He had three 
hits and two walks, but back troubles prevented Paciorek from returning to the 
Majors. He retired with aperfect 1.000 batting average and on base percentage.  
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/boxes/HOU/HOU196309290.shtml>

Perhaps the most peculiar "cup of coffee" story belongs to Larry Yount, 
brother of another Hall of Fame player, Robin Yount. If youcheck out Larry's 
numbers, you'll see that he appeared in one game 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/boxes/HOU/HOU197109150.shtml>, but did not 
pitch in a single inning, or even a portion of an inning. That's because on 
September 15th 1971, Larry came on to face the Braves, but never faced a 
batter. Why? He hurt his right elbow during warmups and had to be removed 
before the start of the inning. Since he was announced into the game, he gets 
credited with the appearance, and thus, after failing to return to a big league 
mound, can now claim the shortest career in baseball history - a cup of coffee 
that was actually closer to a sip.

Now you see it...

We're used to rain delays in baseball, maybe even a snow delay in April. Fog? 
Well, not so much. On Monday in Chicago a thick blanket rolled into town and 
affected not one but two games - the White Sox and Blue Jays and the Cubs and 
Reds. At Wrigley Field the two NL Central foes managed to play through despite 
the visual impairments, but down south at U.S. Cellular Field they were not as 
lucky, being forced to stop play for over an hour. It was so dense that a Cubs 
broadcaster amusingly remarked that outfielders should be carrying a baseball 
in their back pocket.

Despite the fog, Brandon Phillips was able to hit a grand slam to help the 
Reds to a 6-2 victory. You could argue that Adam Dunn has been playing in a fog 
all season long, hitting .165 coming into the game with Toronto. Curiously, 
Dunn actually managed to hit two home runs in the Chisox victory, which makes 
you think that he may, well, be coming out of the fog (rimshot 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=obKLdou0LH0>). 

It's not the time we've seen fog have an impact on games, and certainly not 
the first time we've seen the phenomenon in Chicago. The Bears and Eagles were 
famously enveloped by fog in a divisional playoff game during the 1988 NFL 
season - Chicago were able to make the best of the conditions on the day, 
winning the Fog Bowl 20-12.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyLdGCHUbMCY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyLdGCHUbMCY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyLdGCHUbMCY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

It can even happen indoors - in Game Three of the 1975 Stanley Cup Finals, the 
Sabres and Flyers were covered in the stuff as a hot and day in Buffalo helped 
create a thick layer of fog in "The Aud", which couldn't have had air 
conditioning. Few fans could follow the action, but the Sabres managed to win 
5-4 in overtime, eventually falling to Philadelphia in six games.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBBXA-e2AB3g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBBXA-e2AB3g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBBXA-e2AB3g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
MLB standings <http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/>
 