
Pool party

Some members of the Diamondbacks are mad that the Dodgers partied in their pool
 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2013/09/19/dodgers-clinch-al-west-pool-chase-field-diamondbacks-upset/2840485/>
afterLos Angeles defeated Arizona 7-6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/20/dodgers-red-sox-mlb-playoff-spots>
, clinching their first NL West title since 2009.

D-backs infielder Willie Bloomquist sounded off, saying:

It's surprising because they have a lot of veteran guys on that team that I 
thought were classier than that. I just think they have enough guys on that 
team that it's surprising that they would allow that to happen. You have to 
give credit where credit is due. They won the division; congratulations to 
them, but I would expect them to act with a little more class than they did. I 
doubt the New York Yankees would do something like that.

I love the idea that the Yankees, who for decades were run by an owner who was 
suspended by baseball not once but twice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2010/jul/15/george-steinbrenner-loser-baseball>
, whose current GM tells his players publicly to "shut the fuck up" are seen as 
this classy organization, but I suppose that's another conversation.

Back to business - what's left of baseball purists will likely believe that 
the best way to keep opponents from celebrating in your pool is not to have one 
in your stadium in the first place.

This is just the latest case of baseball players proving themselves to be the 
world's most sensitive athletes - is it me or does it seem like every week 
brings about another unwritten baseball rule controversy? Now the Dodgers are 
supposedly "classless" because they jumped in a pool (didn't you know, that's 
in the book also?). I suppose that the D'Backs consider the pool to be some 
sort of sacred ground, but I still have to disagree with the reaction from 
Bloomquist.

The Dodgers completed one of the more dramatic turnarounds in baseball 
history, going from the basement in late June to a division title, and that is 
certainly an achievement worthy of a celebratory dip.After toweling off, 
manager Don Mattingly and his band of $200m stars will attempt to find the 
balance between getting some rest while staying sharp. Mattingly would be wise 
to keep his regulars on the field for most of the remaining season, baseball 
being a sport of timing and repetition that can only be honed by playing in 
real games, even if they mean little in the standings.

PS - If I were an Arizona D'Back, I'd be a lot more offended by this. 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2EQUYvF7rLs>

Lonely stars

The Texas Rangers are in the midst of their second consecutive late season 
collapse. However, unlike a season ago, this current Rangers slide could see 
them out of the playoffs altogether. With just 10 games to go, With just 10 
games to go, Texas are fighting for their postseason existence, mired in a muck 
of soul destroying baseball.On August 31st, 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/TEX/2013-schedule-scores.shtml> Texas 
were in the thick of a race for the American League West division title, up a 
pair of games on their rivals, the Oakland A's, and seemingly in control. They 
had just finished off their best month of the campaign, winning 20 games, 
despite the loss of sluggerNelson Cruz to a suspension for 
performance-enhancing drugs. 
<http://mlb.si.com/2013/09/18/jhonny-peralta-nelson-cruz-tigers-rangers-biogenesis-playoffs/>
 In fact, their offense had not slowed down a bit - even without one of their 
key cogs in a lineup that averaged close to six runs per game in August. 
Meanwhile, the pitching staff put up their best numbers of the season during 
the month, and so the team was cruising -coolstandings.com put their chances at 
October baseball at 97.1%. 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=TEX&sn=2013>

Then, suddenly, as the calendar flipped over, their bats died, slumbering to 
under 3.5 runs per game while a handful of their pitchers completely forgot how 
to throw. Next thing you know the division race was virtually over and the 
panic was back in Arlington, where they recently dropped six games in a row. 
Altogether, they are 4-13 in September, now battling a pack of six AL teams 
trying to shoehorn themselves into two playoff spots, 6.5 games behind Oakland 
- that's a swing of more than eight games in 19 days, during which their 
chances of reaching the postseason has plummeted by more than 30%.

This is a different story to 2012, when the Rangers coughed up a five game AL 
West lead in the blink of an eye. On September 24th, with just nine games to go,
they had a 95% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=TEX&sn=2012> of winning the 
division, only for their season to fall apart at a blistering pace. The 
freefall made the A's unlikely division winners - the consolation prize was a 
one game wildcard game at home to Baltimore. They lost 5-1. Just like that, a 
season in which a third straight World Series appearance was well within in 
reach, was over.

This time around the agony seems destined to be spread across an entire month 
rather than 10 grim days. When the Rangers went out andacquired Matt Garza to 
bolster their pitching staff 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/dallas/texas-rangers/post/_/id/4904894/garza-admits-hes-feeling-some-pressure>
, they couldn't have thought they would be getting a pitcher that would allow 
more than eight runs per nine innings in September. Derek Holland is another 
rotation stalwart who has just killed Texas down the stretch - his ERA is 
approaching eight this month. Ian Kinsler and Adrian Beltre, two major pieces 
that just couldn't slump with Cruz out, have been abysmal. All manager Ron 
Washington can do is go out there and play his best team, while deflecting 
speculation that the swoon will cost him his job. Washington told ESPN radio in 
Dallas:

I'm not going to give that any legs. Let the people who put that out there 
answer it. I never said one thing about fearing for my job. I'm steadfast in 
what my job is on this ballclub, and that's to be the best manager for this 
organization and back my players, back my coaches and back the organization. I 
want to be the best manager possible, and that hasn't changed.

Right now it's Ron Washington's job to try somehow convince his players that 
one loss isn't connected to the next, to keep up his team's mental state 
through a second consecutive September slide. Wednesday gave an indication of 
just how serious a scenario the Rangers are in - Washington, up six runs 
against Tampa, brought in his closer,Joe Nathan to close the door on the Rays. 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/dallas/texas-rangers/post/_/id/4905337/darvish-grinds-his-way-to-key-victory>
 The rare September victory kept Texas in the second wildcard playoff spot for 
another day.

Bashing birds
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpNfOfl6L6io%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpNfOfl6L6io%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpNfOfl6L6io%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

On Tuesday night in Boston Chris Davis hit his 51st home run to become the 
Baltimore Orioles all-time single season home run leader. He passed the 
entertaining Brady Anderson, who is well known for the50 homers he hit out of 
absolutely nowhere in 1996. 
<http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2013-09-13/sports/bal-chris-davis-ties-brady-andersons-orioles-singleseason-hr-record-with-50th-homer-of-the-season-20130913_1_first-orioles-player-brady-anderson-albert-belle>
 Anderson, who hit a combined 72 homers in the first eight years of his career, 
is one of those players that stands out in the so-called steroid era. Whenever 
I think of Anderson's 50 homers and the speculation of PED use that came later, 
I recall an amusing defense he once provided. I'm paraphrasing here, but he 
once said something to the effect of:

"So let me get this straight. I started taking steroids in 1996, hit 50 home 
runs, and then because I hated the success, attention and fame that came with 
it, not to mention the kind of contract I could have gotten, I decided, no, 
that's OK, I don't want any of that, then stopped taking steroids and went back 
to putting up my regular numbers. "

That's the jist of what I believe Anderson said, which, whether you believe 
him or not, is really quite funny, and represents the kind of personality he 
brought to the Orioles during his 14 seasons with the team. More officially, 
Anderson told the Baltimore Sun in 2004:

Because I only hit 50 home runs once, it was, in fact, an aberration. However, 
it was not a fluke. Nothing can be considered a fluke that takes six months to 
accomplish. Rather it was a culmination of all my athleticism and baseball 
skills and years of training peaking simultaneously. This was my athletic 
opus...Hitting in front of [Roberto] Alomar, [Rafael] Palmeiro, [Bobby] Bonilla 
and [Cal] Ripken didn't hurt, either.

Anderson, who is the Vice President of Baseball for the Orioles has been an 
enormous supporter of Davis, and on Wednesday, Anderson was in Boston to 
celebrate with him. He told the Baltimore Sun:

He's a really good hitter. I told him, 'Dude, I can see you contending for a 
batting title one year,' and he said, 'Exactly, so do I.' So the fact that he's 
been hitting around .300 all year, I'm as happy about that as anything. But 
that goes hand in hand. His home runs and his average, same as mine did.


After dropping the series finale to Boston 3-1 on Wednesday 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2013_09_19_balmlb_bosmlb_1&mode=box>
, Baltimore travel to Tampa Bay with a huge series against the Rays, one that 
could go a long way in determining whether or not Davis' Orioles reach the 
playoffs for the second consecutive season. The Red Sox victory means they have 
clinched a wildcard at the very least, reaching the postseason for the first 
time since 2009. Sox pitcher John Lackey took a no-hitter into the seventh 
inning for a Boston team that could wrap up an AL East title as early as Friday.

Billy ball


The old adage around light hitting but speedy players is that they can't steal 
first base - however, I wouldn't put it past Billy Hamilton. The Cincinnati 
Reds prospect stole 155 bases last season and has finally arrived on the big 
league scene where he has had an immediate impact. On Wednesday against the 
Astros, Hamilton stole four bags bringing his total to nine since arriving with 
the big club in early September. According to the Elias Sports Bureau, he's 
"he's the first player in the "live ball era" (since 1920) to steal four bases 
in his first start".Mobile users can take a look at Hamilton's handy work by 
clicking here. <http://wapc.mlb.com/play?content_id=30754987>
 The runner was thrown out after failing to get back to the bag in time. 
Photograph: Chris O'Meara/AP 

Believe it or not, as you can see above, Hamilton's in-game heroics weren't 
even the most interesting thing that happened on the base paths this week.

The third place Reds are making a run at the division title after taking three 
straight against the Astros to pull within two games of the first placeSt Louis 
Cardinals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/st-louis-cardinals> in the 
competitive National League Central. They face the second place Pirates in a 
series which starts on Friday which could determine home field advantage in a 
one-game wildcard playoff against Pittsburgh.

Hitting streak snapped

Denard Span is a big reason why the Washington Nationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-nationals> have climbed back into 
the wildcard race thanks to a 13-4 September record. Span's 29-game hitting 
streak, which was snapped on Thursday after he went 0-4 in the Nats narrow 3-2 
win at home over the Marlins, was the longest in MLB since 2011. After the game 
he said:

It was a few things -- I haven't not gotten a hit in 29 days, so that felt 
weird, walking back to the dugout without getting a hit. I felt sad, like I let 
myself down, let the fans down, they've been rooting for me...but once I hear 
the round of applause, it did make me feel a bit better.

The Nationals are now five games behind the second wildcard spot with nine 
games to play, which means it would take a complete and total meltdown by the 
leading Reds or Pirates for Washington to even have a hope. With Pittsburgh and 
Cincinnati's pitching, the Nats' chances of returning to the postseason are a 
long shot at best. Meanwhile, the Tigers are days away from clinching a third 
consecutive AL Central title, but apparently Prince Fielder is hungry for more.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcMORWf3tbNo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcMORWf3tbNo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcMORWf3tbNo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
MLB wildcard standings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/wildcard.jsp?ymd=20130919>
 