
Monday

The EU referendum hasn’t been short of its absurdities, but Vote Leave’s event 
at the DCS distribution centre in Stratford-on-Avon must be a strong contender 
for the most surreal. Boris, Michael Gove and Gisela Stuart were all guests of 
warehouse owner Denys C Shortt, who has declared himself a strong supporter of 
Vote Leave. Shortt introduced the event by telling his 150 or so employees that 
he was concerned about high levels of immigration and appeared surprised to be 
greeted with only lukewarm applause. He shouldn’t have been. Stratford has 
extremely low levels of unemployment and he struggles to get any Brits to work 
for him at the wages he is prepared to offer. So many of his staff are Polish 
immigrants that signs throughout the warehouse are written in both Polish and 
English. The only sign that wasn’t written in Polish was the one saying “Smile 
Please”.

Tuesday

Finally Abba have cracked. Sort of. At an event in Stockholm to mark the 50th 
anniversary of Bjorn and Benny’s song-writing career, the pair were joined on 
stage by Agnetha and Anni-Frid for an impromptu rendition of their 1980 hit Me 
and I. While it must have been great for the audience, I rather wish Abba had 
not even momentarily performed in public as a group for the first time in 30 
years. One of the things I had always rather admired about Abba was their 
bloody-mindedness; they were quite happy enough – and rich enough – as they 
were and saw no need to give in to the public’s thirst for nostalgia. 
Hopefully, though, like Pink Floyd at Hyde Park in 2005 and Led Zeppelin at the 
O2 in 2007 –Abba <https://www.theguardian.com/music/abba> reforming will be 
just a one-off. Far better to go out in a blaze of glory, leaving people 
wanting more, than risk fading away gracelessly.

Wednesday

What’s going on with the new so-bad-it’s-good BBC2 show Versailles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/versailles>? It came hyped as the 
series to rival Game of Thrones for scenes of gratuitous sex and violence – and 
the first episode more than delivered with at least six shags inside the first 
half hour, along with a couple of tortures and some of the worst dialogue ever 
written for television. I particularly enjoyed the scene where Louis was 
surrounded by wolves and his brother said: “There are more wolves at court.” 
But this week’s episode tried to pass itself off as serious costume drama with 
no nudity and precious little violence and was just a wee bit dull as a result. 
It was more like the 1980s soap Howards’ Way in fancy dress than Salle de Loup. 
Hopefully things will pick up again next week. And if anyone can help me make 
out the lyrics to the 1970s Genesis song being used as the theme tune, then I’d 
be grateful. So far all I’ve got is: “I am the king of my own name / The faeces 
tending to doubt / Tears the endsomething something / Fleeces of matches / Now 
is forever and forever.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feu-referendum-remain-blair-major-leave-boris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d94b58f2d9efbb97ebeb9c2df9f0adbcf439b25%2F873_436_2302_1381%2F2302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20remain's%20use%20of%20Blair%20and%20Major%20point%20to%20a%20secret%20agenda%20to%20lose%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feu-referendum-remain-blair-major-leave-boris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20remain%27s%20use%20of%20Blair%20and%20Major%20point%20to%20a%20secret%20agenda%20to%20lose%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feu-referendum-remain-blair-major-leave-boris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d94b58f2d9efbb97ebeb9c2df9f0adbcf439b25%2F873_436_2302_1381%2F2302.jpg>
 Versailles: Howards’ Way in fancy dress. Photograph: Canal Plus/BBC 
Thursday

For every referendum debate, the broadcaster kindly lays on a spin room away 
from the TV studios, where the press and other broadcasters can watch the 
action on a live screen in the company of politicians from both camps. For the 
Nicola Sturgeon, Angela Eagle and Amber Rudd versus Boris Johnson, Gisela 
Stuart and Andrea Leadsom debate the media was joined in the Methodist Central 
Hall in Westminster by Chuka Umunna, Liz Truss, Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh, Kate Hoey,
Priti Patel <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel> and Iain Duncan 
Smith, who all went round saying how wonderful and honest their own side had 
been and what a useless bunch of lying toerags the oppo were. Everyone knows 
it’s a meaningless exercise but no one dares not take part. In politics, the 
futile is often deemed to be essential.

Friday

Sometimes it feels as if the remain campaign has a secret agenda to lose the 
referendum. If it’s not Jeremy Corbyn sounding half-hearted about the EU in the 
rare moments he hasn’t gone awol, it’s sending John Major and Tony Blair out on 
a public meet-and-greet. It’s hard to think of two former prime ministers more 
likely to send any undecided voters into the arms of Vote Leave. It was Major 
who cost the UK £3.7bn in a single day while crashing the pound out of the 
European exchange rate mechanism in 1992, and Blair’s tarnished legacy is about 
to be further trashed by the publication of the Chilcot report next month. 
Remain would have done far better sending out Gullfrazie the seagull that went 
for a dip in a tub of curry to campaign for it. Now there’s a bird that wants 
to integrate. By contrast, Vote Leave have been quite canny about sidelining 
some of their flakier advocates whom no one much likes, such as IDS, Nigel 
Lawson and Kate Hoey. It will be interesting to see what they do with Labour’s 
John Mann, who has just switched sides. Mann is a member of the Treasury select 
committee that heard evidence from both sides and concluded that though the 
remainers were exaggerating the economic impact, the leavers were telling 
outright porkies. Go figure.

Digested week, digested: Get that lie off the bus
 