
Domino Records, the label behind Arctic Monkeys, Franz Ferdinand and Wild 
Beasts, has announced it will be unveiling a new radio station next month. 
Drawing on the spirit of the "John Peel Show, Radio Caroline and Rinse FM", 
Domino Radio will begin broadcasting on 6 June and will feature unique 
contributions from many of the artists on its roster, includingAnimal Collective
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/animalcollective>, Steve Mason, Robert 
Wyatt and Anna Calvi.

The station will also broadcast contributions from "tastemakers, instigators, 
thinkers and activists" such as Bobby Gillespie, Faris Badwan and Dennis 
Bovell. The brains behind music blogs such as No Pain in Pop and those behind 
fellow indie labels such as Transparent Records and Angular Records will also 
be involved.

Domino's Laurence Bell, who co-founded the label in 1993, said that putting 
the station together was a "bit like running a marathon I imagine. You train 
all year and then the pistol fires and off you go." Speaking exclusively to the 
Guardian, Bell said: "It is important for us to keep pushing ourselves. We 
don't do these things to make money obviously. We do them because we want to 
contribute and because we enjoy representing creativity on different levels."

A statement released by Domino today said the station would provide "a dynamic 
schedule celebrating exhilarating alternative arts and music loaded with 
individuality, free expression and all manner of sounds from around the world". 
Though specific details about shows and DJs will remain under wraps until the 
launch, the station promises to deliver under the tagline "DominoRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio>, a pop-up radio station for the 
world outside of pop".
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbFy9vj2N950%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbFy9vj2N950%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbFy9vj2N950%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
â€¢ Domino Radio will begin broadcasting on 6 June on 87.7 FM 
 