
Every country in the Caribbean faces huge economic losses caused by rising sea 
levels over the coming decades, losing hospitals, airports, power plants, 
multi-million dollar tourism resorts, roads, bridges and farmland, according to 
a UN report.

Diplomats from the 43 Caribbean, African and Pacific nations grouped as Aosis 
(Alliance of small island states) <http://www.sidsnet.org/aosis/> at the UN 
climate talks in Cancún said that they faced "the end of history" if rich 
countries did not raise their ambition to hold temperatures well below 2C.

According to the report by researchers at the Oxford University Centre for the 
Environment <http://www.ouce.ox.ac.uk/>, the damages in the 15 Caricom countries
 <http://www.caricom.org/> could amount to between $4bn and $6bn a year and 
with infrastructure costs running to tens of billions in many countries.

The study, which does not consider the costs of coral loss, or the possibility 
of increased hurricane or storm activity with climate change, says a rise of 1 
metre, would result in the sea encroaching by around 100m on average in all 
coastal states in the region.

This loss would force more than 100,000 people to move, erode beaches, 
contaminate fresh water supplies and decimate or degrade the tourism industry 
on which most countries have come to depend.

The Bahamas, Suriname, Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago and Belize are expected to 
suffer the greatest economic losses and damages in absolute terms but 
proportionately the loss to smaller states like Grenada, St Lucia,St Kitts and 
Nevis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saint-kitts-and-nevis> are predicted 
to be greater.

"Some of our countries, like Kiribati, Tuvalu, the Cook Islands, the Maldives 
and the Marshall islands, are going to drown [if the talks are not more 
ambitious]. They face the end of history. They are in a desperate situation," 
said Antonio Lima, ambassador to the UN for theCape Verde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cape-verde> Islands, off the west coast of 
Africa. "All of us face disaster. We don't want to be the forgotten, the 
sacrificed countries of the 21st century," he said.

The 43 have flatly rejected suggestions by rich countries that they could use 
adaptation money to build sea defences and say they cannot compromise on their 
position that the world must seek to hold temperatures to no more than a 1.5C 
rise rather than the 2C now proposed by Britain, Europe and the US.

"For us, anything not below 1.5C is a red line," said Dessima Williams, 
vice-chair of Aosis. "It costs $4,500 a metre just to protect airports, so we 
would need hundreds of billions of dollars. We cannot compromise. But now the 
rich countries want us to be collateral damage," said Albert Binger, science 
adviser to the alliance.

Aosis will next week announce details of a deal to promote low-carbon economic 
growth for 17 small island states, backed by a group of developed nations as 
part of "fast-start" aid for the poor that was agreed at last year's Copenhagen 
talks – meant to total $30bn from 2010-21.

Although present rates of global sea level rise are not yet approaching one 
metre per century, they are observed to be accelerating in response to 
increased global warming. The UN panel of climate scientists said in a 2007 
report that seas were likely to rise between 18cm and 59cm this century, before 
accounting for the possibility of a change in the melt rates of Greenland and 
Antarctica. Some scientists say these predictions were based on old data and 
too conservative. They say arise of more than a metre by 2100 is possible 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2009/mar/11/sea-level-rises-climate-change-copenhagen>
.
 