
At the moment, everyone wants to talk about reform â€“ and the Liberal 
Democrats, who in the past have had reams of policies about the need for 
fundamental democratic reform, risk being crowded out. In fairness to Nick 
Clegg he has made attempts to reclaim the reformist crown. He launched his 
leadership with acall for a constitutional convention 
<http://www.libdemvoice.org/clegg-calls-for-a-british-constitutional-convention-1888.html>
. He has repeatedly sought to link theeconomic crisis with the failure of the 
political system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/mar/08/clegg-liberal-democrats-tax>. 
Political reform is listed as one of the party's three main priorities in the
pre-manifesto 
<http://libdems.org.uk/policy_papers_detail.aspx?title=Nick_Clegg_launches_%27A_Fresh_Start_for_Britain%27&pPK=9f178394-1d8f-4c69-b55f-01c885dd02b7>
 they will be debating this week. He has his work cut out, but he is plainly 
determined not to repeat Charles Kennedy's mistakes.

There remain two main concerns about the Lib Dems' commitment to reform. 
Firstly, does their policy match their rhetoric about trusting in people? While 
the party has always been strong on institutional reform, the debate about more 
direct decision-making has largely been left to rightwing Conservative 
commentators such asDan Hannan and Douglas Carswell 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/torydiary/2008/09/the-plan-by-han.html>. 
This is all the more puzzling given the strong track record the Lib Dems have 
in this regard at a local level. Chris Huhne's proposal for acitizens' veto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/oct/31/liberaldemocrats.nickclegg1> 
has sunk without trace. Even Nick Clegg's proposal for a recall system only 
applies to MPs who have been judged to have done something "seriously wrong". 
Surely MPs who do something seriously wrong should be charged and tried in a 
court of law like anyone else?

There are good liberal reasons to be sceptical of wholly unrestrained forms of 
direct democracy, but the Lib Dems need a clearer position, especially since it 
is one area of reform we are likely to see some progress on under Cameron.

The other issue where the Lib Dem position needs clarifying is, oddly, 
electoral reform. For years we have taken it for granted that this is one area 
where the Lib Dems position is settled, yet recently the party has appeared to 
be rowing back. In 2007, a press officer wasfired for briefing journalists 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/lib-dem-spin-doctor-resigns-after-policy-gaffe-439469.html>
 that the Lib Dems were prepared to abandon their commitment to proportional 
representation in circumstances that have never been fully explained. In May 
this year, at a time whenelectoral reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/politics-and-reform> suddenly 
shot to the top of the political agenda, the Lib Dems seemed to be downplaying 
its significance. In theirresponse to the expenses scandal 
<http://www.takebackpower.org/100_days_to_save_democracy.html>, rather than 
restating their support for the single transferable vote they called for the
only slightly proportional system 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternative_Vote_Top-up> thrashed out by Lord 
Jenkins in an attempt to appease Tony Blair in 1999. Throughout the summer 
there has been a steady trickle of press articles about the need for electoral 
reform written by Labour ministers and supporters, largely couched in terms of 
partisan self interest. The Lib Dems have been all but silent

There have always been people within the Liberal Democrats who are ambivalent 
about electoral reform. What's more, the party has learned over the past decade 
to its great cost that its honed election tactics are not particularly well 
suited to PR elections. But there are at least three reasons why now is an 
especially bad time to be watering down their commitment: firstly, agreeing 
with half the Labour front bench hardly makes them look distinctive and 
anti-establishment. Secondly, a compromise at this stage will strengthen the 
hand of opponents of PR within Labour; already there are signs that Labour is 
likely to go no further than hold areferendum on the alternative vote system 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instant-runoff_voting>, which is not proportional 
at all. Thirdly, it makes it look as if the Lib Dems' support for electoral 
reform amounts to little more than narrow self-interest.

There is simply no reason for the Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> to water down their 
vision this side of a general election; if they don't wish to be drowned out by 
the competing Labour and Conservative noise about reform they can't afford to 
do so. Nick Clegg needs to bring greater clarity to his message and spell out 
how he intends to put more power in the hands of ordinary people rather than 
simply changing the way Whitehall and Westminster do business.
 