
In the face of an overwhelming amount of data suggesting that climate change 
poses an immediate and catastrophic threat to our very existence, we remain 
largely inert. The stakes truly could not get any higher, yet many of us 
steadfastedly refuse to change our behaviour.

What’s it going to take?

It’s a question being asked more and more. Slowly, we’re gathering the data to 
begin answering it.

It's spring: stop using your dryer already
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/10/its-spring-stop-using-your-dryer-clothesline>
First, we’ve learned a lot about what doesn’t work, and why. In his book, What 
We Think About When We Try Not To Think About Global Warming 
<http://www.chelseagreen.com/what-we-think-about-when-we-try-not-to-think-about-global-warming>
, psychologist Per Espen Stoknes explains that focusing on scare tactics 
doesn’t serve to motivate. Quite the opposite, in fact.

In an interview  
<http://e360.yale.edu/feature/how_can_we_make_people_care_about_climate_change/2892/>
with Yale Environment 360, Stoknes says, “What we know from psychological 
studies is that if you overuse fear-inducing imagery, what you get is fear and 
guilt in people, and this makes people more passive, which counteracts 
engagement.”

This link between engagement and efficacy is underscored by the results of 
virtual reality experiments carried out by Stanford University, where 
individuals are immersed in virtual reality nature settings and then asked to 
carry out tasks like cutting down trees. The effects of these experiments have 
proven to create both striking and long-lasting positive changes in the 
participants’ behavior relating to environmental issues.

An article 
<http://qz.com/237344/scientists-have-discovered-how-to-make-people-to-care-about-climate-change/>
 explaining the experience sums it up quite neatly: “humans’ willingness to 
shift behavior is directly correlated to our sense of control.”

It makes sense. If we feel afraid and innefectual, there is little motivation 
to act. What good would it do? The task seems too great; the chance of success, 
too slim.

Surprisingly, although increasing our sense of control works to increase 
eco-friendly behaviour, focusing purely on the effects ofindividual action 
(like I tend to in this column, ahem) often proves quite ineffective in 
motivating people to act.

To put it bluntly, a recent study 
<https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/05/160505085721.htm> found that 
“thinking about climate change from a personal perspective produced little to 
no change in behavior”.

What did work? When researchers framed climate change within the framework of 
collective responsibility. Respondents consistently demonstrated a greater 
dedication to environmental issues (measured by the amount they were willing to 
donate to fight climate change) when considering collective causes of and 
solutions to climate change, instead of their own individual actions.

Similarly, a separate series of studies 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016/01/04/psychologists-have-discovered-the-secret-to-making-people-care-about-climate-change/>
 conducted over a two-year period indicated that asking participants to 
consider what kind of legacy they hoped to leave behind caused an increase in 
what the researchers call “helping behaviour”, especially regarding 
environmental causes. In essence, being asked to consciously think about the 
way they would be remembered by future generations caused people to act in more 
environmentally-friendly ways.

What these peeks into our psychological landscapes reveal is that we like to 
have an effect on the world around us. We like to have control, make our mark, 
and be remembered in a positive light. We like to work together, rather than 
feeling like fate of the world rests solely on our imperfect shoulders.

Perhaps most importantly – especially for those embedded within the 
often-depressing world of the environmental movement – there needs to be a 
light at the end of the tunnel. It’s not enough to count the species lost to 
extinction or measure the melting ice caps; there must be stories that go 
beyond the damage we’ve already done. We need stories about how to repair this 
earth, regenerate lost landscapes and reclaim dead ecosystems. Indeed, in his 
interview, Stoknes argues that rather than wallowing in morose pessimism, we 
need to be doing a far better job of spinning the story.

Environmentalism needs to be identified as more than just a good deed and 
called what it is – an incredible opportunity. There will always be small 
segments of the population who will be eco-friendly even when its expensive, 
inconvenient or unpopular, but for the rest, we need a far better sales pitch.

“We need to flip the barriers over so they become successful strategies,” says 
Stoknes. “Rather than doom, we need to emphasize the opportunities that the 
crisis affords us.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is an opportunity for 
economic development – an entire energy system has to be redesigned from the 
wastefulness of the previous century to a much smarter mode of doing things. 
It’s a great opportunity to improve global collaboration and knowledge sharing 
and to create a more just society.”

So, what’s it going to take? Now we know. An expanded focus and a shifting 
story: identifying opportunities, not just consequences. Cultivating stories of 
resilience, rather than catastrophy. Championing collective responsibility, 
rather than lone do-gooders against the world.

And hope. Above all, it’s going to take a hell of a lot of hope.

 