
A number of commentators – including one in the Guardian this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/vital-signs/2014/sep/15/climate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment>
 – have suggested that refugee law and protections should be extended to 
include people affected by climate change. But many Pacific islanders 
explicitly reject the idea of “climate refugee” status.

 On the face of it, that seems like a strange decision. Kiribati’s president 
Anote Tong has predicted that rising sea levels will make the island nation 
uninhabitable in 30-60 years. Aren’t many Pacific islands facing climate 
impacts that mean their citizens will have to move?

Despite that, last week President Tong told ABC News: 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-09-05/pacific-islanders-reject-calls-for-27climate-refugee27-status/5723078>


“I have never encouraged the status of our people being refugees … We have to 
acknowledge the reality that with the rising sea, the land area available for 
our populations will be considerably reduced and we cannot accommodate all of 
them, so some of them have to go somewhere, but not as refugees.”

There are a number of reasons why “climate refugee” status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/vital-signs/2014/sep/15/climate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment>
 does not make sense for people who might have to move.

Legally, the idea of a “climate refugee” is contentious. It currently has no 
standing in international law. And even if it did, the concept would be fraught 
with problems.

When people move because of the impacts of climate change, they tend to move 
within their own country. This is clear from testimonies of people fleeing 
recent disasters in the Philippines:

“I lost one of my grandchildren and my younger sister. Early the next morning, 
rescue workers came with boats and they took us to an evacuation centre.” –
ShelterBox / Reuters 
<http://www.trust.org/item/20130214164700-xrwmo/?source=search>

“We were trapped in the house for two days until someone came and rescued us 
in a boat, and we were taken to the local gymnasium which was being used as an 
evacuation centre. We stayed there for a week but it was so crowded that we 
decided to leave and go back to the ruins of our house.” –ReliefWeb 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/philippines/governor-typhoon-hit-philippines-province-appeals-aid-extension>

These testimonies are a good illustration of the evidence on movement during 
disasters. People move very short distances, without crossing international 
borders and often return to their homes as soon as possible. A modified Refugee 
Convention would be of no use to them.

Slowly unfolding disasters like droughts, changing rainfall and 
desertification create different patterns of movement. It is often internal, 
and often from the countryside to cities. When peopledo cross a border, it is 
often to find work. Although climate change might be among the factors causing 
their movement, their primary motivator is employment. For many this can be a 
vital escape route. Though many see the situation in cities as being equally 
desperate to the situations they are fleeing. Takethis testimony is from a 
Colombian farmer <http://www.irinnews.org/printreport.aspx?reportid=99504> 
affected by changing rainfall patterns:


Rains recently have been very intense – very intense… We don’t want to leave 
our land: here are our past, our memories, our ancestors. We don’t want to move 
to other parts, we don’t know what to do there. We would turn into delinquents. 
We’d enter into a cycle of poverty which happens in the cities.

Protecting these people means two things: making sure they can move to find 
work legally if they want to, and making sure the places and work are safe. In 
these requirements lie a much bigger question of urban development that cannot 
be fixed by altering the Refugee Convention.

Rightly or wrongly the term “refugee” conjures powerful images. Tended camps; 
people moving in urgent distress; leaving their homes and walking huge 
distances. Powerful photos of theZa’arti refugee camp in Syria 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syrian_Civil_War#mediaviewer/File:An_Aerial_View_of_the_Za%27atri_Refugee_Camp.jpg>
 spring to mind when you say the word “refugee.” In the Pacific, it also brings 
to mindimages of people making desperate ocean crossing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/04/australia-indonesia-unite-distressed-boat>
 to gain entry to Australia. The media is awash with photos of people huddled 
in small boats. The desperation and drama is inescapable.

Across the world, refugees encounter racism and discrimination. Host 
governments often do little to challenge this. In the UK, we continue to 
imprison people seeking asylum. The rise of far-right parties across developed 
countries has fueled anti-refugee sentiment. In the Pacific, the Australian 
government has drawnsharp criticism from human rights campaigners and academics 
 <https://www.newsouthbooks.com.au/books/facts-about-refugees/>over its 
treatment of refugees and asylum seekers.

So the prospect of becoming a refugee comes with a lot of baggage. This is a 
tragic reality. But it explains why many people do not like the term “climate 
refugee” and why they do not see the creation of climate-refugee status as a 
good solution.

So what is the answer? Many civil society groups within the Pacific talk about 
migration with dignity. In practice, this can mean a number of things. It could 
involve planned relocation, where entire communities move together. Cultural 
practices, family connections and customs are maintained and the community is 
reestablished in a safer location. Or it can mean migration bit by bit and 
integration into new communities. Many people from Pacific island nations are 
already working and studying abroad. Some see the continuation of this trend as 
the solution.

As Ursula Rakova, an environmental campaigner from the Carteret Islands 
<http://ourworld.unu.edu/en/how-to-guide-for-environmental-refugees>, puts it: 
“Our plan is one in which we remain as independent and self-sufficient as 
possible. We wish to maintain our cultural identity and live sustainably 
wherever we are.”

Alex Randall <https://twitter.com/alex_randall> runs the Climate Change and 
Migration Coalition <http://climatemigration.org.uk/>, a network of refugee and 
migration NGOs with a shared concern about climate change. He has written 
widely on migration and climate change issues and is lead author on theMoving 
Stories report. 
<http://climatemigration.org.uk/moving-stories-report-the-voices-of-people-who-move-in-the-context-of-environmental/>

The Vital Signs <https://www.theguardian.com/vital-signs> platform is funded by
Avery Dennison, Domtar and Chiquita.All content is editorially independent 
except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 