
Our political system is in crisis. In the wake of the expenses scandal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/mps-expenses>, respect for our elected 
representatives is too low. Sitting in the modern equivalent of rotten 
boroughs, MPs are finding it increasingly difficult to engage with the public. 
Add declining voter turnout and the plummeting membership of political parties 
to the mix, and it's clear that reform is desperately needed. What could be 
more important than ensuring that our systems of government and of holding 
power to account are fully fit and functional?

And yet reform of how we are governed and by whom remains almost exclusively 
in the hands of those already in power. Turkeys don't tend to vote for 
Christmas any more than ducks do. So it's perhaps not a surprise that the 
proposals for change they have put forward since the Telegraph exposures in May 
don't cut the mustard. Too little and a little late. The lack of meaningful 
action has left a disillusioned electorate wanting change but feeling powerless 
to make it happen. We need to open the system up to fresh, new voices and views.

When Comic Relief was started in the 1980s, it faced similar challenges about 
engaging people. People knew and were moved by the heart-breaking effect 
desperate poverty and environmental challenges were having on their fellow men 
and women at home and abroad. They saw it, in some form or another, every day 
on the news. But they felt powerless as individuals to change the situation. 
Back then, people questioned the juxtaposition of comedy with serious issues, 
the seamless televisual segue from stand-up to starvation. But experience has 
shown that, done right, the power of entertainment to engage people to think 
deeper about issues that are of common concern and to act in concert to address 
them can work and work well. Comic Relief has played a vital part in changing 
the attitude of a generation towards their own ability to change their world.

The Open Up campaign <http://www.openupnow.org/> hopes to harness this power 
once again. Politics affects every one of us every day, but it's well 
documented that all of us, and especially the young, feel increasingly 
alienated from its workings. We want to open up politics in two key ways – 
first we want people to reclaim their stake in the process, and demand change. 
"My vote doesn't count" is a common and irritating refrain – given every vote 
has equal weight, that state of affairs should at least worry mathematicians.

Second, through our call for open primaries 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/politics/article6886256.ece>, we want to 
open up the pool of people who are ready to take on an even greater role in the 
process of holding power to account, and represent their communities as MPs. We 
also want every current MP who wants to stand in the next general election to 
stand for selection again.

I'm confident about Open Up for a couple of reasons. First, because we have an 
amazingElectoral Commission <http://www.electoralcommission.org.uk/> who can 
turn around a national election in a month, so surely primaries can be 
organised in the projected period before the next general election. The cost 
involved is a relatively small price to pay for better government.

But second and perhaps more important, is that one of the lessons Comic Relief 
has taught me is that people really do care about other people as well as 
themselves. Britain is a nation of volunteers, of generous donors to and 
passionate participants in community activities, causes and charities. Lately, 
this energy has been growing in Britain, but outside of traditional political 
structures. Imagine what would happen if it could be brought to bear now on how 
we are governed. The country faces unprecedented challenges – environmental, 
financial and social – overseas and closer to home.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8ZWInJ4uhrU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8ZWInJ4uhrU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8ZWInJ4uhrU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
If you haven't already seen the duck films we've put together, please do take 
a look – they are the Open Up campaign's attempt to engage attention and divert 
away from exhaustion and disillusionment towards empowerment. If you support 
the campaign to open up politics, please join me insigning the Open Up petition 
<http://www.openupnow.org/sign-up/> demanding open primaries.

I hope the Open Up message is a powerful one. Our talking ducks are as 
resistant to change as some of the sitting ducks in parliament, in part because 
they've feathered their nests and think they have a lot to lose. In fact they 
have a lot to gain. By opening up, by listening, by embracing reform, and by 
harnessing the extraordinary generosity, commitment and talent of the British 
people, they can help us all get to a place where politics can once again 
command all of our respect. We all need to engage and rebuild this respect in 
our politics and politicians.
 