
Jurassic World <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world> concludes 
with an epic, mano-a-mano free-for-all between two genetically-modified 
dinosaurs that do not seem to like each other. The outcome of the tussle is 
still very much in doubt when something totally unexpected occurs: the 
proverbial deus ex machina appears out of nowhere and brings the battle royale 
to a surprising conclusion. And that’s that.


 I found this finale so jarring and unexpected that I complained about it to 
my friend as we left the theatre. I felt like I’d been played.

 “Where the hell did that thing come from?” I asked, still very upset at the 
way the film had ended. “The movie didn’t do anything to set us up for that.”

 “Yes it did; they explained that while you were out in the hall,” my friend 
said. “You missed that sequence. But the movie does set up the ending.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Watch a video review of Jurassic World 
 This was amazing. I have been ducking out of movies to get more candy or 
answer phone calls or reply to texts or go to the loo for years, yet this was 
the first time I had ever missed something important. With good reason: Movies 
are filled with dead spots, padding, meaningless interludes, pointless detours, 
grace notes and extraneous subplots that you don’t have to see to follow the 
movie. There is nothing in any Adam Sandler or Fast and the Furious movie that 
will ruin the film-going experience for you if you miss it. You don’t need to 
see every frame of The Godfather or Gladiator or Avatar or even Sleepless in 
Seattle to see where things are headed.

 Movie-makers understand that the public sometimes needs to visit the bathroom 
or go get more popcorn, and their films are designed accordingly. With most 
films, you could miss huge segments of the movie and you wouldn’t miss anything 
important, at least not in the first 60 minutes. The same principle applies 
here as at Rolling Stones concerts when Mick leaves the stage and Keith does 
his two numbers: if you want another beer or a trip to the bathroom, now’s the 
time to go. Once they start playing Brown Sugar there won’t be any more 
ballads. Or songs by Keith.

But then I remembered a recent experience I’d had when my wife and I watched 
Ida. This was the black-and-white film that won the Oscar for best foreign 
film. In fact, it was the best film of 2014, foreign or otherwise. The 
bittersweet saga of a young Pole about to become a nun who suddenly discovers 
that she is Jewish,Ida <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ida> was sensitive, 
powerful, intoxicating and beautiful. I saw it not once but twice in the 
cinema. I loved it. Just loved it. I talked about it so much that my wife asked 
me to rent it so she could see for herself what all the fuss was about.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F23%2Foscars-2015-ida-wins-best-foreign-language-film-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F23%2F1424666347893%2Fcrop_KP_101366_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ida%20wins%20best%20foreign%20language%20Oscar%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F23%2Foscars-2015-ida-wins-best-foreign-language-film-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ida%20wins%20best%20foreign%20language%20Oscar%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F23%2Foscars-2015-ida-wins-best-foreign-language-film-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F23%2F1424666347893%2Fcrop_KP_101366_640x360.jpeg>
 Ida wins the best foreign language Oscar 
 I did, but there were problems. My wife likes to knit when she watches 
movies. It’s partly because she doesn’t think movies are such a big deal, but 
it’s mostly because she really likes knitting. I told her that it was 
impossible to knit and watch Ida at the same time because the film was in 
Polish and had English subtitles. So it wasn’t like baseball or soccer or Die 
Valkyrie or an Andy Murray match, where if you glanced away for a second – or 
even for a week – you weren’t likely to miss anything important. Francesca 
ignored me, the way she always ignores me. She was knitting socks for our 
daughter and that was the end of it.

 So we watched it. We watched as the young girl went off with her 
hard-drinking aunt to find out what happened to her family. We watched as she 
visited a lot of depressing Polish villages and spoke with a lot of depressing 
Polish farmers. Francesca mostly watched the film, but every so often she would 
glance away to look at the socks she was knitting. Then, about halfway through 
the film, she said:

 “Did I miss something?”

 “You mean the part where Ida finds out that her mother and father and little 
brother were murdered by the Polish farmers who were supposed to be protecting 
them?” I replied in my inimitably diplomatic fashion. “Yes, you did miss that.”

 She didn’t like my snippy tone, but she let it go for the moment. We resumed 
watching the film, which got better and better, and sadder and sadder, but not 
to the point that Francesca could ever completely set aside her knitting. Come 
hell or high water, she was sticking to her knitting. Towards the end of the 
film, she said, “What happened to Ida’s aunt?”

 “She jumped out the window and committed suicide,” I replied, my eyes never 
leaving the screen. “Like I said, you can’t multitask with foreign films.”

 I mention this incident not to criticise my wife, but to admit that I had 
just done the exact same thing when I went to see Jurassic World. I had 
multitasked the film by stepping out for a minute-and-a-half to answer the 
phone, and had thereby missed an integral element of the story. An element so 
vital that missing it would make the ending of the film seem arbitrary and 
dishonest and cheap. But I had missed it. True, the odds that those 90 seconds 
would be pivotal to my fully understanding the film’s ending were microscopic. 
And yet, that is exactly what happened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fdont-look-away-now-the-crucial-movie-moments-you-cant-afford-to-miss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435916682010%2Fd01be55b-bdcf-4fc2-afe9-594c470bbeda-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don't%20look%20away%20now%3A%20the%20crucial%20movie%20moments%20you%20can't%20afford%20to%20miss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fdont-look-away-now-the-crucial-movie-moments-you-cant-afford-to-miss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%27t%20look%20away%20now%3A%20the%20crucial%20movie%20moments%20you%20can%27t%20afford%20to%20miss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fdont-look-away-now-the-crucial-movie-moments-you-cant-afford-to-miss%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435916682010%2Fd01be55b-bdcf-4fc2-afe9-594c470bbeda-1020x612.jpeg>
 Then I had an unnerving thought. I have seen hundreds and hundreds of movies 
in the cinema over the course of my lifetime. No, probably thousands. What if I 
had also missed crucial segments in some of these films because I had stepped 
out for a few seconds? Maybe Kirk Douglas did something really bad to Jennifer 
Jones – like cannibalised the entire family – while I was out buying popcorn 
when I saw Spartacus? Maybe I wasn’t supposed to feel sorry for Spartacus when 
he gets crucified at the end of the film. Maybe he got exactly what he had 
coming to him.

Other possibilities occurred to me. Maybe I was out buying candy when Robert 
Shaw ate the shark’s mother inJaws <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jaws>. 
Maybe Shaw’s horrific demise was pure poetic justice. Maybe he deserved to 
become the shark’s lunch. And maybe I missed the 90 seconds in Braveheart where 
Mel Gibson lops off a little English kid’s head and uses it as a soccer ball, 
meaning that his hideous death by hanging, drawing and quartering at the end of 
the film is something he fully deserved.

Jaws, 40 years on: ‘One of the truly great and lasting classics of American 
cinema’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/31/jaws-40-years-on-truly-great-lasting-classics-of-america-cinema>
Maybe I was out of the room in Casablanca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/casablanca> when you find out that Humphrey 
Bogart is secretly a Gestapo agent. Maybe I was out buying candy when the 
director of Gone with the Wind explains that the Confederates were really, 
really great guys with fabulous clothes and wonderful accents and that slavery 
wasn’t as bad as it seemed to be on the surface. (Actually, that is the basic 
message of Gone with the Wind. But you can see what I’m driving at here.)

 Movies I had seen before I became a critic did not concern me; if I missed 
something important in The House on Haunted Hill or From Russia with Love orThe 
Nutty Professor <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HQ2dJnVqd6g> as a kid, nobody 
got harmed as a result. But what if I, as a critic, had unfairly criticised 
motion pictures that seemed to have stupid or unsatisfactory endings, oblivious 
to the fact that I had been out of the room during the two minutes when the 
denouement was foreshadowed, the two minutes that would make the ending seem 
not only justified but brilliant?

Maybe I missed the pivotal 90 seconds in The Chronicles of Riddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101912/chronicles.of.riddick> where the 
true genius of the film becomes apparent. Maybe I missed the illuminating 90 
seconds inBruno <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/10/film-review-bruno>
 and A Million Ways to Die in the West andGigli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96687/gigli> that made them seem clever 
and ingenious and morally uplifting, and not stupid and offensive.

US critic: 'undeniably racist' Gone with the Wind should be banned from cinemas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/25/us-critic-deniably-racist-gone-with-the-wind-should-be-banned-from-cinemas>
 The ramifications were horrifying. Maybe I only thought Anchorman 2 was 
idiotic because I missed a pivotal scene in the first 60 minutes where Will 
Ferrell discusses state-subsidised hypothalamus transplants with Christina 
Applegate. Maybe I only thoughtThe Lone Ranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/08/the-lone-ranger-review> was 
stupid because I was out of the room when the director explained that the 
construction of the railroads in the 19th century was pivotal to the 
development of modern mass-transit systems everywhere. Maybe I only thought 
John Carter was moronic because I missed the sequence where the hero explains 
Werner Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle.

 The implication was obvious: I would have to go back and watch every film I 
had ever panned to see if I had missed something that made the film seem 
brilliant. Every Vin Diesel movie. Every Drew Barrymore movie. Every film 
starring Steven Seagal, Jean-Claude Van Damne, Sly Stallone. Otherwise, I must 
come clean and admit that my long career as a critic was a sham.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Fanchorman-2-cast-will-ferrell-paul-rudd-steve-carell-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F12%2F16%2F1387204714142%2FAnchorman-2-stars-Will-Fe-020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anchorman%202%20cast%3A%20'Its%20second%20life%20has%20been%20extraordinary'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Fanchorman-2-cast-will-ferrell-paul-rudd-steve-carell-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anchorman%202%20cast%3A%20%27Its%20second%20life%20has%20been%20extraordinary%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Fanchorman-2-cast-will-ferrell-paul-rudd-steve-carell-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F12%2F16%2F1387204714142%2FAnchorman-2-stars-Will-Fe-020.jpg>
 I took a look at some of the films I would have to watch a second time. 
Cowboys & Aliens. Mars Needs Moms. Showgirls. Rocky V.

 And that’s when I made up my mind.

 I admit that my career as a critic is a complete sham.
 