
As deliberate as a thought, or as primal as a cry, drawing can be many things. 
It can describe something seen or felt, and it can be a thing in itself, 
without reference to the visible world.

There are all kinds of drawings here, from the tense, wiry lines of Mira 
Schendel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/sep/29/mira-schendel-tate-modern-review>
 to the warped perspective of aRichard Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2013/mar/14/richard-wright-stellar-art-rembrandt>
, in which a tilted horizon forever curves away. Looking at it feels like 
floating or diving. Look long enough and you feel you are being led over the 
horizon by his succession of little gold-leaf marks to disappear in the 
emptiness of the white paper. In some of the works here, I imagine the artist 
poring over the paper for hours. Others appear as accidental and as sudden as a 
sneeze.

Sculptor Richard Deacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/feb/03/richard-deacon-sculpture-tate-britain-review>
, who has spent the last couple of yearsselecting this show 
<http://drawingroom.org.uk/exhibitions/abstract-drawing>, starts his 
introductory essay with the simple thought that all drawing is, in some sense, 
abstract. It is all just marks on a surface. Abstraction has many levels, both 
conceptually and in terms of execution. At once a language and a thing, drawing 
is as marvellous and mysterious as it can be plain and clear. One might quibble 
that the small, delectableAnish Kapoor <http://anishkapoor.com> drawings, the 
pastels byJohn Golding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/apr/12/john-golding> and the 
work byJackson Pollock  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CrVE-WQBcYQ>are really 
paintings rather than drawings, and thatDom Sylvester Houédard 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/17/arts/design/the-eccentric-monk-and-his-typewriter.html>
's works made with a typewriter are really concrete poetry, but what the hell. 
Drawing, after all, is everywhere.

The pleasures of this exhibition are as various as the works themselves. Paper 
carved into with a knife byGordon Matta-Clark 
<http://mattaclark.pulitzerarts.org>, pinpricked by Anni Albers 
<http://albersfoundation.org>, spat at with a spray gun by John Latham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jan/07/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
 and walked over by a cat (though the cat's contribution to one ofAlison Wilding
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/oct/08/alison-wilding-sculptor-portrait>
's drawings is no more than an accidental aside), are just some of the material 
gambits here.

This is very much a personal choice by Deacon, and takes us from the early 
20th century and the spiritual notebooks of Swedish artistHilma af Klint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/mar/14/2>, via a tiny suprematist 
drawing byMalevich 
<http://www.stedelijk.nl/en/exhibitions/kazimir-malevich-and-the-russian-avant-garde>
 – little more than a cursory notation on a scrap of yellowed paper – to a 1951 
Jackson Pollock, in which Pollock used the marks that had seeped through a 
drawing on porous mulberry paper on to the sheet below, leaving a pattern of 
fuzzy-edged blots, which he then worked over with white gouache. Pollock's 
drawing almost, but never quite, resolves itself into an image. Looking at it, 
I find myself resisting the urge to find figures, or a view, in the way that we 
see faces in clouds. This urge happens unwilled and is probably hardwired into 
our brains.
 Frontal as a punch … Untitled, Richard Serra's paintstick drawing from 2009. 
Photograph: FXP 
There are drawings so small and delicate you have to press your nose to the 
glass to see them. TheRichard Serra 
<http://www.courtauld.ac.uk/gallery/exhibitions/2013/serra/index.shtml> is as 
frontal as a punch. It keeps coming at you. It is about the size of a head. But 
as I look, it starts reversing itself, and I start to see it as a cavernous 
hole. The shape slews towards one edge of the paper, and here and there the 
greasy crumb of the oil stick leaves smudgy traces on the heavy paper. Around 
the corner is a big black square of closely hatched lines drawn over thin grey 
wash, bySam Messenger 
<http://drawingroom.org.uk/drawingbiennial2013/drawing/Sam-Messenger_untited-veil>
. Around its border are numerous little marks, where the artist had to clear 
the clogged nib of his pen. These flecks are more than mere residue. They give 
the eye relief, somewhere to go beyond the repetitive, insistent labour of the 
square itself. There's something touching about them.

There are drawings here that must have taken hours, days, even weeks to make. 
Others were a matter of minutes, or a moment. The tiny Malevich drawing 
probably took a minute or two. The spray of inky dots by John Latham took 
exactly one timed second, using a spray gun on a bit of primed wood. There's 
not much to it. But there doesn't need to be much to detain us and keep us 
looking. You could spend hours here. How compelling it all is.
 Unknowable … Eva Hesse's untitled ink on paper work from 1965. Photograph: 
Estate of Eva Hesse/Hauser & Wirth 
Hilma af Klint's 1906-9 sketchbook drawings, with their spiralling pencil 
tornados capture a hurtling, breathless, almost furious sense of exaltation. 
Iranian artistMonir Shahroudy Farmanfarmaian <http://vimeo.com/22145323>'s 
Geometric Design with Mirror feels like a section from an endlessly 
proliferating pattern that keeps on going beyond the confines of the paper. The 
wonder is all in the geometry. Drawing with painted tape directly on the wall,
Victoria Haven <http://vichaven.com> presents us with two open forms whose 
folds and joins articulate impossible figures that flex about themselves. It is 
as if they were talking back to the viewer. Something similar happens in Tomma 
Abts's drawings, and inEva Hesse 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/artists/34/eva-hesse/images-clips/>'s oddly jointed 
forms – they are like looking at button-holes, the turn of a collar or the fall 
of a sleeve. But that's not quite right. They're too unknowable, and I wallow 
in what she leaves undescribed.

Some drawings here are like places: Emma McNally 
<http://www.thedrawingsuite.com/emma-mcnally.htm>'s huge black work engulfs the 
viewer in darkness. Amorphous voids loom. Get up close and what looks like 
spatter resolves into thousands of perfect circles and jangling repetitive 
marks, all subsumed in a kind of darkness. You can really lose yourself here. 
Maybe the artist is trying to lose herself, too.

Repetitive mark-making, whether made by hand, generated by computer or 
produced with typewriters, is the theme of a number of works. OneLothar Götz 
<http://www.contemporaryartsociety.org/artist-members/lothar-gotz/> 
coloured-pencil drawing looks like shot silk. Another, with its gouache and 
silver pencil lines, all radiating from two points, pitches and yaws as you 
look. The eye can never be still.

Looking at a drawing can lead us into a process of deciphering and describing, 
but also to inhabiting that imaginary space in front of us, and wandering off 
into its marks and empty passages. There were no ballpoint pens in the middle 
ages or felt tips to decorate the caves, but we can still respond to drawing as 
if it were all made yesterday. I find it hard to look at drawings without 
wanting to go off and start making some myself. It's a temptation that's hard 
to resist.Drawing <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/drawing> can lead 
us to places we don't expect, so much so I end up feeling like an abstraction 
myself.
 