
A retired Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
inspector appointed to help with community recovery following Dreamworld’s 
fatal accident says his long-term goal is to restore international trust.

Disaster recovery expert Mike McKay, who spent 41 years in the Queensland 
police service, accepted the position on Thursday after a personal 
recommendation from the state’s police commissioner, Ian Stewart.

He said his first order of business was understanding the logistics of the 
tragedy which claimed four lives.

Dreamworld tragedy victims remembered as 'wonderful people'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/dreamworld-tragedy-victims-remembered-as-wonderful-people>
“It’s a very hard and long process,” McKay said outside the park on Sunday. 

The aftermath of the accident was still “very raw”, he said, for both the 
families of the victims and staff.

“It is the death of a soul and what we need to do is ensure, without a doubt, 
that something like this doesn’t happen again to the best of our ability.

“I’ve been brought in to look at the holistic approach as to how we can best 
get things back to some normalcy at some stage,” Mckay said.

McKay helped support residents of the Lockyer Valley after the 2011 flood 
disaster when a wall of water ripped through the area, and in far north 
Queensland after cyclone Larry in 2006.

The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk>, said it was 
reassuring Ardent Leisure had appointed McKay, who she said had “tremendous 
experience”.

She also said a safety blitz on Queensland’s theme parks and shows, which 
began on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/29/dreamworld-tragedy-safety-blitz-announced-for-states-theme-parks>
, would be important in ensuring all rides were audited and up to standard.

“We need to make sure that families have the confidence to continue to go to 
amusement parks,” she said.

Dreamworld <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/dreamworld> CEO, Craig 
Davidson, said McKay would develop a “comprehensive community engagement and 
recovery program”.

He will work with families, the government, emergency services and 
non-government organisations.

“This rebuilding program is firstly about commencing the healing process,” 
Davidson said. “Secondly, it is about rebuilding trust and confidence in 
Dreamworld.”

McKay said existing community support was already significant.

“We appreciate that we need to show the world – and it is an international 
situation – that this is going to be a safe, happy and comfortable place for 
them to come back to,” he said.

Hundreds of people have continued to pay their respects at the site, leaving a 
blanket of flowers at the entrance.

Four trees will be planted for each of the victims - Kate Goodchild, her 
brother Luke Dorsett, his partner Roozi Araghi and Sydney woman Cindy Low – as 
part of a permanent memorial.
 