
Campaigners angered at the paucity of roles for east Asian actors in Hollywood 
havelaunched a petition calling for Scarlett Johansson to be dismissed 
<http://www.thepetitionsite.com/683/366/733/dreamworks-dont-whitewash-japanese-films/?z00m=22503826>
 from the forthcoming US remake of classic anime Ghost in the Shell.

The campaign on thepetitionsite.com <http://www.thepetitionsite.com/>, which 
has picked up more than 15,000 signatures, calls for studio DreamWorks to 
replace her with an actor of Asian origin, and accuses Hollywood of 
“whitewashing”.

“The original film is set in Japan, and the major cast members are Japanese,” 
reads the petition. “So why would the American remake star a white actress? The 
industry is already unfriendly to Asian actors without roles in major films 
being changed to exclude them.

“DreamWorks could be using this film to help provide opportunities for 
Asian-American actors in a market with few opportunities for them to shine. 
Please sign the petition asking them to reconsider casting Scarlett Johansson in
Ghost in the Shell <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghost-in-the-shell> and 
select actors who are truer to the cast of the original film!”

Petition organiser Julie Rodriguez also cites a recent survey that suggests in 
2013, Asian characters made up only 4.4% of speaking roles in top-grossing 
Hollywood films 
<http://annenberg.usc.edu/sitecore/shell/Applications/Content%20Manager/~/media/MDSCI/Racial%20Inequality%20in%20Film%202007-2013%20Final.ashx?db=master&la=en&vs=1&ts=20140731T1347226383>
.

Johansson looks likely to play a character based on the cyborg detective, 
Major Motoko Kusanagi, a key figure in the original 1995 Ghost in the Shell 
film and the comic book series on which it is based. The US actor, whose star 
has risen following standout turns in Lucy and Marvel Studios’ Avengers series 
of superhero films, was reportedly offered $10m to take the role.
 The original Ghost in the Shell anime film 
It is not yet clear how far DreamWorks plans to alter the original, 
Japanese-set storyline of Ghost in the Shell, though Johansson’s inclusion 
hints that the action could be transferred to North America. Hollywood has been 
criticised in the past for casting white actors in east Asian roles, with M 
Night Shyamalan’s misfiring 2010 film The Last Airbender a notable recent 
example. The dubious tradition runs all the way back to 1956 epic The 
Conqueror, in which John Wayne starred as a suspiciously midwestern accented 
Genghis Khan, and 1961’s Breakfast at Tiffany’s, with a bucktoothed Mickey 
Rooney as the shamefully offensive Japanese caricature, IY Yunioshi.

More recently, Ridley Scott biblical epic Exodus: Gods and Kings was accused 
of whitewashing following the decision to cast famous white actors such as 
Christian Bale and Joel Edgerton in the lead roles, despite depicting events 
taking place in the Middle East and north Africa.
 