
This is a book about a girl called Darcy who goes to live with her dad in the 
snowy wilderness of Yellowstone National Park in the US. But she doesn’t want 
to be there and instead she wants to be back home in London, wearing makeup, 
hanging out with her friends and going to real school. She’s been sent to live 
in the wilderness because she has pneumonia and has been advised by doctors to 
breathe in fresh air.


She hates it, until she finds the bear. One day she’s really tired when she 
gets to the top of a cliff she’s climbing (and she’s not even meant to climb, 
because of her medical problems). Her doctor says that she shouldn’t get too 
cold or wet from the snow when she’s outside. So she sits on the ground for a 
bit knowing it’s a bad idea. Then she finds a cave at the top of the cliff, and 
a bear inside it!

The bear is a grizzly bear, an adult with a wound in her shoulder. It was 
walking along with her cubs, and the rangers shot her in the shoulder and took 
her babies away.

When I found that out I felt devastated and angry with the rangers. The bear 
is still injured when they first meet. Darcy is so tired that she just lays 
down with the bear without even realising it. The bear doesn’t do anything 
horrible to her and afterwards, in a bit of a trance, she can’t even believe 
that happened.

The next day she has an urge to go back to the bear because it’s so beautiful. 
She’s trying to help the bear get down its shoulder from the ledge but she 
can’t. She comes every day and feeds the bear.

I can’t tell anything else because I’m going to spoil the story for you. All 
I’ll tell you is it made me cry and it’s a beautifully written story. It’s all 
written in first person, which I like a lot. It’s inspired me quite a lot to 
write my own fan fiction of similar stories, or at least a similar beginning. 
Great book. I really think you should read it if you like animals and 
fantastic, really engrossing fiction. I’d recommend it for aged 10+.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/368766/> 
Want to tell the world about a book you’ve read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 