
As São Paulo, Brazil, suffers from the worst drought in its history, 
multinational pulp company Fibria, which is headquartered in the city, is one 
of many that has felt the pinch. At times,water has been shut off 
<http://sao-paulo.estadao.com.br/noticias/geral,sem-redutores-de-pressao-sabesp-ja-corta-agua-durante-o-dia-de-40-da-rede,1630881>
 to 40% of the city and even now, after the rainy season, only 6-13% of the 
city’sreservoir’s capacity 
<http://www.climate.gov/news-features/event-tracker/its-supposed-be-rainy-season-brazil-so-where-has-all-water-gone>
 has been filled. In response, the company is working to reduce the amount of 
water it uses for forest irrigation.

This isn’t the first time that Fibria has had to adapt to a shifting 
environment. Over the last several years, the rising scarcity of several 
essential resources – including water, fertilizer, labor and land – has pushed 
the company to reconsider its business model. It has diversified into renewable 
energy, biofuel production and sustainable real estate development. Fibria’s 
goal is tomake these portfolio additions 20% of total free cash flow by 2025 
<http://www.sustainability.com/library/model-behavior-ii#.Va_imGTVFbM>, making 
the company less pulp-dependent and giving it alternative options for future 
business growth in light of looming sustainability challenges.


It’s not hard to see why Fibria is adapting to sustainability challenges. Its 
business model, like those of many of the world’s largest companies, was forged 
at a time when climate change, urbanization, resource scarcity and rapid 
population growth weren’t mainstream concerns. As a result, companies were able 
to prioritize the financial bottom line above all else. Today, however, these 
external conditions have made it difficult for many companies to maintain the 
status quo.


Making urban life sustainable

According to Model Behavior II: Strategies to Rewire Business 
<http://www.sustainability.com/library/model-behavior-ii#.Va_imGTVFbM>, a 
report recently released bySustainAbility <http://www.sustainability.com/>, 
increased urbanization is a major trend driving sustainability. Today, half of 
the world’s population lives in urban areas;by 2050, that figure is expected to 
increase 
<http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/news/population/world-urbanization-prospects-2014.html>
 to 66%. As 2.5 billion more people move into cities, they’re likely to strain 
food security, infrastructure, waste management services and transportation 
networks. Their arrival will necessitate new housing with limited environmental 
impacts, shared living circumstances, and the ability to quickly and safely 
construct housing for growing populations.

Businesses are beginning to respond to these requirements. For example, the 
Broad Group <http://en.broad.com/>, a Chinese construction company, is updating 
its business model in response to challenges associated with Asia’s swift 
urbanization through green building. The company has been decreasing its 
environmental impact by developing 90% pre-fabricated, quick-stacking modules 
that it can use to buildsafe, energy-efficient multi-story buildings 
<http://www.sustainability.com/library/model-behavior-ii#.Va_jomTVFbN>. The 
buildings can filter 99% of particulate matter (PM2.5), an air pollutant, and 
are made to withstand a 9-magnitude earthquake.

The impact of accelerating urbanization will extend far beyond the boundaries 
of cities. As rural workers, lured by the promise of better opportunities, move 
to cities, their migration will affect companies that are dependent upon 
smallholder agriculture. These companies – includingNestle 
<http://www.nestle.com/csv/what-is-csv/women-empowerment/farmers>, Syngenta 
<http://www.sustainability.com/library/model-behavior-ii#.Va_jomTVFbN>, Mars Inc
 
<http://www.mars.com/global/about-mars/mars-pia/our-supply-chain/our-strategy-and-priorities.aspx>
 andMondelez International <http://www.cocoalife.org/> – have been forced to 
grapple with workforce instability, which could easily lead to supply 
instability. Not surprisingly, a growing number of companies are adopting an 
inclusive sourcing or sales model, in which multinationals invest in 
smallholder farmers to ensure supply or a steady customer base.

The costs and opportunities of climate change

The SustainAbility report also identifies climate change as a major trend that 
is affecting all aspects of corporate value chains, from sourcing to 
production, distribution and sales. Some industries, the report argues, will 
feel these strains earlier, creating a ripple effect to others. Corporate 
insurance premiums, for example, are likely to increase (or disappear all 
together) to match growing threats from more frequent catastrophic natural 
disasters, such as the Marchcyclone that devastated Vanuatu 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-31907871>, and sea level rise, currently 
threating many Small Island Developing States (SIDS) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/aug/29/small-island-states-climate-change-sea-level>
 such as Kiribati and the Maldives.

According to the Ceres Insurer Risk Report 
<http://www.ceres.org/resources/reports/insurer-climate-risk-disclosure-survey-report-scorecard-2014-findings-recommendations>
, global average annual weather-related losses increased more than tenfold in 
the last several decades – from $10bn per year in the period 1974-1983 to 
$131bn in 2004-2013 – while the proportion of those damages that are insured is 
steadily declining.


Companies are not the only ones witnessing and responding to these shifts. A 
cadre of institutional investors is calling for a transition to a more long 
term lens. For example, in April 2015, Larry Fink, the CEO of BlackRock, the 
world’s largest asset manager, wrote a letter to S&P CEOs asking them tostop 
focusing on short term results 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/larry-fink-letter-to-ceos-2015-4> “at the 
expense of long term value”. Even traditional hedge fund managers such as Paul 
Tudor Jones have expressed skepticism with the role of capital and capitalism 
in solving social inequalities and begun to look at how to address solutions 
through a lens ofjust capital <http://justcapital.com/>.

Other actors have also called for a transition to a longer term outlook. The 
B20, the business forum that advises G20 governments, released a report last 
year that highlighted the importance of policymakers when it comes totackling 
the structural gap 
<http://www.pwc.com/en_GX/gx/capital-projects-infrastructure/assets/pwc-b20-investment-infrastructure.pdf>
 in infrastructure investment. The report explicitly cited the need to refocus 
investment horizons in favor of longer term returns.

Some large institutional investors have also moved toward longer term thinking.
Calpers <https://www.calpers.ca.gov/>, for example, the California retirement 
fund for public employees, in Marchchanged its investment policies to reflect 
sustainability in decision making 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/25/business/dealbook/the-thorny-task-of-advocating-good-corporate-behavior.html?_r=0>
. At the same time, somefoundations <http://gofossilfree.org/commitments/> and 
major universities, such asStanford 
<http://news.stanford.edu/news/2014/may/divest-coal-trustees-050714.html> and 
Georgetown University 
<http://www.georgetown.edu/news/sustainability-policy-regarding-investments.html>
, have divested from companies with poor environmental performance.

Evolving market conditions are, increasingly, rewarding companies that act 
quickly to adapt their outlook beyond the next quarter. For example, when 
Novelis, thelargest producer of rolled aluminum 
<http://www.novelis.com/en-us/Pages/Home.aspx>, faced financial instability 
after insufficient hedging against volatile prime aluminum prices, the company 
turned this constraint into an opportunity. Now Novelis is in a unique 
position. From 2011 to 2014, it used 33%-46% scrap aluminum; in the next 
decade, it’s on track to use 80% scrap – the largest percentage ofrecycled 
aluminum content 
<http://www.sustainability.com/library/model-behavior-ii#.Va_jomTVFbN> in the 
industry.

As external conditions make it difficult for large companies to generate the 
same level of profit over the long term, business model innovation for 
sustainability will become increasingly essential. Business leaders who respond 
to and harness these external forces to drive innovation will have a distinct 
advantage in the future.
 