
The winner

In the battle of the big US comedies, Due Date, from The Hangover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/jun/16/the-hangover-british-box-office>
 director Todd Phillips, has emerged victorious overJackass 3D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/nov/04/jackass-3d-film-review>. The 
road-trip comedy opened with £2.35m, not so very far behind The Hangover's 
debut of £2.75m (plus £444,000 in previews) in June 2009. The result is good 
news for lead actors Robert Downey Jr andZach Galifianakis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/05/zach-galifianakis-the-hangover>: 
following his success in Iron Man and Sherlock Holmes, properties that had the 
benefit of pre-existing awareness, Downey can now be seen as bankable in an 
original-screenplay comedy; meanwhile Galifianakis, no one-trick pony, has 
proved himself outside The Hangover. Due Date's opening is the biggest for a 
male-driven comedy in 2010. The Other Guys, starring Will Ferrell, debuted with 
£1.98m in September; Grown Ups, with Adam Sandler and friends, began its run in 
August with £2m including £528,000 in previews; Russell Brand and Jonah Hill's 
Get Him to the Greek kicked off in June with £1.57m including £495,000 in 
previews; and Steve Carell and Paul Rudd's Dinner for Schmucks takes up the 
rear with a September start of £941,000 including £296,000 in previews. Due 
Date's debut augurs well forThe Hangover 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/oct/19/hangover-2-cameo-mel-gibson>
, due in cinemas in May 2011.

The runner-up

Although Jackass 3D, with an opening of £1.70m, was convincingly beaten into 
second place, backers Paramount will still be celebrating the result. Jackass: 
The Movie opened with a middling £574,000 back in March 2003, results improving 
when Jackass Number Two kicked off in November 2006 with £735,000 including 
£78,000 in previews. Jackass 3D has now more than doubled the debut takings of 
the second film. The result comes on the heels of a similar phenomenon just a 
week ago, when the addition of3D <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3d> to 
Saw witnessed the flagging horror franchise recover after the commercially puny 
Saw VI, in the process posting by far the best opening of any Saw movie.

The disappointment

The perils of remaking foreign-language films are suggested by a poor debut 
for Let Me in, from Cloverfield director Matt Reeves. Remakes of foreign films 
work best when the original remains relatively obscure, which washardly the 
case with Tomas Alfredson's Let the Right One in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/apr/12/let-the-right-one-in> (£1.10m at 
the UK box office). One method of achieving a different scale of film with a US 
remake is through the addition of A-list movie stars (Tom Cruise and Cameron 
Diaz in Vanilla Sky, for example), but that was hardly an option in this 
instance, due to the young age of the two main characters. Despite strong 
reviews for Let Me in, entirely merited, the film debuted with £488,000 from 
363 screens, including £61,000 in previews, for a weak £1,345 average. This 
compares with Let the Right One in's opening salvo of £224,000, including 
£21,000 in previews, from just 68 screens back in April 2009.

In fairness to Icon, the UK distributor of Let Me in, the opening here is 
pretty much in line with the film's US debut of $5.15m a month ago. That 
number, of course, was also a disappointment. Meanwhile Lionsgate, which has 
The Next Three Days starring Russell Crowe opening in January, will take 
comfort from the fact that the French film it's based on, Anything for Her, was 
little seen by UK audiences.

The arthouse hit

With his last three movies, Mike Leigh had been building steadily at the box 
office, at least as far as openings are concerned. In 2002, All Or Nothing 
debuted with £164,000 from 55 screens; three years later, Vera Drake kicked off 
with £266,000 from 65; then in 2008,Happy-Go-Lucky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/apr/20/culture.mikeleigh> did even 
better, with £385,000 (including £46,000 in previews) from 77. Given its 
rollout at 105 sites, you might expect an even better start for Leigh's latest 
film Another Year, so backers Momentum will be a tad disappointed with a debut 
of £356,000, including £28,000 in previews, especially given the almost 
universally strong reviews for the picture.

One factor may be the discrepancy between the mood of optimism conveyed by 
Happy-Go-Lucky, contrasted with the more sombre feel of Another Year, which 
significantly lacks a youthful major cast member. However, while the earlier 
film's protagonist Poppy (played by Sally Hawkins) proved an irritant to some 
audience members, creating a Marmite effect,Another Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/another-year> is likely to prove more 
universally appealing, especially to middle-aged couples whose contented 
lifestyles are so agreeably validated.

With awards season on its way, upscale audiences now have three strong choices 
at the cinema: Another Year, The Social Network and The Kids Are All Right. 
Between them, the trio grossed over £1m at the weekend.

The Bollywood battle

Diwali is traditionally a strong period for Indian cinema, and this year the 
festival saw Golmaal 3 go head to head with Action Replayy. The third film in 
the Golmaal comedy series opened with £260,000 from 55 screens, not far behind 
last month's debut of Tamil science fiction flick Endhiran: The Robot 
(£285,000). Time-travel romcom Action Replayy posted a reasonable opening of 
£155,000 from 57 locations.

The future

Although takings were 23% down on the previous weekend, the market overall 
rose 7% against the equivalent frame from 2009, when A Christmas Carol debuted 
at the top. Next weekend will be a different story: the week before Harry 
Potter & The Deathly Hallows Part 1 is one of the bleakest for new releases in 
recent memory, with the only big-studio contenders being sci-fi B-movie Skyline 
and Disney's Kristen Bell comedy You Again, which didn't exactly set tills 
ringing when it opened in the US in late September. Cinema owners will be 
tightening their belts for seven days until the arrival of the Potter cash 
avalanche.

Top 10 films

1. Due Date, £2,346,089 from 449 sites (New)

2. Jackass 3D, £1,696,909 from 373 sites (New)

3. Despicable Me, £1,177,507 from 516 sites. Total: £16,863,318

4. Saw 3D, £1,068,403 from 370 sites. Total: £6,408,080

5. Paranormal Activity 2, £687,747 from 403 sites. Total: £9,876,254

6. Red, £595,362 from 407 sites. Total: £5,553,877

7. The Social Network, £541,763 from 387 sites. Total: £9,029,931

8. Let Me in, £488,402 from 363 sites (New)

9. Another Year, £355,626 from 105 sites (New)

10. Burke and Hare, £333,637 from 374 sites. Total: £1,740,715

How the other openers did

Golmaal 3, 55 screens, £236,489 + £23,122 previews

Action Replayy, 57 screens, £154,911

Uthama Puthiran, 12 screens, £26,034

Mammoth, no figures available

Fit, no figures available

Red & White, no figures available
 