
The Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> Airlines help desk 
at Schiphol airport's terminal three remained emphatically closed on Friday 
morning, barricaded shut with additional movable walls. Only a bunch of white 
flowers behind the container hinted at the tragedy that has befallen Holland.

At 12:15pm on Thursday, Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh17> departed from 
this same gate carrying 298 people â€“ according to the latest information, 189 
of them were Dutch. None of them are thought of have survived the incident over 
Ukraine.

The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, released a statement on Tuesday night, 
saying: "I am deeply shocked by the tragic news about the crash of flight MH17 
of Malaysia Airlines from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur over Ukrainian territory. A 
lot is still unclear about the facts, circumstances and passengers."

The Dutch king, Willem-Alexander, also expressed his condolences  
<http://dc.the-netherlands.org/news/2014/07/statement-king-willem-alexander.html>
to the relatives of the victims, saying he was "deeply shocked" by the news. 
"We offer our deepest sympathy to the families, friends and colleagues of the 
victims and to those who are still uncertain if their loved ones were on board 
the plane." The traditional royal photo call to mark the start of the summer 
holidays on Friday was cancelled.

Friday's front page of de Volkskrant newspaper showed a picture of the 
wreckage at the crash site, underneath the headline: "One of the worst air 
disasters in Dutch history."

Yet on Friday morning at 8am, passengers were queuing up to check into another 
Malaysia Airlines flight bound for Kuala Lumpur. One couple in their 20s, who 
didn't want to give their names, said they felt "sad" about what had happened, 
and admitted they were a little bit scared about boarding their flight. But 
they were determined not to give up on their holiday, a trip around Indonesia 
and Sumatra.

Erik Elsenaar, an IT consultant waiting at Schiphol for his midday flight to 
Kuala Lumpur, told the Guardian he was feeling very calm: "This is something 
that never, never happens, and it's unlikely to happen again. It is a tragedy, 
but it doesn't look like the attack was either directed at Holland or Malaysia 
Airlines. You can see here that they've already doubled the security at 
check-in. They will probably triple the checks for bombs. It's definitely safer 
to travel now than it was to travel the day before yesterday."

Elsenaar said Malaysia Airlines staff hadn't mentioned the accident to him 
during check-in. "I expect this will add an hour extra to my flight, but that's 
it."

All across Amsterdam, the Dutch flag was hanging at half mast. Floor Reukers 
and Alex van den Akker, two students having a cigarette break by one of the 
canals, said they were shocked because everyone seemed to know someone who had 
recently been on the same flight route or was planning to fly that way soon. 
"My brother is flying to Kuala Lumpur in a few days," said Reukers, "and a 
friend of mine flew the same way last week."

Asked how they felt the Dutch government should react to the tragedy, Van den 
Akker said: "What happened was awful, and we are all thinking of the victims. 
But we are not going to call for the government to go and catch the 
perpetrators or go to war. We are not America."
 