
Remember Edge of Tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/01/edge-of-tomorrow-review-tom-cruise-emily-blunt-born-again-blockbuster>
 (Warner, 12), Doug Liman’s time warp thriller that, despite its slick 
cleverness and muscular, metallic clatter,underwhelmed at the box office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jun/09/us-box-office-the-fault-in-our-stars-edge-of-tomorrow>
 in June? If you don’t, that’s exactly what the studio is hoping for. Never has 
a blockbuster been asdrastically rebranded 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/edge-tomorrow-has-been-rebranded-live-die-repeat-h-208199>
 for DVD as this one, which now goes by the ungainly double-barrelled moniker
Live Die Repeat: Edge of Tomorrow, that sneaky colon optimistically implying a 
franchise that will never be. It’s not the first such change the film has 
endured, either: they might as well have stuck with itspre-release title, All 
You Need Is Kill 
<http://variety.com/2013/film/news/tom-cruise-thriller-all-you-need-is-kill-changes-to-edge-of-tomorrow-gets-comic-con-push-1200563120/>
. (What is the edge of tomorrow, anyway? Today?)

More’s the pity, since by any name, Liman’s film remains an exciting, 
conceptually rich hunk of mainstream sci-fi. Dismissed by some critics as “
Groundhog Day with aliens” – not an inaccurate description, but not an 
unappealing one either – its one-day-on-loop structure cannily channels the 
perfectionist drive of video-game culture.Tom Cruise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomcruise>, recently so stainless in his 
action vehicles, gets an unusually prickly, self-aware role as a demoted 
military figurehead forced to walk the talk when he’s sent to the front line, 
literally fighting the same extraterrestrial battle over and over until he’s 
worthy enough to survive it. Likewise,Edge of Tomorrow arrives on shelves 
reincarnated, renewed and battle-ready: it deserves another go.

I’m less inclined to lobby for an autumnal reappraisal of The Other Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/27/the-other-woman-review-cliched-women-on-top-revenge-comedy>
 (Fox, 12), a lacquered, would-be feminist farce that plays a little like the 
already light-headedFirst Wives Club on alcopops – but it’s not as toxic as its 
critical reputation. Cameron Diaz and Leslie Mann give it some comic snap as 
the mutually scorned mistress and wife of a Wall Street love rat who embark on 
a collaborative revenge mission, and its gender politics are often arrestingly 
strange, but the fizz flattens as the film succumbs to lowbrow pratfalls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F12%2Frepeat-edge-tomorrow-other-woman-grace-monaco-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F8%2F1412786860749%2Fa7308aa8-a777-4639-979e-35e21bcb8079-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=DVDs%20and%20downloads%3A%20Live%20Die%20Repeat%3A%20Edge%20of%20Tomorrow%2C%20The%20Other%20Woman%2C%20Grace%20of%20Monaco%2C%20Camille%20Claudel%201915%2C%20Chinese%20Puzzle%2C%20Goodbye%20Solo%20%E2%80%93%20and%20more%20%7C%20Guy%20Lodge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F12%2Frepeat-edge-tomorrow-other-woman-grace-monaco-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=DVDs%20and%20downloads%3A%20Live%20Die%20Repeat%3A%20Edge%20of%20Tomorrow%2C%20The%20Other%20Woman%2C%20Grace%20of%20Monaco%2C%20Camille%20Claudel%201915%2C%20Chinese%20Puzzle%2C%20Goodbye%20Solo%20%E2%80%93%20and%20more%20%7C%20Guy%20Lodge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F12%2Frepeat-edge-tomorrow-other-woman-grace-monaco-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F8%2F1412786860749%2Fa7308aa8-a777-4639-979e-35e21bcb8079-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Astonishing’: Juliette Binoche in Camille Claudel 1915. Photograph: 
Allstar/CANAL+ 
Unreservedly deserving of its fatal reviews, however, is Grace of Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/08/grace-of-monaco-nicole-kidman-film-review-mark-kermode>
 (Warner, 12). Olivier Dahan’s stylistically unhinged Grace Kelly portrait is 
every bit as risible as you’ve heard, wafting as it does between Hitchcock 
meta-pastiche, Ferrero Rocher-wrappedPrincess Diaries fantasy and vacant 
historical reflection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jun/04/grace-of-monaco-nicole-kidman-historically-accurate>
 on Charles de Gaulle’s 1963 blockading of Monaco, in which the rights of 
French tax evaders are defended with riotously impassioned verve.Nicole Kidman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolekidman>, committed if brazenly miscast, 
survives it. You might not.

Dahan’s folly looks even more like frippery when placed beside Camille Claudel 
1915 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/22/camille-claudel-1915-review-artist-life-asylum>
 (Soda, PG), fellow Frenchman Bruno Dumont’s very different idea of a tortured 
artiste biopic. A measured, selective snapshot of the eponymous sculptor in 
decline, set two years after she was unjustly institutionalised by her family, 
it’s as tonally dour and formally severe as you’d expect from the director, 
with real mentally ill patients making up the majority of the cast. It’s
Juliette Binoche <https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliette-binoche>’s 
astonishing, open-hearted lead turn that makes the impressively hard graft 
worthwhile.

One wonders how the perma-glowing Audrey Tautou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audrey-tautou> would fare under Dumont’s 
chilly control, but she’s on agreeably familiar turf inChinese Puzzle 
(StudioCanal, 15), a sprightly, primary-coloured closer to director Cédric 
Klapisch’s loose trilogy of globe-trotting romantic comedies. This time we’re 
in the Big Apple, where Tautou is one of several markedly pretty expats on a 
bed-hopping carousel; the stakes are low and leisurely, the comedy droll, the 
result a bright, chicdivertissement.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU5IGC59Q9y8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU5IGC59Q9y8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU5IGC59Q9y8&media=>
The virtual bargain bins of online streaming outlets are often clogged with 
ominous no-name castoffs, but nestled amid the more hilarious Z-list offerings 
in Blinkbox’s99p rental section 
<http://www.blinkbox.com/movies/special-offers/99p-rentals-(454)> – I’ve 
already bookmarkedAngel Dog, in which the title is applied quite literally, for 
future viewing – are some unexpected diamonds that you won’t find on Netflix. 
The pick of the lot is American director Ramin Bahrani’s moving 2008 miniature
Goodbye Solo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/11/goodbye-solo-film-review>, in 
which a crusty, elderly loner in North Carolina hires a gabby Senegalese taxi 
driver to ferry him to his intended suicide spot. It’s a disarming story of 
diverted destiny; a more grounded take, one might say, on living, dying and 
repeating.
 