
Father's Day <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fathers-day> beckons, 
and DVD shelves are laden with even more stubbly, gung-ho new releases than 
usual; if your dad likes films with multiple speaking parts for women, you'd 
best do some digging. The classiest option from the Man Pack, by some distance, 
isTrue Detective <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-detective> 
(Warner, 18), the southern gothicpolicier from HBO that has dominated 
water-cooler conversation (whatever that might be) this year.

Catching up to it late, I find myself coolly understanding the hype. The 
looped, fractured timeline of this long-term serial-killer chase is a thing of 
playful beauty, as is the tremendous performance ofincumbent Oscar champ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/03/matthew-mcconaughey-oscars-best-actor-dallas-buyers-club>
 Matthew McConaughey as Rust Cohle, a transplanted Texan cop now sullenly 
working the Louisiana homicide beat. Riffing jauntily on the script's poetic 
bayou mysticism, he's an eccentric foil for the terser, more straightforwardly 
superb Woody Harrelson. Without this inspired pairing, my reservations about 
the series's writing would be graver; as the episodes progress, the verbiage 
grows as rich and indigestible in large doses as foie gras. It's thrillingly 
smart, but also turgidly so.

Peter Berg's gruelling, grunting Afghanistan war study Lone Survivor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/02/lone-survivor-mark-kermode-review>
(Universal, 15) never gets more articulate than Mark Wahlberg's prize 
one-liner: "That's not a knife, that's a fucking duck." Dramatising the US 
military's failed 2005Operation Red Wings 
<http://www.esquire.co.uk/culture/article/5665/lone-survivor/> mission – the 
title's a bit of a spoiler – it conjures a visceral, panicked sensation of live 
combat, before giving in to star-spangled sentimentality. Still, it's 
considerably more rousing thanThe Monuments Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/monuments-men-review-george-clooney>
(Fox, 12), George Clooney's all-star snooze about the plucky second world war 
allies (read: America and her little friends) who rescued a bushel of priceless 
artworks from grasping Nazi hands. The most heated war in the film is the one 
between its tonal impulses: the half that wants to be a bouncyOcean's Eleven
-in-jackboots caper is thwarted by the half that fancies thishistorical footnote
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/20/monuments-men-reel-history-true-story>
 the stuff of stirring, speechy Oscar bait.
 Last Vegas: 'a grisly farce of grizzled senior stag-do high jinks'. 
Photograph: CBS Films/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
There's more wit and political brio in Brazilian action craftsman José 
Padilha'sRoboCop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/09/robocop-mark-kermode-review> 
(StudioCanal, 12); that sounds a backhanded compliment, but this chrome-plated 
remake is one of the year's most pleasant mainstream surprises. Cutting back on 
the black comedy of Paul Verhoeven's original, the new model cleverly tweaks 
the premise to target the rightwing fear-mongering of post-9/11 America, and 
divides the narrative weight between the titular cyborg and his reluctant 
Frankenstein of a creator, played with unexpected grace by Gary Oldman.

Dad-friendly comedies are also in rich supply this week – though chances are 
your own father's hoariest jokes are funnier thanLast Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/last-vegas> (Universal, 12), a grisly farce 
of grizzled senior stag-do high jinks. Michael Douglas is the groom-to-be, 
while Robert De Niro, Morgan Freeman andKevin Kline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/02/last-vegas-kevin-kline-hollywood-obsession-with-youth>
 are his mates; it's all a bit like watchingThe Hangover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/14/the-hangover-film-review> through 
several layers of Vaseline. More endearing, though still barely breaking the 
"mildly amusing" barrier, isCuban Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/cuban-fury-review-nick-frost> 
(StudioCanal, 12), a Britcom in which "Nick Frost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nick-frost> dances salsa" doesn't prove an 
especially long-running joke, though there's reliably sparky support fromChris 
O'Dowd <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chris-o-dowd> and Olivia Colman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/olivia-colman>. Meanwhile, Vince 
Vaughn's bullish charisma makesDelivery Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/12/delivery-man-vince-vaughn-review-mark-kermode>
(Entertainment One, 12), in which a deadbeat sperm-bank supplier fights to 
protect his identity from 142 of his biological offspring, more raucous and 
affecting than it probably deserves to be.

De Niro pops up again, still rigidly in paycheque mode, in Grudge Match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/26/grudge-match-review-mark-kermode> 
(Warner, 12), a negligible sporting comedy that sees him stepping into the ring 
withSly Stallone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sylvester-stallone>, as 
decayed prize fighters persuaded to face off once more. Suffice to say thatRocky
 vRaging Bull is a concept that might have sounded better on paper, possibly 30 
years ago. Sports nostalgists – well, at least those not averse to Manchester 
United – would be better served byThe Class of '92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-class-of-92> (Universal, 12). A basically 
constructed but chipper documentary, cannily released in time for World Cup 
fever, it tracks the rise ofsix junior Red Devil footballers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/27/football-transfer-rumours> 
(Beckham, Butt, Giggs, Scholes and the two Nevilles) from their 1992 FA Youth 
Cup win.

There's some respite from the testosterone in The Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-past> (Artificial Eye, 15), Asghar 
Farhadi's autumnal follow-up to the Oscar-winningA Separation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-separation>. Despite Cannes acclaim, and a 
best actress award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/26/cannes-2013-winner-blue-warmest-colour>
 for Bérénice Bejo's impressively brittle turn as a Parisian woman caught in 
emotional limbo between marriages, the film came and went with little fanfare 
in cinemas; perhaps Farhadi's admirers sensed diminishing returns from another 
solemn anatomy of a break-up.The Past does lack A Separation's exacting moral 
complexity, but its elegant embrace of overt melodrama reaps different rewards.

The week's best new Netflix addition also deals with the transference of 
desire, and with similar intensity of feeling. German gay dramaFree Fall 
<http://dvd.netflix.com/Movie/Free-Fall/70271913> skipped UK cinemas last year 
– a shame, since it's strong, heated stuff. Frankly charting the devastating 
fallout when a straight police officer surprises himself (and his pregnant 
girlfriend) by falling in love with his male partner, it's high-stakes drama 
that could give the writers ofTrue Detective (or, at least, writers of True 
Detective fan-fic) some intriguing ideas.
 