
EasyJet <https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> is set for its first 
drop in annual profit since 2009 in a year blighted by multiple terrorist 
attacks, industrial action and a sharp fall in the value of the pound.

In a trading update, the budget airline said it expected pre-tax profits to be 
in the range of £490m to £495m for the 12 months to 30 September, compared with 
£686m the previous year, a decline of about 28%.

Shares in the company closed down almost 7% at 933.5p, making easyJet the 
biggest faller on theFTSE 100 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse>.

Carolyn McCall, the easyJet chief executive, said the company had faced a 
series of extraordinary events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/21/easyjet-counts-cost-of-nervous-passengers-weak-pound-and-strikes>
 this year, but she remained confident in the business.

“The current environment is tough for all airlines, but history shows that at 
times like this, the strongest airlines become stronger,” she said.

“That is why we will continue to invest for the long-term success of the 
business, establishing even stronger market positions, delivering excellent 
customer service and establishing new revenue opportunities for the future.”


The company said a combination of “major external shock events” would cost the 
company at least £125m, while currency movements would cost it £90m, largely 
because of the sharp fall in the value of the pound since the Brexit vote on 23 
June.

People were less willing to fly in the immediate aftermath of attacks in 
Belgium and France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/brussels-attackers-planned-second-assault-on-france-belgian-prosecutors>
, andair traffic control strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/flights-across-europe-cancelled-amid-french-strikes-labour-law>
 led to disruption and cancelled flights.

EasyJet reports in pounds, but the airline buys fuel in dollars and pays air 
traffic costs and landing charges on its many European routes in euros.


In the trading update before its full-year results, easyJet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> said passenger numbers for the 
final quarter of its financial year were a record 22 million. Revenue per seat 
decreased by 8.7% over the three months, compared with the same period a year 
earlier. Cost per seat, including fuel, is expected to fall by 4.6%.

McCall said: “EasyJet continues to attract record numbers of passengers due to 
its wide range of destinations, convenient flight times and value-for-money 
fares. We have been disproportionately affected by extraordinary events this 
year but our excellent network, cost control and revenue initiatives, and our 
strong balance sheet underpin our confidence in the business.”

The airline said it would proceed with its strategy of building leading 
positions at important airports in key summer beach and European city 
destinations.

EasyJet has sold about 45% of seats available in the current first quarter, in 
line with the previous year. Revenue per seat continues to decline at about the 
same rate as in the fourth quarter.

George Salmon, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said easyJet was facing 
challenging times on a number of fronts and was one of the FTSE 100’s worst 
performers since the EU referendum.

“The group says weaker sterling is making going abroad less affordable for the 
average Brit, while the rising threat of terrorism is putting customers off 
too. These are industry-wide factors,” he said.

“However, the competition is hotting up too. Other airlines are looking 
covetously at easyJet’s market share, with pressure coming from the budget 
players Wizz and Ryanair, and ‘premium economy’ offerings like Vueling.”
 