
Crime, fantasy, romance, erotica – sometimes digital publishing really does 
conform to the stereotype. July's ebook offerings are unashamedly populist and 
tick all the genre boxes.

The latest self-publishing hit snapped up by the mainstream is Jamie McGuire 
<http://www.jamiemcguire.com/>'s Beautiful Disaster (Simon & Schuster, £2.49), 
an American,Twilight <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/twilight>-style love 
story with a will-they, won't-they couple and endlessly prolonged sexual 
tension. Virginal student Abby falls for tattooed bad boy Travis but she's 
fleeing from her past and he reminds her of it, so how can they ever be 
together? A big hit in the US and out as an early ebook before print 
publication next month.

Meanwhile, explicit tales of erotic entanglement are legion as publishers 
chase the market opened up bythe runaway success of Fifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/06/why-women-love-fifty-shades-grey>
, still dominating the bestseller chart. This month sees the launch of Beth 
Kery's Because You Are Mine, to be published in eight weekly instalments 
(Headline, ￡£1.49 each); Destined to Play by Indigo Bloome (HarperCollins, 
￡£1.99); Marina Anderson's Haven of Obedience (Hachette Digital, £3.99); Diary 
of a Submissive by Sophie Morgan (Michael Joseph, £2.99); and three collections 
of erotic short stories by Tobsha Learner titled, with unashamed camp, Quiver, 
Yearn and Tremble (Hachette Digital, £2.99). The plots involve – well. Do you 
really need to know the plots?

Bloomsbury is publishing a young American author who developed her fantasy 
world over 10 years on the sitefictionpress.com <http://www.fictionpress.com/> 
and so already has a loyal fanbase behind her.Sarah J Maas 
<http://sarahjmaas.com/>'s Throne of Glass, intended for young adults, sees its 
heroine, a girl trained as a daredevil assassin, struggling to survive and find 
love in a savage society. The novel is out in August, but prequel e-novellas 
are being released on Kindle as well as downloadable free from online magazine
Sugarscape <http://www.sugarscape.com/>. This month's release, The Assassin and 
the Empire (99p), sees assassin Celaena Sardothien taking on two highly 
dangerous criminals and, after a gentle start, turns surprisingly dark as the 
story progresses.

Digital-first publishing is throwing up all sorts of unexpected developments; 
one such is the arrival of Italian publisher RCS Libri in our midst with 
Rizzoli First, a digital-first imprint that will publish simultaneously in 
Italian and English and withoutDRM. <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/drm>
 Its first release, Love Will Tear You Apart (£4.99), is a debut by 25-year-old
Giulia Ottaviano <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yLzKlSqELx0>, set in Milan and 
featuring Eugenia, 20-year-old heiress and slacker, with a scandal-hit 
construction magnate father. Crime stories by film director Umberto Lenzi are 
scheduled to follow.

Occasion publishing is now an option in the digital age. Novelist Julia Crouch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/20/laura-wilsons-crime-fiction-reviews>
 penned a story released as a free ebook in honour of theHarrogate Crime 
Writing Festival <http://harrogateinternationalfestivals.com/crime/> held 
earlier this month. Strangeness on a Train (Headline) tells of a divorcing wife 
pushed a little too far by an inconsiderate fellow passenger. It's unlikely to 
have have escaped the publisher's notice that the story will act to raise 
awareness of Crouch's new paperback, Every Vow You Break, out next month. 
Similarly crime writerTess Gerritsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jan/09/digestedread.johncrace> has a 
July eshort, John Doe, (Transworld Digital, £1.29) which sees her series 
character Dr Maura Isles facing unexpected danger at a charity fundraiser. A 
new Isles novel will follow shortly.

July saw ebook prices hit a new low, with Sony and Amazon selling a selection 
of books, including Alan Hollinghurst's new paperbackThe Stranger's Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/25/strangers-child-alan-hollinghurst-kunzru>
 atan astonishing, and controversial, 20p 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/22/ebook-bargains-heavier-price>.

By way of light relief, HarperCollins has come up with a novel method of 
pricing the new ebook of the 1970s cult classicThe Dice Man by Luke Rhinehart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/aug/27/fiction.timadams>, in which a 
psychiatrist begins making his life decisions according to the roll of a dice. 
The publisher promises that the ebook price will be decided the same way each 
week, with the price dipping when the dice fall low. When I last checked, it 
stood at £1.99.
 