
To restore stability to the global financial system (and therefore to trade 
and the ecosystem) we need a "great transformation" to reverse the most 
pernicious elements of the failed "globalisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/globalisation>" experiment. Three pillars 
are vital to any new international architecture. They are:

 The taming of financial markets – through the re-introduction of capital 
controls; restraints in the growth of credit; and the establishment of a
Keynesian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/sep/30/wallstreet.marketturmoil>
 international clearing agency;

 "Upsizing" the state – empowering governments to respond to democratic 
mandates by wresting power over decision-making from unaccountable financial 
markets, and restoring policy autonomy to elected governments;

 "Downsizing" the single global market – by introducing an international 
trading system based on the concept of "appropriate scale".

Since Nixon unilaterally dismantled Bretton Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/globaleconomy-g8> in 
1971 and defaulted on the US government's commitment to meet its obligations in 
gold; and since the introduction of legislation to liberalise credit creation, 
financial markets have been liberated from social, political, and environmental 
constraints. As a result the world was turned upside down. The finance sector 
no longer acted as servant to the economy, but instead became its master. The 
tail wagged the dog.

To restore stability <http://www.debtonation.org>, and to restore powers over 
economic decision-making to elected governments, it will be essential to 
reinstate and coordinate capital controls across borders. (Capital controls 
involve restraints on capital, and are different from exchange controls, 
restraints on the availability of foreign or local currency.) This can be done 
through a multilateral body such as the IMF and is not entirely new thinking. 
The control of capital movements remains a central mandate of the IMF, as 
outlined in Article 6, Section 3: "Members may exercise such controls as are 
necessary to regulate international capital movements."

Second, we must urgently revive Keynes's conception of an independent central 
bank – the international clearing agency (ICA). Third, we need an international 
currency to be used only for trading purposes, and not speculation – thebancor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bancor>. 

Keynes's ICA placed an obligation on countries to achieve balance in trade. 
Globalisation <https://www.theguardian.com/world/globalisation> has generated 
massive destabilising surpluses in countries like China, and deficits in 
countries like the US and the UK.

The ICA would hold the reserve assets of governments centrally to constitute a 
mix of currencies, weighted by the volume of trade with each country. This 
means that the US would no longer act as the world's banker. Loans to the US 
(treasury bills) would no longer serve as the main reserve currency. These 
low-cost loans fuelled US consumption and the US deficit, and were financed in 
large part by countries with millions of poor, like China and India. The ICA 
would also act as an international "lender of last resort" and would serve to 
reduce the volume of speculative flows between countries.

Reversing globalisation means that states must be "upsized" – they must act to 
regain political autonomy. This means clawing back the power given away by 
legislators and central bankers to unaccountable players in international 
capital markets. Elected governments must instead respond to electoral mandates 
and pursue democratic agendas. To do so, they must manage currencies, interest 
rates, and external balances – all vital levers in stabilising an economy. They 
must have freedom to tax and spend and so meet democratically determined 
priorities. They must be freed to introduce environmental and social standards 
and regulations that promote social and economic justice and sustain the life 
support systems of the planet.

Meanwhile, the utopian project of a single global market needs to be 
dismantled. For the purposes of sustainability – economic and environmental – 
production, distribution, and consumption need to take place at the 
"appropriate scale". This could mean a move towards "localisation" – keeping 
production and consumption within an appropriate area, such as a country or 
sub-region; or it could mean promoting trade and investment within and between 
regions, in order to ensure fairer competition and reduce transport costs while 
maintaining some of the advantages of scale. While, inevitably some goods and 
services will be traded internationally, the bulk could be traded locally and 
regionally.

A system of "appropriate scale" takes into account the environmental costs of 
trade. Free trade was given a free ride by the global environment. That is no 
longer sustainable. Governments must be free to pursue the trade policies most 
appropriate to their climate, economy, and stage of development.

Such a great transformation is vital if we are to end the dictatorship of 
haute finance and once more protect the interests of society as a whole, and 
the ecosystem.
 