
Ed Miliband will on Monday try to put the NHS at the heart of the runup to 
polling day by asking theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> to explain why they have 
not published a plan – commissioned by the government from a former supermarket 
executive – for another re-organisation of NHS bureaucracy after the election.

Labour is also highlighting a letter published in the Guardian from US doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/03/us-and-british-health-specialists-support-the-nhs>
 warning that, on the current course, the NHS is on a “slippery slope” to 
pay-as-you-go healthcare.

Miliband, who will campaign alongside cookery writer Delia Smith on Monday, is 
highlighting an unpublished report commissioned by the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> (DH) from the former Marks & 
Spencer chief executive Stuart Rose, a Tory peer.

The report was passed to ministers well before the election purdah period 
during which announcements cannot be made, but has not been published.

The Conservatives said the report had been delayed because the remit had been 
widened to take account of theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
five-year forward view.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F04%2Fed-miliband-conservatives-have-secret-plan-to-reorganise-nhs-after-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F3%2F1430682127286%2Ff58e67ad-5947-4802-9d39-befe35be1170-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20Conservatives%20have%20secret%20plan%20to%20reorganise%20NHS%20after%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F04%2Fed-miliband-conservatives-have-secret-plan-to-reorganise-nhs-after-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20Conservatives%20have%20secret%20plan%20to%20reorganise%20NHS%20after%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F04%2Fed-miliband-conservatives-have-secret-plan-to-reorganise-nhs-after-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F3%2F1430682127286%2Ff58e67ad-5947-4802-9d39-befe35be1170-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Andy Burnham, the shadow health secretary, will say: ‘David Cameron should 
come clean with the British people about his plans for the NHS after the 
election.’ Photograph: Pete Dewhirst/Demotix/Corbis 
The report is understood to focus not on controversial issues, such as the 
contracting out of health services, but on the excessively complex NHS 
bureaucracy, some of which may have been worsened by changes introduced by the 
previous health secretary,Andrew Lansley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley>.

Andy Burnham <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, the shadow 
health secretary, will be speaking alongside Miliband at an event in Brighton 
on Monday.

He will tell voters: “David Cameron should come clean with the British people 
about his plans for the NHS after the election. He commissioned a major report 
on how to change the way the health service is run but has buried the findings.

“They won’t tell us what’s in it. They won’t tell us what they plan to do with 
it. They won’t tell us what they plan to do with the NHS. But we do know one 
thing. We know who wrote it: the Conservative peer, Lord Rose.

“Lord Rose may be good at running supermarkets. But I say to David Cameron: 
you can’t run the NHS like a supermarket, we don’t want a supermarket health 
service, so publish this report and show us what is in your secret plan.”

The Rose report was commissioned by the DH in February 2014 and, according to 
a parliamentary written answer, was submitted to the health secretary on 23 
December, four months ago.

In February this year, the Financial Times reported that one individual who 
had been in meetings in which the report was discussed said it had been put on 
“the back-burner of the back-burner”.


The article said that one reason for the delay could be that “a detailed 
prescription from a private sector leader could be particularly sensitive”.

In March, the Observer reported that Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> was facing allegations of a 
“politically motivated coverup” as the report remained unpublished.


The Tory chair of the health select committee, Sarah Wollaston, said: “It is 
not right that reports paid for out of public money are not made available to 
the public on such vital issues as soon as possible, particularly ahead of a 
general election.”
Click on a party's name to read its policies 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2015/04/2015-04-policy-panels/policy-health.html>
 Click on a party’s name to read its policies 
Wollaston talked of “uncomfortable information being withheld”.

The reality may be that the report is largely uncontroversial, but Rose is 
known to be critical of the current management structure of the NHS – and 
anything that smacks of reorganisation will raise alarm within the NHS.

But, politically, it is damaging for the Conservative-led government to be 
accused days before polling day of not publishing a report that it commissioned.

The US medical experts who wrote to the Guardian said: “We express concern 
over recent movements toward transferring more and more services to for-profit 
corporations in your healthcare system, and measures that encourage the 
development of a self-pay market for care.


“Access to treatment should not depend on whether someone can spare the money.

“While some may say the changes in England have so far only been at the 
margins, it is the risk of a slippery slope that should cause concern.”

Miliband himself will describe the choice between two visions: more 
privatisation, reorganisation and longer waits with a Tory second term, or 
Labour’s plan to protect and improve the NHS by putting the right values back 
at its heart.

He will say: “In the final few days of this general election campaign, the 
future of the NHS is at risk in the way it hasn’t been for a generation.”
 