
Oscar-winner Eddie Redmayne has emerged as the frontrunner 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/eddie-redmayne-frontrunner-harry-potter-787856>
 to play the lead in the new fantasy saga from Harry Potter creator JK Rowling, 
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them, according to the Hollywood Reporter.

Redmayne, who won the best actor gong in February for his portrayal of 
theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking in James Marsh’s The Theory of 
Everything, would play swashbuckling adventurer Newt Scamander. Rowling is 
writing her debut screenplay for the project, which is set in theHarry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter> universe 70 years before 
Voldemort’s nemesis and his pals Ron and Hermione attended Hogwarts School of 
Witchcraft and Wizardry.

Scamander is a swashbuckling adventurer and the author of Fantastic Beasts and 
Where to Find Them, a school textbook which Potter uses at Hogwarts in the novel
Harry Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> and the 
Philosopher’s Stone. Rowling published the “magizoology” compendium in 2001 to 
raise money for Comic Relief.


According to the Hollywood Reporter, Redmayne is keen on reading the finished 
screenplay before signing on, and Rowling has not yet completed it. 
Oscar-winner Alfonso Cuaron, of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban and 
Gravity, waslinked to the new film last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/20/alfonso-cuaron-harry-potter-fantastic-beasts-jk-rowling-film>
 by Nikki Finke.


The Harry Potter series of eight films currently stands as the 
highest-grossing film saga of all time, with $7.7bn (£4.6bn) in box office 
receipts. However, it is likely to be overtaken by Marvel’s superhero-based 
“cinematic universe” when The Avengers: Age of Ultron debuts in cinemas on 23 
April (1 May in the US).


Redmayne is expected to be a part of the 2015-16 Oscars conversation once 
again if his upcoming film The Danish Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/27/eddie-redmayne-transgender-lili-elbe-first-picture-danish-girl>
, from The King’s Speech’s Oscar-winning director Tom Hooper, attracts a 
positive critical response. The English actor plays pioneering transgender 
artist Lili Elbe, born Einar Mogens Wegener, who underwent one of the world’s 
first gender reassignment surgeries in the early 1930s.
 