
Thanks for the memories


It's my last day on the fringe and I'll be tying up a few loose ends, seeing a 
final couple of shows and revisiting a favourite:Knee Deep at Assembly 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2012/aug/14/knee-deep-edinburgh-festival-assembly-george-square>
. I must have seen hundreds of shows at Edinburgh over the years, and I wonder 
how many of this year's shows will really imprint themselves on my mind? I 
certainly won't be forgettingMies Julie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/aug/08/mies-julie-edinburgh-review> in 
a hurry, and I suspect people will be talking aboutBullet Catch 
<http://www.traverse.co.uk> at the Traverse for a long time to come. And Songs 
of Lear <http://www.summerhall.co.uk> seems to have already passed into legend 
even though it's only a work in progress.

At the beginning of the festival, I asked about the shows people remembered 
from their previous fringe visits. Some of you clearly take this kind of task 
very seriously. Thank you to the man who stopped me on South Bridge to tell me 
about the thrill of seeing Black Watch in the Drill Hall off Forest Row. Check 
out Edinburgh Festival Punter's listhere 
<http://www.edinburghfestivalpunter.co.uk/FavouriteShows.pdf>. 

On the blog, Edinclare remarked how lucky she was to actually live in the city 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17559301> and offered 
an extensive list:

Early Theatre de Complicite shows down at the much lamented Theatre Workshop. 
Black Watch at the Drill Hall. Medea with the chariot flying off into the 
Edinburgh sky at the end. The Tempest on oil drums at the Quad, Coriolanus with 
soldiers strutting between the colonnades there (liking that venue!). Down at 
St Stephen's when it was Aurora Nova, so many wonderful shows – Song of the 
Goat, DoTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, the Marionette's 
Battle of Stalingrad (tiny scale for something so huge and it worked). Looking 
forward to seeing the space used again – well done, Northern Stage. The 
Traverse – Gargarin Way, Prudencia Hart, Ontroerend Goed's in your face 'Once 
and for all, we're gonna to tell you who we we are so shut up and listen! (also 
award for longest title).' So many shows there over the years, both at the new 
and old building down in West Bow – images remain though some of the titles 
have gone. And Polish shows from Richard Demarco. The old Cafe Graffiti. 
Fantastic memories.

Senton offered 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17562575>:

The first production of John Clifford's Inés de Castro at the old Traverse; 
The Three Bonazzi, a clown show directed by Jos Houben; my first exposure to 
Derevo with Harlekin at Pleasance, and again with Ketzal at St Stephen's (still 
digesting Mephisto Waltz); an extraordinary sketch show called Universal 
Grinding Wheel; Licedei's The Family.

Next year, I will have been coming to the fringe for 30 years, so over the 
next 12 months I'll be trawling my own memories to come up with the list of 
memorable shows. If you can help me give my memories a nudge by sharing yours, 
I'd be very grateful.

What to see: my UK-wide theatre tips


With Edinburgh in its last gasp, and the rest of the country's theatre still 
not fully awake, it's another abbreviated list this week. Full service will 
resume next Friday, when things start warming up again. In Edinburgh, these are 
the shows you shouldn't miss this weekend: Mies Julie at Assembly Mound and 
Knee Deep atAssembly <http://www.assemblyfestival.com> George Square, The List 
and Big Mouth atSummerhall <http://www.summerhall.co.uk>, Oh the Humanity and 
The Price of Everything atNorthern Stage at St Stephen's 
<http://www.northernstage.co.uk>, Bullet Catch, Beats, Monkey Bars 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/aug/16/monkey-bars-edinburgh-festival-review>
 and the Curious Scrapbook of Josephine Bean at theTraverse 
<http://www.traverse.co.uk>, Dr Brown Befrdfgth (in the comedy section, but 
full of theatre techniques) atUnderbelly <http://www.underbelly.co.uk>. 

Lots of Edinburgh fringe shows are heading out on tour this week: Stellar 
Quines <http://www.stellarquines.com>' The List heads to the Byre theatre in St 
Andrews, The Prize heads toLive Theatre <http://www.live.org.uk> in Newcastle, 
Phil Porter's delightful Blink goes intoSoho <http://www.sohotheatre.com>, 
Anthony Rapp's Without You opens at the Menier Chocolate Factory in London on 
Wednesday, Joel Horwood's deeply touchingI Heart Peterborough 
<http://www.easternangles.co.uk> is at the Nightingale in Brighton from Friday, 
and Curious Directive's After the Rainfall is atWatford Palace 
<http://www.watfordpalacetheatre.co.uk> from Thursday. 

Of course, it's not all over on Monday for the International Festival 
<http://www.eif.co.uk>, which still has Ariane Mnouchkine's Les Naufragés du 
Fol Espoir running until Tuesday, and Vanishing Point's modern version of 
Alice, Wonderland, opening at the Royal Lyceum on Wednesday.

Elsewhere in Scotland, the new season begins at Dundee Rep 
<http://www.dundeerep.co.uk> on Thursday with Chris Rattray's The Mill Lavvies, 
set in a jute mill in the early 1960s. In Northern Ireland, director Robert 
Wilson is on stage in his own production of Beckett's Krapp's Last Tape as part 
of theEnniskillen International Beckett Festival 
<http://www.ardhowentheatre.com> this weekend, and his ambulatory performance 
Walking <http://www.nnfestival.org.uk> continues at Holkham on the Norfolk 
coastline until 2 September.

The brilliant Lakes Alive <http://www.lakesalive.org> continue to bring 
outdoor theatre and street arts to the Lake District: rock up to Whitehaven for 
the aerial show, Voala, on Monday and head to Kendal for Mintfest, which starts 
next Friday.

It's your last chance for the York Mystery Plays 
<http://www.yorkmysteryplays2012.com> this weekend. There is a revival of The 
Importance of Being Earnest opening atNottingham Playhouse 
<http://www.nottinghamplayhouse.co.uk/>, but of rather more interest is Calixto 
Bieito's Forests atBirmingham Old Rep <http://www.birmingham-rep.co.uk> which 
is a journey through landscape using Shakespeare's texts. There are good things 
atOxford Playhouse,  <http://www.oxfordplayhouse.com>where Druid's Tom Murphy 
season is followed by Hysteria with Antony Sher. Haunting Julia goes out on 
tour from theMercury <http://www.mercurytheatre.co.uk> in Colchester. I'm off 
to theTheatre Royal <http://www.theatreroyal.org.uk> in Bath on Wednesday to 
see Adrian Noble's The Tempest.

In London, BAC's Cook Up <http://www.bac.org.uk> season begins with work by 
John Moran, Ross Sutherland and Amy Draper.Kaite O Reilly's In Water I'm 
Weightless <http://www.kaiteoreilly.com/>, Claire Cunningham, and Bobby Baker's 
Mad Gyms are among theUnlimited productions and commissions 
<http://www.london2012.com/festival> that can be seen at London's South Bank at 
the end of the week. Enjoy the weekend, and do tell us all about the shows you 
have seen or are seeing.
 