
Egypt’s public prosecutor is to bring nearly 300 suspected Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> militants before the country’s 
military judiciary in one of the biggest trials of alleged violent extremists 
in recent years.


The accused include members of Isis’s networks in Egypt and Saudi Arabia who 
plotted to kill the Egyptian president,Abdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>, and Saudi Arabia’s 
crown prince Mohammed bin Nayef, officials in Cairo say.


Isis has generally steered away from ambitious plots to assassinate such 
high-profile figures as Sisi and Bin Nayef, who is also Saudi Arabia’s minister 
of the interior. It is unclear whether these alleged efforts – which date back 
to 2014 – had the sanction of senior commanders of the group.

The 292 suspects in the coming mass trial are accused of belonging to 22 cells 
and carrying out 19 attacks in total, 
<http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/292-affiliates-accused-failed-presidential-assassination-attempt>
 including the killing of three judges who were overseeing a parliamentary 
election in restive northern Sinai, which borders Gaza, Israel and the Suez 
Canal.

Almost all are alleged to be members of the Wilayat al-Sinai, Isis’s Egyptian 
affiliate; 151 are in custody, seven are out on bail, and the rest on the run.

According to prosecutors, the suspects include members of a network consisting 
of six former police officers and a dentist, who plotted to kill Sisi in Egypt 
by targeting his motorcades, while a linked cell, based inSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, wanted to strike in a hotel in 
Mecca where they mistakenly thought Sisi would be staying on a pilgrimage to 
the holy city.

The network, active in 2014, included some Egyptians working in the kingdom 
and a number of other attackers who travelled fromEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> to execute the plan, according to 
official documents.

 The conspirators are said to have planned a suicide bombing by the wife of 
one of the members at a holy site in Mecca to distract security forces while 
they targeted both Sisi and the Saudi prince.

Isis claims responsibility for killing of Egyptian general
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/isis-claims-responsibility-for-killing-of-egyptian-general-hesham-mahmoud-abualazm>
The police officers involved in the network 
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/News/250388.aspx> had clashed with authorities in 
2012 whenthey grew beards 
<https://english.alarabiya.net/en/News/2013/03/18/-My-beard-is-my-right-Egypt-s-policemen-protest-against-ban-.html>
, in accordance with their strict interpretation of Islamic custom, and had 
been shifted to reserve forces before becoming involved in violent extremism, 
officials said.

Authorities in Egypt have been accused repeatedly of fabricating or 
exaggerating charges against political opponents.

Mokhtar Awad, an expert in militancy in Egypt at George Washington University, 
Washington DC, said the claims of a double conspiracy to kill Sisi and Bin 
Nayef were credible.

“It may seem far-fetched but there have been reports about this plot for some 
time and the government is unlikely to implicate former [police] officers if 
there was no substance to it,” Awad said.

There have been a series of mass trials of alleged extremists in Egypt. Three 
major trials involved hundreds allegedly linked to jihadi groups in Egypt, 
while others have targeted members or supporters of theMuslim Brotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muslim-brotherhood>, Egypt’s oldest Islamist 
organisation.

The trials have drawn fierce international criticism, while the imposition of 
a “collective” death sentence on hundreds of accused has drawn fierce 
condemnation from the United Nations, EU and international campaigners. The US 
state department described mass verdicts as “unconscionable”.

Secular activists have also faced prosecution under a 2013 law banning protests
 <https://www.hrw.org/news/2014/10/26/egypt-23-sentenced-over-anti-protest-law> 
deemed to “threaten public security”.

HA Hellyer, an analyst at the Royal United Services Institute (Rusi) in 
London, said suspects in the coming trial “shouldn’t expect much leniency” as 
“the Egyptian state has a record of very tough sentences when it comes to 
[Isis] types”.

Campaign groups say torture and mistreatment 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/05/egypt-military-court-sentences-eight-to-death-after-disappearance-and-confessions-under-torture/>
 is widespread in Egyptian prisons, and many convictions are based on false 
confessions. Accused are frequently detained without charge for long periods 
and denied access to legal representation.

Authorities say tough measures are needed in the face of an insurgency that 
has killed hundreds,including large numbers of policemen and soldiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/isis-gunmen-egyptian-security-forces-attack-checkpoint>
. Egypt faces a “ferocious war against terrorism and extremism”, Sisisaid last 
year. 
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/1/64/144440/Egypt/Politics-/-Egypts-Sisi-to-AP-Country-in-ferocious-war-with-t.aspx>

Although violence there has been overshadowed by that in Iraq and Syria, Egypt 
remains of critical strategic importance to Isis. The group made the country a 
key target in its bid to expand beyond strongholds in Iraq and Syria in the 
aftermath of the declaration of a new caliphate under leader Abu Bakr 
al-Baghdadi in June 2014.

Egypt has a history of Islamic militancy reaching back to the 1960s, and has 
experienced successive waves of extremism. Violence has intensified since 2013, 
when Sisi overthrew the previous president, Mohamed Morsi, leader of the Muslim 
Brotherhood, following protests against his rule.

Authorities then launched a crackdown targeting the Brotherhood and other 
opponents. Tens of thousands have been detained and thousands killed,according 
to analysts and rights groups. 
<http://carnegieendowment.org/2014/03/24/egypt-s-unprecedented-instability-by-numbers/h5j3?reloadFlag=1>

A series of Islamic militant factions have since emerged, of which one, Ansar 
Beit al-Maqdis (ABM), pledged allegiance to Isis and adopted the name Sinai 
Province in 2014.

The new Isis affiliate claimed responsibility for destroying a Russian 
passenger jet full of tourists in October 2015. That attack came shortly after 
a failed attempt to seize a town in Sinai. Since then, the group has been under 
significant pressure.

“They are currently not as acute a threat as last summer but continue to be 
deadly. They’ve adopted a strategy of long-term attrition. On the mainland 
[beyond Sinai] they’ve had much more difficulty,” said Awad.

The efforts of Isis to establish a powerful presence in north Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> have met with mixed fortunes. Plots 
and small networks have been discovered in Morocco and Algeria, while the group 
has launched bloody attacks in Tunisia.

In Libya, Isis managed to establish control over significant coastal towns in 
early 2015. The last of these enclaves, in Sirte, now appears on the point of 
disappearing entirely.

Backed by US airstrikes, brigades dominated by fighters from the city of 
Misrata have been edging forward against militants trapped in an area a few 
hundred metres wide next to Sirte’s Mediterranean coast in recent days. 
Fighters said they were close enough to their enemies to hear their Tunisian 
and Egyptian accents.

The presence of militants from elsewhere in north Africa in Sirte is a 
reminder of the extent of the Isis presence along the Mediterranean region.

Militant cells have also been discovered in major Egyptian cities, and in the 
west of the country, near the Libyan and Tunisian borders, with one Egyptian 
cell, loosely affiliated with al-Qaida, now based out of eastern Libya.

In Egypt, as elsewhere, Isis have also targeted traditional leaders and 
religious figures. Earlier this week the group released a video showingthe 
execution by sword of an elderly Sufi cleric 
<https://english.alarabiya.net/en/News/middle-east/2016/11/19/ISIS-Egypt-branch-executes-100-year-old-Sufi-cleric.html>
 said to be revered by many local communities.

Aggressive tactics by state security forces in Sinai have exacerbated the 
problem,some analysts say 
<https://www.chathamhouse.org/expert/comment/enduring-repression-and-insurgency-egypts-sinai>
. However, militant activity in Egypt extends beyond groups linked to Isis and 
al-Qaida.

“There has been a rise in unaffiliated groups connected either to the Muslim 
Brotherhood or people who support the Muslim Brotherhood. They don’t pose an 
acute threat today but are steadily building their capabilities,” said Awad.

Hellyer said there was no consensus among experts on the links between the 
apparently independent groups and the Muslim Brotherhood. “It’s quite unclear … 
On the one hand, many security analysts reckon that the Brotherhood is not 
actively encouraging political violence from the leadership level, but on the 
other the suspicion has been raised that a lot of Brotherhood supporters or 
even members may be involved in political violence, with the leadership turning 
a blind eye, or unable to do very much about it,” he said.
 