
Welcome to our latest round-up of the Edinburgh international book festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/edinburgh-book-festival>. Here are our picks 
of the events that have been happening today:

Beautiful photographs by Murdo Macleod

If you still haven’t seen this gallery of photos from the first week of the 
festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2014/aug/14/murdo-macleod-shines-a-light-on-edinburgh-festival-book-authors-in-pictures?CMP=twt_gu>
, do take a look. From a happy-looking Margaret Drabble to a giggling Rod 
Liddle and a celestially serene Rowan Williams, former Archbishop of 
Canterbury, photographer Murdo Macleod gets to the heart of his subjects in his 
amazing portraits. Here’s an example – actor turned children’s author Mackenzie 
Crook:
 Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Eimear McBride on novels taking radical new forms 

Irish writer Eimear McBride <https://www.theguardian.com/books/eimear-mcbride> 
and Scottish novelist Dilys Rose discussed the innovative approaches they both 
took in their novels A Girl Is a Half-Formed Thing and Pelmanism.. Here are 
some of the highlights from Baileys prize-winner McBride about her novel, one 
of the most talked-about books of the year:

I wanted to make the reader feel as if the story was happening inside their 
own bodies.

My big influence is Joyce, undoubtedly. Reading Ulysses was the beginning of 
all that [her style] for me, it really changed all I thought about writing.

I don’t remember thinking differently as a child. The only difference is the 
perspective [on how she writes child characters]

 There are lots of interesting reasons for experimentation – and pleasure is 
one of them. Pleasure in language.

I wanted to use the word ‘thing’ in the title because a lot of the book is 
about the objectification of women and how women learn to objectify themselves.


McBride also said that she is working on her next book, which is set in 
England and is “about two people” – and that is all she was willing to give 
away. You can read more about her and A Girl is a Half-Formed Thing here:

 * Guardian review: “an instant classic” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/20/girl-half-formed-thing-review>

 * A Girl is a Half-formed Thing is uncompromising in style and subject matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/04/eimear-mcbride-style-subject-matter>
, by Justine Jordan 
 * Eimear McBride’s novel doesn’t fit any terms we use to categorise writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/06/eimear-mcbride-novel-terms-writing-consciousness>
, by John Sutherland 
 * Eimear McBride: a genius easily missed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jun/05/eimear-mcbride-genius-girl-is-a-half-formed-thing-baileys>
, by Sam Jordison

We will be bringing you a books podcast with McBride very soon.

Letters Home night promenades: Christos Tsiolkas on feminism

We already brought you a review of the brilliant series of nightly promenades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/12/edinburgh-festival-2014-review-letters-home-books>
 called Letters Home, one of the most sought-after events of the festival. In 
it, theGrid Iron theatre company <http://www.gridiron.org.uk/> have adapted 
four short stories based on letters into two stage plays, a film installation 
and a play for voices, performed in rooms around Charlotte Square.

Three of the writers - Christos Tsiolkas, Kamila Shamsie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kamilashamsie> and Kei Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/14/when-considering-the-long-long-journey-of-28000-rubber-ducks-kei-miller>
 - met up with their Grid Iron collaborators for the first time at a session to 
introduce the project. (The fourth,Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie>, was in Nigeria.) 
Here’sClaire Armitstead’s piece on the session 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/aug/14/eve-according-christos-tsiolkas-slap-barracuda-short-story>
, in which Tsiolkas expresses delight that his short story has been described 
as “feminist”. Here’s hoping that this performance will move to other locations 
soon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Faug%2F14%2Feimear-mcbride-alasdair-grey-and-a-spy-opera-edinburgh-book-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408039996853%2Ffdc352b4-fa24-4418-8a8a-5b293c011648-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eimear%20McBride%2C%20Alasdair%20Gray%20and%20a%20spy%20opera%3A%20day%20six%20at%20the%20Edinburgh%20book%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Faug%2F14%2Feimear-mcbride-alasdair-grey-and-a-spy-opera-edinburgh-book-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eimear%20McBride%2C%20Alasdair%20Gray%20and%20a%20spy%20opera%3A%20day%20six%20at%20the%20Edinburgh%20book%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Faug%2F14%2Feimear-mcbride-alasdair-grey-and-a-spy-opera-edinburgh-book-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408039996853%2Ffdc352b4-fa24-4418-8a8a-5b293c011648-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kei Miller, Kamila Shamsie and Christos Tsiolkas at the festival. Photograph: 
Tina Norris/REX 
Alasdair Gray doesn’t hate anybody

The The Scottish writer and artist spoke vividly against “Englished 
administrators” being in charge of Scottish arts: “The idea of Scottish writers 
and painters in charge of their own institutions – impossible! It would be as 
bad as having teachers in charge of the schools!” Gray made it clear, though, 
that he doesn’t “hate anybody”, addressing accusations of hating the English. 
ReadMark Brown’s report here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/14/alasdair-gray-hate-anybody-scottish-edinburgh-book-festival>
.

Kamila Shamsie and Louisa Young on post-war stories

To say that there has been a first world war overdose in the last few months 
would possibly be an understatement – and we’re only halfway through the 
commemorative year of the start of the war. Nevertheless, each particular story 
about the first global conflict has its charm. Today’s podcast guests focus on 
its aftermath.alasdair gray

Kamila Shamsie’s novel A God in Every Stone follows an English archaeologist 
to India, where she meets up with two brothers – a wounded survivor of Ypres 
and a precociously talented archaeological researcher. And Louisa Young’s In 
The Heroes’ Welcome returns to a family we first encountered in her bestselling 
novelMy Dear I Wanted to Tell You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/24/wanted-tell-you-louisa-young-review>
. All intoday’s books podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2014/aug/14/kamila-shamsie-louisa-young-edinburgh-books-podcast>
.

Lynne Segal discussed ageing
Edinburgh Book Fest (@edbookfest) 
Rethinking ageing is to rethink what it is to be human. To be human is to care 
for other people. ~@lynne_segal <https://twitter.com/lynne_segal>
 <https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499908176658309120> August 14, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499908176658309120> Edinburgh Book Fest
(@edbookfest) 
There is a contempt for dependency at the moment. But we do depend on people. 
When we are young, when we work, when we are old ~@lynne_segal 
<https://twitter.com/lynne_segal>
 <https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499907737569214464> August 14, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499907737569214464> Edinburgh Book Fest
(@edbookfest) 
One of joys of ageing is that we can be more outrageous. ~@lynne_segal 
<https://twitter.com/lynne_segal> #edbookfest 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/edbookfest?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499906252257112064> August 14, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499906252257112064> 
... and agony aunt Irma Kurtz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/02/irma-kurtz-my-life-in-agony-review-katharine-whitehorn>
 tackled online dating, gossip and social media
Edinburgh Book Fest (@edbookfest) 
It's impossible to fall in love with a man you've never smelled ~Irma Kurtz on 
online dating#edbookfest <https://twitter.com/hashtag/edbookfest?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499850909753815040> August 14, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499850909753815040> Edinburgh Book Fest
(@edbookfest) 
Gossip can be very valuable. Men are not adapted to it. They'd rather talk 
about football scores; it's a structure, it's safer. ~Irma Kurtz
 <https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499853749050150912> August 14, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499853749050150912> Sara Sheridan 
(@sarasheridan) 
Agony has changed because of social media, Irma says. #edbookfest 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/edbookfest?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/sarasheridan/statuses/499844293633540096> August 14, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/sarasheridan/statuses/499844293633540096> Edinburgh Book 
Fest (@edbookfest) 
If you listen to the inner voice, it usually has the right idea. ~Irma Kurtz 
#edbookfest <https://twitter.com/hashtag/edbookfest?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499844348503400448> August 14, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499844348503400448> Edinburgh Book Fest
(@edbookfest) 
'Where's the pill I can take for heartbreak' is how Irma Kurtz describes agony 
emails. Letters would be much longer- sometimes 9 pages long.
 <https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499847928199249920> August 14, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/edbookfest/statuses/499847928199249920> 
Alexander McCall Smith on his new spy opera

Finally, whe writer of The No. 1 Ladies’ Detective Agency gave details about 
his new opera Blunt, a story based on surveyor of the Queen’s paintings and spy 
Anthony Blunt. “It is really exciting because there is so much in the story,” 
said McCall Smith. “There is something for everybody; you’ve got friendship, 
loyalty, betrayal and a sense of horror when you realise that you’ve been 
supporting something that you thought was ideologically attractive before 
discovering it was tyranny.”Read Mark Brown’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/14/alexander-mccall-smith-anthony-blunt-spy-libretto-edinburgh-international-book-festival>
.

If you’re here, don’t forget to share your festival photographs by clicking on 
the blue “contribute” button at the top and bottom of this article; and if you 
have any comments or want to chat with us, do post in the comment thread below.

 