
Changing the electoral system can be a complicated subject at the best of 
times. But even those most versed in explaining thed'Hondt formula 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/91150.stm> might struggle to 
decipher the current topsy-turvy political conundrum about reform.

Campaigners for electoral reform have been pushing for a referendum by 
election day in theVote for a Change <http://www.voteforachange.co.uk/> 
coalition, arguing that it is a last, best hope to seize the 
once-in-a-generation moment in a political crisis. The smoke signals from 
Downing Street see the government inching towards change, withsome unsure if it 
could distract from the economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/sep/20/cabinet-election-referendum-voting-reform>
. Long-standing Labour opponents of reform, likeRoy Hattersley, have changed 
sides 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/columnists/guest_contributors/article6836002.ece>
.

Gordon Brown is meeting the campaigners for a referendum soon. But are the 
LibDems getting cold feet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/sep/21/electoral-reform-lib-dems-pr>
?

Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg, whose party has promoted electoral reform ever 
since they left power 80 years ago, seems to be pleading with the prime 
minister to ignore the campaign,telling Saturday's Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/sep/18/nick-clegg-liberal-democrats-spending>
 that "anything that Gordon Brown proposes now will turn to dust."

A referendum might be won or lost at any time. There is majority public 
support, but we don't know how robust it will be in a campaign.

The claim that the government is trying to change the rules because it fears 
defeat makes little sense – a referendum can't change the result of this 
election. Brown won't be leading the charge, either: his focus will be on 
Labour's argument for re-election. It would be for many of those not engaged or 
excited by the party choices on offer at this election to lead a campaign for a 
different politics in future.

And what is Clegg's alternative route to reform?

This summer, he too wanted a referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/27/politicians-constitutional-reform-nick-clegg>
 this autumn. But those campaigning for a referendum may face a more difficult 
dilemma if they succeed – but do not get quite what they want. The issue is not 
only about the timing of a referendum, but what it is on.

If the government calls a referendum, all the signs are that it would back the 
Alternative Vote <http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk/article.php?id=55>, where 
voters get to number candidates 1, 2 and 3, and where candidates need to win 
50% of the constituency vote to be elected.Douglas Alexander is the latest 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/politics/labour/6212667/Douglas-Alexander-Labours-strategist-comes-out-of-his-shell.html>
 cabinet minister to promote AV. The argument will be that it combines a clear 
choice of governments, more stability and less chance of coalitions with a more 
pluralist system where every MP needs to appeal to a broader electorate to win, 
and where dilemmas of tactical voting are ended.

But AV is not proportional representation. That is why Roy Jenkins recommended 
anAV+ system <http://www.electoral-reform-scotland.org.uk/article.php?id=56> to 
make it more proportional. (Almost all pro-PR voices would back this pretty 
enthusiastically, even if they prefer the holy grail of theSingle Transferable 
Vote <http://www.electoral-reform-scotland.org.uk/article.php?id=48>, though 
AV+ also tends to produce majority governments from more proportional 
parliaments.)

Some reformers, such as Peter Kellner 
<http://www.fabians.org.uk/debates/democracy/kellner-we-should-endorse-av>, 
believe that the Alternative Vote is a better system than either PR or 
first-past-the-post. I am more sympathetic to PR than Kellner is, butalso 
argued, back in 2007 
<http://www.fabians.org.uk/publications/extracts/call-for-lab-libdem-deal-on-alternative-vote>
, that the Alternative Vote had the best prospects for breaking a deadlock on 
reform, especially if combined with PR for an elected Lords and in local 
government. Much of that case remains, though the prospects for full PR are now 
stronger as a result of the MPs' expenses crisis.

Most reformers are strongly in favour of proportional representation – and so 
are divided about whether half a loaf would be worth having.

Almost all do think the Alternative Vote – Lewis Baston published a very 
thorough account <http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk/downloads/AVReportweb.pdf> 
of its pros and cons for the Electoral Reform Society – is a considerably 
better system than the current one. But those who take that view note that this 
is a "head over heart" decision, and think it would be considerably harder to 
mobilise an enthusiastic campaign. Some who support PR may shout "betrayal", 
too.

A PR referendum would see Labour, Lib Dems and Greens lined up against the 
Conservatives: this is one "progressive" cause to whichDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> cannot pay even lip 
service. But would the AV battlelines be more muddled?

If a referendum on AV might not quite please anybody, might it be more likely 
to go down to defeat? Perhaps. But its supporters would point out that it might 
prove more robust against some arguments that would be made against PR. It 
would never let in the BNP; but, by the same token, it won't do much for the 
Green party either. TheConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> would oppose it 
vehemently, though it is the system they use to select their own candidates.

What are the alternatives? If reformers are divided, perhaps the status quo 
will come up trumps. Labour might edge forward by simply proposing the 
Alternative Vote in its own manifesto, without calling a referendum. (Some 
civic campaigners and Lib Dems would now preferLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> to take this approach than 
propose a referendum on AV.)

If there was a hung parliament after the next general election, this would 
prove a much better basis for negotiation than Labour standing on its head 
having gone into a campaign with no position on electoral reform. So this 
pre-election policy shift might be better than nothing. But even the most 
gradualist of Fabian reformers might legitimately fear that this approach will 
end up being too little, too late.

The case for seizing the day with a referendum remains strong. If campaigners 
get less than they want, they might still work with the government. One idea is 
to push for a multi-option referendum – whether the electoral system should be 
changed; and whether that should be to AV or to a PR system. There is precedent 
for that in the New Zealand referendum, and the Scottish devolution referendum, 
which had a second question on tax raising powers.

But the argument that now is not the right time is a weak one. It never is.
 