
This year's Edinburgh film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/edinburghfilmfestival> will host the world 
premieres of a brace of biopics, including Eddie Izzard as the Scottish 
engineer Robert Watson-Watt, who pioneered use of the radar during the second 
world war, and Elijah Wood as a close confidante of Welsh poet Dylan Thomas.

Izzard headlines Gillies MacKinnon's Watt biopic Castles in the Sky, while 
Wood is the main attraction in Andy Goddard'sSet Fire to the Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/10/elijah-wood-dylan-thomas-biopic-set-fire-to-the-stars>
, described as a semi-biographical drama about the iconic author of Under Milk 
Wood. The Lord of the Rings star, who plays Thomas's fellow poet John Malcolm 
Brinnin in the film, is among the famous faces expected to attend the festival, 
which will also see Django Unchained's Don Johnson making an appearance.

Edinburgh this year features 156 feature-length films, 10 more than last 
year's festival. There are 10 world premieres in total, along with seven 
European premieres and 95 UK firsts. The impressive lineup was unveiled on 
Wednesday ahead of the event's 68th edition next month.

This year's festival also presents UK premieres for Abel Ferrara's film 
Welcome to New York <https://www.theguardian.com/film/welcome-to-new-york>, 
starring Gerard Depardieu as a character based on the disgraced French 
politician Dominique Strauss-Kahn, and Bong Joon-ho'sSnowpiercer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jul/09/snowpiercer-trailer-off-the-rails-with-bong-joon-ho>
, which stars Chris Evans, John Hurt and Tilda Swinton and is the futuristic 
tale of an enormous train permanently circumnavigating a post-apocalyptic Earth.

 The Anton Corbijn spy thriller A Most Wanted Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/18/sundance-film-festival-review-most-wanted-man>
, an adaptation of the 2008 Hamburg-set John LeCarre spy novel starring the 
late Phillip Seymour Hoffman in one of his final roles, also gets a screening. 
Hoffman plays an intelligence officer hoping to uncover links to the 9/11 
bombers in the German port city's Islamic community. The film's cast also 
includes Rachel McAdams, Willem Dafoe, Robin Wright and Daniel Br√ºhl.
 