
The last time I saw Elizabeth Fraser was in 1984 on the stage of a short-lived 
Birmingham nightclub called the Powerhaus. I was then 18, and she, fronting her 
band the Cocteau Twins, was 20. It was, on my part, love at first sight. The 
Cocteaus, at the time, were high in the John Peel pantheon, on an independent 
cloud somewhere alongside the Smiths and the Jesus and Mary Chain, and like 
both of those bands, they sounded like no one you had ever heard before. 
Fraser's ecstatic vocals, which carried just a hint of her growing up in 
Grangemouth, Falkirk – were not only hair-raising, they also dwelt in unique 
soundscapes of her own devising. Her lyrics formed an invented language, words 
chosen for texture rather than meaning, and the adjectives that clung to her 
among ardent critics in the artier music pages were "ethereal" or 
"otherworldly".

On recordings, the most successful of these compositions, Sugar Hiccup 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e_CHbmZIRXE> or Pearly-Dewdrops Drops 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Ka-WpqCAJI>, had a dreamlike, almost prenatal 
quality; I seem to recall grown men in theNew Musical Express routinely 
confessing to being reduced to tears. Watching Fraser sing these songs live you 
saw their point. That night in a Birmingham basement the emotional force of her 
voice was held in constant tension with a palpable anxiety in her performance, 
which gave the music a nerve-shredding high-wire tension; by the end of the 
evening, the audience (and her band, led by her partner Robin Guthrie) seemed 
to be collectively willing her on to her next improbable feat of melody; an 
encore seemed almost an unfair ordeal to impose on her. As my friend Stuart 
memorably observed at the time: "It's like watching Alice in fucking 
Wonderland." He meant that in a good way.

For a decade or so after that concert, the Cocteaus followed their own 
creative path with increasing commercial success, but the fragilities that 
seemed apparent that night didn't go away. Interviews with the band became a 
kind of rite of passage for music journalists; Fraser, in particular, was an 
infamously reluctant and awkward subject, sometimes seemingly tortured by the 
obligation to explain the music she helped to conjure with Guthrie and bass 
player Simon Raymonde; shy to the point of monosyllable.

She had a daughter with Guthrie in 1989 but by the time of their seventh album,
Four-Calendar Café, three years later, the Cocteaus were close to breaking 
point; Guthrie had been addicted to drugs and alcohol, they had been in dispute 
with various record labels, and Fraser resorted to confessional songwriting for 
the first and only time ("Are you the right man for me?" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P6uHLheeRHQ> she wondered. "Are you safe? Are 
you toxic? Are you my friend?").
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fe_CHbmZIRXE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fe_CHbmZIRXE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fe_CHbmZIRXE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Another album followed but the band – and Guthrie and Fraser – had already 
split. Fraser subsequently became close to the mercurialJeff Buckley 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HKnxmkOAj88>, one hallelujah voice attracting 
another. After Buckley died tragically in a river accident, Fraser was said to 
have had a breakdown of sorts, she moved from London to Bristol, became mother 
to a second daughter (with her partner Damon Reece, sometime drummer with 
Massive Attack) and, though there have been whispers of a solo album for more 
than a decade, the rest has mostly been silence.

This silence will be broken this summer when Fraser sings her own songs on 
stage for the first time this century, at the invitation of Antony Hegarty for 
hisMeltdown festival <https://www.theguardian.com/music/meltdown-festival> at 
the Southbank Centre. For Hegarty, it is the "centrepiece of the festival" and 
for Fraser's legion of fans, it is a wish come true. Still, on the train to see 
her in Bristol on a summer Saturday afternoon, to talk about all this, with her 
soaring voice in my headphones, I have a slight trepidation about whether she 
will turn up at all.

She has suggested we meet outside WH Smith – something else I haven't heard 
since the early 1980s – and she hurries up a little late, already apologising 
for everything, severe-fringed as ever, but now silver-haired, suggesting we 
walk over to the park in the local square to sit on a bench and talk.

I say talk, but listening back to the tape of that hour and a half of 
conversation there is at least as much pause as chat; at certain moments, 
birdsong seems to have taken over for good. Fraser is a small and wonderfully 
spirited presence, quick to laugh, self-deprecating to the point of 
embarrassment, but words remain a problem for her, at least in the artificial 
context of an interview. She can't say one thing without wishing immediately 
she had said another. Her speech is endearingly punctuated with caveats – "this 
is so difficult", "what do I want to say?", "I understood it for a moment then, 
but, no, it's gone now" – and I hear myself attempting to finish her sentences 
(always wrongly) gamely willing her on, just as I recall doing watching her on 
stage all those years ago.

And this, she assures me at one point with a wild laugh, is her in decisive 
mood – she has turned a corner, having said no for such a long time she has 
resolved to start saying yes.

What's happened, I wonder, to make her feel so uncharacteristically bullish?

She thinks for a moment. "What can I say?" she says. "I think it has to do 
with sevens."

Sevens?

"I've always had a thing about sevens. And I am coming up for my 49th birthday 
in August. Seven sevens. It feels like a really important moment to consider 
all the things that are coming toward me." She stops for a while, reconsiders. 
"And my mum died very recently so maybe that has something to do with it too."

In this sense, she suggests, the call from her friend Antony Hegarty came at a 
propitious moment. Was she minded immediately to answer in the affirmative, I 
wonder.

She laughs at the idea. "Well it wasn't an immediate yes, of course not! But 
part of me was saying, you know, 'Come on, Fraser! This is it! This is the one 
you have to do!' But then there is always another part saying: 'What are you 
thinking? You can't do this! You are really going to need the rest of your life 
to think about whether this is a good idea...'"

Have those two voices always been chuntering on in her head?

"Well," she says, "I do have to respect the 'not ready' voice. But then: seven 
sevens – hard to argue with."

The concert will include quite a lot of new material, the songs Fraser has 
been working on for the past 15 years. She composes in the way she always has, 
starting with single phrases or melodies, recording them, and passing them on 
to someone else to add more layers, her bass player, or her keyboard player, 
before working on them some more, like a painter returning constantly to a 
canvas. The process itself is the important thing, the creative thing, she 
tells herself, and whether the songs are ever put out in the world is not 
essential, but she would like people to hear them, of course she would. Is one 
of the reasons for the waiting, I ask, a sense that she always feels she is 
competing against what she has done before?

"Oh, you can't compete," she says quickly. "I am really learning this from 
rehearsing. Going back and listening to old songs and thinking. 'Christ, I 
can't do that!' I am so much older than I was then, and a female voice in 
particular changes so much over the years. It just felt like such a gift then, 
you can't compete with that."

Fraser was the youngest child of six; her father worked as a tool maker in a 
factory. "He would come home sometimes with this metal beard," she says, "all 
these tiny bits of metal embedded in his face." Her mother made all their 
clothes, "and if she couldn't make it, we couldn't have it". When, I wonder, 
was she first aware of her voice?

"The enjoyment of it started at school," she says, "quite young. There were a 
few singers at home, one or two aunties. We did have a piano but I think that 
got put on the fire eventually."

Fraser's two daughters, 22 and 14, can both sing too, though she seldom hears 
them, she says, and they seldom hear her. We talk a little about the difference 
in teenage girls, their worldliness. Can she recall herself at 14?

"I was very dreamy," she recalls. "Insular. I'm always amazed I survived 
adolescence at all and wasn't squashed flat by a juggernaut. Gaping, I think 
was my main skill. Staring out of the window."

She joined the band at 17, after Guthrie saw her dancing in an absent-minded 
way in a nightclub. Were her dreams always of escape from the harder realities 
of Grangemouth?

"No, I never thought of the next day," she says. "I had no aspirations at all 
really. I just had a lot of something – what was it? So much sun, I suppose, 
running through me. All this wonderful sun! An Apollonian spirit, if that is a 
word."

Was she writing at the time?

"Terrible poems, I think. But the thing was I wrote them without fear. It's 
not until you get asked about your writing and you don't know the answers to 
things that you start to get scared. I used to just do it, you know. And then 
people would ask me what it meant. And I didn't know. And then I felt: I can't 
talk. I can't write. And I would get all twisted up about it."

I mention reading back through interviews from her early career, a lot of 
ambitious, slightly self-obsessed young men expecting hard-won pop philosophy 
from her. No wonder she didn't have many answers…

"Well, we were all pretty self-obsessed," she says. "I mean, I had been making 
up languages! Looking back, that was a tool to help get things out. I didn't 
have the confidence just to sit down and write something. I was always running 
away from that… It's funny," she laughs. "I go to college now. I'm so proud of 
myself! I do creative writing. At this wonderful college, Emerson College, in 
Sussex.Paul Matthews <http://www.paulmatthewspoetry.co.uk/>, a poet, is our 
tutor. And one of the first things he said was: 'Right, today, we are going to 
make up our own languages.' I knew somebody else out there did that! I used to 
think everyone did it…"

That playfulness, she suggests, was always at odds, too, with the business the 
Cocteau Twins found themselves in. It's the familiar tale, she wanted to let 
ideas come in their own time, but contracts and commitments prevented that; 
when she looks back on her years in the band, it is "the pressure to perform, 
the pressure to create" that she recalls first. She wouldn't have missed it for 
the world, she says, but she's "sad that it all went on so long".

The last two albums were a particular regret. By that point, she and Guthrie, 
with their young daughter, had taken to working shifts in the studio to avoid 
each other; he'd do nights and she would do days, or vice versa. Drugs had got 
in the way of everything by then too.

"I resisted it for a long time," she says. "I thought they would get tired of 
all this soon, and we will be back to normal but, of course, that didn't 
happen, unfortunately. Then, weirdly, I got into this pot smoking. I guess that 
was the part of me saying: 'Right, if you are going to let this slide, you 
might as well do it properly.' I should never have smoked pot. That was the end 
of the band really. Before that, I wouldn't have smoked because I am a singer. 
And I can't string a sentence together as it is. Christ! But there it was. And 
then quite a few other things happened together."

These things included splitting up from Guthrie, leaving the band, losing Jeff 
Buckley (she devoted the song Teardrop she wrote withMassive Attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/massive-attack> to him), and experiencing 
the beginning of the more crippling creative doubt that she has fought since. 
"I just got so depleted and exhausted by everything," she says. "I was in a 
horrible place. I had always thought of myself as a sanguine person, quite 
light and airy. But for a long while, no one could have possibly made me laugh 
or smile. It was awful."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fu7K72X4eo_s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fu7K72X4eo_s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fu7K72X4eo_s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Fraser's journey out of that depression began with her meeting Damon Reece, 
sometime drummer with Massive Attack, moving to Bristol, devoting herself to 
motherhood, and obsessively avoiding a lot of the pressures of the life she had 
found herself trapped in.

Her profound and understandable mistrust of returning to any of those 
pressures since – despite requests to collaborate with everyone from Prince to 
Peter Gabriel – have not gone away. Slowly, she has tried to reconnect with her 
gift, as well as to analyse the source of it. Hence the creative writing 
course, the painting trips to the Alps – "though I can't paint for toffee!" – 
using pigments made only of wild flowers, and a reading list that has moved on, 
she says, from "theosophy toanthroposophy <http://www.anthroposophy.org.uk/> – 
though I don't understand any of it enough to explain it, I am desperate to. 
I'm interested in lots of things I don't understand. I so wish I did! It makes 
me so sad. I think I'm such a feeling person but, obviously, you can't just let 
it run riot. Especially with age. And I would never wish to or pretend to be 
that youth again. I could not wait to have grey hair! I love my grey hair! I 
just wish that some fucking wisdom had come with it!"

She grits her teeth with frustration, talks of needing to be more closely 
connected to natural things – later that afternoon, she is taking herself off 
to West Wales to try to finish the songs she is working on. Does she like 
wilderness, I ask.

"I do, in my own way," she says. "But I don't have the wherewithal to go 
somewhere remote on my own. I can't do that. I can't drive, for one thing [a 
fact which I can't help thinking might come as a relief to other road users], 
but my strategy is to create the right atmosphere for myself and that is 
really going somewhere where it would be safe for me to panic. I find making 
decisions really very difficult. The torture of deciding about something is 
almost too much for me. That's why I'm so excited to have made this decision to 
play. I need that commitment! I'm honestly not as bad as I used to be."

I believe her, I suggest. And it will be great to hear her voice again. Thank 
goodness for the sevens, I say.

"Exactly," she says, brightly, "the sevens!"
 