
Death shall have no dominion over Emmanuelle Riva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emmanuelle-riva>, the French actor – and 
sometime poet – who we see winding down quite brilliantly over the course of 
Michael Haneke's harrowing Amour. "I can't go on," murmurs her character, Anne, 
as she finds herself unpicked by a series of strokes and retires to the 
confines of her book-lined Paris apartment.

The drama ushers her towards the deathbed and then beyond – all the way to the 
gaudy paradise of this month's Bafta and Oscar ceremonies. If such a thing as 
life after death exists, it can be found at the Royal Opera House in London on 
Sunday and the Dolby theatre in Hollywood two weeks later.

The success of Amour <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amour> (in general) and 
Riva (in particular) has caught Oscar pundits flat-footed: a topsy-turvy 
development for an industry that traditionally values youth over experience and 
English above other languages.

Defying predictions, Haneke's film has been nominated for the best picture and 
director prizes, while its 85-year-old star is the oldest acting nominee in 
Academy Awards history. For added novelty, Riva is joined on the best actress 
list by the youngest: nine-year-old Quvenzhané Wallis from the magical-realist 
Beasts of the Southern Wild.

"The acclaim for Riva's performance started at the Cannes film festival last 
May," says Wendy Mitchell, editor ofScreen International 
<http://www.screendaily.com/>. "But the Oscars is a much bigger hurdle and it's 
a surprise to see her nominated. But now she's made it, I think she's got a 
good shot at winning it outright. She's not just there for sentimental reasons."

Riva was born in north-eastern France, the daughter of an Italian-born 
sign-painter, and worked as a seamstress before turning to acting. Even today 
she is arguably best remembered for her breakthrough role as the unnamed 
heroine in the 1959 classicHiroshima Mon Amour 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zjGdLZNAdRc>.

Alain Resnais' fractured romance about memory and forgetting inspired the 
nouvelle-vague film-makers who followed and was hailed by director Eric Rohmer 
as "the most important film since the war, the first modern film of sound 
cinema". Another fan was Haneke. "As a young man I'd been captivated by 
Emmanuelle Riva in Hiroshima Mon Amour," the director told the New York Times 
last year. "But after that I lost her from view."

This is not to suggest Riva has been hiding for the past 50 years. She became 
a low-key talisman of French cinema throughout the 1960s, working with the 
likes of Georges Franju and Jean-Pierre Melville. But since Riva hit middle 
age, when rewarding screen roles started drying up, she has primarily been 
working on stage.

In the past few decades, she has cropped up in Three Colours Blue and the 
Julie Delpy drama Skylab. But she has never bloomed into a national treasure 
like, say, her contemporary Jeanne Moreau.

"Riva is mostly unknown to a wide French public," says the French cultural 
commentator Agnès Poirier. "In the sense that she belongs to hardcore 
cinephilia, the unyielding clique, the guardians of the nouvelle vague."

For all that, Hiroshima Mon Amour stands as the ghost in the wings of Haneke's 
movie. In casting Riva as the frail, fading Anne, the director is implicitly 
trading on the actor's former glories. This, he seems to be saying, is the fate 
that awaits us all.

The capricious young lover of 1959 becomes an ailing octogenarian, raging 
against the dying of the light, her body breaking down. Beauty fades and the 
music stops and all that survives us (maybe) is love.

"It is always poignant to see people like Riva back on centre stage, because 
in many ways they represent the history of cinema. What she brings to Amour is 
so much more than her performance. She adds the power of things that have 
passed. The emotion she conveys is very Proustian in that sense," says Poirier.

Away from the deathbed, Riva lives quietly in a Paris apartment, which, 
reports suggest, is not so different from Anne's bourgeois home in Amour. She 
has no children and her long-time partner died in 1999, but she fills her life 
with books, paintings and photography.

Riva largely shuns the limelight, although she has published three collections 
of poetry and a book of her photographs, taken on the set of Hiroshima Mon 
Amour. She admits theatre roles have become more difficult in recent years, and 
now struggles to memorise her lines. But acting has been good to her and she is 
reluctant to let it go. "I have always loved cats," shetold the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/08/emmanuelle-riva-amour-michael-haneke>
 last year. "And I think that being an actor is like being a cat. You have the 
opportunity to go out and live nine lives. And then you can come home and sleep 
by the fire."

Since Amour played at Cannes, Riva has received prizes from the Los Angeles 
film critics and the National Society of Film Critics and was honoured at the 
European film awards last December. Might she crown them all with a best 
actress Oscar? "I'd be astounded if she won," admits Poirier, although she 
points out that The Artist – a French-made, black-and-white silent film – did 
win the best picture statue last year. "Tout est possible," she says.

At Screen International, Wendy Mitchell suspects Riva is probably second 
favourite to Jennifer Lawrence, the 22-year-old star of Silver Linings 
Playbook. "Lawrence has been hotting up over the last few weeks and she is seen 
as a rising talent in the US," she says. "On the other hand, that might finally 
count against her. Jennifer Lawrence is going to have other years, other 
chances, whereas for Riva it's probably now or never."

By that logic, the actor's age may even work in her favour. "You have to 
remember that the median age of Academy voters is 62. Only 14% of the members 
are under 50. Some of these people have been following her career since 
Hiroshima Mon Amour."

In the fraught runup to Oscar night, only a fool would read too much into 
omens and portents. Yet sometimes the runes are hard to ignore. The Academy 
Awards ceremony takes place on Sunday, 24 February. And this, by a happy quirk 
of fate, is also Emmanuelle Riva's 86th birthday.

Potted profile


Born Paulette Riva in Cheniménil, France; 24 February 1927

Career to date Riva was a seamstress in her teens before landing a role in a 
stage production of Shaw's Arms and the Man. She became an emblem of the French 
New Wave, thanks to her role in Hiroshima Mon Amour, before returning to the 
Paris stage in the 1970s. She is a keen photographer and a published poet.

High point Playing embattled, graceful Anne in Michael Haneke's Amour – a 
performance that arguably eclipses her vibrant early roles

Low point Waving to the press on the red carpet. "What's that about? We're not 
performing monkeys."

What she says "If I don't act in another film, who cares? I'm 85, it doesn't 
matter. I'm still alive and that feels great."

What others say "Actors know a good performance when they see it, and Emmanuel 
Riva's is the best of the year" (Nicole Kidman)
 