
The last time we see Emmanuelle Riva in Amour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147440/amour>, she's lying pale and 
lifeless on a double bed, petals strewn about her head, the lights turned down 
low and the shutters closed. The last time we see Jean-Louis Trintignant, he's 
the walking wounded, racked by grief and barely there. Michael Haneke's 
acclaimed new picture offers such an unflinching portrait of the grubby 
business of dying – focusing on the final days of an elderly French couple – 
that it precludes all talk of second acts or miracle cures. To paraphrase 
Dorothy Parker, there'sno such thing as a happy ending 
<http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/18927-i-know-this-will-come-as-a-shock-to-you>.

All of which makes it curious to find the film's stars abruptly reunited in 
the airy limbo of a Paris hotel, just south of the Arc de Triomphe. There's 
Riva, waxing lyrical about poetry as she pours out the tea. Here's Trintignant, 
twirling his walking stick in one hand and gesticulating with the other; taking 
issue with this and that. The two look so hale it's disconcerting. Meeting them 
is like attending a private screening of an unlikely sequel.Amour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amour> 2: Life Goes On.

Riva is 85 and Trintignant is 81 and they both trail long, illustrious 
pedigrees. The former is indelibly stitched into French film history thanks to 
her breakthrough role in Alain Resnais'Hiroshima Mon Amour 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0052893/> way back in 1959, though she has also 
made films for Georges Franju and Jean-Pierre Melville. Trintignant rose to 
fame as the gauche young pup who pursued Brigitte Bardot in 1956'sAnd God 
Created Woman 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/And_God_Created_Woman_%281956_film%29>. He went 
on to star in the freewheelingA Man and a Woman 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0061138/>, then shot the gorgeous My Night With 
Maud <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0064612/> for Eric Rohmer and The Conformist 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0065571/> for Bernardo Bertolucci. In the early 
1990s the pair cropped up in Krzysztof Kieslowski's acclaimedThree Colours 
trilogy <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/three-colours-trilogy>. Riva played 
Juliette Binoche's mum inBlue 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77082/three-colours-blue> and Trintignant 
starred as the judge inRed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76557/three-colours-red>.

"That's right, we did," says Trintignant, still twirling his stick. "And 
actually there are a lot of similarities between Kieslowski and Haneke. In 
fact, I'd put them in the same family as Bergman and Tarkovsky. They all have 
the same generous, magnificent vision of the world."

"Yes, but I think Haneke is more happy, more smiley," adds Riva. "Kieslowski 
did not strike me as a very happy man."

I confess that Haneke does not especially strike me that way either 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2012/may/22/cannes-2012-michael-haneke-armour-video>
. This, after all, is the director who put Isabelle Huppert through the wringer 
in The Piano Teacher, foreshadowed the rise of Nazism in The White Ribbon and 
douses the lights altogether with Amour. There was I thinking he might be a 
little austere.

"No, no, not austere," insists Trintignant. "Strict, yes, but never austere. I 
mean, the subject matter is obviously intense. But we had a lot of fun along 
the way."

Riva rushes to chip in. "So much laughter, so many funny things. I remember 
once, when I was playing dead, I had to stay quite still. But when the crew 
went to look at the monitor, they came back laughing. I said, 'What's so 
funny?' and they told me that my toes were wiggling. My toes! I didn't even 
know they could see them. So I had to do the whole scene again and concentrate 
very carefully. I think my feet have a will of their own."
 Jean-Louis Trintignant, 85, and Emmanuelle Riva, 81. Photograph: Rex Features 
Rest assured that Riva's waggling feet do not feature in the final cut of 
Amour – a film that sticks largely to the same book-lined apartment, keeping 
pace with its characters as they move inexorably towards the exit door. 
Haneke's picture is gruelling, moving and finally transcendent.It scooped the 
crowning Palme d'Or award 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/may/27/cannes-palme-haneke-amour> when it 
premiered at this year's Cannes. In so doing, it thrust its actors back under 
the floodlights, though it turns out they were not won over.

"What I don't like about Cannes is the competition, the competing with each 
other, having to defend yourself," says Trintignant. "I don't like that. It's 
not the directors' fault, it's how the festival is arranged. One film wins, one 
film loses. But you can't compare works of art in that way. Do it with 
cyclists, not with film-makers."

"I don't particularly like it either," says Riva. "The crowds, the 
photographers shouting at you. So many flashes going off. It's crazy, it blinds 
you. 'Turn one way! Turn the other way!' What's that about? We're not 
performing monkeys. I know that some actors love it – they live for it. But I 
don't like it. Haneke doesn't like it either."

"Oh, Haneke doesn't mind it," says Trintignant. "He likes getting the pat on 
the head."

Riva points out that she first went to Cannes with Hiroshima Mon Amour and 
Trintignant with And God Created Woman. Her feeling is that Cannes was a little 
simpler, a little sleepier, back then in the 1950s, although Trintignant 
cautions against turning too nostalgic. Even the great years, he says, only 
tend to look great with the benefit of hindsight.

"I remember when My Night With Maud was shown at Cannes in 1969," he says 
ruefully. "It went down very badly. Before the screening they played a short 
film that had a scene in a church and showed a cat that came in and wandered 
about. And the audience liked that. They went, 'Ah, how nice, a cat.' Then we 
presented My Night With Maud. We also had a scene in a church but this time 
everybody in the audience burst out laughing because they remembered the cat 
from the earlier film. 'Where's the cat?' they shouted. 'We want the cat!' And 
they didn't pay any attention to our film because they were still thinking 
about the cat." He twirls his stick in exasperation. "I know that today My 
Night With Maude is seen as a great triumph. But back then it was a disaster."

Trintignant basically sees himself as having retired from screen acting. He 
made an exception for Haneke, he says, because you don't say no to a film like 
Amour. But he suspects that's it; he's finished with movies. Riva, for her 
part, remains more game. "If by chance people would still offer me roles, I'd 
still like to do them. But if not, that's OK. I love life," she says. "I love 
life to death. If I don't act in another film, who cares? I'm 85, it doesn't 
matter. I'm still alive and that feels great."

"There was an advert I saw once," Trintignant says. "It was an advert for 
cinema and it said, 'If you love life, you love cinema'."

"Ah," sighs Riva. "Yes."

"Well, I don't think that's true," he says. "If you love life, you're not 
going to go and sit in the dark in some cinema, are you? Why would you want to 
do that? Go and live your life instead." Interview complete, he drains his tea, 
seizes his stick and prepares to do precisely that.

• Amour is released in the UK on 16 November and in the US on 19 December
 