
As access to mobile phones and the internet grows, information and 
communication technologies (ICTs) are playing an ever-stronger role in efforts 
aimed at improving the lives of girls.

In many countries, however, girls still lag behind boys in terms of access to 
and use of ICTs. Barriers such as gender discrimination, lack of confidence, 
language difficulties, low literacy and lack of time and money continue to 
prevent girls and young women from taking full advantage of technology.

The corporate sector can help girls overcome these barriers in four important 
ways. It can provide direct support to girls through ICT programmes, recruit 
and hire young women for technology-based jobs, set an example through its own 
actions, and use its influence to encourage others to do their part.

Precisely where it will be most appropriate for a company to get involved will 
depend on its size and mandate, the context in which it operates and the areas 
in which it wishes to be involved.

Educating girls on ICTs

Directly supporting programmes that work to improve literacy and education is 
one way to help girls reach their potential. If a girl cannot read or write, 
she will be held back from using new technologies to their fullest.

A Unesco programme in Pakistan 
<http://www.meducationalliance.org/sites/default/files/intel_education_summit_brochure_web.pdf>
 found that SMS (mobile text messages) can be very effective. Following 
face-to-face training, girls were sent SMS messages reminding them to do their 
reading. They also received literacy quizzes. SMS-based programmes can be 
especially useful for girls in stricter cultural environments because they can 
take part without leaving the home.

Moving beyond basic literacy, formal education and programmes that help 
educators integrate ICTs into interactive teaching approaches can help improve 
learning outcomes and teach "21st century skills" such as use of technology, 
problem-solving, teamwork and self-motivation. Microsoft'sShape the Future 
programme 
<http://www.microsoft.com/publicsector/ww/programs/shape-the-future/pages/index.aspx>
, for example, is partnering with government and non-government organisations 
in several countries to achieve large scale digital access, and will 
incorporate a gender lens into its curriculum to ensure that girls are included 
in a holistic way in the methodology.

Recruitment drive

Expanding jobs for girls outside the traditional employee pool and building 
training programmes that meet the needs of disadvantaged young women as well as 
those of a particular company are also key areas for businesses. Rockefeller 
Foundation, for example, is working with a range of corporate and non-profit 
partners on itsDigital Jobs Africa 
<http://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/our-work/current-work/digital-jobs-africa/digital-jobs-defined>
 programme, which is aimed at training and connecting marginalised young 
people, including young women, with available jobs in the ICT and related 
sectors.

Young women not living in cities or who have limited resources may have 
trouble finding out about jobs.Souktel's Job Match 
<http://souktel.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=61&Itemid=132> 
is an application that works on a basic mobile phone. Employers advertise their 
jobs, and potential candidates upload SMS-sized resumés to a data bank. Job 
Match sends alerts when relevant jobs are advertised. These kinds of services 
can help companies specifically recruit young women in less advantaged 
communities. More companies recruiting this way could help more young women 
find employment.

Mentoring schemes

Another way that businesses can help is by providing ongoing mentorship and 
encouraging girls to enter the field of ICTs, traditionally considered a male 
field.Girls in ICT Day <http://storify.com/ITU/girls-in-ict-day-2013>, 
celebrated every April, is aimed at connecting girls and technology jobs and at 
providing advice, mentoring and exposure to jobs in this field.Girls Who Code 
<http://www.girlswhocode.com/> in New York works directly with girls to 
educate, inspire and equip them with the skills and resources to pursue 
academic and career opportunities in computing fields. High-touch mentorship 
with some of the industry's top female engineers and entrepreneurs is a key 
part of the programme.

Businesses must put their own houses in order

Alongside all the valuable work that private companies can do to support 
female empowerment through ICTs, it is important for businesses to walk the 
talk on equality and diversity by implementing policies that value young women 
and treat them fairly in the workplace. Steps that businesses can take include:

• Equal pay for equal work
• Producing marketing and communications that are respectful to women and that 
show women in strong roles rather than sexualised ones
• Seeking and maintaining a balance of women in leadership and decision-making 
roles
• Not tolerating gender-based discrimination or sexual harassment in the 
workplace
• Paid maternity and paternity leave
• Benefits such as healthcare and flexible work schedules

Lastly, in addition to the above actions, businesses can influence others to 
support ICT-enabled programming with girls. Initiatives such asmWomen 
<http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/mwomen>, which has formed 
a broad coalition that works to increase access to mobile phones for women and 
girls, help to bring funds and attention to the issue of girls' access and use 
of ICTs. The Women in ICTs and Development (WICTAD 
<http://blogs.state.gov/stories/2013/01/10/women-technology-and-international-development>
) coalition is working along similar lines to increase women's access to 
broadband. Two important reports are the Cherie Blair Foundation and GSMA's
Women and Mobile, a Global Opportunity 
<http://gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/GSMA_Women_and_Mobile-A_Global_Opportunity.pdf>
 and Intel'sWomen and the Web 
<http://newsroom.intel.com/community/intel_newsroom/blog/2013/01/10/intel-announces-groundbreaking-women-and-the-web-report-with-un-women-and-state-department>
, both of which provide research in this area and are helping move these 
coalitions forward towards concrete goals.

The challenges girls and young women face are not small, but ongoing efforts 
from all sides can help to bring more attention to this critical area so that, 
in time, girls and young women can improve their access to ICTs and use these 
tools to move towards reaching their full potential.

Linda Raftree blogs about ICTs and development at Wait... What? 
<http://lindaraftree.com/> and works as the Senior ICT4D Advisor at Plan 
International USA <http://www.planusa.org/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become GSB member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> to get more stories 
like this direct to your inbox
 