
The chancellor's autumn statement 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/nov/29/public-sector-george-osborne-growth>
 outlined a raft of policies designed to get the UK economy moving again. With 
the Office of Budget Responsibility predicting that the economy will grow by 
just 0.9% this year and 0.7% in 2012, everyone is hoping that the chancellor's 
policies do the job.

During his statement the chancellor noted the economic importance of our 
cities which, he said, "are at the heart of our regional economies." The 
chancellor is right: The UK'snine largest cities generate 49.5% of the nation's 
GDP 
<http://www.centreforcities.org/assets/files/2011%20Research/11-03-14%20Centre%20for%20Cities%20Supporting%20Note_Growth%20conundrum.pdf>
 and just ten cities wereresponsible for nearly two thirds of English net 
private sector job creation 
<http://www.centreforcities.org/assets/files/10-06-07%20Private%20Sector%20Cities%20web.pdf>
 between 1998 and 2008.

Despite this, there was little in the speech to give cities the fiscal freedom 
to develop their own solutions to the unique economic challenges they face. The 
chancellor made a commitment to "allow city mayors to borrow against future tax 
receipts"; though it is not clear if, or how, this is different from 
pre-existing tax increment finance powers.

Earlier this year the Institute for Government and the Centre for Cities 
publishedBig Shot or Long Shot 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/publications/34/> looking at the ways 
in which cities can be empowered, beyond fiscal measures, to drive economic 
growth at the local level. The research recommends greater devolution of powers 
over planning, transport and skills to our big cities to enable them make the 
big infrastructure investments crucial to driving economic development. The 
report also recommends that mayors should be adopted in cities across the UK. 
It argues that only somebody with a direct, city-wide, electoral mandate can 
take properly strategic decisions about the future development of their place 
and coordinate the diverse range of players active in any big city.

This morning the Institute for Government 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/> hosted a discussion on Cities, 
Mayors and Growth at City Hall in London. Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, 
argued that mayors are a natural choice for cities. Power is inevitably 
dispersed in big cities and this "symphony of stakeholders" needs somebody with 
the authority and profile to "orchestrate" it. Johnson described how he was 
able to capitalise on the publicity generated by the Royal Wedding and secure 
sponsorship for projects across the capital.

Michael Heseltine painted a vivid picture of the time he spent in Liverpool 
talking to the city's people after the Toxteth riots. It didn't take him long 
to realise that the big problem was "nobody was in charge". Heseltine added 
that the hoarding of power within Whitehall departments creates "functional 
monopolies". This distracts us from seeing our cities as self contained 
entities that require a holistic policy approach.

Andrew Adonis asked the 110-strong audience of journalists, wonks, and 
government officials if any of them could name the leaders of Liverpool, Leeds 
and Birmingham. Only Dermot Finch, ex-director of the Centre for Cities, could 
manage it. The marked anonymity of our provincial leaders stood in stark 
contrast to the profile of the mayor of London; for Johnson his job is to "sell
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> to the planet".

In May next year, eleven of our largest cities will go to the polls to decide 
if they want to be run by directly elected mayors. Yet there is still 
uncertainty over the powers these mayors will have. By making an offer of 
additional powers now, the government could increase the chances of a yes vote. 
Perhaps then our provincial cities could take up the mayor of London's 
challenge to begin really competing with the capital on the economic stage. 
Cities taking control of their own futures is an essential element of any truly 
comprehensive growth strategy.

â€¢ Sam Sims is a researcher at the Institute for Government
 