
Last Sunday night, me and the rest of Mogwai closed the very last ATP 
Weekender. The atmosphere there was totally celebratory, despite the fact that 
we were playing at 11pm on a Sunday night and everyone had been partying all 
weekend. We've been part of theAll Tomorrow's Parties 
<http://www.atpfestival.com/> family since it started – performing at Belle and 
Sebastian's Bowlie event in 1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/28/all-tomorrows-parties-festival-belle-and-sebastian>
 – so I just hope we did the festival justice by giving it a send-off. After we 
played the gig I handed the sound guy my iPod and he playedSonic Youth's 
Teenage Riot <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xvDuATZCY8I>; everyone started 
going crazy. We're not the most subtle of bands, so we are probably quite a 
good option for closing an event like that. It's always good to go out with a 
bang.

The mood of the last festival itself was far from miserable too – we went out 
afterwards and all the ATP staff were having a party. Barry [Hogan], who 
organises the event, was giving a speech too, but I was pretty hammered by that 
point. It felt like everyone who helped run ATP was happy that weekend because 
of the way the festival had evolved throughout the years - I'm so glad that it 
never changed into a massive event because it can happen so easily; festivals 
lose their soul as they grow experientially. They can lose the spirit of what 
it was they set out to be. But not ATP.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_YJ1yzompMs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_YJ1yzompMs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_YJ1yzompMs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch Sonic Youth at ATP NY 2010 here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_YJ1yzompMs>

The first festival we curated was in 2000, at the first official event. It was 
a little bit stressful. I can remember feeling vaguely responsible, worrying 
about if everyone was having a good time. But in the actual runup to the 
weekend, working alongside Barry and booking bands was definitely hard work. It 
gets political when you have to decide how much people are going to get paid, 
and face issues that you've never really thought of. It doesn't happen too 
often, but every once and a while you get someone kicking off that their name's 
not big enough on the poster – you'd be surprised at the people who get touchy 
about the weirdest stuff. Aside from the technicalities – and the time thatour 
drummer's pacemaker started coming out of his chest after My Bloody Valentine's 
gig <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/23/popandrock1> in New York – I 
look back at ATP with a lot of pride. I suggested to Barry that we got Sonic 
Youth to play and when they said they were actually going to do it I couldn't 
believe it. It was a teenage dream come true.

Being on the same kind of platform as a band who have influenced so much of 
the music we make was massive for me, and I think that's one of the best things 
about the festival. You've got generations of musicians together, some who have 
grown up on each other's music and you're are finally getting to see them all 
play. I'm sure it's not just us - but we've made so many friends over the years 
and bonded through music, developing a life long friendships. I think that's 
one of the biggest parts of ATP's appeal, that and the idea that you share your 
music taste. All of my favourite musicians have been really into revealing 
their own influences and have always loved that bands like the Cramps,the Cure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/10/robert-smith-the-cure-bestival> 
orPrimal Scream <https://www.theguardian.com/music/primal-scream> have been so 
open about the artists they love, so turning that into a live situation is a 
great idea.

When picking acts to play, we learnt that you've got to be realistic – every 
band who's curated ATP has tried to getKraftwerk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kraftwerk> and Neil Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/neilyoung>. But you need to sell a lot more 
than 2,000 tickets to get those kinds of people. The unique thing about ATP is 
all of the lesser known bands who you stumble upon. Often at big festivals 
agents have so much power that the bottom of the bill is clogged up with bands 
who are only playing because of favours. It's rarity to see a band that you 
don't know who are playing a mainstream festival, and at ATP the chances are 
that you'll see something pretty exciting at some point.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxcAilJf6ECw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxcAilJf6ECw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxcAilJf6ECw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch Mogwai play at ATP's I'll Be Your Mirror festival at 
Alexandra Palace, London, in 2012 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xcAilJf6ECw>

The ATP at Kutsher's Country Club 
<http://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/02/da/67/1b/kutsher-s.jpg> in 
New York was one of my favourite ATP memories. We played withDinosaur Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/dinosaurjr> and My Bloody Valentine – it was 
a dream come true for me. As a place it's weird – a Scooby Doo kind of 
atmosphere and the place was falling apart. But the interesting thing about it 
was that the audience were going to bed early, as soon as the bands had 
performed! I guess fans in the US are not as hedonistic as European people. Our 
crowd normally has that Dawn of the Dead vibe - they definitely give the bands 
playing a run for their money in the drinking stakes. I also remember going to 
the Autechre ATP, and adding techno fans to the mix was absolute armageddon. 
Insane. But there's been so many others great times and it was destination for 
a handful of like-minded people to go to. Where they'll go now, I don't know. 
But it was a wonderful thing and something I'm lucky to have been part of.

• Stuart Braithwaite was talking to Harriet Gibsone

• This piece was amended on Dec 4 to change the sentence regarding Sonic 
Youth's Teenage Riot, which was played after Mogwai's set
 