
Abbey shareholders will, it seems, have to get a Spanish habit now that it 
looks certain that Banco Santander Central Hispano's Â£8.5 billion bid will 
succeed.

Patience in this case was certainly not a virtue. Those who sold back in 
August, when HBOS, owner of Halifax and the Bank of Scotland, indicated that it 
was considering a bid, could have pocketed more than 610p a share (and those 
lucky enough to sell when Lloyds TSB made a bid approach three years ago could 
have made twice that). Now that HBOS has ruled itself out and there is no sign 
of any other bidder, investors have the choice of selling out now or getting 
familiar with the Spanish stock market.

Unlike most foreign bidders, Santander is not offering shareholders the option 
of a full cash bid, to the dismay of the big institutional investors as well as 
the Sids who bought when Abbey demutualised in 1989. Instead, it will swap each 
Abbey share for one of its own, and will pay a special dividend of about 31p 
which, depending on the value of the euro and Santander's share price, is worth 
about 573p.

That illustrates the issues for anyone accepting Santander's share offer. To 
judge when to sell, you will have to become familiar with the operation of the 
Spanish stock market, and the banking industry in Spain, Portugal, Germany and 
Latin America - the places where Santander has operations - as well as our own 
market. You will also need to watch the currency market: the euro has gyrated 
between 1.65 and 1.9 to the pound this year. Not surprising, therefore, that 
Hilary Cook of Barclays Stockbrokers advises private investors to sell their 
shares now; spending the money on a Spanish holiday is likely to be more 
satisfying.

Santander is trying to help shareholders, whether they want to sell or hold 
on. It plans a free dealing service once the offer becomes unconditional, 
probably towards the end of next month, which will allow holders of fewer than 
2,000 shares to sell without charge. By then, these holdings will have been 
converted to Santander shares, so the price will be in euros, although 
Santander will convert the money into sterling before sending out the cheques, 
so there is some currency risk. You will also have to fill out a Spanish tax 
form. Selling now would avoid these headaches, though your stockbroker would 
doubtless charge commission.

For those who decide to stay on board, Santander is promising to seek a London 
listing and will pay dividends to British shareholders in sterling. But there 
is no guarantee that the British share quote will mirror the Spanish value - 
companies with two quotes often have big differences between them - and 
dividends would be declared in euros, so you would still suffer some currency 
risk.

To add to the problems of holding foreign shares, there is the risk of the 
deal itself. British investors were sceptical about Abbey's chances of 
improving its performance as an independent company. Santander's shareholders 
are likely to be at least as sceptical about the Spanish company's chances. 
While it has considerable experience of integrating acquisitions, and a 
much-admired technology system, called Partenon, Abbey is by far the biggest 
deal it has done. Integrating a business of that size in a company's home 
market is a challenge; doing it in a foreign country is more difficult still. 
Santander points out that it knows the British market well, having had a 
relationship with Royal Bank of Scotland for more than a decade; sceptics, 
however, point to research showing that most cross-border banking mergers 
destroy, rather than create, value. The fear that the Abbey deal will be 
another one is likely to weigh on Santander's share price until there is 
evidence that it has made it work.

Analysts also expect that many of Abbey's institutional shareholders will want 
to sell. They may be prohibited from holding foreign shares, or may prefer 
another international bank. That will be one more cloud over the Santander 
share price.

The conclusion is inescapable: Abbey shareholders should sell now. Those who 
want to stay exposed to the banking sector should look at HSBC, which looks 
inexpensive, has an impressive international spread and good growth prospects.
 