
The engineer and project manager Amec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> is set to buy its US rival Foster 
Wheeler in a $3.2bn (£1.9bn) deal combining two big players in the UK's oil and 
gas sector.

The London-listed Amec employs 29,000 people in about 40 countries and 
generates annual revenues of £4.2bn from markets including energy, mining and 
infrastructure. Foster Wheeler has more than 13,000 staff in more than 30 
countries, including in Aberdeen and its operational HQ at Reading.

Amec said it had provisionally agreed the terms of a cash and shares deal to 
buy Foster Wheeler for $3.2bn. The combination would create a new firm valued 
at £5bn.

The two firms already work together after recently securing consultancy 
contracts for building of a new refinery in Kuwait.

Amec said the tie-up with Foster Wheeler would more than double its revenues 
from growth regions, including through boosting its Latin America exposure.

It will also extend its oil and gas capabilities from exploration and 
production to the downstream sector, as well as bring in new customers. Amec's 
chief executive, Samir Brikho, said the potential combination was "financially 
and strategically attractive". He added: "I believe it would be a compelling 
proposition for our shareholders, customers and employees."

The making of a firm offer is subject to a number of pre-conditions, including 
completion of due diligence by both parties.

The move is the latest attempt by Amec to bolster its scale, having recently 
failed with a £700m takeover approach for Kentz, which works on oil and gas 
services projects across the globe.

Foster Wheeler was formed in 1927 from a merger of two companies based in the 
United States – the Power Specialty Company and the Wheeler Condenser &
Engineering <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/engineering> Company, whose 
roots go back to 1891.
 