
Robert Green: 6

His first touch 23 minutes in drew sarcastic cheers from the supporters. He 
might have snoozed after the break and still emerged with his second successive 
shut-out

Glen Johnson: 8

Conjured fine crosses for Rooney's first-half brace and played his part in the 
build-up to the Lampard goal and Defoe's first. With no defensive duties he 
revelled in the fun

Joleon Lescott: 6

The occasional thumped header from Andorra's desperate punts forward gave him 
welcome touches but his air-kick in front of goal from Beckham's cross left him 
perplexed

John Terry: 6

The captain will bask in a seventh successive competitive win and the most 
comfortable to date. His exertions were limited to the odd trot up to meet a 
Beckham set-piece

Ashley Cole: 7

Irrepressible down the left, charging forward merrily with no defensive duties 
to trouble him, and supplying his forwards with a conveyor belt of crosses

David Beckham: 6

Deep-lying but never required to muster a tackle of any note. His delivery 
from set-plays lacked the fizz of old at times but he still spread panic 
against shoddy opponents

Frank Lampard: 8

Ghosted unnoticed to the edge of the box to side-foot in England's second and 
swaggered classily around the centre utterly untroubled by the gasping 
Andorrans. All too easy

Theo Walcott: 7

The neat cut-back for Lampard's goal offered evidence of his improved 
awareness, though Ars√®ne Wenger will be frustrated that he was not withdrawn at 
the break

Wayne Rooney: 8

Nodded his team ahead then, with his smartly taken second goal, equalled Gary 
Lineker's record of 10 international goals in a season. He has been untouchable 
recently

Steven Gerrard: 6

Cut inside from the left and shot at will, pummelling from distance only to be 
denied by Koldo, but guilty of over-elaborating at times as he attempted the 
Hollywood pass

Peter Crouch: 6

How he craved some of the opportunities that fell to Rooney. His only first 
half chance was headed awkwardly over the bar. Scored from a toe-punt near the 
end

Substitutes 

Ashley Young for Gerrard, h-t

Another live wire to terrorise Josep Ayala and ran riot on the flank 6

Jermain Defoe for Rooney, h-t 

Took his chances exceptionally well and cashed in when cheap international 
goals were there for the taking8

Wayne Bridge for Cole, 64 

Steady and got forward well 6
 