
Look back carefully and we will probably find that even Nostradamus saw this 
one coming. A committed Netherlands side who first of all showed their mettle 
in qualification by beating a fancied Ireland team, and then played their group 
matches with such zest, enjoyment and no little skill that they were able to 
run both New Zealand and South Africa close enough to have beaten them, against 
an England side who have been battered from pillar to post since the second day 
of the first Test in Brisbane.

Of course England should have won their final match but somehow there was an 
inevitability that they would not. Not even Jade Dernbach, the default 
scapegoat, could be blamed this time as he was not playing: as a demonstration 
of a team who were utterly shot, this was from the top drawer.

England came into this tournament ranked No8 in the world, and consequently 
(at least from the periphery) with low expectation, and they duly lived down to 
that. The runs they scored against New Zealand, Sri Lanka, and South Africa 
(three of the top dozen totals in fact) flattered them, the conditions, in 
which the dew factor helped skid the ball on to the bat, favouring them, even 
if the drenched balls made bowling a lottery.

It is largely the same for all sides and England coped less adequately than 
others. Their fielding, the benchmark by which teams, not least their spirit, 
can be judged, was lacklustre and simply inept at times. Had England played 
their matches in Dhaka, or even during the daylight hours in Chittagong, before 
the dew descended as the sun set and the pitch was grabby as in the final 
match, then they would certainly have struggled even more. England teams have 
rarely coped well with limited-overs cricket on the subcontinent and this was 
no exception, where their strategies and tactics might well have been 
deciphered from the Rosetta Stone. It was ever thus.

What caused such a final meltdown? In the aftermath, when taking the positives 
was no longer an option and a little honesty was called for, both the captain 
Stuart Broad and the head coachAshley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> used words such as "ugly" and 
"embarrassing", and there is no arguing with that. Both suggested that 
complacency was a factor, although this is harder to rationalise.

A team who have carried all before them, underestimate their opponents, 
disrespect them even, and then lose, might be said to be complacent. Maybe that 
is an accusation that could be better directed at Australia, who arrived as one 
of the favourites and have been humbled, but not England. This winter, they 
have been slaughtered in five Test matches; lost five out of eight ODIs; and 
eight out of 10 T20s. That sort of record does not make for complacency no 
matter who the opposition.

The lack of confidence is another matter. Success breeds success and with it 
confidence. Sides that hold catches are successful but in no small part they 
hold the catches because they are successful. In their match against Sri Lanka, 
where the wet ball was only partial mitigation, the dropping of catches became 
endemic to the point where it was apparent that fielders did not want the ball 
to come to them.

To fail to chase a low total against a modest Netherlands side highlighted not 
only the lack of skills in the English game in general when confronted with 
alien conditions, but also a lack of commitment and personal responsibility, 
the latter something that Giles has been trying to drum into players without 
obvious success.

Now, though, there is some breathing space before the summer internationals 
during which time some crucial, and possibly difficult, decisions will have to 
be taken right across the board, from support staff, all of them, to captain. 
Ultimately, it matters not what coaches say to players, or how they prepare 
them, for that final responsibility for performance rests with those who take 
the field. They cannot, and should not, hide behind their backroom staff.

This has not been a good few weeks for Giles, though, for the head man gets 
the plaudits but must carry the can too. To suggest that he was a shoo-in to 
replace Andy Flower as the England head coach is to misjudge both the 
intentions of the new managing director of England cricket, Paul Downton, and 
the integrity of the recruitment process. In this regard, England are fortunate 
that Downton, who did not take up his position officially until the start of 
February, comes to the post with a largely uncluttered mind. He will certainly 
assess things dispassionately, divorced as he is from the system that installed 
Giles as Flower's heir apparent (albeit with the expectation that the vacancy 
would not arise probably until after the 2015 Ashes).

Giles' record in charge of the one-day elements of the England side has been 
modest, aside from taking the ODI team within touching distance of the 
Champions Trophy, and these past few weeks have been catastrophic as far as his 
ambition is concerned. That the players enjoy playing under him is not 
sufficient in itself: enjoyment is not translating into results. If they, those 
of them who survive, are keen to have Giles in permanent charge then they have 
done him few favours in Chittagong.
 