
England and Australia will stage a 1970s revival of Ashes to Ashes in 2013, 
with back-to-back series for the first time in 38 years. If the teams meet in 
the semi-finals or final of the new ICC World Test Championship that is also 
likely to be played in England in the summer of 2013, international cricket's 
oldest adversaries could play no fewer than 11 Tests inside seven months.

With England likely to host another Ashes series in the summer of 2015, it 
would represent an unprecedented glut that will lead to inevitable accusations 
of devaluing the rivalry. It will also bring a major financial boost to the 
England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board and 
should help them to ease the pressure being felt by the majority of the 
counties that stage international cricket, with a minimum of 10 Ashes Tests now 
available to be allocated in the space of three years.

The new Ashes dates, like the four-team play-off to be crowned world Test 
champions which is set for England in June 2013, have still to be finalised. 
But after details had been leaked by Cricket Australia overnight, Steve 
Elworthy, the ECB's marketing director, confirmed they are likely – and denied 
they would represent too much of a good thing. "I believe the brand is strong 
enough, as we've seen this year," he said.

Under the usual arrangements of Ashes series every two years, England would 
have been due to go to Australia in the winter of 2014-15. But with Australia 
due to host the ICC World Cup in the early months of February 2015, that would 
have meant a stay of up to five months for the England players – and a repeat 
of the strains the team are currently showing, with little time to recover from 
their Ashes triumph before the start of the World Cup on the sub-continent.

The decision was therefore made that England would tour Australia a year 
early, in the winter of 2013-14. Ideally, the next home series would also have 
been brought forward from 2013 to 2012 to avoid the Ashes orgy. But the London 
Olympics made that impossible.

"It's always been our aim to break that cycle of two huge events in the same 
winter," Elworthy added in comments to ESPNcricinfo that he later reiterated to 
the Guardian. "To ensure that the teams have better preparation time for the 
World Cup, this is the only solution. But I also think it's absolutely 
manageable."

It means that far from being a dish best served cold, the losers of the next 
Ashes battle in England will now have the chance to take their revenge piping 
hot, with only a couple of months between the end of one series at The Oval and 
the start of the next in Brisbane – assuming the venues retain their 
traditional places in the increasingly crowded schedule.

There was a comparatively huge gap of five months between the last 
back-to-back Ashes series in 1974-75, providing a welcome respite for England's 
batsmen when Dennis Lillee and Jeff Thomson were in their pomp – although not 
for Mike Denness, who was sacked as captain when his team followed the 4-1 
thrashing in Australia that was completed in Melbourne in February with a heavy 
defeat in the first Test in Edgbaston in July.

"I haven't seen the details but it sounds pretty heavy duty stuff," said the 
former England coach Peter Moores, reflecting the likely concerns of his 
successor, Andy Flower about such an exacting schedule. "To be playing your 
showpiece series twice in quick succession without the gap in between would be 
tough and not necessarily the easiest sell – sometimes the gap in between can 
be part of the attraction."

The major significance of the new proposals for Australia is to thrust their 
next home Ashes series to the beginning of the period for which they are 
currently negotiating a new television contract. There have been suggestions 
that Cricket Australia could be adversely affected by the significantly 
improved new deals that the major winter football codes, rugby league and 
Australian Rules, are expected to conclude over the next 12 months, especially 
after England's dominance of the recent series. The ECB's television deal with 
Sky expires after the 2013 Ashes series, so the shift in the next home series 
to 2015 is unlikely to make a huge difference.
 