
There will be no need for a public outcry should Sam Allardyce, as is widely 
anticipated, return to management with Crystal Palace before the year is out. 
The same year when his long-held ambition ofbecoming England manager was 
realised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/sam-allardyce-appointed-new-england-manager-fa-confirm>
 andthen curtailed a mere 67 days later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
, the shortest reign of any permanent Football Association appointment, after 
being in charge for a single game. Allardyce is simply too capable an operator 
to stay out on the sidelines for long.

That was what earned him a crack at the England job in the first place and 
though he behaved foolishly, to use the FA chairman Greg Clarke’s phrase, the 
cost was entirely to himself. Even as he agreed with his employer that his 
position with England had been fatally compromised and accepted the need for a 
mutual parting, Allardyce was being hotly tipped to be back in work in no time 
with the next club that found its Premier League status in peril. He always is. 
That is what he does, and ifCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> had not been in touch this 
time it could easily have been Swansea or even Sunderland.

Sam Allardyce set to take Crystal Palace job after Alan Pardew’s sacking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/crystal-palace-alan-pardew-sacked>
The great irony of Allardyce’s career is that much of it has been successfully 
spent firefighting at struggling clubs and when he finally achieved the 
opportunity to work with top players with England – he also famously fancied he 
could do a decent job with Real Madrid – he managed to talk his way out of it 
simply by being himself.

There are still those who believe Allardyce was harshly treated by the Daily 
Telegraph’s sting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/26/sam-allardyce-fa-newspaper-sting-england-manager>
. He did not recommend breaking any rules, could not and would not offer advice 
on how to get round third-party ownership and kept insisting he would need to 
run the proposal for keynote speaking that was being suggested past his 
employer, the FA. But it was not a good position for an England manager to be 
caught in so early in his tenure, actively seeking more money after signing an 
England contract worth £3m a year, making fun of his predecessor’s speech 
difficulty and explaining to undercover reporters precisely how to go about 
making a vast amount of money for just a few hours’ work.

Taken in isolation none of it demanded the manager had to be sacked, but it 
was an embarrassment and Allardyce appeared to agree with Clarke that he had 
stepped out of line. His punishment, apart from losing his dream job, will be 
to be remembered forever as an arrogant braggart who could not keep his greed 
and self-regard under control. Perhaps unsurprisingly, if he was really 
drinking a pint of wine.

The contents of the large glass on the table in front of Allardyce have never 
been properly verified, but the image of Big Sam talking himself into trouble 
while necking a pint of Pinot Grigio or something is simply too good not to be 
true.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fcrystal-palace-sack-manager-alan-pardew-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crystal%20Palace%20sack%20Pardew%20with%20Allardyce%20set%20to%20take%20over%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fcrystal-palace-sack-manager-alan-pardew-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crystal%20Palace%20sack%20Pardew%20with%20Allardyce%20set%20to%20take%20over%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fcrystal-palace-sack-manager-alan-pardew-video-report&media=>
Crystal Palace sack Pardew with Allardyce set to take over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/22/crystal-palace-sack-manager-alan-pardew-video-report>
For better or worse, that is the picture of Allardyce that will now follow him 
around, though Palace need not be unduly concerned. The manager they want is 
the one who hauled Sunderland out of trouble against the odds last season, the 
one who took West Ham from the Championship to comfortable mid-table in the 
Premier League, handing them over in good repair despite constant complaints 
from supporters about the quality of the football.

Along with unresolved allegations about his relationship and financial 
dealings with certain agents, playing unattractive football with a heavy 
reliance on long-balls and set pieces has been another theme that has dogged 
his career.

There is some truth in it – his Bolton side were often physical and 
intimidatory – though he did attempt to sweeten the pill for supporters by 
bringing in players of the calibre of Jay Jay Okocha, Youri Djorkaeff and 
Nicolas Anelka. It did not completely work, but after falling as low as League 
One Bolton supporters would happily welcome a return to those days.

Sam Allardyce is a firefighter but some Crystal Palace fans will be alarmed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/22/sam-allardyce-crystal-palace-survival-fan-alarm>
Allardyce’s reputation as an unsophisticated long-ball merchant probably cost 
him his chance at Newcastle, whose owner had hired him precisely because he 
wanted an end to short-termism under constantly changing managers and admired 
the long-term plan he had put into effect at Bolton. Unfortunately, the club 
changed hands shortly after Allardyce’s arrival and as early results were 
unimpressivethe new owner took the opportunity to ditch a manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/jan/09/newsstory.newcastleunited1> 
who had never proved popular with fans and make their own appointment. Kevin 
Keegan then lasted less than a year, quickly followed by Joe Kinnear and Alan 
Shearer. Two relegations later, the same owners who enjoyed a degree of success 
under Alan Pardew have now turned to Rafa Benítez to implement a long-term 
strategy.

Allardyce again fell foul of a new owner at Blackburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/dec/13/sam-allardyce-sacked-manager-blackburn-rovers>
, rescuing the club after Paul Ince’s flirtation with relegation in 2008 but 
failing to negotiate his own survival once the Venky family took over. West Ham 
was the first venture in the capital for a manager generally assumed to be a 
northerner, even though he hails from the West Midlands. Supporters might 
quibble, but he did a good enough job at Upton Park. He achieved promotion at 
the first attempt, and kept the side in the top fightuntil the completion of 
his contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/west-ham-sam-allardyce-contract-not-renewed>
.

For a while at Sunderland last season it appeared he might have bitten off 
more than he could chew and the dreaded word relegation might appear on his 
top-flight CV for the first time, but he turned the situation round. Crystal 
Palace will be wanting more of the same and in a way they are in a better 
position than Sunderland. At least they can be fairly certain that if Allardyce 
proves to be their saviour they are not going to lose him to England at the 
start of the following season.
 