
Graeme Swann <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/graeme-swann> will miss 
England's final two matches in the NatWest Series against Australia to rest the 
sore elbow in his bowling arm.

Swann, one of three players also released for the final match of last month's 
one-day series against West Indies, which England won 2-0, will be replaced by 
his fellow off-spinner James Tredwell in the squad for Chester-le-Street and 
Old Trafford.

England have also called up, as expected, the seamer Chris Woakes â€“ already in 
the squad for yesterday's washed-out match at his home ground Edgbaston while 
Jade Dernbach and Stuart Meaker attended the funeral of their former Surrey 
team-mate Tom Maynard.

Dernbach will be unavailable for the final two matches as well because of a 
side strain, and it was therefore an obvious course of action to retain Woakes 
as England seek to consolidate their 2-0 lead.

England were planning all along to rest Swann, a vital member of the Test team 
who will soon put their world No1 status on the line in three matches against 
South Africa.

The national selector Geoff Miller said: "We had earmarked the fourth and 
fifth matches in this series as an opportunity to rest Graeme, regardless of 
the result at Edgbaston, because we have to consider our preparations for the 
Test series later this month.

"Graeme has some pain in his elbow at the moment and we feel that an extra 
week's rest will allow his elbow to settle. Chris Woakes replaces Jade 
Dernbach, who has been ruled out with a side strain."

The all-rounder Samit Patel has been released to play for Nottinghamshire in 
Thursday's Twenty20 match against Yorkshire, a fixture in which England's Jonny 
Bairstow will feature for the visitors.

Bairstow will also be available for Yorkshire's Roses match at Old Trafford on 
Friday, and he and Patel will rejoin England in time for Saturday's fourth 
NatWest Series match at Durham.
 