
English National Opera was founded by Lilian Baylis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/nov/19/fitting-memorial-lilian-baylis>, 
the visionary impresario who laid the foundations of not just ENO but the 
National Theatre and the Royal Ballet. She was 15 years older than John Reith, 
the first general manager of the British Broadcasting Company, and these great 
organisations emerged into the same cultural climate in the 1920s and 30s. 
(Baylis had in fact started presenting operas before the first world war at the 
Old Vic, but it was in the 1930s that Sadler’s Wells theatre became the settled 
home of her ballet and opera companies.)

The organisations shared a pioneering spirit: one of invention, cleverness, 
adventure, in the early days often in slightly shabby and improvisatory 
contexts. Most importantly, they also shared a strong sense of purpose and 
ideology: the high culture enjoyed by the privileged should be the province of 
all. It was for the many, not just the few.


Some believe that Wigglesworth should have stayed on, however difficult his 
position, for the sake of the company

In different ways and at different speeds, these organisations all became 
institutions that, along with the universities, were really appendages of the 
postwar welfare state, supported by government funds because they were seen as 
contributing to the spiritual health of the nation. The 1960s demolished the 
notion that “high” culture was the only culture worth arguing for. Under 
Thatcher and Blair, culture was asked to justify itself on a number of mainly 
economic grounds: it was part of the “knowledge economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2000/mar/07/tonyblair>” or the “cultural 
industries”. This long-term trend, you could say, has found its perfect 
expression in the fact that ENO currently lacks an artistic director and a 
music director and is, for the moment, being run bya chief executive whose 
previous job was as a management consultant from McKinsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/21/brunjes-pollock-steer-english-national-opera>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fstriking-english-national-opera-choristers-sing-against-cuts-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F26%2F1456506810171%2FKP_1813390_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Striking%20English%20National%20Opera%20choristers%20sing%20against%20cuts%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fstriking-english-national-opera-choristers-sing-against-cuts-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Striking%20English%20National%20Opera%20choristers%20sing%20against%20cuts%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fstriking-english-national-opera-choristers-sing-against-cuts-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F26%2F1456506810171%2FKP_1813390_crop_640x480.jpg>
 TheENO chorus sing in protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/feb/26/striking-english-national-opera-choristers-sing-against-cuts-video>
 against job cuts, at the London offices of Arts Council England. 
Mark Wigglesworth: ENO needs to innovate to survive, not reduce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/mark-wigglesworth-eno-needs-to-innovate-to-survive-not-reduce>
This lack of a music director is down to the abrupt resignation of conductor 
Mark Wigglesworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/22/eno-music-director-mark-wigglesworth-quits>
. As a figure of international repute, his loss is lamentable, and was greeted 
instantly with fury and sadness (directed at ENO’s board) by some of the 
company’s greatest vocal stars. In his leaked letter to musicians, Wigglesworth 
wrote that “the company is evolving now into something I do not recognise, and 
as hard as I have tried to argue to maintain what I believe to be the 
fundamental pillars of our identity, I have failed to persuade others of this 
necessity”. In recent months he has presented colleagues and the board with 
suggested cost-­cutting measures, especially to production costs such as actors 
employed – measures urgently necessary given the reduction of Arts Council 
England funding from £17m to £12.38m.

While his departure is to be mourned, there are some who believe Wigglesworth 
should have stayed on, however difficult his position, for the sake of the 
company, until the arrival of an artistic director to succeed John Berry 
(interviews have been happening this week, and an announcement expected by the 
end of April).

One thing is certain. If ENO is to survive, it must do so in reduced 
circumstances

Others have argued that Wigglesworth’s cost­-cutting suggestions ate into 
production costs rather than musical costs, protecting his own area. Senior 
management atENO <https://www.eno.org/> say every single possible avenue has 
been visited, every option raked over, every unthinkable thought considered, 
and that the current proposals are the best chance the company has to balance 
its artistic identity against the inescapable realities of its financial 
situation and the absolute necessity of putting forward a credible strategy for 
the next funding round. That means employing the chorus for nine months of the 
year, running two sub-seasons in spring and autumn, and hiring out the Coliseum 
at other times while the company performs on other stages.


One thing is certain: there will be no bail­out, no magic funds from Arts 
Council England <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>. If 
ENO is to survive, it must do so in reduced circumstances. It is an 
understandable impulse for the company’s defenders to decry any cut or any 
change. But it must change. Its history is full of change. It moved to the 
Coliseum only in 1968, for example. At the same time the question of what ENO 
is – what it is in its bones and sinews – must be cherished and protected.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Feno-english-national-opera-situation-bleak-not-terminal-embrace-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F954c30362cefd19dee9d384814621d3bdfd9bab7%2F0_267_4748_2892%2F4748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ENO%3A%20The%20situation%20looks%20bleak%2C%20but%20it%20need%20not%20be%20terminal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Feno-english-national-opera-situation-bleak-not-terminal-embrace-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ENO%3A%20The%20situation%20looks%20bleak%2C%20but%20it%20need%20not%20be%20terminal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Feno-english-national-opera-situation-bleak-not-terminal-embrace-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F954c30362cefd19dee9d384814621d3bdfd9bab7%2F0_267_4748_2892%2F4748.jpg>
 ENO’s most recent production, Akhnaten, starring Anthony Roth Costanzo. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
In my view, what ENO is is twofold. First it is people, its singers, players, 
its backstage and front­-of-­house staff. Second, it is those founding values, 
albeit remade and reframed for today, that Baylis breathed into the work of her 
young companies.

The situation looks bleak. But it need not to be terminal. ENO needs strong 
artistic leadership and much better governance. Louise Jeffreys, head of arts 
at the Barbican and a former technical director of ENO, has joined the board 
this month and is a wise and careful head, precisely what is needed. But it is 
still overbalanced in the direction of those with no experience of the delicate 
and difficult work of running arts organisations. It is hard to imagine who 
would want to become artistic director of ENO under the current circumstances, 
but one can only hope that someone with an iron will and a determination to 
rescue this much-loved company will emerge from the car-wreck that we see at 
the moment.

ENO may have sprung from a historical moment alien from that in which we find 
ourselves now, but its founding impulse – that the strange, camp, glittering, 
ridiculous, glorious, disturbing, heartstopping artform of opera has something 
to say to us – is still valid. For many years now, ENO has been a paradoxical 
place. It has had a superb orchestra and chorus, the best technical team in 
Britain, and has produced artistically brilliant work. This is true even now, 
as everything seems in a state of disintegration, with its productions ofThe 
Magic Flute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/07/the-magic-flute-review-eno-coliseum-review-mozart-lucy-crowe>
 andAkhnaten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/06/akhnaten-review-eno-coliseum-philip-glass-improbable>
. And yet there has been no sense of what the organisation is for, or for whom. 
No sense of purpose, and no sense of identity. The choice of artistic director 
is absolutely crucial. It is the make-or-break moment.
 