
When it comes to stories about the fate of the earth, headlines are usually 
dominated by tales of gloom and doom. And there’s certainly a great deal to be 
depressed about: global temperatures hit their highest levels ever last year, 
oceans are growing so warm and acidic that fisheries could be lost, and food 
and water systems are in decline.


A big reason for focusing on the negative is that bad news tends to drive 
action. According to research by my organization, sustainable business 
nonprofit Future 500, negative messages typically yield two and a half times as 
much fundraising and five times as much media attention as positive ones. But 
as effective as the doom-and-gloom storyline is, there’s another important 
environmental narrative that’s waiting to be told.

Following the work of environmental pioneers like William McDonough, Paul 
Hawken, Amory Lovins 
<https://www.asid.org/content/bibliography-recommended-books#.VOTBYPnF-Sp> and 
other eco-designers, it’s clear that there’s an audience – and a desperate need 
– for a new generation of realistic optimists to help us envision a genuinely 
prosperous post-carbon economy.

There is much to be optimistic about. In its 2013 report The 3% Solution 
<http://www.worldwildlife.org/?utm_campaign=301-redirects&utm_source=wwf.org&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=wwf.org>
, wildlife nonprofitWorld Wildlife Fund <http:> says that the key challenge 
facing developed countries is the need to reduce carbon emissions by roughly 3% 
a year.The McKinsey Global Institute 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/energy_resources_materials/resource_revolution>
 says that’s not only doable, but it’s exactly what the economy needs to grow 
sustainably and overcome its economic deficits.

Specifically, it says, the US needs to squeeze a third more value out of the 
energy it uses in the next decade, and improve that efficiency by 3% a year or 
more thereafter, to avoid painful economic and environmental consequences.


The quest for that 3% solution may prove challenging, but it will also open up 
a wide range of business opportunities. Here are some of the biggest potential 
opportunities and the companies trying to tap them:


Creating living farms, oceans and forests

The industrial agriculture system treats land like a machine. It’s based on 
the assumption that, if farmers feed the earth the right fuel and keep out 
contaminants, the engine will run smoothly and generate massive agricultural 
output. That can be true, but nature offers a much more productive and 
sustainable model: life. Farms, forests and oceans have the capacity tocreate 
more value than they consume 
<http://www.amazon.com/What-We-Learned-Rainforest-Business/dp/1576751279>, 
something that machines can’t do. What’s more, they’re inherently sustainable.

One step that large-scale agriculture could take towards adopting the 
nature-based model would be to shift to carbon-reducing agriculture. Fertile 
soil is a complex system with millions of carbon-sequestering microorganisms 
per square inch. Tilling, a common agricultural practice, burns fuel, releases 
poisonous exhaust gasses and strips the soil. The standard solution – pumping 
in pesticides, herbicides and nitrogen – only adds to the problem by 
contaminating groundwater and polluting oceans with runoff.

Studies have shown 
<http://www.nrcc.cornell.edu/climate_change/climate_farmenergy.pdf> that more 
natural soil amendments, like compost, manure and charcoal products, like those 
produced bythe Biochar Company 
<http://www.virginearth.com/finalists/biochar-solutions/>, can reduce 
atmospheric carbon and keep soils highly productive. In terms of water usage, 
treatment alternatives developed by companies likeAlgae Systems 
<http://algaesystems.com/> purify water at low cost, while generating 
carbon-negative fuels and fertilizers that are chemically identical to 
petroleum-based products.


On the retail end, Whole Foods 
<http://media.wholefoodsmarket.com/news/produce-rating-release> is driving 
mainstream consumer demand for approaches like these. At the same time, 
organic, slow and local food movements are also continuing to gain momentum. 
For further-reaching substantive change, however,major food companies and 
manufacturers 
<http://www.twincities.com/business/ci_26590989/general-mills-treads-carefully-debate-over-genetically-modified>
 will need to get involved in order to make any broader systemic changes 
mainstream.


The sustainable seafood movement could offer a useful model for businesses and 
activists looking to change the agriculture system. Increasingly,careful 
fisheries management 
<http://www.edf.org/oceans/how-catch-shares-work-promising-solution> and the 
support of retailers likeWalmart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/walmart-sustainable-seafood-alaskan-salmon>
 andSafeway 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/media-center/reports/Carting-Away-the-Oceans-2014/>
 are making sustainable seafood more commonplace. At the same time, groups like
Environmental Defense Fund 
<http://www.edf.org/oceans/why-edf-supports-catch-shares> are continuing to 
push the needle forward.


Admittedly, the aquaculture battle is still raging and oceans are still in 
crisis. Carbon emissions are making them warmer, more acidic and less 
productive, and resource competition is driving fishing well beyond sustainable 
yields. So how can a living agriculture approach further benefit the seas? One 
way is to end the race for fish through “catch shares,” a market based system 
that sets aside a secure share of fish for individual fishermen, communities or 
fishing associations.


Forestry is another industry that could potentially offer a useful 
agricultural model. On the market end, brands likeNestle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/greenpeace-procter-gamble-palm-oil-change>
 andStaples 
<http://www.greenbiz.com/blog/2014/09/05/asia-pulp-and-papers-zero-deforestation-policy-holds-weight>
 are helping to shift the market towards more sustainable forest practices.


In this case, too, the problem is far from over, and activist groups are 
continuing to ramp up pressure oncustomers of companies like April 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/news/Blogs/makingwaves/april-leading-deforestation/blog/44213/>
 and a host of other palm oil and paper producers. The “zero deforestation” 
effort, championed byGreenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/26/app-deforestation-greenpeace-campaign>
 andothers 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/press/releases/Major-breakthrough-in-protection-for-Indonesias-remaining-rainforests/>
, has driven attention and engagement to a critical international issue.

Prosperity, not consumption, by design

Another business opportunity lies in the shift from excessive consumption to 
impressive design. Traditional business models are moored in consumption. The 
industrial economy, for example, propelled consumption by accelerating the 
speed of extraction.


Natural systems, on the other hand, develop value through efficient, smart 
design. AT&T, Advanced Micro Devices and Cisco are already putting this lesson 
to work, bringing productivity leaps to the non-digital economy. The internet 
of things is connecting computing devices and the Internet in factories, farms, 
buildings and homes. To put this in context, while industrial companies find it 
difficult to achieve 25% productivity gains,AMD expects a 2,500% gain in energy 
productivity 
<http://www.amd.com/en-us/press-releases/Pages/amd-accelerates-energy-2014jun19.aspx>
 for its computer processors by 2020.

New technologies are also following nature’s lead when it comes to design. 
Rather than following the traditional model of extracting complex raw materials 
from the earth, AMD is producing microchips and solar cells that take plentiful 
raw materials like silica and inscribe on them a value-creating design,building 
value up <http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1576751279>. That’s why – as 
Future 500 has documented 
<http://www.amazon.com/Innovation-Nation-Right-Left-Alliance-Entrepreneurial/dp/1499364229>
 – innovations in microchips, telecommunications, and the Internet often yield 
productivity gains of 1000% or more. If producers and consumers can use these 
innovations wisely – admittedly, a big “if” – it will be possible for the 
economy to harness nature’s value-creating strategy.


The sharing economy is another step forward. When digital technologies come 
into contact with consumptive industrial-era practices, the result can be 
positively disruptive. How many fewer hotels, rental cars, and taxis do we 
need, now thatAirBNB, Zipcar and Uber 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/bill-shireman/sharing-economy-leaders-w_b_5682812.html>
 enable consumers to share what they already have?


Putting a price on carbon

The third strategy also applies a core principle of nature: feedback and 
adaptation. While Congress delays on overarching federal climate policy, 
hundreds of companies are acting on their own, supporting an internal carbon 
price that drives down energy costs and carbon emissions simultaneously. Carbon 
taxes inBritish Columbia and Sweden 
<https://www.future500.org/tale-two-carbon-taxes/>, for example, outperform 
regulations and emission trading systems combined.


Critics argue that a carbon tax can’t happen broadly, but environmental groups 
have more carbon-pricing allies than they think. Even oil companyExxonMobil 
<http://corporate.exxonmobil.com/en/current-issues/climate-policy/climate-policy-principles/overview>
, a major carbon producer, is a genuine supporter – a fact that many simply 
can’t comprehend. But Exxon Mobil’s data tells it that, in the long term, it’s 
smart policy to insure thatcarbon pays its way 
<http://www.forbes.com/fdc/welcome_mjx.shtml>.

Adopting a carbon tax shift is one systemic way to put a price on an 
atmospherically dangerous byproduct. And while the quest for that 3% solution 
will be difficult, it will open up a wide range of opportunities as well. So 
let’s begin to think outside the standard gloom-and-doom mentality to make 
systemic, positive environmental changes that benefit multiple interests. When 
we do, we might very well discover that the technological, corporate, and 
political support needed to save the planet is well within our reach.



 