
In contrast to Yahoo, Google has always had a long-standing resistance to 
describing itself as a media company. It always seemed unlikely, then, that
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> might bail out a 
newspaper by buying it.

Chief executive Eric Schmidt has put an end to any industry fantasies that 
Google might rescue any one of the beleaguered newspaper companies in an 
interview with theFinancial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/73bc2fe4-45b4-11de-b6c8-00144feabdc0.html?nclick_check=1>
, saying that the firm considered an acquisition or - and this is telling - 
charitable support throughGoogle.org - but decided against it.


Eric Schmidt said Google has looked at buying newspaper businesses, but 
decided against it. Photograph:Mario Sundar 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/mariosundar/463746748/>/Some rights reserved 
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en_GB>

Rather than investing money into a dying business, Google seems to think the 
way forward is to help publishers make money through online advertising - a far 
less risky investment from Google's point of view.

The FT said that Google.org, it's charitable wing, had said "'clever ideas' 
about sheltering newspapers in non-profit structures" were "unlikely to happen 
without some massive, massive set of corporate bankruptcies". Still, nice to 
know Google could be there to pick up the pieces of a dead industry when it 
collapses completely.

He very matter-of-factly describes the old joke that some newspapers have 
actually been not-for-profit for years.

"The reality is that news gathering and the profitability model was always an 
uncomfortable relationship because it's very difficult to make money from a 
story about a tragedy or murder or so forth - and yet it's enormously valuable. 
So the structure of newspapers that evolved, where the majority of the revenue 
came from classifieds and these big, untargeted print ads, the content was 
fascinating but they were not connected to... it was ultimately destined to be 
challenged by technology and that's indeed what happened."

Schmidt confirmed the recent reports that Google is working on a premium news 
aggregator, if the details remain vague.

"With a number of newspapers, and The Washington Post being an example, we are 
very interested in trying to develop online news versions that somehow address 
the immediate needs of people and for which advertising works better. Without 
commenting specifically about products it seems to me that the newspaper that I 
read online should remember what I read. It should allow me to go deeper into 
the stories. It's that kind of a discussion that we're having."

The value that Google provides newspaper is in the traffic, he said, and there 
has to be a level of co-dependency that creates enough revenue through 
advertising that supports the production of high-quality content. Just a moment 
later, he admits that Google abandoned its own experiments with print and radio 
advertising because they didn't work well enough.

And with that $18bn in the bank, aren't there any acquisitions on the horizon?

"Internally, we say that the cash is not burning a hole in our pocket. The 
fact that we have all that cash does not mean that this is a great time to go 
blow it on billions of dollars of acquisitions that don't work. We have looked 
at a few things but nothing has really struck our fancy. The prices are too 
high."
 