
How should a concert begin? This is a question Es Devlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/es-devlin> has asked herself many times 
since she started designing for pop music in the mid-2000s. Devlin, who grew up 
in Kent, made her name creating dazzlingly imaginative sets for theatre and 
opera, where there is (usually) a script to work from and the opening scene is 
fixed in the text , but at a gig there is no script. There is only the music, 
the persona of the artist and the expectations of the audience going in.

Smoke, mirrors and fake plastic trees: the designs of Es Devlin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ng-interactive/2015/jun/17/es-devlin-set-designs-the-nether-chimerica-louis-vuitton-u2>
“When artists and I talk about how they should first be seen,” she says, “I 
often think about it in the context of the conversation that’s being had around 
them in the public domain while we are planning the show.” The conversation 
during the planning of Miley Cyrus’s Bangerz tour in 2014 was all about 
twerking and tongues (Cyrus had a habit of sticking hers out at the general 
public). In response to the furore around Cyrus’s behaviour, Devlin suggested 
the singer “enter by sliding down a giant bright-pink slide version of the 
contentious tongue – a bright, bubblegum gesture as an antidote to toxic talk”.

Similar thinking informed the openings of two other shows Devlin has worked on 
in the past couple of years. Prior to their Innocence + Experience tour in 
2015, U2 had released theirSongs of Innocence album by dropping it, unbidden, 
into millions of iTunes accounts for free.Not everybody appreciated the gesture.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/15/apple-u2-album-itunes-delete>
 In this instance, says Devlin, “an understated entry felt like the right 
medicine: Bono walking through the audience, lit by the same house lights as we 
were, the same scale as us”.

Adele, meanwhile, had kept fans waiting five years for her return, so Devlin 
decided to project an image of the singer’s sleeping eyes on to a giant screen 
for the two or so hours it takes for the audience to fill an arena. “The moment 
we hear the first word,‘Hello,’ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pvSpF_znLVU> 
the eyes open.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fes-devlin-theatre-set-designer-kanye-adele-beyonce-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7f036d50aadec901dfa56209b6cf1f75f8e9ece%2F0_29_4133_2480%2F4133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Es%20Devlin%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20touring%20stadium%20rock%20show%20is%20a%20formidable%20physical%20phenomenon%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fes-devlin-theatre-set-designer-kanye-adele-beyonce-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Es%20Devlin%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20touring%20stadium%20rock%20show%20is%20a%20formidable%20physical%20phenomenon%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fes-devlin-theatre-set-designer-kanye-adele-beyonce-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7f036d50aadec901dfa56209b6cf1f75f8e9ece%2F0_29_4133_2480%2F4133.jpg>
 Es Devlin in her studio. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
These juggernaut commissions, witnessed by tens of thousands of people in a 
single night, have been taking up more and more of Devlin’s time over the past 
decade, but it doesn’t mean she’s phased out her smaller-scale jobs. Quite the 
opposite. When we talk, she reels off a long list of projects either in 
production or being developed, including plays (Faith Healer 
<http://www.donmarwarehouse.com/whats-on/donmar-warehouse/at-the-donmar/2016/faith-healer>
 at the Donmar,Ugly Lies the Bone for the National), opera (Carmen for the 
Bregenz festival,Elegy for Young Lovers for Theater an der Wien), fashion (she 
designs catwalk shows for Louis Vuitton), sporting events (Devlin spent two 
years working on theopening ceremony for the Rio Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/aug/06/rio-olympics-2016-opening-ceremony-in-pictures>
) and pop concerts: her designs are currently on tour with Beyoncé and the 
Weeknd as well as Adele. How does she keep all these extremely diverse projects 
in her head at the same time?

“Well, I guess I don’t keep them all in my head at the same time,” she 
replies. “I bring them up from the depths on the day they need attention. It’s 
like having quite a lot of children who all eat at different times. The ones 
that eat at the same time are the problem.”

I need to hold on to the vision while also adapting it to what is physically 
achievable

Devlin, who has two actual children of her own – Ry, nine, and Ludo, six – 
works out of an old paint factory in Peckham, south London, assisted by a team 
of six designers. It’s here that colossal arena tours are devised alongside 
more intimate productions (if you can call the National theatre intimate). 
These projects have obvious differences, not least in the size and power of the 
machinery involved, but Devlin insists that the thinking behind them is 
connected. “Each object I design or make is part of a continuum,” she says. 
“There are paths of enquiry that I might have started with the director of a 
play 18 years ago, continued with a musician five years later and picked up 
with a choreographer nine months after that.” Sometimes toggling between 
disciplines can be unexpectedly productive: “We tend to view each new project 
through the prism of the other projects in the studio at the same time. This 
often leads to interesting cross-fertilisations.”

Working on the set design for Brian Friel’s Faith Healer at the Donmar, her 
team “quite quickly came up with the idea of a three-sided box of rain to 
enclose the performers between monologues”. For Devlin, the sheets of rain 
“expressed the weather-ridden, itinerant lives of the protagonists, while 
providing the curtain necessary to hide the shift in scenery and props between 
each monologue”. The effect is mesmerising. What audiences at the Donmar may 
not realise, however, is that the idea was borrowed from the Adele show, where 
a much larger box of rain encloses the performer when she singsSet Fire to the 
Rain <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jUWyNdNrD4k>. Devlin is unapologetic 
about the borrow, pointing out that the new context completely transforms the 
rain’s meaning and effect. “If I worked only in theatre,” she says, “then I 
wouldn’t be able to develop these practices, carrying one train of thought so 
overtly from one project to the next.”

She was first approached to design a (non-opera) concert stage in 2003 by the 
English punk band Wire, who were planninga farewell gig at the Barbican 
<http://www.wireviews.com/reviews/live_reviews/0403_barbican_cg.html>. Their 
manager persuaded Devlin to see the band performing in Sweden. “They were doing 
a big old thrashy gig in a bierkeller. I saw that and said, OK, I can 
definitely make you look better than you look now.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fes-devlin-theatre-set-designer-kanye-adele-beyonce-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c1aabc892c1519388247a5bdd318ac512bcf578%2F0_307_3916_2349%2F3916.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Es%20Devlin%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20touring%20stadium%20rock%20show%20is%20a%20formidable%20physical%20phenomenon%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fes-devlin-theatre-set-designer-kanye-adele-beyonce-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Es%20Devlin%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20touring%20stadium%20rock%20show%20is%20a%20formidable%20physical%20phenomenon%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fes-devlin-theatre-set-designer-kanye-adele-beyonce-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c1aabc892c1519388247a5bdd318ac512bcf578%2F0_307_3916_2349%2F3916.jpg>
 Adele at the Staples Center, Los Angeles, August 2016, with set design by Es 
Devlin. Photograph: Kevin Winter/Getty Images for BT PR 
Her designs for Wire caught the attention of Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest>, who asked her to collaborate on 
his Touch the Sky tour in 2005. At around the same time she received a 
commission from the Pet Shop Boys, which led in turn to interest from the likes 
of Muse and Goldfrapp.

I wonder about her criteria for accepting a commission. Is it essential that 
she likes the music? “Yes, but sometimes I don’t know it that deeply – I might 
only know the hit songs.”

This is when the research begins. “I immediately get into Toad of Toad Hall 
mode and buy everything, listen to everything and become completely obsessed. 
With Kanye’s music, I didn’t understand it until I understood his life, the 
autobiography, all the references – until I knew the thread through all the 
albums, one lyric to the next.”

Once she has read, listened to and watched everything she can find around the 
subject, she makes a start on the design, which she approaches from two angles. 
One tries to answer questions of function: “How many people need to perform 
within this environment? How do they enter it? Where does the light come from?” 
The other, she says, “responds to the question of form in a more abstract, 
instinctive way and develops a piece of kinetic sculpture in response to the 
lyrics and music.”

She can’t spend too much time in the abstract realm, however, because 
deadlines are always pressing – she had just four months to realise her designs 
for Beyoncé’s mammoth Formation tour. “A touring stadium rock show is a 
formidable physical and logistical phenomenon. It takes a crew of several 
hundred people, predominantly men, to put it together and the last thing they 
want to hear at the end of an 18-hour day is me quoting lines of poetry. So I 
need to hold on to the vision while also adapting it to what is physically 
achievable.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fes-devlin-theatre-set-designer-kanye-adele-beyonce-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fbf574a5b1c3a4667343028717b6ca13e6b4d9e%2F0_0_3676_3676%2F3676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Es%20Devlin%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20touring%20stadium%20rock%20show%20is%20a%20formidable%20physical%20phenomenon%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fes-devlin-theatre-set-designer-kanye-adele-beyonce-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Es%20Devlin%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20touring%20stadium%20rock%20show%20is%20a%20formidable%20physical%20phenomenon%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fes-devlin-theatre-set-designer-kanye-adele-beyonce-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fbf574a5b1c3a4667343028717b6ca13e6b4d9e%2F0_0_3676_3676%2F3676.jpg>
 Beyonce’s Formation tour in Paris. Photograph: Courtesy of Es Devlin 
In Devlin’s world, even the wildest imaginings can be made physical. Look at 
thecolossal robot man <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YFM3g-a459E> she marched 
through the set of Take That’s Progress tour in 2011, or the revolving video 
box the size of a building that’s currently wowing audiences on Beyoncé’s tour.

Ultimately, is kitting out a vast pop concert more challenging than working in 
a much smaller theatre space?

“No,” she says. “It’s less about the size of the venue than the ambition of 
your co-conspirators. It might be a very young theatre director putting on a 
big play for the first time and they need everything to be exactly as they 
envisaged it. That can keep you awake at night just as much as the worry of a 
giant 60ft-high monolith falling over.”

Es Devlin is on the bill for FutureFest <http://www.futurefest.org/>, London, 
17-18 September 2016, discussingthe future of play. Her new art installation 
Mirror Maze <http://thefifthsense.i-d.co/en_gb/> is at the Bussey Building, 
Peckham, London SE15, 20-25 September. You can see more of her work onInstagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/esdevlin/>

 