
Every day humanitarian aid workers impact the lives of countless people around 
the world. TreatingEbola patients in Liberia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/23/ebola-deaths-in-guinea-prompt-liberia-to-close-border>
, administeringcash transfer programmes 
<https://www.wfp.org/stories/kenya-wfp-introduces-electronic-cash-transfers-refugees-kakuma-camps>
 in Dadaab, doing inventory in a refugee camp in Turkey; all these jobs demand 
experienced workers. Their efforts frequently mean the difference between life 
and death.


But as worthwhile as their work is, it is not without its occupational risks. 
The year 2014 was themost dangerous year to be an aid worker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/19/deaths-aid-workers-world-humanitarian-day>
. And on top of the risk of injury or kidnapping,research shows that mental 
health and well-being issues are commonplace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/aid-workers-stories-mental-health>
.

Secret aid worker: is humanitarian work a career for escapists?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/23/secret-aid-worker-is-humanitarian-work-a-career-for-escapists>
So what keeps aid workers in their jobs? Recently I worked with a seasoned aid 
worker to survey more than 1,000humanitarians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/humanitarianshumanitarians>
 fulfilling a variety of roles in communities from sub-Saharan Africa to the 
South Pacific. Their responses provided insight into what makes the work 
meaningful, as well as how we can improve conditions for staff in the field.

So what did aid workers tell us?


Going back home can be daunting

Some told us that even a short amount of time in the field creates a sense 
that they no longer fit in at home after their assignments. This is especially 
true for those who’ve worked in conflict zones and in emergency relief.

Many told us that they felt changed in ways friends and family could not 
understand, and remaining in the sector provides a place to share experiences 
with like-minded people. “You do get addicted to the job and it’s hard to 
settle back to life in Europe and a normal job,” said one respondent. Another 
reported not even trying to explain the job: “I say I work in international aid 
and leave it at that.”

I would argue for a mandatory sector-wide detox transition period for field 
staff coming back home. Those who feel they don’t need it might be those that 
need it the most. Spending time with others who have experienced similar mental 
stresses can be critical, especially with HR staff who have been trained in 
counselling. Having to go back and forth between gears, from home to field, can 
be physically and mentally exhausting.

 ... and seem banal

It is difficult to un-know things, and knowing things that I do, I find it 
difficult to think of giving up this work

A second answer to why workers choose to stay in the field is a desire to test 
their mental, physical and spiritual potential. Working there is intense, and 
brings out strengths that might have remained dormant in life outside the job. 
Back home, life can seem banal.

One respondent captured this common theme: “It is much more difficult for me 
to fit in at home, where people do not care about the inner workings of [the] 
war. I think it is difficult to un-know things, and knowing things that I do, I 
find it difficult to think of giving up this work and moving to a different 
sector, without any resolution to these crises. Perhaps it’s putting a bandaid 
on a gaping chest wound, but I still feel it is better than doing nothing at 
all.”

Some saw life outside of aid work as pedestrian. “What else would I do with my 
life?” one worker reported. “Live in the suburbs and drive kids to sports 
activities?”

The vast majority of our respondents came into the sector with a sense of 
purpose about making a positive impact in the world. Being a part of the sector 
provides meaning in their lives and most (57%) reported very much liking their 
current jobs.

Options elsewhere feel limited

More than 50% of our respondents have devoted at least five years of their 
life to aid work, 22% of them more than 10 years. This mental, emotional and 
time investment has prepared them to do ... more aid work.

Steve Dennis and the court case that sent waves through the aid industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/05/steve-dennis-court-case-waves-aid-industry>
“After so much time gaining expertise and competence in this field, it seems 
daunting to start again in another one … even if I could figure out which other 
one I would choose,” said one aid worker.

In any occupation the thought of making a radical move to another field is 
intimidating. Also it usual means, at best, a lateral move and often settling 
for less money, less responsibility and, for many, less meaningful work. For 
most aid workers, the sense of purpose is critical. One survey respondent said 
“… the underlying moral call to action, remains the same.”

A sense of loyalty

“What keeps me coming back are the colleagues I have worked with for a long 
time, women who I love and feel as deep friends, my loyalty to them, my rage at 
the continuing injustice in the world, particularly for women, and my sense 
that we can’t give up and roll over,” said one female survey respondent.

This sentiment reminded me of research I did years ago on US soldiers who 
volunteered for multiple tours of duty in Vietnam. Like those soldiers, aid 
workers want their work to make a positive difference in the lives of those 
caught in conflict – not the least of which is the lives of their colleagues. 
No one wants to abandon other aid workers with a common purpose.

How aid workers can stay healthy – a psychologist's guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/26/how-aid-workers-can-stay-healthy-a-psychologists-guide>
Despite all the challenges of the job, the aid workers we spoke to want to be 
in the field. They’re dedicated. In the words of one survey respondent, they’re 
like “Rottweilers” who have “bitten into a leg and will not let go even though 
it’s been bashed over the head with a heavy metal frying pan”.


We need to listen more to aid workers about how they feel about their jobs. By 
listening to their voices we can develop a deeper understanding that can lead 
to a more effective, mentally healthy workforce.

Tom Arcaro is a professor of sociology at Elon University. A beta version of 
Aid Worker Voices: survey results and commentary 
<http://blogs.elon.edu/aidworkervoices/> is planned for publication early 
summer 2016.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 