
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> was never 
likely to find the EU referendum a comfortable experience. It is a topic far 
removed from his comfort zone and he has long viewed Euroscepticism as 
Kryptonite to Conservative electoral chances. In his first conference speech as 
leader, he criticised fellow Tories for “banging on about Europe”, and the 
painful memories of his formative years as a special adviser in the 1990s loom 
large.

Many close to him had similar experiences of the Major and Hague years, and 
the letters “EU” inevitably spark loud alarms in their minds blaring the words 
“splits” and “defeat”.

Given that background, the Downing Street grid for the official beginning of 
the referendum campaign will have been inked in with heavy foreboding. “Banging 
on about Europe”, pro or anti, is inevitably the order of the day.

Despite that apprehension, the past fortnight has proved more uncomfortable 
than expected. ThePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/16/panama-papers-inside-the-guardians-investigation-into-offshore-secrets>
 were unrelated to the EU, but bogged the prime minister down in a personal 
battle. Just as the pro-EU campaign was meant to kick off, Cameron, its 
greatest asset, faced allegations about his family finances. It wasn’t the 
start he would have wished for.

News of the government’s decision to spend £9.3m on leaflets and online 
adverts in favour of a Remain vote was smuggled out of No 10 late one weekday 
evening, but still went down about as well as aJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> speech on the floor of the 
London stock exchange. Tory MPs railed against attempts to fix the referendum 
and grassroots Eurosceptics have been galvanised into action by the perceived 
unfairness.

Such resentment in Conservative circles is dangerous for the party itself. 
Zealous Remainers such as Matthew Parris accuse their opponents of “madness”, 
caricaturing them as “spittle-flecked” adolescents. Others still maintain that 
Iain Duncan Smith’s resignation was motivated by Euroscepticism, despite all 
the evidence that it was a belated reaction to a bullying Treasury.

On the other side, some Tory Leavers have lost all trust in Downing Street. 
Last week some suggested that stale revelations aboutJohn Whittingdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/15/john-whittingdale-whorephobia-mainstream-sex-workers-dominatrix-contempt-women>
’s private life came to light conveniently soon after the culture secretary 
declared for Vote Leave.

The renegotiation is no longer mentioned, given how it fell to pieces under 
closer scrutiny, and now some seek to question if Cameron can credibly 
negotiate Brexit given his rather hysterical warnings of apocalypse if Britain 
votes to leave. Ken Clarke, always ready to say the wrong thing in an EU 
debate, has further inflamed that speculation by declaring that a Leave vote 
would unseat the PM.

That line may encourage some of Cameron’s fans to back Remain, but they may 
also attract frustrated Labour voters to support Leave. While Alan Johnson’s 
Labour In campaign has won the support of the biggest unions, there are 
justified concerns that Labour’s core vote is much more Eurosceptic than the 
party’s Westminster establishment.

Corbyn’s lacklustre case for staying in the EU 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36039925> concluded with a 
rejection of concerns about migration unlikely to win over Labour voters who 
are tempted by some of Ukip’s arguments. Johnson revealed that his “plan to win 
the referendum” by persuadingLabour voters to back Remain  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/26/alan-johnson-interview-eu-referendum-labour>
has a budget of just £75,000, providing more evidence that the opposition’s 
heart isn’t really in it.

With the Panama row only now receding, growing annoyance among Tory 
Eurosceptics and a Labour leader at best half-hearted about the EU, this was 
far from Cameron’s ideal way of starting the referendum battle.

Mark Wallace is executive editor of ConservativeHome
 