
4.33pm BST 16:33  <> 

Afternoon summary

 * Albania’s prime minister has criticised Michael Gove, the justice 
secretary, for suggesting that the UK should adopt Albania’s relationship with 
the EU. Given that Albania wants to join the EU, Edi Rama said this was 
“ridiculous”. Rama told the World at One: 
When I heard about it I thought it was a joke.

Then when I read it knowing that Mr Gove is one of the very intelligent 
persons in the UK politics I thought it was kind of weird because why in the 
world Brits would have to follow a model we don’t want for ourselves. We think 
it’s the other way round.

Talking about this new BBC - British Balkan Confederation - is really amazing, 
but not for serious politics. I am sorry to that because I have a lot of 
respect for Mr Gove as a person and it’s, let me say bluntly, ridiculous.

Earlier, writing in the Times, Rama said Albania had only limited access to 
the EU’s market in services, no passport for financial services, its banks 
could not operate acrossEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
in the way British banks can, and it was outside the EU customs union which 
meant it faced costly red tape.

In his speech last week Gove said:

There is a free trade zone stretching from Iceland to Turkey that all European 
nations have access to, regardless of whether they are in or out of the euro or 
EU.26 After we vote to leave we will remain in this zone. The suggestion that 
Bosnia, Serbia, Albania and the Ukraine would remain part of this free trade 
area - and Britain would be on the outside with just Belarus - is as credible 
as Jean-Claude Juncker joining Ukip.
 Edi Rama Photograph: Armando Babani/EPA 
 * An online poll for ICM suggests that President Obama’s intervention has not 
helped the Remain campaign. The poll, conducted between Friday and Sunday, 
shows Leave marginally ahead, whereas ICM’s online poll the week before showed 
Leave and Remain 50/50. Here is an extract from the ICM write-up. 
<http://www.icmunlimited.com/polls/> 
Following Barack Obama’s intervention in the EU debate last week, the Remain 
campaign will have hoped for a boost in public support. During his three-day 
visit to London, Obama warned that the UK would lose influence if it were to 
leave the EU, and suggested that it could take up to 10 years to negotiate new 
trade deals with the US.

However, this week’s data does little to support this idea. Leave takes a 
narrow lead in ICM’s EU tracker, with 46% in favour of leaving compared to 44% 
who support remaining in the EU.

Excluding non-voters and DKs, this translates as 51% vs 49% in the topline 
numbers.

Interestingly, we do see a hardening of resolve among Leave supporters when it 
comes to turnout, with four in five (80%) saying they are absolutely certain to 
vote, compared to 75% who said the same in our first April poll – perhaps 
reflecting a sense of displeasure among Leave supporters about Obama’s comments.

UPDATE: Does this show that President Obama’s intervention backfired? Vote 
Leave seem to think so. This is fromPaul Stephenson, its communications 
director.
Paul Stephenson (@stephenson_pr) 
No 10 briefed anyone who would listen that they won #EUref 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/EUref?src=hash> last week - then polls swing 
against them - typical hubris. Long hard fight ahead
 <https://twitter.com/stephenson_pr/status/724977859308212224> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/stephenson_pr/status/724977859308212224> 
And this is from Dominic Cummings, its campaign director.
odysseanproject (@odysseanproject) 
As per what I said yesterday, SW1 often misjudges things like Obama - 2 polls 
now out both showing swing to Leave:https://t.co/8LcXHLfAFg 
<https://t.co/8LcXHLfAFg>
 <https://twitter.com/odysseanproject/status/724985674500296710> April 26, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/odysseanproject/status/724985674500296710> 
But, even though the polls may have tightened, that does not necessarily mean 
that Obama’s comments were counterproductive. In 2014 George Osborne’s 
announcement (backed byLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and 
the Lib Dems) ruling out a currency union with an independent Scotland 
infuriated the Scots, who saw it as a threat and a bluff, and subsequently the 
No lead shrank. But, come polling day, uncertainty about what would happen to 
the Scottish currency and economy in the event of a Yes vote was probably 
decisive in explaining why No won. Obama’s “back of the queue” comment (another 
threat/bluff) may well impact on the campaign in the same way; in the short 
term, it energises the Leave camp, but in the long term it may create a 
firewall of uncertainty that will keep don’t knows on the Remain side.

 * David Cameron has claimed that the whole of Britain will “pay the price” if 
Labour’s Sadiq Khan becomes London mayor. Supporting the Conservative mayoral 
candidate Zac Goldsmith on a campaign visit, Cameron said: 
If Corbyn wins in London next week, he is one step closer to carrying out his 
dangerous experiment on the country.

Everyone who cares about jobs, common-sense ideas and the future of our 
country has an interest in stopping Corbyn’s march.

If London sleepwalks into electing Jeremy Corbyn’s candidate, the whole 
country will pay the price.

That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
 David Cameron (left) and Zac Goldsmith on a campaign visit in London 
Photograph: Andrew Parsons / i-Images 
Updated at 8.23am BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306%23block-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306%23block-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306%23block-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306%23block-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306%23block-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306%23block-571f810ae4b013ccd78f5306&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.51pm BST 15:51  <> 

Here are two more extracts from Alan Johnson’s speech earlier to the Usdaw 
conference in Blackpool.

On Labour’s 1945 government

It was here in this hall that the first post-war Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party conference met after VE Day 
in 1945.

It was chaired by Ellen Wilkinson, a suffragette, socialist, leader of the 
Jarrow Crusade, and former organiser for your union. In May 1945, she sat where 
John Hannett is sitting right now, chairing the Labour conference.

Many of the delegates were in the uniforms of the Army, Navy and Royal Air 
Force, with medals on their chests from campaigns in Africa, Italy and 
Normandy. Major Denis Healey made his first ever speech to a Labour conference. 
So did Barbara Castle, demanding ‘jam today, not jam tomorrow’. Clem Attlee was 
seeking permission to dissolve the wartime coalition government and force a 
general election to chuck out the Tories and vote in a Labour government.

The delegates sitting where you are now demanded two things. First, they 
wanted peace. Two world wars had started on our continent in the space of just 
over 20 years: and every 20 years for centuries before that Europeans had been 
slaughtering one another on the battlefield.

Labour leaders like, Clem Attlee, Ernie Bevin and Herbert Morrison, helped 
create the United Nations, NATO and the great institutions of the post-war 
world. They knew that to keep the peace, nations needed strong international 
institutions to work together, not to cede sovereignty but to pool it, not to 
reduce British influence, but to enhance it.

But they also wanted what Nye Bevan called ‘serenity’ in the lives of working 
people. They heeded the lessons of what happened after the first world war, 
when the men came home from the trenches and found only slums and slump and 
soup kitchens.

On the 1950s

Nostalgia can be a powerful force in politics.

I have to say, whenever I hear Ukip hanker after the sepia-tinted world of the 
1950s, I’m reminded of the conditions that we of a certain age in this hall, 
grew up in. Living in slums which had been condemned years before as unfit for 
human habitation. The cards in shop-windows advertising rooms-to-let – “no 
Irish, no blacks and no dogs”.

A young black man, Kelso Cochrane, was murdered on the corner of my street in 
the Notting Hill race riots. If you fell in the Grand Union Canal you’d die of 
the pollution before you drowned. The war hero, Alan Turing, chemically 
castrated by the state for being homosexual. A married woman couldn’t hire a 
telly or buy something on hire purchase without her husband being present to 
counter sign the agreement.

That was Britain in the 1950s – Nigel Farage and his cronies are welcome to it.
 Alan Johnson Photograph: Tom Nicholson/REX/Shutterstock Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff%23block-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff%23block-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff%23block-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff%23block-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff%23block-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff%23block-571f7f74e4b013ccd78f52ff&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.23pm BST 15:23  <> 

Vote Leave chief Matthew Elliott criticised for ducking Treasury committee 
invitation

Matthew Elliott, Vote Leave’s chief executive, has been criticised for ducking 
an invitation to give evidence to the Commons Treasury committee about the EU 
referendum.

Elliott was originally due to give evidence last week, alongside his colleague 
Dominic Cummings, but he pulled out at the last minute. According to the 
committee he said he could not be there “for understandable personal reasons”.

The committee asked him to turn up tomorrow instead. But now he has told the 
committee he can’t come because he has a prior engagement in Switzerland. In a 
statementAndrew Tyrie, the committee chairman, said this was “unacceptable”. 
Tyrie said:

Mr Elliott’s decision is unacceptable, and does not reflect well on Vote Leave.

Vote Leave’s response to requests to give evidence is not making parliament’s 
job any easier.

Given that Cummings’ evidence session was, by common consent, a bit of a 
disaster, Elliott’s decision to stay away may perhaps be understand. The Sunday 
Telegraph columnist Simon Heffer said at the weekend 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/04/23/the-election-of-malia-bouattia-proves-that-the-nus-is-beyond-sal/>
 that the the “bizarre performance” by Cummings “left some of us wondering 
whether he was on day release from a secure facility”.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429%23block-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429%23block-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429%23block-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429%23block-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429%23block-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429%23block-571f7704e4b0a57b991f6429&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.09pm BST 15:09  <> 

Carmichael says government's ECHR position is now 'utterly incoherent'

Alistair Carmichael, the Lib Dem home affairs spokesman, has issued this 
statement after the urgent question on the European convention on human rights.

The home secretary first went rogue and then went missing after she failed to 
come before Parliament and defend her position.

The government’s policy in this area is now utterly incoherent.

Theresa May wants to stay in the EU, but leave the ECHR, the minister for 
human rights wants to leave the EU, but stay in the ECHR. AndMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> wants to leave the EU, stay 
in the ECHR but ignore its rulings.

The convention on human rights is a British invention and is key to liberty 
and fundamental rights and something we should be proud of and not wanting to 
leave.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9%23block-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9%23block-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9%23block-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9%23block-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9%23block-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9%23block-571f7625e4b0c06db41970e9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.03pm BST 15:03  <> 

Earlier the Labour MP David Hanson used a 10-minute rule bill to propose 
getting rid of the remaining hereditary peers from the House of Lords. In a 
very good speech he ridiculed the byelection system that allows hereditary 
peers currently in the Lords to elect a new hereditary peer from outside to 
join them when one of their number dies. Last week there was a byelection that 
led to Viscount Thurso, a former Lib Dem MP, being elected to the Lords in a 
contest with just three voters. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-36084455>

Here’s an extract from Hanson’s speech.

The electorate that held the power of electing the noble peer to the House of 
Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> was in this case just 3 
people.

 Now, this House will remember the very great fights on the 1832 Reform Act, 
an act that abolished, for example, the constituency of Old Sarum, that used to 
be able to send two members of parliament to this House. Now Old Sarum had 11 
voters, positively huge, almost the Isle of Wight in comparison with the noble 
lord’s election last week.

The electorate last week for the chamber of the noble lord was three Liberal 
Democrat peers, noble lords Addington, Glasgow and Asquith, all hereditary 
peers. Baron Addington’s peerage dates back to 1887 when his ancestor, a 
businessman and Conservative member of parliament, was granted the title. The 
10th Earl of Glasgow can trace his title back to 1703 when it was created for 
his ancestor David Boyle who was subsequently one of the commissioners who 
negotiated the Treaty of Union. The 3rd Earl of Oxford and Asquith is a more 
new entrée to the House of Lords, being the grandson of the former prime 
minister Henry Herbert Asquith, created in 1925.

Each hopeful in this election to write 75 words on why they should be trusted 
with a seat in the mother of all parliaments. The eventual winner, Viscount 
Thurso’s manifesto, was excellent for the environment. It was a blank piece of 
paper. For the gang of three people who voted for him there were no words 
saying what he would do, or why he would do it.

I’m pleased to tell the House that, unlike the national trend of voter 
decline, there was 100% turnout, no spoilt ballot papers and miraculously all 
three votes went to Viscount Thurso in the first round.

The count, by the way, took 24 hours - which is not quite Houghton and 
Sunderland South [a Commons constituency famous for its fast declarations] but 
which still resulted in a member of parliament.

 Hanson’s 10-minute rule bill will not become law - at least, not in this 
form, or any time soon - but MPs use this procedure to highlight issue in the 
hope that one day parliament will legislate.
 David Hanson Photograph: BBC Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0%23block-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0%23block-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0%23block-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0%23block-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0%23block-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0%23block-571f70f4e4b0c06db41970d0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.57pm BST 13:57  <> 

Lunchtime summary

 * Michael Gove, the justice secretary, has overruled Theresa May by saying 
her call for Britain to leave the European court of human rights is not 
government policy. Speaking during justice questions in the Commons, Gove said 
he believed “we should remain within the European convention on human rights”. 
He also backedDominic Raab, a junior minister in his department, who said 
explained in more detail that withdrawal from the ECHR was not government 
policy, although the idea was not ruled out “forever”. (See12.34pm.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/26/eu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live?page=with:block-571f50c8e4b0a57b991f63a8#block-571f50c8e4b0a57b991f63a8>
Labour and SNP MPs said that May’s speech yesterday, which explicitly advocated 
ECHR withdrawal, had left the government’s policy in disarray, and several MPs 
criticised May for not coming to the Commons herself to answer an urgent 
question on the matter. 
 * Frank Field, the Labour former welfare minister, has said Ukip poses a 
“deadly threat” to his party and that Jeremy Corbyn should respond by avoiding 
“more actively” campaigning for Remain in the EU referendum.(See 11.05am.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/26/eu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live?page=with:block-571f3932e4b0c06db4196fe6#block-571f3932e4b0c06db4196fe6>
 * The Labour MP Naz Shah has resigned as a parliamentary aide to John 
McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, after apologising for an anti-Israel Facebook 
post she made before she was elected to parliament.(See 11.18am 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/26/eu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live?page=with:block-571f3f8de4b0a57b991f6356#block-571f3f8de4b0a57b991f6356>
 and 1.29pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/26/eu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live?page=with:block-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7#block-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7>
 * Jeremy Hunt has insisted he has no intention of backing down in the junior 
doctors’ strike, saying his post as health secretary is likely to be his “last 
big job in politics”, and history will judge him on his ability to deliver a 
seven-day NHS. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/26/jeremy-hunt-history-will-judge-me-seven-day-nhs-junior-doctors-strike>
 * David Cameron is to visit the steelworks at Port Talbot in south Wales to 
speak to bosses, unions and staff at the under-threat plant. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/26/david-cameron-to-visit-port-talbot-steelworks-tata-steel>
As the Press Association reports, the prime minister’s surprise visit on 
Tuesday comes as a director at theTata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata>Steel plant seeks to put together a 
management buyout of the firm’s UK business. 
 * The shadow immigration minister, Keir Starmer, has promised that “the fight 
will go on” to force the UK to do more to help some of the thousands of 
unaccompanied child refugees stranded in mainland Europe. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/tories-vote-against-accepting-3000-child-refugees>
 * Sir Andrew Dilnot, chair of the UK Statistics Authority, has vowed to 
resist any political pressure over the release of migration statistics in the 
run-up to June’s EU referendum 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36141497>. 
 * The Labour MP David Hanson has proposed a bill getting rid of hereditary 
peers from the House of Lords using the 10-minute rule procedure.There was no 
opposition to the bill although, like all 10-minute rule bills, it has no 
chance of becoming law. (Hanson’s speech was superb, and I will post quotes 
from it later.) Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da%23block-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da%23block-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da%23block-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da%23block-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da%23block-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da%23block-571f5fc2e4b0a57b991f63da&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.29pm BST 13:29  <> 

Naz Shah resigns as John McDonnell's PPS

The Labour MP Naz Shah has resigned as John McDonnell’s parliamentary private 
secretary (PPS) in the light of the controversy about her 2014 “relocate 
Israel” Facebook post. (See 11.18am.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/26/eu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live?page=with:block-571f3f8de4b0a57b991f6356#block-571f3f8de4b0a57b991f6356>
She issued this statement.

I deeply regret the hurt I have caused by comments made on social media before 
I was elected as an MP. I made these posts at the height of the Gaza conflict 
in 2014, when emotions were running high around the Middle East conflict. But 
that is no excuse for the offence I have given, for which I unreservedly 
apologise.

In recognition of that offence I have stepped down from my role as PPS to the 
shadow chancellor John McDonnell. I will be seeking to expand my existing 
engagement and dialogue with Jewish community organisations, and will be 
stepping up my efforts to combat all forms of racism, including anti-semitism.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7%23block-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7%23block-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7%23block-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7%23block-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7%23block-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7%23block-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.21pm BST 13:21  <> 

Sylvia Hernon, the independent MP for North Down in Northern Ireland, says she 
was horrified when she heardTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> propose leaving the ECHR 
yesterday. What consideration did she give to the impact this would have in 
Northern Ireland?

Wright says May is aware of the Northern Ireland dimension.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3%23block-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3%23block-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3%23block-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3%23block-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3%23block-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3%23block-571f5cece4b0a57b991f63d3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.19pm BST 13:19  <> 

In the Commons Peter Bone, the Conservative MP, asks Wright if it is possible 
to leave the ECHR and remain a member of the EU? What is the legal position?

Wright says the legal position is not clear. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c%23block-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c%23block-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c%23block-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c%23block-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c%23block-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c%23block-571f5c92e4b0c06db419708c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.18pm BST 13:18  <> 

This is from the legal commentator David Allen Green.
David Allen Green (@DavidAllenGreen) 
Without the Human Rights Act <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act>
 there would not have been this Hillsborough inquest.

Impact of Article 2 of ECHR on domestic law.
 <https://twitter.com/DavidAllenGreen/status/724931744852529154> April 26, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/DavidAllenGreen/status/724931744852529154> 
Theresa May, the home secretary, is due to make a Commons statement on 
Hillsborough tomorrow, and so MPs will have a chance to raise this.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0%23block-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0%23block-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0%23block-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0%23block-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0%23block-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0%23block-571f5c31e4b0a57b991f63d0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.14pm BST 13:14  <> 

Yesterday Labour’s Lord Falconer claimed Theresa May was wrong to think 
Britain could stay in the EU while leaving the ECHR. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/25/eu-referendum-gove-boris-johnson-brexit-fightback-politics-boris?page=with:block-571e05ede4b0ef2ed34e016a#block-571e05ede4b0ef2ed34e016a>
 As I reported at the time, this is a matter of dispute. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/25/eu-referendum-gove-boris-johnson-brexit-fightback-politics-boris?page=with:block-571e0ac6e4b0c06db4196def#block-571e0ac6e4b0c06db4196def>

Today Nick Timothy, who used to work as May’s special adviser in the Home 
Office, says government legal advice says you can leave the ECHR without having 
to leave the EU. He has set out his views on Twitter.
Nick Timothy (@NickJTimothy) 
1. I happen to take a different view to TM on the EU, and will vote to leave. 
But we should get facts straight about the ECHR.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922350785978372> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922350785978372> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
2. Government legal advice has always been clear: you can leave the ECHR 
without leaving the EU.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922466028666880> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922466028666880> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
3. There is no provision in EU law that says member states must sign up to 
ECHR.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922556399116288> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922556399116288> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
4. The EU itself is not yet a signatory to the ECHR. If that happens it will 
affect EU institutions only and not member states.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922691015327744> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922691015327744> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
5. It is highly unlikely the EU itself will actually sign up to ECHR, given an 
opinion already issued by the ECJ.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922781587128320> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922781587128320> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
6. The UK has a veto over the EU becoming an ECHR signatory anyway.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922881155670016> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922881155670016> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
7. If it was impossible to leave ECHR but not EU, why has the pro-EU PM 
refused to rule out leaving the ECHR?
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922971425521665> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922971425521665> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
8. Bill Cash, EU expert, told Pol Home on 6 March 2013 that “the UK could 
leave the Convention and stay within its EU treaty obligations”
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923137830326276> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923137830326276> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
9. Former Attorney Gen Dominic Grieve: Leaving the ECHR “would have not any 
bearing on our membership of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.”
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923267153285124> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923267153285124> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
10. PM himself said in Bloomberg speech: "Some antipathy about Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> really relates to the European 
Court of Human Rights.”
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923378365243393> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923378365243393> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
11. I am baffled why people who want to leave the EU (like me) think we can’t 
leave the ECHR - a much simpler exercise.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923518295658496> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923518295658496> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856%23block-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856%23block-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856%23block-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856%23block-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856%23block-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856%23block-571f59f9e4b0386b6c84c856&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.04pm BST 13:04  <> 

Yvette Cooper, the former shadow home secretary, says Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> said clearly Britain should 
pull out of the ECHR. Is that government policy?

Wright says he has set out government policy. What May was doing yesterday was 
saying the status quo is unacceptable, he says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852%23block-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852%23block-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852%23block-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852%23block-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852%23block-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852%23block-571f5924e4b0386b6c84c852&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.02pm BST 13:02  <> 

Wright says Human Rights Act has been 'tarnished'

Harriet Harman, Labour’s former deputy leader, says when Wright says the 
government won’t rule out ECHR withdrawal, that sounds like a “direction of 
travel”. She says that is chilling. She says the government wants to exempt 
itself from ECHR jurisprudence. That would me a mistake, she says. All 
governments need some sort of restraint on what they do.

Wright says he thinks there is no prospect of this government, or any other, 
moving away from human rights.

He says Harman attaches “too much significance” to the Human Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act>. He says it has been 
“tarnished” by cases that have undermined support for the HRA.

And he says Harman is overlooking the way British courts hold government to 
account.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848%23block-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848%23block-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848%23block-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848%23block-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848%23block-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848%23block-571f5809e4b0386b6c84c848&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.58pm BST 12:58  <> 

Joanna Cherry, the SNP justice spokeswoman, says Theresa May’s comments caused 
great concern in Scotland.

She says MSPs are opposed to withdrawal from the ECHR. The Human Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act> is “hard-wired” into the 
Scottish parliament, she says. The Scottish parliament would never give 
legislative consent to withdrawal from the ECHR. Any attempt to do this would 
provoke a constitutional crisis, she says.

Wright says:

I think there is a risk in this discussion that we make a little too much of 
what happened yesterday.

He repeats the point about the prime minister and others not ruling out ECHR 
withdrawal.

He says the SNP seem to be saying they will oppose any human rights reform. 
But at the same time the SNP are also urging the government to bring forward 
its reform.

He accepts the proposals will involve significant consequences for devolution. 
The government will consult fully, he says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845%23block-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845%23block-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845%23block-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845%23block-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845%23block-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845%23block-571f56d9e4b0386b6c84c845&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.53pm BST 12:53  <> 

Crispin Blunt, a Conservative former justice minister, says this illustrates 
what happens when you contract out policy to the tabloid press. He says the 
government reformed the way theEuropean court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights> worked in the 
last parliament. Now the government should work with it, he says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841%23block-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841%23block-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841%23block-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841%23block-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Gove%20snubs%20May%20by%20dismissing%20call%20to%20leave%20ECHR%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841%23block-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Feu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841%23block-571f5666e4b0386b6c84c841&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
 * Albania’s prime minister has criticised Michael Gove, the justice 
secretary, for suggesting that the UK should adopt Albania’s relationship with 
the EU. Given that Albania wants to join the EU, Edi Rama said this was 
“ridiculous”. Rama told the World at One: 
When I heard about it I thought it was a joke.

Then when I read it knowing that Mr Gove is one of the very intelligent 
persons in the UK politics I thought it was kind of weird because why in the 
world Brits would have to follow a model we don’t want for ourselves. We think 
it’s the other way round.

Talking about this new BBC - British Balkan Confederation - is really amazing, 
but not for serious politics. I am sorry to that because I have a lot of 
respect for Mr Gove as a person and it’s, let me say bluntly, ridiculous.

Earlier, writing in the Times, Rama said Albania had only limited access to 
the EU’s market in services, no passport for financial services, its banks 
could not operate acrossEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
in the way British banks can, and it was outside the EU customs union which 
meant it faced costly red tape.

In his speech last week Gove said:

There is a free trade zone stretching from Iceland to Turkey that all European 
nations have access to, regardless of whether they are in or out of the euro or 
EU.26 After we vote to leave we will remain in this zone. The suggestion that 
Bosnia, Serbia, Albania and the Ukraine would remain part of this free trade 
area - and Britain would be on the outside with just Belarus - is as credible 
as Jean-Claude Juncker joining Ukip.
 Edi Rama Photograph: Armando Babani/EPA 
 * An online poll for ICM suggests that President Obama’s intervention has not 
helped the Remain campaign. The poll, conducted between Friday and Sunday, 
shows Leave marginally ahead, whereas ICM’s online poll the week before showed 
Leave and Remain 50/50. Here is an extract from the ICM write-up. 
<http://www.icmunlimited.com/polls/> 
Following Barack Obama’s intervention in the EU debate last week, the Remain 
campaign will have hoped for a boost in public support. During his three-day 
visit to London, Obama warned that the UK would lose influence if it were to 
leave the EU, and suggested that it could take up to 10 years to negotiate new 
trade deals with the US.

However, this week’s data does little to support this idea. Leave takes a 
narrow lead in ICM’s EU tracker, with 46% in favour of leaving compared to 44% 
who support remaining in the EU.

Excluding non-voters and DKs, this translates as 51% vs 49% in the topline 
numbers.

Interestingly, we do see a hardening of resolve among Leave supporters when it 
comes to turnout, with four in five (80%) saying they are absolutely certain to 
vote, compared to 75% who said the same in our first April poll – perhaps 
reflecting a sense of displeasure among Leave supporters about Obama’s comments.

UPDATE: Does this show that President Obama’s intervention backfired? Vote 
Leave seem to think so. This is fromPaul Stephenson, its communications 
director.
Paul Stephenson (@stephenson_pr) 
No 10 briefed anyone who would listen that they won #EUref 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/EUref?src=hash> last week - then polls swing 
against them - typical hubris. Long hard fight ahead
 <https://twitter.com/stephenson_pr/status/724977859308212224> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/stephenson_pr/status/724977859308212224> 
And this is from Dominic Cummings, its campaign director.
odysseanproject (@odysseanproject) 
As per what I said yesterday, SW1 often misjudges things like Obama - 2 polls 
now out both showing swing to Leave:https://t.co/8LcXHLfAFg 
<https://t.co/8LcXHLfAFg>
 <https://twitter.com/odysseanproject/status/724985674500296710> April 26, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/odysseanproject/status/724985674500296710> 
But, even though the polls may have tightened, that does not necessarily mean 
that Obama’s comments were counterproductive. In 2014 George Osborne’s 
announcement (backed byLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and 
the Lib Dems) ruling out a currency union with an independent Scotland 
infuriated the Scots, who saw it as a threat and a bluff, and subsequently the 
No lead shrank. But, come polling day, uncertainty about what would happen to 
the Scottish currency and economy in the event of a Yes vote was probably 
decisive in explaining why No won. Obama’s “back of the queue” comment (another 
threat/bluff) may well impact on the campaign in the same way; in the short 
term, it energises the Leave camp, but in the long term it may create a 
firewall of uncertainty that will keep don’t knows on the Remain side.

 * David Cameron has claimed that the whole of Britain will “pay the price” if 
Labour’s Sadiq Khan becomes London mayor. Supporting the Conservative mayoral 
candidate Zac Goldsmith on a campaign visit, Cameron said: 
If Corbyn wins in London next week, he is one step closer to carrying out his 
dangerous experiment on the country.

Everyone who cares about jobs, common-sense ideas and the future of our 
country has an interest in stopping Corbyn’s march.

If London sleepwalks into electing Jeremy Corbyn’s candidate, the whole 
country will pay the price.

That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
 David Cameron (left) and Zac Goldsmith on a campaign visit in London 
Photograph: Andrew Parsons / i-Images  
Here are two more extracts from Alan Johnson’s speech earlier to the Usdaw 
conference in Blackpool.

On Labour’s 1945 government

It was here in this hall that the first post-war Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party conference met after VE Day 
in 1945.

It was chaired by Ellen Wilkinson, a suffragette, socialist, leader of the 
Jarrow Crusade, and former organiser for your union. In May 1945, she sat where 
John Hannett is sitting right now, chairing the Labour conference.

Many of the delegates were in the uniforms of the Army, Navy and Royal Air 
Force, with medals on their chests from campaigns in Africa, Italy and 
Normandy. Major Denis Healey made his first ever speech to a Labour conference. 
So did Barbara Castle, demanding ‘jam today, not jam tomorrow’. Clem Attlee was 
seeking permission to dissolve the wartime coalition government and force a 
general election to chuck out the Tories and vote in a Labour government.

The delegates sitting where you are now demanded two things. First, they 
wanted peace. Two world wars had started on our continent in the space of just 
over 20 years: and every 20 years for centuries before that Europeans had been 
slaughtering one another on the battlefield.

Labour leaders like, Clem Attlee, Ernie Bevin and Herbert Morrison, helped 
create the United Nations, NATO and the great institutions of the post-war 
world. They knew that to keep the peace, nations needed strong international 
institutions to work together, not to cede sovereignty but to pool it, not to 
reduce British influence, but to enhance it.

But they also wanted what Nye Bevan called ‘serenity’ in the lives of working 
people. They heeded the lessons of what happened after the first world war, 
when the men came home from the trenches and found only slums and slump and 
soup kitchens.

On the 1950s

Nostalgia can be a powerful force in politics.

I have to say, whenever I hear Ukip hanker after the sepia-tinted world of the 
1950s, I’m reminded of the conditions that we of a certain age in this hall, 
grew up in. Living in slums which had been condemned years before as unfit for 
human habitation. The cards in shop-windows advertising rooms-to-let – “no 
Irish, no blacks and no dogs”.

A young black man, Kelso Cochrane, was murdered on the corner of my street in 
the Notting Hill race riots. If you fell in the Grand Union Canal you’d die of 
the pollution before you drowned. The war hero, Alan Turing, chemically 
castrated by the state for being homosexual. A married woman couldn’t hire a 
telly or buy something on hire purchase without her husband being present to 
counter sign the agreement.

That was Britain in the 1950s – Nigel Farage and his cronies are welcome to it.
 Alan Johnson Photograph: Tom Nicholson/REX/Shutterstock  
Matthew Elliott, Vote Leave’s chief executive, has been criticised for ducking 
an invitation to give evidence to the Commons Treasury committee about the EU 
referendum.

Elliott was originally due to give evidence last week, alongside his colleague 
Dominic Cummings, but he pulled out at the last minute. According to the 
committee he said he could not be there “for understandable personal reasons”.

The committee asked him to turn up tomorrow instead. But now he has told the 
committee he can’t come because he has a prior engagement in Switzerland. In a 
statementAndrew Tyrie, the committee chairman, said this was “unacceptable”. 
Tyrie said:

Mr Elliott’s decision is unacceptable, and does not reflect well on Vote Leave.

Vote Leave’s response to requests to give evidence is not making parliament’s 
job any easier.

Given that Cummings’ evidence session was, by common consent, a bit of a 
disaster, Elliott’s decision to stay away may perhaps be understand. The Sunday 
Telegraph columnist Simon Heffer said at the weekend 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/04/23/the-election-of-malia-bouattia-proves-that-the-nus-is-beyond-sal/>
 that the the “bizarre performance” by Cummings “left some of us wondering 
whether he was on day release from a secure facility”.

 
Alistair Carmichael, the Lib Dem home affairs spokesman, has issued this 
statement after the urgent question on the European convention on human rights.

The home secretary first went rogue and then went missing after she failed to 
come before Parliament and defend her position.

The government’s policy in this area is now utterly incoherent.

Theresa May wants to stay in the EU, but leave the ECHR, the minister for 
human rights wants to leave the EU, but stay in the ECHR. AndMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> wants to leave the EU, stay 
in the ECHR but ignore its rulings.

The convention on human rights is a British invention and is key to liberty 
and fundamental rights and something we should be proud of and not wanting to 
leave.
 
Earlier the Labour MP David Hanson used a 10-minute rule bill to propose 
getting rid of the remaining hereditary peers from the House of Lords. In a 
very good speech he ridiculed the byelection system that allows hereditary 
peers currently in the Lords to elect a new hereditary peer from outside to 
join them when one of their number dies. Last week there was a byelection that 
led to Viscount Thurso, a former Lib Dem MP, being elected to the Lords in a 
contest with just three voters. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-36084455>

Here’s an extract from Hanson’s speech.

The electorate that held the power of electing the noble peer to the House of 
Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> was in this case just 3 
people.

 Now, this House will remember the very great fights on the 1832 Reform Act, 
an act that abolished, for example, the constituency of Old Sarum, that used to 
be able to send two members of parliament to this House. Now Old Sarum had 11 
voters, positively huge, almost the Isle of Wight in comparison with the noble 
lord’s election last week.

The electorate last week for the chamber of the noble lord was three Liberal 
Democrat peers, noble lords Addington, Glasgow and Asquith, all hereditary 
peers. Baron Addington’s peerage dates back to 1887 when his ancestor, a 
businessman and Conservative member of parliament, was granted the title. The 
10th Earl of Glasgow can trace his title back to 1703 when it was created for 
his ancestor David Boyle who was subsequently one of the commissioners who 
negotiated the Treaty of Union. The 3rd Earl of Oxford and Asquith is a more 
new entrée to the House of Lords, being the grandson of the former prime 
minister Henry Herbert Asquith, created in 1925.

Each hopeful in this election to write 75 words on why they should be trusted 
with a seat in the mother of all parliaments. The eventual winner, Viscount 
Thurso’s manifesto, was excellent for the environment. It was a blank piece of 
paper. For the gang of three people who voted for him there were no words 
saying what he would do, or why he would do it.

I’m pleased to tell the House that, unlike the national trend of voter 
decline, there was 100% turnout, no spoilt ballot papers and miraculously all 
three votes went to Viscount Thurso in the first round.

The count, by the way, took 24 hours - which is not quite Houghton and 
Sunderland South [a Commons constituency famous for its fast declarations] but 
which still resulted in a member of parliament.

 Hanson’s 10-minute rule bill will not become law - at least, not in this 
form, or any time soon - but MPs use this procedure to highlight issue in the 
hope that one day parliament will legislate.
 David Hanson Photograph: BBC  
 * Michael Gove, the justice secretary, has overruled Theresa May by saying 
her call for Britain to leave the European court of human rights is not 
government policy. Speaking during justice questions in the Commons, Gove said 
he believed “we should remain within the European convention on human rights”. 
He also backedDominic Raab, a junior minister in his department, who said 
explained in more detail that withdrawal from the ECHR was not government 
policy, although the idea was not ruled out “forever”. (See12.34pm.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/26/eu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live?page=with:block-571f50c8e4b0a57b991f63a8#block-571f50c8e4b0a57b991f63a8>
Labour and SNP MPs said that May’s speech yesterday, which explicitly advocated 
ECHR withdrawal, had left the government’s policy in disarray, and several MPs 
criticised May for not coming to the Commons herself to answer an urgent 
question on the matter. 
 * Frank Field, the Labour former welfare minister, has said Ukip poses a 
“deadly threat” to his party and that Jeremy Corbyn should respond by avoiding 
“more actively” campaigning for Remain in the EU referendum.(See 11.05am.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/26/eu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live?page=with:block-571f3932e4b0c06db4196fe6#block-571f3932e4b0c06db4196fe6>
 * The Labour MP Naz Shah has resigned as a parliamentary aide to John 
McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, after apologising for an anti-Israel Facebook 
post she made before she was elected to parliament.(See 11.18am 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/26/eu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live?page=with:block-571f3f8de4b0a57b991f6356#block-571f3f8de4b0a57b991f6356>
 and 1.29pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/26/eu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live?page=with:block-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7#block-571f5e2de4b0a57b991f63d7>
 * Jeremy Hunt has insisted he has no intention of backing down in the junior 
doctors’ strike, saying his post as health secretary is likely to be his “last 
big job in politics”, and history will judge him on his ability to deliver a 
seven-day NHS. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/26/jeremy-hunt-history-will-judge-me-seven-day-nhs-junior-doctors-strike>
 * David Cameron is to visit the steelworks at Port Talbot in south Wales to 
speak to bosses, unions and staff at the under-threat plant. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/26/david-cameron-to-visit-port-talbot-steelworks-tata-steel>
As the Press Association reports, the prime minister’s surprise visit on 
Tuesday comes as a director at theTata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata>Steel plant seeks to put together a 
management buyout of the firm’s UK business. 
 * The shadow immigration minister, Keir Starmer, has promised that “the fight 
will go on” to force the UK to do more to help some of the thousands of 
unaccompanied child refugees stranded in mainland Europe. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/tories-vote-against-accepting-3000-child-refugees>
 * Sir Andrew Dilnot, chair of the UK Statistics Authority, has vowed to 
resist any political pressure over the release of migration statistics in the 
run-up to June’s EU referendum 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36141497>. 
 * The Labour MP David Hanson has proposed a bill getting rid of hereditary 
peers from the House of Lords using the 10-minute rule procedure.There was no 
opposition to the bill although, like all 10-minute rule bills, it has no 
chance of becoming law. (Hanson’s speech was superb, and I will post quotes 
from it later.)  
The Labour MP Naz Shah has resigned as John McDonnell’s parliamentary private 
secretary (PPS) in the light of the controversy about her 2014 “relocate 
Israel” Facebook post. (See 11.18am.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/26/eu-referendum-frank-field-speech-be-labour-second-longest-suicide-note-says-frank-field-politics-live?page=with:block-571f3f8de4b0a57b991f6356#block-571f3f8de4b0a57b991f6356>
She issued this statement.

I deeply regret the hurt I have caused by comments made on social media before 
I was elected as an MP. I made these posts at the height of the Gaza conflict 
in 2014, when emotions were running high around the Middle East conflict. But 
that is no excuse for the offence I have given, for which I unreservedly 
apologise.

In recognition of that offence I have stepped down from my role as PPS to the 
shadow chancellor John McDonnell. I will be seeking to expand my existing 
engagement and dialogue with Jewish community organisations, and will be 
stepping up my efforts to combat all forms of racism, including anti-semitism.
 
Sylvia Hernon, the independent MP for North Down in Northern Ireland, says she 
was horrified when she heardTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> propose leaving the ECHR 
yesterday. What consideration did she give to the impact this would have in 
Northern Ireland?

Wright says May is aware of the Northern Ireland dimension.
 
In the Commons Peter Bone, the Conservative MP, asks Wright if it is possible 
to leave the ECHR and remain a member of the EU? What is the legal position?

Wright says the legal position is not clear. 
 
This is from the legal commentator David Allen Green.
David Allen Green (@DavidAllenGreen) 
Without the Human Rights Act <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act>
 there would not have been this Hillsborough inquest.

Impact of Article 2 of ECHR on domestic law.
 <https://twitter.com/DavidAllenGreen/status/724931744852529154> April 26, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/DavidAllenGreen/status/724931744852529154> 
Theresa May, the home secretary, is due to make a Commons statement on 
Hillsborough tomorrow, and so MPs will have a chance to raise this.
 
Yesterday Labour’s Lord Falconer claimed Theresa May was wrong to think 
Britain could stay in the EU while leaving the ECHR. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/25/eu-referendum-gove-boris-johnson-brexit-fightback-politics-boris?page=with:block-571e05ede4b0ef2ed34e016a#block-571e05ede4b0ef2ed34e016a>
 As I reported at the time, this is a matter of dispute. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/25/eu-referendum-gove-boris-johnson-brexit-fightback-politics-boris?page=with:block-571e0ac6e4b0c06db4196def#block-571e0ac6e4b0c06db4196def>

Today Nick Timothy, who used to work as May’s special adviser in the Home 
Office, says government legal advice says you can leave the ECHR without having 
to leave the EU. He has set out his views on Twitter.
Nick Timothy (@NickJTimothy) 
1. I happen to take a different view to TM on the EU, and will vote to leave. 
But we should get facts straight about the ECHR.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922350785978372> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922350785978372> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
2. Government legal advice has always been clear: you can leave the ECHR 
without leaving the EU.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922466028666880> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922466028666880> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
3. There is no provision in EU law that says member states must sign up to 
ECHR.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922556399116288> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922556399116288> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
4. The EU itself is not yet a signatory to the ECHR. If that happens it will 
affect EU institutions only and not member states.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922691015327744> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922691015327744> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
5. It is highly unlikely the EU itself will actually sign up to ECHR, given an 
opinion already issued by the ECJ.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922781587128320> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922781587128320> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
6. The UK has a veto over the EU becoming an ECHR signatory anyway.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922881155670016> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922881155670016> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
7. If it was impossible to leave ECHR but not EU, why has the pro-EU PM 
refused to rule out leaving the ECHR?
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922971425521665> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724922971425521665> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
8. Bill Cash, EU expert, told Pol Home on 6 March 2013 that “the UK could 
leave the Convention and stay within its EU treaty obligations”
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923137830326276> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923137830326276> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
9. Former Attorney Gen Dominic Grieve: Leaving the ECHR “would have not any 
bearing on our membership of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.”
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923267153285124> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923267153285124> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
10. PM himself said in Bloomberg speech: "Some antipathy about Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> really relates to the European 
Court of Human Rights.”
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923378365243393> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923378365243393> Nick Timothy 
(@NickJTimothy) 
11. I am baffled why people who want to leave the EU (like me) think we can’t 
leave the ECHR - a much simpler exercise.
 <https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923518295658496> April 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickJTimothy/status/724923518295658496>  
Yvette Cooper, the former shadow home secretary, says Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> said clearly Britain should 
pull out of the ECHR. Is that government policy?

Wright says he has set out government policy. What May was doing yesterday was 
saying the status quo is unacceptable, he says.
 
Harriet Harman, Labour’s former deputy leader, says when Wright says the 
government won’t rule out ECHR withdrawal, that sounds like a “direction of 
travel”. She says that is chilling. She says the government wants to exempt 
itself from ECHR jurisprudence. That would me a mistake, she says. All 
governments need some sort of restraint on what they do.

Wright says he thinks there is no prospect of this government, or any other, 
moving away from human rights.

He says Harman attaches “too much significance” to the Human Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act>. He says it has been 
“tarnished” by cases that have undermined support for the HRA.

And he says Harman is overlooking the way British courts hold government to 
account.
 
Joanna Cherry, the SNP justice spokeswoman, says Theresa May’s comments caused 
great concern in Scotland.

She says MSPs are opposed to withdrawal from the ECHR. The Human Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act> is “hard-wired” into the 
Scottish parliament, she says. The Scottish parliament would never give 
legislative consent to withdrawal from the ECHR. Any attempt to do this would 
provoke a constitutional crisis, she says.

Wright says:

I think there is a risk in this discussion that we make a little too much of 
what happened yesterday.

He repeats the point about the prime minister and others not ruling out ECHR 
withdrawal.

He says the SNP seem to be saying they will oppose any human rights reform. 
But at the same time the SNP are also urging the government to bring forward 
its reform.

He accepts the proposals will involve significant consequences for devolution. 
The government will consult fully, he says.
 
Crispin Blunt, a Conservative former justice minister, says this illustrates 
what happens when you contract out policy to the tabloid press. He says the 
government reformed the way theEuropean court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights> worked in the 
last parliament. Now the government should work with it, he says.
 