
European governments are bracing for a major humanitarian emergency in Greece 
amid rising panic that the EU’s fragmented efforts to cope with itsmigration 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/number-of-refugee-arrivals-in-greece-passes-100000-in-less-than-two-months>
 are nearing breakdown.

EU interior ministers met in Brussels on Thursday in their latest attempt to 
forge a common response, but the meeting was clouded bya ferocious row between 
Greece and Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/25/greece-wont-be-lebanon-of-europe-yannis-mouzalas-refugees-eu>
, which is spearheading a campaign to quarantine Greece and throttle the flow 
of migrants up the Balkans by partially sealing theGreek border with Macedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/greece-implores-macedonia-to-reopen-border-to-refugees>
.

If Greece is cut off from the rest of Europe’s free-travel Schengen area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/25/greece-under-growing-pressure-to-stem-flow-of-refugees-and-migrants-into-eu>
, Berlin predicts a humanitarian and security emergency within days.

Dimitris Avramopoulos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/10/eu-gives-greece-one-month-to-improve-conditions-for-refugees>
, the EU commissioner in charge of migration, said contingency planning for a 
major aid operation was highly advanced and would be finalised within days. 
“The possibility of a humanitarian crisis of a large scale is there and very 
real,” he said.

This racist backlash against refugees is the real crisis in Europe | Apostolis 
Fotiadis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/25/racist-backlash-against-refugees-greece-real-crisis-europe>
A senior EU official involved in the planning said “the humanitarian dimension 
inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is becoming much more 
important than it has been until now”.

The shift in focus from taking in refugees to dealing with the consequences of 
keeping most of them out amounts to an admission of abject failure in 
developing coherent EU policies on the crisis.

Athens reacted furiously to the latest developments, recalling its ambassador 
from Vienna, accusingAustria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> of 
19th-century behaviour, and blaming Europe for creating a crisis it was now 
preparing to relieve.

An EU country recalling its ambassador from another EU country may be 
unprecedented, highlighting the depths of division and grievance in Europe over 
the refugee crisis.

Speaking of the interior ministers’ meeting, Yannis Mouzalas, the Greek 
migration minister, said: “A very large number [of participants] here attempt 
to discuss how to address a humanitarian crisis inGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> that they themselves intend to 
create.”

Ministers appear to have set themselves a deadline of 7 March before resorting 
to a “plan B” being pushed byanti-immigration eastern Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/european-states-deeply-divided-on-refugee-crisis-ahead-of-summit>
, which would cut Greece off and probably also see the 26-country Schengen area 
being suspended for up to two years as national border controls proliferate 
across the EU.

Refugee arrivals in Greece exceed 100,000 in less than two months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/number-of-refugee-arrivals-in-greece-passes-100000-in-less-than-two-months>
“In the next 10 days, we need tangible and clear results on the ground. 
Otherwise there is a risk that the whole system will completely break down,” 
warned Avramopoulos.

Austria provoked the fury of the Greeks, the Germans and the European 
commission by announcing last week it waslimiting the number of people who 
could claim asylum to 80 a day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/18/austria-dismisses-criticism-of-its-plan-to-limit-daily-refugee-numbers>
, and then on Wednesday unilaterally convening a meeting of 10 Balkan countries 
aimed athalting the refugee flow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/25/racist-backlash-against-refugees-greece-real-crisis-europe>
 and returning them to Greece. The Austrians did not invite the Greeks or the 
Germans, two pivotal countries.

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, insisted on a special EU summit with 
Turkey on 7 March, hoping to cajole the Turks into stopping the crossings to 
Greece and in return pledging to take hundreds of thousands of refugeesdirectly 
from Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/10/turkey-dismisses-eu-plan-to-resettle-refugees-in-return-for-sealing-sea-route>
.

Merkel, however, is isolated. There is little confidence that the Turks will 
deliver and several countries opposed to Merkel actively hope her plan will 
fail. A large majority of EU states will refuse to take part in directly 
resettling refugees fromTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>.
Balkans route map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/border_balkans-zip/giv-27167tA8Ey1IlansM/>
 “The clock is ticking. Time is running out on a Turkey solution,” said the 
Dutch immigration minister, Klaas Dijkhoff, who chaired Thursday’s meeting. 
“Other plans and measures are being taken in the meantime.”

 The piecemeal unilateral moves being taken across Europe – this week alone 
Hungary, Belgium, and Austria announced solo moves on immigration curbs – are 
adding to the sense of chaos and impotence in the EU and are turning Greece 
into Europe’s immigration pressure cooker.

Alexis Tsipras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, the Greek 
prime minister, is threatening to block decisions at EU summits unless there is 
a major shift towards coherent policy-making. Avramopoulos reiterated tired 
mantras on Thursday on the need for European rather than national solutions, 
but his pleas only served to underline how the commission in Brussels is being 
ignored and bypassed.

 Senior officials in Brussels and from several countries say that the sole 
yardstick that matters is that the numbers of migrants arriving in the EU falls 
sharply. This is not happening.According to the International Organisation for 
Migration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/number-of-refugee-arrivals-in-greece-passes-100000-in-less-than-two-months>
, 100,000 have arrived in Greece since the start of the year, a tenfold 
increase on the same period last year.
 