
Annie Lennox and Dave Stewart will reunite the Eurythmics for the first time 
in almost a decade, paying tribute to the Beatles at a concert later this 
month. The duo are expected to cover one of their Fab Four favourites alongside 
performances byMaroon 5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jul/12/adam-levine-maroon-5-moves-like-jagger>
,Alicia Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jul/14/alicia-keys> and 
John Legend.

"What I felt was important was to try and find those artists who not only 
would be able to interpret Beatles songs, but would also have an ... 
understanding of what they meant," Ken Ehrlich, the show's producer, told the 
Associated Press. Titled The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to the 
Beatles, the event takes place on 27 January, the day after the Grammys' main 
gala. It will be televised on 9 February - the 50th anniversary of the Beatles' 
career-defining first appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show.

Although organisers have not revealed whether either of the surviving Beatles 
are attending the concert, Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr are due to receive 
lifetime achievement Grammy awards at another Los Angeles ceremony on 25 
January. "[The Beatles] really did change people's lives," Ehrlich said.

Eurythmics - Missionary Man 
<http://www.muzu.tv/eurythmics/missionary-man-music-video/17599/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
 Reading on mobile? Click here to watch 
<http://www.muzu.tv/eurythmics/missionary-man-music-video/17599/>

Neither of the Eurythmics have issued a statement about their reunion nor 
indicated which Beatles song they plan to perform. It's an unexpected 
reconciliation: Lennox and Stewart haven't played together since 2005 and the 
two musicians talk to each other "only rarely", Lennox told WENN in 2009. Both 
artists have cultivated their solo careers, and Stewart released a 2012 album 
with Mick Jagger, Joss Stone, Damian Marley, andAR Rahman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/15/superheavy-superheavy-review>.

About a dozen acts will reportedly appear as part of The Night That Changed 
America. Alicia Keys and John Legend will duet onLet It Be 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=26bZZwPs5zM>, while John Mayer has agreed to 
join country singer Keith Urban for a rendition ofDon't Let Me Down 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bUNxWax8WGs>. "Various presenters" will also 
"help highlight and contextualise the musical, cultural and historical impact 
of [the Beatles] and this legendary performance on pop music and the world."

Whereas the Eurythmics have only ever received one Grammy - a 1986 best rock 
performance gong, for Missionary Man - the Beatles were the recipients of seven 
Grammy awards, including the 1964 prize for Best New Artist.
 