
Acupuncture <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/acupuncture> can help 
people who suffer from headaches and migraines, even when the needles are put 
in the "wrong" place, according to a major review of medical studies.

Volunteers who were treated with the traditional Chinese technique, in which 
thin needles are pushed into the skin at specific points, had fewer headaches 
and migraines, and experienced less pain if a headache came on, researchers 
found.

Scientists working for the Cochrane Collaboration 
<http://www.cochrane.org/index.htm>, which publishes gold standard reviews on 
the effectiveness of medical treatments, confirmed the beneficial effect of 
acupuncture after analysing 33 separate studies involving nearly 7,000 patients 
in total.

Researchers led by Klaus Linde at the centre for complementary medicine 
research at the Technical University of Munich, Germany, reviewed published 
evidence for acupuncture as a treatment for tension headaches, which usually 
affect both sides of the head, and migraines, which tend to affect only one 
side.

Eleven trials involving 2,317 patients found many experienced fewer headaches 
after having acupuncture, though a similar improvement was seen in those who 
had "fake" acupuncture, where the needles were either inserted at incorrect 
points or did not puncture the skin.

A further 22 trials involving 4,419 patients who suffered migraines were 
assessed. Again, those who had acupuncture, even when it was faked by placing 
the needles incorrectly, reported having fewer migraines afterwards.

"The studies suggest that migraine patients beneÔ¨Åt from acupuncture, although 
the correct placement of needles seems to be less relevant than is usually 
thought by acupuncturists," the researchers report.

"Much of the clinical benefit of acupuncture might be due to non-specific 
needling effects and powerful placebo effects, meaning selection of specific 
needle points may be less important than many practitioners have traditionally 
argued," said Linde.

Overall, after an eight-week course of treatment, patients who had acupuncture 
and no painkillers suffered fewer headaches compared with those who were given 
only painkillers.

Linde said the results suggest acupuncture could be given to patients who do 
not wish to take drugs, but he added that more research was needed. "Doctors 
need to know how long improvements associated with acupuncture will last and 
whether better trained acupuncturists really achieve better results than those 
with basic training only," he said.
 