
Monster black holes may be lurking behind smokescreens in our cosmic backyard, 
say scientists. But they are still millions of light years away and much too 
distant to pose any threat to Earth.

Astronomers have discovered evidence of supermassive black holes at the centre 
of two of our galactic neighbours. One, the galaxy NGC 1448, is “just” 38m 
light years from our own body of stars, the Milky Way. The other, IC 3639, is 
170m light years away. Both are classified as “active” galaxies that emit 
intense levels of radiation.

In each case the powerful black hole is concealed behind clouds of gas and 
dust. Scientists now believe most large galaxies have supermassive black holes 
at their cores, but many are hidden from view.

Black holes <https://www.theguardian.com/science/black-holes> are places where 
gravity is so powerful it traps light and distorts time and space. They can 
only be detected from the last-gasp emissions of radiation from objects falling 
into them.

The hidden black holes were spotted by Nasa’s Nustar (nuclear spectroscopic 
telescope array) orbiting observatory.

British researchers from the universities of Durham and Southampton conducted 
analysis of the Nustar data. Ady Annuar, of the University of Durham’s centre 
for extragalactic astronomy, said: “These black holes are relatively close to 
the Milky Way, but they have remained hidden from us until now. They’re like 
monsters hiding under your bed.

“Their recent discoveries certainly call out the question of how many other 
supermassive black holes we are still missing, even in our nearby universe.”

Daniel Stern, project scientist for Nustar at Nasa’s jet propulsion 
laboratory, said: “It is exciting to use the power of Nustar to get important, 
unique information on these beasts, even in our cosmic backyard where they can 
be studied in detail.”
 