
Andrew Lansley <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley>, the 
architect of the coalition government’s efforts to privatise parts of the NHS, 
has taken a job advising corporate clients on healthcare reforms despite David 
Cameron’s pledge to close the “revolving door” between Whitehall and the 
private sector.

The management consultants Bain & Company took on Lord Lansley in August. The 
newly ennobled Conservative peer also plans to become an active associate of a
“strategic communications consultancy” set up by his wife 
<http://www.lowassociates.eu/Who-we-are> and will advise on health and social 
care.

His appointments will raise eyebrows because Lansley, who was health secretary 
for two years until 2012, is still blamed by many in the health service for the
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Social Care Act, which 
critics said increased the privatisation of the NHS.

According to documents released by the advisory committee on business 
appointments 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/advisory-committee-on-business-appointments>
 (Acoba), which approved the roles, Lansley’s job with Bain will involve 
“leading a discussion on innovation in healthcare for Bain’s clients and 
consultants”. He does not include details of how much he is being paid or the 
hours he will work in the part-time role.

Bain & Company, which has its headquarters in the US, has taken a keen 
interest in the British healthcare system. In 2013 it claimed that the volume 
of services provided by non-NHS organisations was increasing. A Bain & Company
report 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/acbd7be4-165c-11e4-8210-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3p7BwSLSI>
 released that year found that about £5.8bn of NHS work was being advertised to 
the private sector, up 14% on the previous year.

The firm’s website <http://www.bain.com/.> says: “Healthcare companies face 
dramatic changes in customer behaviour, market dynamics and regulatory demands. 
Bain works with healthcare companies to deliver better value for patients, fuel 
innovation and reduce the cost and complexity of operating systems.”


It continues: “For healthcare companies, growth is an imperative – not an 
option. However, many companies find it difficult to achieve sustained, 
profitable growth. We work with healthcare players to develop and execute 
growth strategies that will help them achieve full potential.”

Lansley also plans to work for the firm set up by his wife, Sally Low, called 
Low Associates, which specialises in PR and EU-related public affairs. 
Documents released by Acoba say he proposes to “provide consultancy expertise 
on competition, economic regulation, health and social care, local government 
and the communications industry.”

Low has previously denied that the firm is a lobbying company, insisting that 
it offers “strategic advice”.


The chair of Acoba, Angela Browning, wrote to Lansley in July to approve both 
appointments, adding that he should not draw on any privileged information from 
his time in government or become “personally involved in lobbying the 
government” for either firm or their clients for two years after leaving 
office. He should also seek the committee’s advice before taking a commission 
for Low Associates, the committee said.

Lansley was replaced as health secretary by Jeremy Hunt in 2012 shortly after 
the BMAvoted in favour of his resignation 
<http://www.pulsetoday.co.uk/bma-calls-for-andrew-lansley-to-resign/14196451.article#.U8UZDeJkZK0>
 and staged a day of action against the government’s NHS pensions reform. He 
then became leader of the House of Commons.

Cameron attempted to ensure that Lansley became the next UN under-secretary 
general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief 
<http://www.unocha.org/about-us/headofOCHA> this year, but his efforts were 
thwarted. The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, announced that he would 
appoint the former UK international development minister Stephen O’Brien.

Lansley had made preparations for the move to New York by announcing last year 
that he would stand down as Conservative MP for South Cambridgeshire at the 
general election. Cameron, a longtime friend of Lansley, gave him a peerage in 
the summer.


Bain & Company did not respond to a request for a statement. 
 