
France's former foreign minister, Roland Dumas, and the country's leading 
auctioneer, Jacques Tajan, are to be tried after accusations of an alleged 
fraud involving artworks left by the Swiss sculptorAlberto Giacometti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/giacometti>.

Mr Dumas, 81, the closest political ally of the late president, François 
Mitterrand, was acquitted in January of fraudulently accepting antiques and a 
pair of shoes during the Elf oil company scandal. He was ill for much of that 
trial and lawyers said that they feared for him if he had to return to court.

In 1993 Giacometti's widow, Annette, died and Mr Dumas, who practised at the 
bar with Mitterrand, was appointed her executor and principal administrator of 
a proposed foundation dedicated to the sculptor, who died in Switzerland in 
1966.

Family disputes over Giacometti's legacy and a series of court cases were 
considered the main reason for the 10-year delay in setting up the foundation, 
which intends to lend thousands of unexhibited sculptures to museums across the 
world.

But the impending trial of Mr Dumas and Mr Tajan has revealed other legal 
problems over the legacy of the artist. Giacometti's slim works fetch millions, 
with a top price of $14m (£8m) having been paid for his sculpture Grande Femme 
Debout II - big, standing woman.

The 2.68 metre statue was sold by Christie's in New York in 2000. In ordering 
a trial, Judge Colette Bismuth-Sarron submitted a report which alleged that the 
auction house kept more than €300,000 (£210,000) from a Giacometti sale in 1994.

She alleged that €380,000 was transferred by the firm to Mr Dumas's bank 
account although there was "practically no trace" of legal assistance to the 
auctioneer by the retired politician.

Lawyers for Mr Tajan said he had "only obeyed instructions" given to him by Mr 
Dumas.
 