
Scrapping Australia’s “green army” without restoring Landcare funding to 
pre-2014 levels would further weaken community conservation efforts, experts 
have said.

The Turnbull government is reportedly set to abolish the derided environmental 
program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/tony-abbotts-green-army-expected-to-be-abolished-in-budget-update>
 – tothe dismay of its creator and greatest champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/tony-abbott-defends-green-army-amid-reports-it-will-be-scrapped>
, the former prime minister Tony Abbott.

Its abolition would save $350m, of which $100m would go towards Landcare in a 
one-off funding boost secured by the Greens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/01/greens-to-support-15-backpacker-tax-in-return-for-100m-for-landcare>
 in exchange for their help passing the backpacker tax.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, refused to 
confirm the budget change on Monday, telling reporters they would “have to wait 
until Myefo” – referring to the the midyear budget update on 19 December.

Tony Abbott's 'green army' expected to be abolished in budget update
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/tony-abbotts-green-army-expected-to-be-abolished-in-budget-update>
For Landcare, an internationally renowned volunteer-driven organisation born 
in 1989 of an unlikely partnership between the AustralianConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Foundation and the 
National Farmers’ Federation, it is another chapter in a long funding saga.

Landcare lost $484m, half its ongoing funding, in the 2014 federal budget, 
despite promises from theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> that it would not be 
touched. At the same time, the green army, the flagship program of Abbott’s 
environment policy, received $535m.

The cuts had a significant impact on the morale and effectiveness of Landcare, 
which leverages $12 of voluntary contributions for every $1 spent,according to 
a 2014 report. 
<https://theconversation.com/another-broken-promise-budget-switches-landcare-for-green-army-26818>

Landcare’s chief executive, Tessa Jakszewicz, said axing the green army 
without restoring its funding to pre-2014 levels could be even more devastating 
because the organisation would not be able to use green army resources to 
complete projects it could no longer afford to do on its own.

The grassroots movement is a registered provider of the green army program, 
which arms unemployed young people with shovels and busses them out to do 
conservation projects forless than the minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/02/tony-abbott-green-army-recruiting-drive>
. About 40% of those who participated through Landcare have since found work.

Jakszewicz said each program had its “unique benefits” but if the pool of 
money were capped, as it was in 2014, “obviously our preference would be that 
all that money went to Landcare”.

Tony Abbott defends green army amid reports it will be scrapped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/tony-abbott-defends-green-army-amid-reports-it-will-be-scrapped>
Ideally, she said, you would fund both. “We would not expect that Landcare 
would have been reduced to support the green army program, and think that the 
green army program could have been separate and committed to separately,” she 
said.

There are 5,400 Landcare groups in Australia, of which 1,400 are in rural or 
regional areas. Those groups link into 56 natural resource management areas.

Funding has been moved away from Landcare into other, accompanying programs a 
number of times in its 27 years: first to the national NRM model, under the 
Howard government, followed by a 40% reduction in funding to the NRM model 
under the Rudd government’s 2008 Caring for Our Country program.

A Melbourne University associate professor of geology, Ian Rutherford, said 
axing green army funding was yet another bait-and-switch to reduce overall 
spending on conservation in Australia.

How the additional funding secured by the Greens will be distributed is yet to 
be determined but Rutherford said it would not provide the long-term security 
required to add staff or orchestrate significant long-term projects.


“They will have to blow the money on local tree-planting efforts – that’s 
usually what happens,” he said. “It’s almost the worst of all possible worlds.”

Greens support 15% backpacker tax in return for $100m for Landcare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/01/greens-to-support-15-backpacker-tax-in-return-for-100m-for-landcare>
Rutherford said the organisation needed funding security to rehire local 
coordinators – jobs funded by the pooled resources of neighbouring Landcare 
groups – and to organise big-picture conservation projects, such as catchment 
management on the Great Barrier Reef.

“These are chronic, long-term problems that need long-term, strategic 
decisions,” he said. “Landcare is among the most successful environmental 
programs in the world … Now there’s a very good chance that we are looking at 
its demise.”

The green army had done some good work, he said, but the effect was fleeting 
compared with the long-term commitment of local volunteers. “Green army rolls 
up in their van and they build a fence and they disappear and the fence falls 
down,” he said.

Max Kitchell, formerly head of the national peak body NRM regions, agreed: 
conservation work was done well by both the green army and Landcare volunteers, 
but it was the commitment of local Landcare volunteers that ensured the work 
was maintained, he said.

Kitchell said the loss of local coordinators, combined with the loss of 
morale, meant Landcare groups “deflated” and lost motivation after the 2014 
budget cut.

“Landcare has always been well regarded by the government of the day and this 
was perhaps the first time that a government, by its funding decision, had 
demonstrated that Landcare was perhaps not as appreciated as it could have 
been,” he said.

Kitchell said he continued to hear enthusiastic support for Landcare and the 
work of NRM groups when meeting bureaucrats in Canberra.

But, he said: “It hasn’t translated, with this government, to a commitment of 
funding similar to those of previous governments, both Liberal and Labor.”
 