
The credit checking company Experian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/experiangroup> was under fire on Tuesday 
for promoting its chief executive, Don Robert, to chairman in a move that 
contravenes City corporate governance codes.

On the eve of the annual meeting where shareholders will vote on the election 
of directors to the board, the Institute of Directors (IoD) warned that the 
promotion of Robert was of significant concern.

The annual meeting in Dublin on Wednesday will be chaired by Sir John Peace 
for the last time before Robert's elevation. Robert has been the chief 
executive since Experian was spun out of GUS in 2006.

The matter risks becoming the third standoff between big City investors and 
Peace during this year's annual general meeting season. Peace presided over a 
shareholder revolt about pay at the bankStandard Chartered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered>, which he chairs, 
while last week investors voted down the remuneration report at Burberry, the 
fashion company he chairs.

Almost 53% of investors voted against the pay report at Burberry  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/11/burberry-shareholders-revolt-christian-bailey-pay-package>
- a rare defeat - to protest against an award of £15m shares to the new chief 
executive, Christopher Bailey, while at Standard Chartered 41% voted against 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/18/standard-chartered-pressure-executive-pay-investor-revolt>
 the pay deals for its top management.

The IoD's focus is on the promotion of Robert rather than on pay, although 
Experian's annual report shows that long-term incentive plans and annual pay 
deals have handed him £45m in the past five years.

The investor group the Investment Management Association has warned its 
members about the succession planning.

The IoD's corporate governance adviser, Oliver Parry, said: "Shareholders have 
understandably raised significant concerns about the decision of the board of 
Experian to appoint Mr Robert as their next chairman.

"Experian have contravened a key provision of the corporate governance code 
that a CEO should not go on to be chairman except in the most exceptional 
circumstances.

"The chairman's role is to lead the board in the oversight of the executive 
team, but without interfering in operational management. The former CEO is 
likely to find this a challenging task … Furthermore, their presence may 
inhibit the ability of the new CEO to properly manage the company."

Robert is being replaced as chief executive by the finance director, Brian 
Cassin.

The City corporate governance codes operate on a comply or explain basis. The 
company declined to comment on Tuesday but has previously said that it 
"maintains an active dialogue with our shareholders who every year have shown 
considerable support for the resolutions".

At the time of his appointment in January 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/experian-plc--expn-/rns/directorate-changes/201401160700297781X/>
, Experian said Robert had been selected as chairman because the company "will 
derive substantial benefit from ensuring the continuity of the senior 
leadership team into the medium term, and maximise the likelihood of preserving 
the company's unique and successful culture".
 