
Agent Coulson still lives, but there’s a lingering sense audiences might have 
had their Phil.Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> was one of the most 
eagerly awaited shows of the last TV season; an unprecedented attempt to expand 
Marvel’s wildly successful movie universe to the small screen. After an 
impressive launch, SHIELD’s shine rapidly came off after a lukewarm critical 
reception and the dawning realisation that Iron Man was unlikely to do even a 
flyby, let alone mingle.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCqo-7oli7iA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCqo-7oli7iA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCqo-7oli7iA&media=>
Surprisingly, it was brand synergy that revitalised the show. A violent 
restructuring of SHIELD inCaptain America: the Winter Soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-the-winter-soldier> had a 
seismic effect on Coulson’s world, but also gave Agents of SHIELD a new sense 
of purpose. It became leaner, meaner and cut back on the goofy one-liners. Now 
it’s back, trying to carve out some space in a TV marketplace suddenly 
super-crowded with superhero shows such as The Flash,Gotham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/oct/06/gotham-tv-series-imagines-city-before-batman>
, and the returning Arrow. Things don’t look good for Coulson. But here are 
five reasons to tune in when Agents of SHIELD returns to Channel 4 on Friday.


1. It’s gone full Blake’s 7

Just before he legged it at the end of season one, Nick Fury (Samuel L 
Jackson) appointed Coulson (Clark Gregg) as the new director of SHIELD. 
Essentially, this means Coulson is in charge of a handful of shellshocked 
agents and a lot of smoking rubble. Hydra, the insidious organisation that 
turned SHIELD inside out to advance their aim of world domination, has more 
agents, more resources and much nicer offices. Coulson and his team are 
outnumbered and outgunned, and – crucially – they’re also outlaws being hunted 
by the US government in the dogged form of Colonel Talbot (Adrian Pasdar from 
Heroes with a magnificent moustache). It’s much easier to root for weary, 
desperate underdogs than lanyard-wearing paper-shufflers.

2. Kyle MacLachlan is in it

The late appearance of Bill Paxton in season one gave Agents of SHIELD a 
welcome jolt of gonzo energy. Kyle MacLachlan appears to have picked up the 
gurn-baton in season two, imbuing his mysterious character, the Doctor, with a 
larger-than-life intensity that feels comicbook-ey in all the right ways. Cult 
favourite Lucy Lawless also stars as a capable mercenary, while Adrianne 
Palicki (who was almost the new TV Wonder Woman in 2011 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2013/12/17/adrianne-palicki-on-her-time-as-wonder-woman-one-of-the-coolest-things-ever>
) will appear as Bobbi Morse, a long-standing agent of SHIELD from the comics.

3. All of the unlikeable characters have been horribly traumatised

Coulson previously inspired the Avengers to team up to fight an alien invasion 
but assembling an instant ensemble for Agents of SHIELD proved to be far 
trickier. The core team – two frowning special-ops soldiers, a pair of British 
lab geeks and a snarky hacker – rubbed a lot of potential fans up the wrong 
way: there was no chemistry, the banter seemed forced, they triumphed too 
easily. Season two is good news forAgents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> hate-watchers, as 
every member of the original squad has been put through the wringer physically 
and emotionally. One’s a traitor, one has permanent brain damage and two have 
been infected with mysterious alien goo.

4. They’ve sorted out the stop-start broadcast

It used to be a superhero show would be on the same Bat-time, same Bat-channel 
every week. But planned production breaks – allowing the writers and crew to 
catch up with a hefty 22-episode season order – meant new episodes of Agents of 
SHIELD was often AWOL from the schedules. The show lost momentum, particularly 
in the UK. This time round, ABC has committed to screening the season in two 
blocks, with theeight-episode spin-off Agent Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/09/marvel-agent-carter-captain-america-tv>
 – starring Hayley Atwell as a proto-SHIELD agent in the 1940s – plugging the 
gap during a longer mid-season break. If Channel 4 opts to pick up Agent 
Carter, the same relatively uninterrupted SHIELD sandwich could happen in the 
UK.

5. There’s a touch of Strictly
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn54yDGD1aSc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn54yDGD1aSc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn54yDGD1aSc&media=>
Season two might be a consciously darker and grittier spin on the SHIELD 
formula, but you’d have to a Hydra-loving mega-grump not to want to see veteran 
agents Coulson and May (Ming-Na Wen) perform a tango while undercover as part 
of an elaborate Mission: Impossible-style heist.

Will you be watching season two? Let us know in the comments below
 