
The family of Indigenous man Wayne “Fella” Morrison who died following an 
incident at a South Australian prison last month have called for a national 
overhaul of the coronial investigation process and for the release of all CCTV 
footage related to deaths in custody.

Morrison, 29, died at Royal Adelaide hospital on 26 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/26/indigenous-prisoner-dies-south-australia-altercation-brain-dead>
, three days after an alleged altercation with corrections staff at Adelaide’s 
Yatala prisonleft him braindead.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/25/aboriginal-inmate-left-braindead-after-brawl-with-guards-at-sa-prison>

His sister, Latoya Aroha Rule, said her family were yet to receive any formal 
information from police investigating the case and have not been shown the 
preliminary autopsy report, despite requests from their lawyers.

Indigenous prisoner dies in South Australia after altercation left him 
braindead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/26/indigenous-prisoner-dies-south-australia-altercation-brain-dead>
“If they were transparent it would be much easier to move on and think that 
justice would come through the justice system,” Rule told Guardian Australia.

All deaths in custody in Australia are subject to a public coronial inquest, 
but that can be a lengthy process. It has already delayed Morrison’s funeral by 
six weeks: his body was only released to his family last week.

“The lack of support for our family and the lack of information has even more 
so made us fearful of corrections and police now because we don’t know who we 
would go to for protection, we don’t know who we can trust,” Rule said.

The first Rule knew of her brother’s injuries was a cryptic comment from a 
magistrate who had been preparing to hear his application for bail.

It was 24 September, six days after Morrison was arrested, and he was due to 
appear via video link. Rule and her mother were in the public gallery to 
support him.

“Someone literally ran into the court with a note for the [magistrate] and 
said, ‘we won’t be able to do it today’,” Rule said.

Aboriginal inmate 'left braindead' after brawl with guards at SA prison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/25/aboriginal-inmate-left-braindead-after-brawl-with-guards-at-sa-prison>
“The judge said to us, ‘we won’t be able to do this today, you will have to 
call Yatala’.”

It took seven hours to confirm, through a third party, that Morrison had been 
taken to RoyalAdelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> 
hospital.

Rule said the lack of transparency made the loss of her brother, who she 
described as a gentle, cultural man of Kokatha and Wiradjuri ancestry, even 
more difficult.

A comment by the state’s correctional services minister, Peter Malinauskas, 
denying any “conspiracies of any cover-up,” <http://news.nirs.org.au/65265-2/> 
has further muddied the waters.

“We are not calling it a cover up – I don’t know where he got that from, but 
now it’s making us think that,” she said.

On Friday, Morrison’s family will hold a rally outside parliament house in 
Adelaide supported by Shaun Harris, whose niece Ms Dhudied in police custody in 
Western Australia in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/23/ms-dhu-death-in-custody-inquest-hears-details-of-the-last-48-hours-of-her-life>
, and Joanne and Kirra Voller, whose son and brother Dylan Voller washooded and 
tied to a chair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/teenager-in-four-corners-juvenile-detention-expose-fears-for-his-safety>
 in images that prompted a royal commission into the Northern Territory’s youth 
detention system.

Ms Dhu death in custody inquest hears details of the last 48 hours of her life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/23/ms-dhu-death-in-custody-inquest-hears-details-of-the-last-48-hours-of-her-life>
All three families have become faces of the Black Lives Matter movement in 
Australia.

Like Dhu, who was arrested on a warrant of commitment for $3,622 in unpaid 
fines, Morrison had not been in custody before.

He was a well-known fisherman in the seaside Adelaide suburb of St Kilda. Rule 
said she had been inundated since his death with messages of support from that 
community, including fishing shop owners who made memorials for the popular 
local.

“We are going to take him back there to the place where he fished and scatter 
his ashes,” she said.

The Department of Corrections in SA declined to comment on the case because it 
was subject to a coronial inquiry, separate police investigations, and an 
internal department inquiry.

“Until these investigations are complete, it is not appropriate for the 
Department to comment further,” a spokeswoman said.
 