
Snapshot: Mum’s 100 years of ups and downs

This is my mother, Rose Louisa Billard born on 17 January 1914, holding her 
congratulatory card from Queen Elizabeth II on her centenary birthday.

My mother’s life has been tragedy and triumph. Born in the East End of London, 
she lost her father when she was five and the family was plunged into poverty. 
A champion swimmer, she left school at 14 and worked in the garment industry.

After many jobs, she worked in a bar in Victoria and then met my dad. Married 
on 5 September 1939 (the honeymoon in Germany was cancelled), Dad was called up 
to the Royal Navy and served on Arctic convoys. Mum received his Arctic Star 
medal last year.

After four miscarriages, I arrived in 1946 and my sister two years later. 
Sadly my dad died in 1974 and it was a terrible shock when my sister went the 
same way with cancer in 1987. Undaunted, my mum was able to visit Australia 
four times to see friends, travelling on her own until she was 90.
 The congratulatory card from Queen Elizabeth II on Rose’s centenary birthday. 
She has three lovely granddaughters and seven great-grandchildren. She still 
lives alone in her bungalow, which is immaculate. She has just finished 
listening to Alan Sugar’s autobiography. “He is just my sort of man”, she says. 
“He comes from Clapton, just round from where I lived. There are no flies on 
him!”

There are no flies on my mum, either. We love her dearly and are so proud of 
her. I could say much more.

John Billard

Playlist: Carefree days of Abba in my Renault 5

Chiquitita by Abba <https://www.theguardian.com/music/abba> 

Chiquitita, you and I know/ How the heartaches come and they go and the scars 
they’re leaving/ You’ll be dancing once again and the pain will end/ You’ll 
have not time for grieving
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp4QqMKe3rwY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp4QqMKe3rwY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp4QqMKe3rwY&media=>
It was the spring of 1993. I was a student at college and lived at home with 
Mum and Dad. I’d just passed my driving test (after two attempts). I’ll always 
remember the date I passed – 25 April. It was Mum’s birthday. I hadn’t told her 
I was taking the test because I wanted it to be a special birthday present for 
her. Besides, I wasn’t entirely sure I’d pass after my last efforts (the tester 
wasn’t too impressed by my hitting the kerb and coming to a standstill on the 
pavement). But I passed and Mum said it made her day.

Soon after, I bought my first car. It was a second-hand Renault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/renault> 5, with a black body and 
brilliant orange seats and, as I was to find out later when it rained, its own 
in-board shower. Mum and Dad were so excited when I said I’d take them for a 
spin. Dad raced Mum to the car and bagged the front seat.

It was when Mum got in the back and found herself immersed in a foot of water 
that we realised there was a problem. Strangely enough, Mum and Dad weren’t so 
keen to get in the car after that. I didn’t ever find out where the leak was 
coming from, but for the bargain price of £75, I couldn’t complain.

I loved my car – even if Mum and Dad didn’t. I wouldn’t have trusted her to 
take me further than about 20 miles but she was a perfect first car.

Reggie, as I affectionately called her, even had a working tape deck. Abba 
Gold was my favourite album of the time, along with the song, Chiquitita, in 
particular. It’s the only song I’ve ever sung out loud to (I’m completely tone 
deaf) and I always sang it with all my heart. When the song was over, I’d 
rewind to listen to it again and again.

Now, whenever I hear it, it reminds me of those wondrous, carefree days when I 
had no responsibilities or anything in particular to worry about. I still sing 
along to Chiquitita (though in my head only, to spare my family’s suffering) 
and when the song has finished, I think fondly of Reggie, and of poor Mum’s wet 
feet.

Dear Reggie was a steal at £75 – I even made a profit when I sold her – to a 
policeman for £100!

Esther Newton

We love to eat: Dad’s delicious ratatouille

Ingredients 

Onions, peppers, aubergines, courgettes and tomatoes (tinned or fresh)
Tomato puree
Lots and lots of garlic
Basil (optional)
Salt and pepper
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F09%2Ffamily-life-note-from-queen-abba-chiquitita-dads-ratatouille%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F4%2F1407171361381%2F2475e17a-3395-4366-b75d-a5ef71dcc2e3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20life%3A%20a%20note%20from%20the%20Queen%2C%20singing%20Abba%E2%80%99s%20Chiquitita%20out%20of%20tune%20and%20Dad%E2%80%99s%20ratatouille&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F09%2Ffamily-life-note-from-queen-abba-chiquitita-dads-ratatouille%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%20life%3A%20a%20note%20from%20the%20Queen%2C%20singing%20Abba%E2%80%99s%20Chiquitita%20out%20of%20tune%20and%20Dad%E2%80%99s%20ratatouille&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F09%2Ffamily-life-note-from-queen-abba-chiquitita-dads-ratatouille%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F4%2F1407171361381%2F2475e17a-3395-4366-b75d-a5ef71dcc2e3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dad’s is still the best … Katherine Stothard’s version of her father’s 
ratatouille. 
Chop vegetables into chunks or thick slices. Fry each vegetable, except the 
tomatoes, separately in olive oil and pop in large ovenproof pot. Add tomatoes 
on top. Add tomato puree, basil, salt and pepper to taste. Cover and cook in 
oven for at least 3 hours (lowish heat) stirring every hour or so until it goes 
mushy. Serve with fresh basil torn on top.

Vary the quantities of vegetables – or put in more of the veg you like. I tend 
to use 3 courgettes, 2 aubergines, 2 peppers, 2 tins of tomatoes and lots of 
onion and garlic. Chefs seem to like firm ratatouille, but we prefer it mushy 
and it is even better reheated a couple of days later to eat with crusty bread 
for lunch.

We spent every summer holiday as children driving down to the south of France. 
We set off before dawn for the ferry and spent days driving in the sun with my 
sister and I singing, playing and fighting over the middle bit of the back seat 
of the car. My dad always made ratatouille from gorgeous fresh market-bought 
vegetables near the gîtes we stayed in. It reminds me of lavender fields, 
strange foreign-city smells, 1980s music and my dad. I make it when I fancy a 
bit of sunshine, but the best is still my dad’s.

Katherine Stothard
 