
Loyal members of nerd/geek fandoms like to spend money on their obsessions. 
Thanks to websites full of merchandise like ThinkGeek, worldwide Comic Con 
events, year-round conventions and an endless supply of memorabilia, an 
addiction to Doctor Who or Star Wars can be expensive.

However, there are a few talented, entrepreneurial fans who use their 
ingenuity to claim a place on the profit side of the fandom industry. And, in 
the midst of making money, they are also getting a chance to utilise their 
natural gifts and be an integral part of something much larger than themselves. 
From performance art to fan art, there are manifold ways to turn a fandom 
obsession into a lucrative endeavour. Here are four businesses who took the 
leap.

Dimitri Walker, paintings by Dimitri
 Dmitri Walker: a Browncoat, Trekker and Whovian. Photograph: Supplied 
Who are you?


I am an Atlanta, Georgia native who is a simple artist at heart. I have been a 
portrait artist since 1983. In 2009, I graduated with a degree in fine art so I 
could show my five children the importance of higher education.

Which fandoms are you in?

I am everything from a Browncoat to a Trekkie to a Whovian. 

How did you get into the business of fan art?

In 2012, I left a job at Hobby Lobby doing picture framing and I was trying to 
decide my next move. I was teaching drawing and painting classes to make ends 
meet. A student who took my class to learn to draw the Tardis better said: 
“Dimitri, I know you watch and love all the same shows and movies I do. 
Supernatural, Star Trek, Doctor Who, Star Wars, Firefly, and all the comic book 
movies. I have been to your website. Why don’t you have any fan art?” I said 
“What’s fan art?” The rest is history.

Name a difficult aspect of being a business owner.

I am not a big fan of math. Inventory, budgeting, and cash-flow management ... 
forcing myself to treat these things with the same importance as the colours I 
use in a painting has definitely been a challenge.

What advice would you give someone who wants to set up a fan-centric business?

The same two pieces of advice I have given to every student I have ever 
taught. One, practice, practice, practice, and be creative. Working inside the 
world of fandoms has its unique limitations, but these limitations should be 
stretched to make art that actually belongs toyou. Make whatever you are doing 
the absolute best product you can create.

Two: do not give up under any circumstances. This does not mean there won’t be 
any stumbling blocks. Just stumble over them, regroup, and keep plugging away. 
It might sound trite, but people have given this advice for centuries because 
it works.

 * Dimitri is scheduled to appear at over 20 conventions in 2015. For more 
information, visit hisEtsy shop <https://www.etsy.com/shop/PaintingsbyDimitri> 
orwebsite <http://paintingsbydimitriwalker.yolasite.com/>

Amber M, founder of Tsubasa Nyan Cosplay
 Amber M as Officer Stocking: ‘I fell in love with bringing these characters 
to life.’ Photograph: Supplied 
What do you do?


I am a cosplayer who loves conventions.

Which fandoms are you in?

Quite a few! The ones I can list off the top of my head include Doctor Who, 
Marvel, Supernatural, Game of Thrones,Free 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free!_%28anime%29>, Panty and Stocking 
<http://myanimelist.net/anime/8795/Panty_&_Stocking_with_Garterbelt>, DC 
<http://www.dccomics.com/>, Attack on Titan 
<http://www.crunchyroll.com/attack-on-titan>, Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_The_Melancholy_of_Haruhi_Suzumiya_episodes>
,Kuroshitsuji <http://kuroshitsuji.wikia.com/wiki/Kuroshitsuji_Wiki>, Naruto 
<http://www.viz.com/naruto>, Clamp 
<http://www.animenewsnetwork.com/encyclopedia/people.php?id=5765>, Disney, 
Dreamworks,Studio Ghibli <http://www.studioghibli.com.au/>, Kill la Kill 
<http://www.crunchyroll.com/kill-la-kill>, and Inuyasha 
<http://myanimelist.net/anime/249/InuYasha>.

How did you launch your business?

I stumbled into it after discovering I had a knack for sewing while organising 
amaid cafe <http://gothamist.com/2013/11/11/she_just_took_my_empty.php> in high 
school. I designed the outfits and managed to pull the looks together. From 
there, I decided to cosplay atOtakon <https://www.otakon.com/> in 2013 and I 
was encouraged by veteran cosplayers to delve a into becoming a more serious 
cosplayer.

This was the first time I had ever tried cosplay, and the reception was so 
warm. I had to give it a go. After I cosplayedOfficer Stocking 
<http://enchantedcupcake.deviantart.com/art/Police-Officer-Stocking-II-410424665>
, I didMartha Jones <http://tardis.wikia.com/wiki/Martha_Jones> [from Doctor 
Who] andPlaybunny Loki <https://www.pinterest.com/pin/341288477985310184/>. By 
the end of 2014, I had myFacebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/tsubasnyancosplay> set up and a couple more costumes 
in my portfolio. I was even taking small prop, accessory, and clothing 
commissions in between work and classes.

I had started a small business. I fell in love with bringing these characters 
to life, and became addicted to the feeling of finding something to create and 
share with the world. I love making other people happy. Once I realised my 
purpose,Tsubasa <http://tsubasanyancosplay.tumblr.com/> began to take flight.

What are some difficulties you face with managing your business?

It can be difficult to balance my home, school, and regular work life with my 
life at conventions. I lead a double life!

Any advice for people who want to follow your lead?

Fandom business can be hit or miss depending on what it is you want to do 
versus what people want to see. Be true to what feels right to you. Every 
aspect of cosplay is an art, and as an artist, make it yours! Breathe in and 
breathe out, youwill be amazing!

Jamie Broadnax, founder of BlackGirlNerds 
 Jamie Broadnax of BlackGirlNerds. Photograph: BlackGirlNerds 
What is BlackGirlNerds?

Black Girl Nerds (BGN) <http://blackgirlnerds.com/> is a place for diverse 
women to express themselves, embrace their nerdiness, and find a community 
where they can connect with other people who refuse to conform to the status 
quo. Since our launch in 2012, BGN has grown to have over 37,000Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/BlackGirlNerds> followers, live-tweet events, and 
countless podcast episodes. [The site makes income off of page clicks/ads and 
donations.]

Why did you start BGN?

I googled the term Black Girl Nerds one day and nothing came up in Google. So, 
I decided to create a blog with that term to fill a void for women like me who 
have been attached to a stigma that does not accurately represent our unique 
personae.

What is the biggest challenge you have encountered so far?

Public speaking. I am often asked to appear on panels and speak in front of 
large audiences. For an introverted and awkward nerd like myself, it is a scary 
experience.

What advice would you give to a person who wants to build a brand like BGN?

I would tell them to create something that they would want to subscribe to or 
purchase. They have to think about if their pursuit is going to fulfill their 
own desires as well as their target market.

BGN covers a wide array of fandoms. Which ones are you in?

I love various TV shows: Daredevil, The Walking Dead, and Game of Thrones.

Mary Emerick from Antipode Geek Bellydance
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ffan-art-cosplay-fandom-money-careers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432071810593%2F9ea793ff-e78f-4d4f-8e92-635a7c6beb04-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fan%20art%2C%20cosplay%20and%20geek%20belly%20dancing%3A%20turning%20fandom%20into%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ffan-art-cosplay-fandom-money-careers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fan%20art%2C%20cosplay%20and%20geek%20belly%20dancing%3A%20turning%20fandom%20into%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ffan-art-cosplay-fandom-money-careers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432071810593%2F9ea793ff-e78f-4d4f-8e92-635a7c6beb04-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Antipode Geek Bellydance: ‘a full geek experience’. Photograph: Supplied 
What’s the concept of Antipode?


Antipode <https://www.facebook.com/AntipodeBellyDance> is a comedic geek 
bellydance troupe, formed in 2006, who performs at numerous fandom conventions 
along the east coast and internationally. The group consists of a few eccentric 
performers who have combined their love of otaku/nerd culture with dance to 
create a unique performance art. Antipode shows are a fusion of acting with a 
mix of cosplay, pop-culture, and offbeat humour. Fans get a full geek 
entertainment experience.


What kind of shows and characters does you use in performances?

We have done a long list of shows including Doctor Who, My Little Pony, and 
Pokémon. This year, we are working on X-Men,Groot 
<http://marvel.wikia.com/Groot_%28Earth-616%29>, Avatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avatar> and Shantae.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuGg24VbYXwA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuGg24VbYXwA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuGg24VbYXwA&media=>
How do you streamline communication in a group business?

We live miles apart from each other, so Google Drive and Skype are our best 
friends.

What is the key to success?

Doing what you love. You will be investing all of your time, money, and sanity 
towards it, so you need to have a passion for what you do.
 