
 Author:  Nikolai Gogol (1809-1852) grew up in Ukraine but moved to St 
Petersburg aged 19. After a disastrous self-published poem, Hans KÃ¼chelgarten 
(1829), Gogol worked as a tutor before putting out a collection of "Ukrainian 
tales", Evenings on a Farm near Dikanka (1831-32), which included the story 
Viy. They were a huge success, with Pushkin being a particular supporter. Gogol 
published more story collections in 1835, including Diary of a Madman, Taras 
Bulba and Nevsky Prospekt. The following year saw his play, The Government 
Inspector, critical reaction to which precipitated Gogol's flight from Russia. 
He began Dead Souls in Rome; it was published in two volumes in 1842 and 1846. 
In the final decade of his life, Gogol fell into religious fanaticism and 
stopped publishing, burning a Dead Souls sequel a few days before he died.

 Story:  Viy is part of an 1830s vogue for "Little Russia", as Ukraine was 
known, as well as a general interest in folk literature. Supposedly "as told" 
to the author, Viy is the name given to "the chief of the gnomes, whose eyelids 
reach the ground". A supernatural tale of sorcery and possession, Viy has 
philosophy student Khoma Brut tormented by an old witch, who transforms into a 
beautiful girl after Brut beats her senseless. Brut is then called to recite 
prayers over the body of the girl (the daughter of a Cossack chieftain). But 
the corpse revives, and demons assail Brut inside a church, resulting in the 
summoning-up of Viy, a being with a face of iron. Brut dies of fright.

 The film-maker:  Mario Bava (1914-1980) originally worked as a 
cinematographer and special effects designer in the postwar Italian film 
industry and, after stepping in to finish films abandoned by their directors 
(including Italy's first sound-era horror film The Devil's Commandment, 1956), 
he was given the chance to make his own. For The Mask of Satan he enlisted 
British-born actor Barbara Steele, then virtually unknown in her homeland. The 
film's success established him in Italian cinema, allowing him to move on to a 
wide variety of films, such as the spaghetti western Road to Fort Alamo (1964) 
and the pop art fantasy Diabolik (1968). Bava died shortly after shooting 
special sequences on Inferno (1980) for his protege Dario Argento.

 How book and film compare:  Bava was inspired by the success of British 
costumed horror films such as The Curse of Frankenstein (1957) and Dracula 
(1958). The Mask of Satan only tangentially relates to its credited original, 
in the cod-Russian setting and the basic idea of a beautiful young witch who 
comes back to life. The film has its own narrative: a pair of vampire demons 
are woken after 200 years, and return to feed off the descendants of the family 
who had originally persecuted them (Steele plays the dual role of witch and 
princess).

 Inspirations and influences:  Bava's near-fetishistic interest in gruesome 
special effects (the film was initially refused a certificate in the UK and 
only given one, under the title Black Sunday, in 1986) broke new ground in 
horror movies, and his attention to design and lighting resulted in a new 
emphasis on style and atmosphere. Bava was followed by a generation of Italian 
horror directors - known as " giallo ", or "yellow" - headed by Argento, who 
combined blood-splattered stories with glossy art direction.
 