
Ahead of the UK release of Dior & I, the documentary about Raf Simons’s first 
haute couture collection for the fashion house, the Guardian is hosting a 
screening of the film and a live interview with director Frédéric Tchengat 
Clapham Picturehouse in London on Thursday 19 March 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/dior-and-i-preview-screening-and-director-qa-15946684964>
. Here are the highlights to look out for in Dior & I, plus four more brilliant 
fashion documentaries to watch.

Dior & I
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-best-documentaries-dior-and-i-screening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F12%2F1426152580056%2F3db6ce53-13fe-4444-9c49-a24788831856-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion's%20best%20documentaries%20%E2%80%93%20plus%20a%20chance%20to%20see%20Dior%20%26%20I&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-best-documentaries-dior-and-i-screening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%27s%20best%20documentaries%20%E2%80%93%20plus%20a%20chance%20to%20see%20Dior%20%26%20I&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-best-documentaries-dior-and-i-screening%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F12%2F1426152580056%2F3db6ce53-13fe-4444-9c49-a24788831856-1020x612.jpeg>
 Raf Simons analyses a dress in Dior & I. Photograph: Dior 
The story: Raf Simons, a designer best known for his work at minimalist label 
Jil Sander, has been appointed creative director of the fabled French design 
house Dior. His first collection will be haute couture – the most arduous, 
labour-intensive discipline in fashion.

Standout character: Florence, the head of the couture atelier, who is slightly 
in love with Raf’s right-hand man Pieter Mulier. “It’s a pity he’s gay,” she 
says, mournfully, in a lift.

Best fashion item: Simons’s bermuda shorts. He pairs them, incongruously, with 
a crisp white shirt, black jumper and black business socks, and always looks 
elegant.

Quote this: “Sublime”. Simons’s compliment of choice – pronounced 
“Suub-leeeeeeme”. Classy.

 * Released in the UK on 27 March; see the trailer here 
<http://www.diorandimovie.com/>.

Valentino: The Last Emperor, 2008
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUGJJRPWqvzM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUGJJRPWqvzM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUGJJRPWqvzM&media=>
The story: An examination of Valentino Garavani’s 45-year career and 
relationship with partner Giancarlo Giammetti as he rails against the 
modernisation of the fashion business and strives to bring beauty to every 
aspect of his life.

Scene stealer: Valentino’s pug entourage, who fly on private jets, wear 
diamond earrings and have their teeth brushed by staff.

Best fashion item: Watch out for Valentino’s white suits and layered shirts. 
The epitome of elegance.

Quote this: “An evening dress that reveals a woman’s ankles while walking is 
the most disgusting thing I have ever seen.” Quite.

The September Issue, 2009
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxp8iIyKDOtk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxp8iIyKDOtk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxp8iIyKDOtk&media=>
The story: The Vogue team are pulling together the biggest – and most 
profitable – issue of the magazine all year. Cue clashes about whether pink is 
“important” enough to be included (crestfallen stylist: “I thought it was 
pretty”) and on-brand imperiousness fromAnna Wintour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour>.

Scene stealer: Grace Coddington, the cheeky, passionate and supremely talented 
creative director, who dares to roll her eyes at Wintour and attempts to sneak 
extra pictures into photoshoots against her wishes.

Best fashion item: Editor-at-large André Leon Talley’s Louis Vuitton tennis 
trunk, which he teams with a Louis Vuitton hat, towel, clutch and racket case 
when Wintour tries to inspire him to get some exercise. Why settle for a 
battered rucksack?

Quote this: “She looks pregnant. We need to fix her.” (Wintour on Jennifer 
Garner).

Lagerfeld Confidential, 2007
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn22yzBmr5sY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn22yzBmr5sY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn22yzBmr5sY&media=>
The story: A profile of fashion’s most prolific, and quotable, designer, shot 
over three years.

Scene stealer: The poster in the office men’s toilets: “Pissing everywhere 
isn’t veryChanel <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/chanel>.”

Best fashion item: As accessories go, Diet Coke served on a silver tray, as 
Karl likes it, is pretty strong.

Quote this: Where to start? Maybe: “When I took on Chanel, it was a sleeping 
beauty – not even a beautiful one; she snored,” or perhaps: “I’m rather 
pro-prostitution. I admire people who do it. It can’t be much fun. Thank 
goodness for it. People need relief or they become murderers.”

Mademoiselle C, 2013
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvGMdJVZUjFg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvGMdJVZUjFg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvGMdJVZUjFg&media=>
The story: Carine Roitfeld – muse to Tom Ford and formerly the editor of 
French Vogue – launches her own fashion magazine, CR book.

Scene stealer: Roitfeld’s granddaughter Romy, who is taken on a test drive in 
a Bugaboo pram around a photographic studio by Lagerfeld while the Chanel boss 
debates the merits of breastfeeding with her mother, Julia.

Best fashion item: Roitfeld’s taupe ballet clothes. Very Kanye West for Adidas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/12/kanye-west-debuts-fashion-line-wolves-song>
.

Quote this: Makeup artist Tom Pecheux hints at the ultimate horror in a 
drunken conversation with Roitfeld: “If you were reincarnated, you would come 
back as you, but with fat ankles.”

 * Guardian Membership is hosting a screening of Dior & I followed by a Q&A 
with the director, Frederic Tcheng, at 6.30pm on Thursday 19 March at Clapham 
Picturehouse.Book tickets here 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/dior-and-i-preview-screening-and-director-qa-15946684964>
.
 