
Albert Maysles, the legendary documentary maker who died last week aged 88 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/06/grey-gardens-documentary-maker-albert-maysles-dies-aged-88>
, left a final addition to his canon of cinéma vérité classics fromGimme Shelter
 <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1657510/> to Grey Gardens 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0073076/>.

Set for release in late April, Maysles’s final film is Iris, a study of 
93-year-old fashion legendIris Apfel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/mar/13/iris-apfel-muse-new-york> – a 
figure widely celebrated for an uncompromising style and a trademark pair of 
giant spectacles.

Apfel, who was subject of an exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 
2005, told the documentary maker that when she was starting out in fashion, a 
department store owner informed her: “You’re not pretty and you’ll never be 
pretty, but it doesn’t matter. You have something much better. You have style.”

Apfel is widely credited with inspiring the current vogue for senior models. 
In recent months writer Joan Didion has appreared for Céline, Jessica Lange for 
Marc Jacobs, Joni Mitchell for Yves Saint Laurent, and Apfel herself for Kate 
Spade.

Albert Maysles: Stones, socialites and monsters
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/15/albert-maysles> 
Maysles’s death just six weeks before the release of Iris has given his 
passing an elevated sense of poignancy. In the movie, Maysles’s camera follows 
Apfel as she combats old age and is visited by contemporary figures concerned 
with style, including Kanye West.

“Making a film isn’t finding the answer to a question; it’s trying to capture 
life as it is,” Maysles said in 1994.

The Maysles brothers, Albert and David, shot 30 films together, including 
Psychiatry in Russia (1955), a silent documentary shot on a trip to the Soviet 
Union, and What’s Happening! The Beatles In The USA that followed the band to 
three American cities in 1964. Their partnership lasted until David, the 
younger brother, died in 1987.

Their best-known work include s Salesmen (1969), about a quartet of 
door-to-door Bible salesmen; Gimme Shelter (1970), which recorded the Rolling 
Stones at their peak in 1969 and the infamous concert in Altamont, California, 
that ended in the murder of a black fan by Hells Angels; and Grey Gardens 
(1975), a double-portrait of Edith Ewing Bouvier Beale and her daughter, Edith 
Bouvier Beale – cousins of Jackie Kennedy who lived in a tumbledown house in 
East Hampton with feral cats.

Maysles called his pioneering style cinéma vérité or direct cinema and worked 
in a way that avoided interviewing and set-up situations, placing a premium on 
casual observation.

Film maker Martin Scorsese once described Maysles’s use of a camera as “an 
inquisitive presence, but also a loving presence, an empathetic presence, tuned 
to the most sensitive emotional vibrations.”

In tribute, LA Times critic Kenneth Turan recalled a conversation in which a 
photographer described feeling protective of her subjects. “That’s good,” 
Maysles said, after a moment’s thought. “But don’t be too protective.”
 