
The real scandal of Adam Rickwood's death in the Hassockfield secure training 
centre is that it revisits issues around the physical restraint and care of 
children in custody that have been known about for years ('What gives them the 
right to hit a child in the nose?', June 2).

For 17 years up to 2001, I managed local-authority secure units, and saw 
issues with physical restraint come and go. As a freelance consultant in the 
care of children, I know the issues remain. In 1993 the Department of Health 
published a report into the use of physical restraint at the Aycliffe centre in 
Durham after revelations that staff using prison-service training had injured 
several children.

The department and the prison service college made efforts to develop a 
restraint method for children and young people, but then neither delivered it 
nor gave it official approval. Private firms developed these and other 
techniques, and delivered training commercially. Training staff only became 
compulsory in most children's care after the Care Standards Act 2000, although 
service providers still had to select the methods they wanted to use.

In April 2004 Gareth Myatt died while being restrained at Rainsbrook secure 
training centre. This had echoes of the situation at Aycliffe, when there was 
an outcry over the techniques being used; things were allowed to drift until 
another tragedy produced public concern.

Someone on behalf of the government should take a lead in monitoring restraint 
techniques to ensure the current level of knowledge and understanding informs 
practice in all children's provision. My experience suggests that the interest 
will die down after a few more weeks and re-emerge the next time there is a 
tragedy.
Roy Grimwood
Market Drayton, Shropshire
 