
Dubbed “The Uncatchable” for staying at large for so long, and “Mr Marlboro” 
after his cigarette smuggling operation to fund jihad, Mokhtar Belmokhtar 
became one of al Qaida’s most notorious operatives.

Belmokhtar was reportedly killed by a US air strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/14/us-counterterrorism-strike-al-qaida-libya>
 on Saturday, according to statement from the Libyan government.


But his death has not been verified and the truth about the man who lost an 
eye fighting the Russians in Afghanistan – or possibly inAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, fighting the military, depending 
on which source you believe – has always been as evasive as the man himself.

Belmokhtar was known best for masterminding the 2013 attack on an Algerian gas 
plant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/02/algerian-siege-mastermind-killed-mali>
 that killed 39 hostages, and was carried out by his own al-Qaida offshoot 
known as the “Masked Men brigade”, or “Signed in Blood battalion”.

This is not the first time he has been reported dead. In 2013 Chadian troops 
claimed to have killed him in an operation against a terrorist base in northern 
Mali, only for him to resurface months later, linked to terror attacks in Mali 
and Niger.

Mr Marlboro: the jihadist back from the 'dead' to launch Algerian gas field 
raid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/17/mokhtar-belmokhtar-algeria-hostage-crisis>
Born in Algeria in 1972, Belmokhtar professed to being inspired by jihad as a 
schoolboy and travelling to Afghanistan aged 19 to train with al-Qaida. He 
later claimed that during his time in Afghanistan he was in touch with leading 
lights of the terror group including Abu Qatada and the recently released Abu 
Muhammad al-Maqdisi.

Belmokhtar returned to Algeria in 1993 and joined the country’s fledgling 
jihadi movement, going on to become a leading figure in the militant Armed 
Islamist Group (GIA) and later the Group for Preaching and Combat (GSPC), a 
breakaway group formed by former GIA commander Hassan Hattab.

In early 2007, it was announced that GSPC would merge with al-Qaida to form 
al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) and Belmokhtar took control of an AQIM 
battalion.

But in 2012, after in-fighting among AQIM commanders, Belmokhtar broke away 
once again to form his own group, the Signed in Blood battalion, or “Those Who 
Sign in Blood”.

It was under this moniker that he masterminded the 2013 attack against the In 
Amenas gas facility in south-eastern Algeria, the group’s first big operation.

The militants seized control of the facility, taking hundreds of people 
hostage. By the time the Algerian army stormed the facility four days later, 39 
foreign hostages were dead, including six Britons. An Algerian security guard 
and 29 militants also lost their lives.

In recent years, Belmokhtar reportedly made money smuggling cigarettes and 
other contraband across the Sahara and extorting ransoms for western hostages.

In January, he emerged to praise the shooting at satirical magazine Charlie 
Hebdo <https://www.theguardian.com/media/charlie-hebdo> in Paris and called on 
Muslims to carry out similar attacks.

In August 2013 it was announced that the Signed in Blood battalion would join 
with another al-Qaida offshoot, the Movement for the Unity and Jihad in West 
Africa, to form theal-Mourabitoun 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Mourabitoun_%28jihadist_group%29> group.

In May this year, Belmokhtar was forced to deny that he had pledged allegiance 
to Islamic State after a faction within al-Mourabitoun defected. He issued a 
statement reiterating his allegiance to al-Qaida and its chief, Ayman 
al-Zawahri.
 