
The Australian Open is a killer. The frequently intense heat, coupled with 
persistent swirling winds and the stickiness of the Rebound Ace courts, puts a 
premium on physical conditioning, with the conservation of energy essential 
whenever possible and particularly during the first week.

With that in mind Roger Federer, the multitalented Swiss No6 seed, spent much 
of his second-round match against Germany's Lars Burgsm√ºller making careful 
note of the speed gun which recorded the velocity of his serve.

This was not because he wanted to see how fast he was serving, rather to check 
how slowly he could ping the ball down and still win the points. It was all 
about making absolutely sure he did not expend too much spare capacity, and his 
6-3, 6-0, 6-3 victory was duly achieved with a minimum of fuel consumption.

Federer, on his day, has the ability to trouble and beat the best players in 
the world, but as yet he has not translated these talents into sustained 
success at grand slam level. On too many occasions he has run out of gas at 
crucial times, and he has been working hard on his physical conditioning in 
order to break through into the world's top five.

"Unlike my first-round match, when I had to do quite a lot of running around, 
it was all black and white to me," said Federer, who next faces Sweden's 
Andreas Vinciguerra. "I knew that I had to try and win as quickly and as simply 
as possible, and I managed to do just that." He was not alone.

The top half of the draw, which includes the world No1 and top seed Lleyton 
Hewitt, has an abundance of star names, including the two Americans Andy 
Roddick and James Blake and Russia's Marat Safin, last year's runner-up.

All four, like Federer, were on cruise control yesterday, none more so than 
Hewitt, who defeated his fellow Australian Todd Larkham 6-1, 6-0, 6-1 in the 
final match of the day under floodlights.

Five years ago Larkham, then 22, beat Hewitt, 16, in a Challenger event at 
Dendy Park club, a bayside suburb of Melbourne. Larkham, a qualifier here, has 
had only one other occasion to compare with this second meeting with Hewitt, 
and that was playing Pete Sampras in the US Open at the opening of the Arthur 
Ashe Stadium in 1996. "I was way too nervous then," he admitted, and the same 
was true this time.

Larkham, ranked 234 places lower than Hewitt, had watched his opponent's 
demanding five-set first-round match against Magnus Larsson of Sweden from the 
doctor's surgery, attached to a drip to rectify the dehydration and cramps that 
arose from beating Cecil Mamiit of the United States in four sets. Since 1998 
Larkham has had a serious shoulder injury; it led to a 20-month break, and he 
had to call for the trainer yesterday.

"It's always nice to have an easy match after a tough one," said Hewitt. "You 
put in your work before a grand slam starts and you have to be pre pared to 
play seven best-of- five-set matches, but I felt like I bounced back really 
well. I felt hungry, I felt eager, and I felt quick on my feet."

Hewitt next plays Radek Stepanek of the Czech Republic, ranked No 69, who in 
his second-round match defeated Brazil's Gustavo Kuerten, the three-times 
French Open champion, over five sets.

"I've only seen Radek play a few times but he's a different kind of player," 
said Hewitt. "He plays with a lot of finesse and is one of the best movers on 
the tour. He's also probably one of the most underrated, but obviously he may 
be a little bit tired and I've got to try and take full advantage of that come 
Saturday."
 