
The general view, since Roger Federer missed the pre-Australian Open warm-up 
exhibition in Kooyong with a stomach illness, is that the great man is 
vulnerable. Every one of his matches has been minutely analysed and every time 
he has deviated from perfection teeth have been sucked and I-told-you-so 
glances exchanged. Yet here he is in the semi-finals again for the 15th 
consecutive slam with Serbia's 20-year-old Novak Djokovic, the world No3, 
standing between the Swiss and the chance to win his 13th major. And this may 
be the biggest test of all.

The rise of Djokovic has been remarkable. A year ago he and Andy Murray were 
neck and neck, pushing and straining for a place in the top 10 as teenagers, 
and drawing plaudits wherever and whenever they played. Now the Serb, one week 
younger than Murray, has accelerated away in terms of achievement and 
experience. His 6-0, 6-3, 7-5 quarter-final victory over Spain's David Ferrer, 
the world No5, saw him reach his fourth consecutive slam semi-final. Murray has 
yet to get past the fourth round and lost here in the first.

Djokovic is remarkably mature and has impressed everybody on and off the 
court. His post-match mimicry of other players, limited to Maria Sharapova 
here, has caused something of a stir inside the locker room. For the most part 
he has let his tennis do the talking and he has achieved a level of controlled 
excellence, combined with an unbending mental fortitude, that has lifted him to 
an undisputed third place in the world behind Federer and Rafael Nadal.

Tomorrow evening in the Rod Laver arena is the chance for him to step up on to 
a more elevated plane. The last player to defeat Federer in a slam, other than 
Nadal on the clay of Roland Garros, was Russia's Marat Safin in the semi-finals 
of this tournament three years ago. Djokovic recorded his first and only 
victory against the Swiss in the final of last year's CanadianTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Masters Cup. For him to repeat that 
here is a colossal ask, though not beyond him. "It's difficult to compare this 
year with last. I was told that the year after your breakthrough year is the 
most difficult but I'm feeling really, really good, both physically and 
mentally," he said.

There seems little doubt that Federer will regard this latest challenge with a 
degree of circumspection. At Djokovic's first major final at the US Open last 
year when Federer beat him 7-6, 7-6, 6-4 the Serb was within a shot or two of 
making serious inroads and his stature has hardly diminished since then, even 
though he had a horrid time in the end-of-season Tennis Masters Cup. Much hard 
work throughout December has restored his batteries. "I've been playing really 
consistently here and I think I have improved. I've played with more patience, 
and have also been more and more aggressive." He has taken inspiration from the 
fact that his fellow Serb Janko Tipsarevic took Federer to 10-8 in the fifth 
set on Saturday.

Federer, back in all-black, shifted through the gears against James Blake and 
accelerated away under the starry skies for a 7-5, 7-6, 6-4 quarter-final 
victory of his own. The American had never previously beaten him in seven 
attempts, managing just a single set in the process, so there was always an air 
of the inevitable about this match. There was plenty of absorbing tennis, with 
magnesium flashes of blinding brilliance, but only ever one outcome.

As usual Federer will concentrate on his own game rather than worrying about 
Djokovic: "I go a lot with my feelings throughout a match. If I need to adjust 
something I'll do it - either playing more aggressively or more defensive. I 
used to concentrate much more on my opponent when I was younger but right now 
it's automatic. I don't have to change my game plan a whole lot except for Rafa 
because he's a lefty."

Five matches, five wins, the last two in straight sets. If this is Federer 
being vulnerable then the word has to be given a new meaning. "I look forward 
to playing my best tennis against Novak. I look forward to playing to win. 
That's my mindset." Nobody ever really doubted it, though Djokovic must.
 