
Western Australia

The Liberal party managed to hold on to most of its seats in the west, despite 
predictions that frustration at the Barnett Liberal government could see as 
many as four seats fall to Labor. Labor’s Matt Keogh, who has been greeting 
commuters at Armadale train station and warning them of changes to Medicare for 
six months,performed as expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/14/voter-fatigue-in-burt-can-labor-muster-motivation-to-take-this-new-wa-seat>
 and picked up the new seat of Burt.

Still in play is Cowan, held by Liberal MP Luke Simpkins. Labor candidate Anne 
Aly was leading the two party preferred vote on Sunday morning by a slim 0.73% 
margin off the back of a 6% swing to Labor, but the conventional wisdom that 
postal votes favour conservative parties could see Simpkins regain ground. 
Governmentfrontbenchers attacked Aly over her de-radicalisation program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/24/julie-bishop-steps-up-attack-on-anne-aly-in-hate-preacher-row>
, which was actually sponsored by the Coalition government, in the last few 
weeks of the campaign, which was taken by Labor as a sign they were concerned 
about losing theculturally diverse electorate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/11/cowan-wa-liberal-labor-changing-electorate-could-decide-australian-election>
.

Australian election 2016: Malcolm Turnbull says Coalition can form majority 
despite dramatic losses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/malcolm-turnbull-says-coalition-can-form-majority-despite-dramatic-losses-australian-election>
It wasn’t all bad news for the Liberals: Julie Bishop experienced a boost in 
her primary vote in “golden triangle” seat ofCurtin and the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> had positive swings 
in the outback seats ofDurack and O’Connor.

Tasmania

A large swing against the Liberal party is a return to politics as normal in 
Tasmania <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania>.

The island state recorded a 9.4% swing against the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> in 2013, the largest 
in the country, off the back of anger at the state Labor government’s handling 
of the collapse of the forestry industry.

That anger saw three Liberal MPs, dubbed the three-amigos, take over the safe 
Labor seats ofBraddon and Lyons and the marginal seat of Bass.

The re-setting of the Labor vote in Tasmania with a swing of almost 9% against 
the Coalition on Saturday, helped considerably by the campaign on Medicare, saw
those three seats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/23/coalitions-fight-for-tasmania-three-seats-under-threat-in-states-north>
 change again.

Liberal MP Andrew Nikolic lost Bass to Ross Hart, Lyons MP Eric Hutchinson 
lost to Brian Mitchell, and Brett Whiteley lostBraddon to Justine Keay. Franklin
, held by Labor’s Julie Collins, andDenison, held by independent Andrew Wilkie, 
remained unchanged.

Tasmania has the oldest and sickest population in the country, one of the 
highest levels of welfare dependency, and one of the lowest levels of 
educational attainment. Labor’s campaign, focusing on health, education, and 
inequality, resonated with their concerns.

Victoria

There was very little change on the surface in Victoria, but a huge increase 
in the Greens primary vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/greens-celebrate-close-election-contests-in-batman-and-melbourne-ports>
 in the inner-city seats ofHiggins, Melbourne Ports, and Batman indicated those 
seats could turn Green at future elections.

As of Sunday morning Labor’s David Feeney was ahead in Batman and expected to 
retain the inner-north seat, despite a 9.16% swing to Greens candidate Alex 
Bhathal.

The Liberal Party’s Stephanie Perri was a whisker ahead in Chisholm, held by 
retiring Labor MP Anna Burke; Liberal MP Jason Wood is leading inLa Trobe, and 
Liberal candidate Chis Crewther, who replaced retiring Liberal MP Bruce 
Billson, is just ahead inDunkley. They were seats the Labor party had hoped to 
win; there’s a suggestion the Liberal Party’s campaign around the Country Fire 
Authority dispute neutralised a possible Labor swing.

The central Victorian seat of Murray, held by retiring MP Sharman Stone, did 
change hands, with former state MP and Fremantle Dockers football coach Damian 
Drum winning decisively over Liberal candidate Duncan McGauchie. Former Liberal 
MP Sophie Mirabella’sbid to win back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/28/election-2016-cathy-mcgowan-sophie-mirabella-will-indi-hold-on-to-the-power-of-one>
 the border seat ofIndi failed, with incumbent independent Cathy McGowan 
increasing her margin by 4%.
The seats count results map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/aus/2016/jun/electioncharts/results-map-interactive2/>
South Australia

The change in South Australia came from newcomer party the Nick Xenophon Team, 
with ex-Liberal staffer Rebekha Sharkie winning the seat ofMayo from her former 
boss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/the-election-scalps-jamie-briggs-and-andrew-nikolic-lead-coalitions-casualty-list>
, Liberal MP Jamie Briggs.

The Liberal Party is also behind in the seat of Hindmarsh, in Adelaide’s 
western suburbs, with Labor candidate Steve Georganas slightly ahead of 
incumbent Matt Williams.

The Nick Xenophon Team ran a good campaign in Grey, which Liberal MP Rowan 
Ramsey has held with a two party preferred margin of less than 2% on NXT 
candidate Andrea Broadfoot. NXT also beat Labor to be the second party in the 
seat ofBaker, which was decisively returned to the Liberal Party.

Xenophon campaigned heavily on retaining the state’s manufacturing industry, 
which is struggling to recover from car manufacturer Holden downsizing local 
production.

New South Wales

Labor has gained the psychologically important bellwether seat of Eden-Monaro, 
with former MP, Mike Kelly, claiming victory over Liberal incumbent Peter 
Hendy. The bellweather status of the seat is under threat after an electoral 
redistribution.


A statewide swing of 3.5% away from the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition>, greater than the 3.2% 
swing nationally, also saw Labor pick upMacquarie, Mcarthur, Lindsay, and Barton
.

Of those four the most historically significant is Barton, where Labor’s Linda 
Burney has become thefirst Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander woman elected 
to the House of Representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/linda-burney-first-indigenous-woman-elected-australia-lower-house>
.

There was speculation on Sunday that Malcolm Turnbull’s decidedly inner-city 
aesthetic had not played well in western Sydney, but the seats ofLindsay and 
Mcarthur were heavily targeted by Bill Shorten and Macquarie was the site of 
the first leaders debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/13/five-moments-mattered-turnbull-shorten-peoples-forum>
, which Shorten won.

The Liberal Party is just ahead in the south coast seat of Gilmore, after a 
3.6% swing towards Labor.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/aus-election/results-interactive/embed/embed.html>
Queensland

The Liberal National party seat lost to Labor in Queensland was Longman, held 
bystaunch Turnbull ally Wyatt Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/11/election-2016-wyatt-roy-malcolm-turnbull-queensland>
. Roy lost the seat to Labor’s Susan Lamb, a United Voice union campaigner.

Labor is also ahead in Capricornia, Flynn, Herbert and Forde, all held by the 
Liberal National Party, off the back of a 2.6% swing.

Herbert, centred around Townsville, had been a particular focus of Labor’s 
campaign and was the focus of debate around thebleaching of the Great Barrier 
Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
, which the Coalition argued was not as serious as scientists made out. 
Incumbent Ewen Jones experienced a 6.9% swing against him.

Peter Dutton’s seat of Dickson is also close with a swing of almost 6% against 
the immigration minister, but he is expected to retain it.

LNP MP Luke Howarth has pulled ahead in Petrie, but the contest is yet to be 
decided.

But the biggest change in Queensland was the return of the One Nation party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/pauline-hanson-set-to-return-to-parliament-as-queensland-senator>
. Pauline Hanson easily secured enough votes to join the senate and it’s 
possible she could have enough support to fill a second or third quota.

Northern Territory

Labor’s Luke Gosling won the Darwin seat of Solomon from Country Liberals MP 
Natasha Griggs, a loss that has been put down to reaction against the chaotic 
Territory government.

Labor’s Warren Snowden strengthened his hold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/01/lingiari-the-huge-desert-to-the-sea-nt-electorate-that-refuses-to-be-forgotten>
 on the seat ofLingiari, giving Labor a clean sweep of Territory seats.
 