
So here we are again The start of this morning's Aussie Open entertainment is 
delayed somewhat, thanks to the Grosjean-Kiefer marathon. Kiefer came out on 
top, incidentally, but it means Kim Clijsters and Martina Hingis are only just 
off court and Eurosport haven't had a chance to show their highlights package. 
While we're waiting, would anyone care to fill me in on the deranged goings-on 
in the "celebrity" Big Brother house last night? I hear there was a bit of a 
ding-dong between Galloway and Barrymore...

Ooh, things are happening Finally, Roger Federer and Nikolay Davydenko are 
warming up on court. The pundits are sticking their necks on the line and 
tipping a hide-whipping for Davydenko this morning. "If Davydenko wins I'll 
invite you & 10 of your fave Guardian colleagues to stay in my Barcelona flat 
just off the Rambla," says Mike Crooks, making their point for them.

Federer *1 - 0 Davydenko That'll be the first ace of the day then, but we also 
get one of those rare opportunities to see Federer drop a point as he thwacks a 
backhand lazily into the net. He doesn't look in the mood to be on court long 
though: pouncing on an unlikely fetch from Davydenko and slamming it down the 
line.

Federer 1 - 1* Davydenko Davydenko looks like he's game for a rally or two, 
but Federer isn't exactly short of a groundstroke and is finding the lines by 
the smallest margins - twice putting backhands down the line. If the Russian 
can keep him on the forehand - which he does there to earn his first point in 
this game - then he stands a chance, but it's an anaemic looking one.

Federer *2 - 1 Davydenko What a great point to get the third game going - 
Davydenko holding his own from the baseline until Federer finally moved in for 
the kill, nudging a forehand push across court and out of harm's way. Easy hold 
to love.

Federer 2 - 2* Davydenko What a pass! Federer steamed into Davydenko's serve 
then chased into the net behind a drop shot, but the Russian was wise to it and 
planted it neatly down the line. Davydenko helps himself to a love service game.

Federer *3 - 2 Davydenko Davydenko's unlucky to drop the first point, his 
cross-courter just failing to dip in time. And there was nothing he could do 
about the second, Federer thumping a forehand volley into the corner. Even 
Federer's mishit creeps in as the Russian simply watches.

Federer 3 - 3* Davydenko Superb forehand winner from Davydenko, spinning it 
towards the tramline to leave Federer flat-footed. The crowd are still spilling 
into the arena but find time to ooh accordingly as Federer's forehand kisses 
the outside edge of the line. It can't really have been intentional, can it? 
Probably was, talented bugger. Davydenko holds though - he's not afraid to try 
and push Federer around the baseline a bit and it's forcing the odd mistake on 
the forehand.

Federer *4 - 3 Davydenko A harsh decision for Davydenko - the line judge 
calling a perfectly placed winner out. Replaying the point won't exactly 
cushion the blow, especially as Federer takes it with a volley so well-placed 
it's not even worth chasing. But he's not having it all his own way - Davydenko 
watches him into the net then blasts a forehand low at his feet. Federer still 
holds with another corking serve.

Federer 5 - 3* Davydenko New balls! And Davydenko doesn't like the feel of 
them: Federer drops his serve back at him and the Russian can only sling a 
forehand long. He has more luck on the second point, coming into the net and 
forcing Federer into two slightly rubbish lob attempts, the second of which 
drops well past the baseline - but it's wasted when he swings at the ball like 
he's holding a cricket bat, sending the fourth into the stands. Federer earns 
two break points and takes the first when Davydenko's forehand strays past the 
baseline.

Federer *5 - 4 Davydenko Davydenko forges a chance to break back by stealing 
the first point but he's over eager approaching the net to push the ball into 
the corner and drops the second. Federer's forehand is misfiring though and 
Davydenko finds himself with an unlikely two break points - and takes the first 
with another poor forehand from the world No1! Blimey!

Federer wins first set 6-4 What a rally! Both men end up in at the net after 
some delicately precise slices, Federer sends Davydenko back towards the 
baseline and Davydenko's pass looks for all the world to have snuck onto the 
line. The line judge doesn't think so though, and it's not long before 
Davydenko finds himself 0-40 down, just when he looked to have found a 
foothold. That's the break and the set for Federer.

Federer leads 6-4, *1 - 0 A new shirt for Davydenko, and Federer is so 
bewitched he drops the first point - but abeautiful sliced drop shot bags him 
the second. And it's an easy hold in the end, Davydenko struggling to do more 
than get strings to the Federer serve.

Federer leads 6-4, 1 - 1* Just lovely work from Federer, making all the angles 
from the comfort of the service line. He's being forced into some unusually 
poor shots from the baseline though, underhitting the backhand and overhitting 
the forehand. And Davydenko grabs an unlikely hold - Federer has the Russian 
scampering frantically but misjudges a drop shot.

Federer leads 6-4, *2 - 1 The Federer forehand continues to look a mite dodgy 
at times, especially when Davydenko can keep up the power and keep the Swiss at 
the baseline. And there's even a mistake on the approach shot! He almost ran 
through the ball before it dribbled into the net. Davydenko still finds his 
apparent winners spinning back at him most of the time though - eek! Another 
wild Federer forehand and that's break point for Davydenko... spurned it with a 
wild sweep at a serve onto the forehand. There's a brief exchange of the 
advantage before Federer closes it out.

Federer leads 6-4, 2 - 2* Federer looks about as beatable as Roger Federer 
ever looks, but Davydenko has to take every chance he gets. He's not having too 
much trouble holding - a frustrated Federer looping a forehand up into the 
stands - but it's Federer's serve he needs to make a dent in.

Federer leads 6-4, *2 - 3 And this could be his chance... Federer comes into 
the net on the first three points but takes only one of them as first the net 
and then an errant over-the-shoulder lob conspire against him. And then 
Davydenko finds a stunning double-handed backhand pass to set up the break 
point... and takes it! My word. Not quite the cakewalk they were predicting, it 
seems.

Federer leads 6-4, 2 - 4* That's an iffy line call and it goes against the 
Russian just when he needs a bit of luck. And then he rustles up a decent drop 
shot only to see Federer whip it back across court in front of his nose. A 
lovely backhand down the line, whistling past a stationary Federer, eases the 
pain and he finds the line across court to redeem himself further.

Federer leads 6-4, *3 - 4 Even on the second serve Federer's proving 
unreturnable - that one straight down the line and fast enough to escape all 
but the frame of Davydenko's flailing racket. Some magnificent net play sees 
the top seed to an easy hold.

Federer leads 6-4, 3 - 5* A hugely important hold for Davydenko - and doesn't 
Federer know it: smacking the ball away in disgust as he throws away not one, 
not two but three points with miserable attempts at service returns.

Federer won the first set 6-4, Davydenko takes the second 6-3 Is this really 
Roger Federer? He drops the first two points in this must-hold game thanks to 
some poorly timed shots. Ah, yes, it's the right man - straight into the net to 
make amends. And that lethal wide serve comes out of the back pocket. But what 
a lob from Davydenko for set point! Just,just misses the line going across 
court with Federer scurrying. That's a heartbreaker for the Russian, but he 
gets another chance via another crazy forehand from Federer... and he's taken 
it! Federer fluffs it from the net and it's a set a piece.

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer 0 - 1* Davydenko Magnificent play from a 
newly-confident Davydenko, sending him this way and that before sending a 
searing forehand straight down the line. But two can play at that game and 
Federer gives him a taste of his own medicine for the second point. An ace - 
his first of the game? - for Davydenko, a faltering backhand from Federer, and 
another ace, and that's an easy hold.

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer *1 - 1 Davydenko Federer shapes up in that 
fearful, Matrix-slow-motion way in front of a slower Davydenko ball, but the 
vicious whipped forehand takes a hefty net cord and flies out. The next, from 
the baseline, finds the line nicely though. He needed that.

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer 1 - 2* Davydenko Another be-atch of a rally from 
Federer, Davydenko must have covered about six miles chasing his alternate 
forehands and backhands before putting the ball into the net. He responds with 
his fastest serve of the match - 126mph - but then gets forced into another 
scampering rally and ends up pinging the ball just out. That's a peach of a 
drop shot though, and the game is safe.

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer *2 - 2 Davydenko Judging by my echoingly empty 
inbox, I'm sat here watching this game for the good of my health. But how glad 
I am - this is a cracking encounter. Davydenko's not just chancing his arm, 
he's thinking on every point and pushing Federer all the way. Except then. 
Federer's just smacked him to love.

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer 2 - 3* Davydenko It's crucial, absolutely vital 
that Davydenko holds all his service games and he's going the right way about 
it. He pushes Federer into the corner then comes into the net to force the 
cross courter, which Federer duly slings wide. And his backhand suffers another 
blip when his attempted pass twangs markedly wide. Davydenko holds to love and 
Federer's shaking his head.

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer *3 - 3 Davydenko "Just letting you know you're 
not going unread," says Neil Levy, metaphorically proferring a chivalrous cloak 
to protect my bare behind. Or something. Better stuff from Federer, meanwhile, 
coming into the net and smashing a somewhat feeble lob attempt. Easy hold.

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer 3 - 4* Davydenko New balls! Davydenko struggled 
serving with the new balls last time but he's making them work for him this 
time - a cracking serve down the middle has Federer stretching and probably 
wishing he hadn't.

"I am a nice bloke who likes sport and talks about football," says Andy in the 
City. "But I sit next to a bloke called Nick who has never played any team 
sports and is in the territorial army. Has anyone got a worse social life at 
work?" You wouldn't believe some of the goons here on the sports de[snip! 
Turner Employment Protection Committee]. Anyone?

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer *3 - 5 Davydenko No, no, no this is not 
happening. I got out of bed this morning and stepped into a parallel universe 
[admittedly still one where it's friggin' freezing and the bus is filled with 
morons]. Federer throws away the first two points on his serve and then another 
to hand Davydenko two break points! He helps himself to the first with a 
terrific cross-courter that Federer can only dink up and over the baseline.

"Mention a distressed whale," suggests Rob Farrow. "That'll get the nation's 
attention."

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer 4 - 5* Davydenko Probably the longest rally of 
the match, and Davydenko has Federer on the run - but that pesky net must have 
moved up a notch or two, 0-15. And that backhand was feet past the line, 0-30. 
Pull yourself together man. That'll do: a smash not even Peter Crouch [brazen 
football mention to get the punters in] could have got to. Ah my word!The most 
amazing rally and if this is a boxing match, Davydenko has Federer on the ropes 
and is beating his face into a big bloody mess - then he fluffs the drop shot! 
Federer breaks with a rasping "Come on!".

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer *5 - 5 Davydenko "Sorry - I had mistakenly gone 
to the BBC coverage and was wondering why there were no pithy remarks along 
with the commentary," says Keric Morris, rightly believing that flattery will 
put his name in lights. "What has happened to Fed Express? Is he just toying 
with us or having a crisis of confidence?" If that umpteenth straying forehand 
- his 30th unforced error - is anything to go by, this is a genuine wobble. As 
Federer wobbles go, of course. We're not talking a Barrymore emotional meltdown 
here. He holds.

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer 5 - 6* Davydenko Another long forehand from 
Federer and he kung-fu kicks the ball in anger. And then a shout of frustration 
as another forehand blunders into the net. Davydenko is playing the match of 
his life here. Maybe that's pushing it, but he must be one of only about five 
people to have really worried Federer in the last 18 months. He's making the 
angles and smashing every Federer lob back over the net with gusto.

Third set [6-4, 3-6] Federer *6 - 6 Davydenko By 'eck that's a lovely backhand 
from Davydenko, far nicer, at least, than the return shot, which Federer puts 
wide and long to concede the first point on his serve. He's wrong-footed by one 
down the line from the Swiss, but makes it 15-30 at the net. "I think Federer 
believes he's so much better than everyone else, he likes to give the other guy 
a bit of a chance before he demolishes him, just to keep the crowd interested," 
says Jay Van Rensburg. Hmm. Davydenko's got two set points here. I don't think 
this is a ruse to keep the fans in the arena. The first goes begging as a 
scampering Davydenko can only stretch to put the ball into the net, and he 
sticks the second inexactly the same spot after a marathon rally.

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7) That dodgy forehand is back again, Davydenko 
goes 1-0 up in the tiebreak, but Federer levels with a cute little shot that 
even has his opponent smiling... Federer forehand into the net to hand 
Davydenko a 2-1 lead... sloppy return from Federer for 3-1... ludicrous 
backhand from Federer to make it 4-1 Davydenko... 4-2 as Davydenko struggles to 
get anything on a wide Federer serve... 4-3 thanks to a sweet volley from 
Federer... 5-3 - the most exquisite pass from Davydenko! Federer barely moves 
his arm in a terrible backhand for 6-3 and set point... Davydenko goes for the 
on-the-line winner and misses! 6-4... and that serve from Federer wasn't going 
anywhere but clean through, 6-5... Jesus, Mary and Joseph! Davydenko makes the 
wrong shot choice and ends up slinging a backhand into orbit: 6-6! Davydenko 
regains the lead with another - and this is a real worry - careless backhand: 
7-6... Federer rescues a sixth set point with a scorching serve, 7-7... and 
Federer gets a big dollop of luck, his mishit backhand landing in and pushing 
Davydenko into a dreadful forehand: 8-7 to Federer... and Federer claims a 2-1 
lead thanks to a Davydenko double fault. A horrible, horrible way to concede 
the set after all that.

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), *0 - 1 OK. Fresh start now. Davydenko takes 
first blood by forcing a badly-aimed volley, then his acute slice strays wide 
for 0-30. Ooh, another new shirt for Davydenko, and two break points. This is 
incredible. Another break.

"Barrymore accused Gorgeous George of using him as an easy target to win 
public sympathy ahead of the eviction vote," explains Tom Chivers to give me my 
daily CBB fix. "The elected representative for Bethnal Green and Bow retaliated 
with a rather cruel 'oh poor me... poor me... pour me a drink' stab at 
Barrymore's addiction problems. It all went off from there, with Big Dennis 
reportedly telling Little Chantelle that "where I come from you'da been hit by 
now", which was touching. And Pete Burns sat back having sparked the mayhem 
with a little smirk on that malevolent, alien, cave-fish face of his." Righto.

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), 1 - 1* There's a swarm of insects on the 
pitch! They think it's all over... squish. It is now. The ball boy's quite 
rightly splodged them all with a towel. Federer's backhand is in bizarre mode: 
first slinging the ball into the net to fall behind, then whipping it over and 
right onto the line for a splendid point. And that's a spectacular backhand 
down the line for break back point. Duly handed over.

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), *2 - 1 New balls! And a new racket for 
Davydenko. No doubt that was the problem all along. A sticky grip or something. 
It's worked a treat, anyway - he nudges Federer into the corner then watches 
serenely as the cross-court return sails wide. There was no putting that 
forehand back into court though - Federer slammed it towards the baseline. Game 
Federer.

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), 2 - 2* Yet again, I have to type the words 
'Federer', 'forehand' and 'into the net'. He has a heavy net cord to thank for 
keeping him from running after Davydenko's next shot, but again he finds the 
net himself - shouting "What the hell are you doing?" as he does so. I can't 
claim to have seen every Federer game ever in the world ever, but personally 
I've never seen him so obviously irritated by his play. "Nooo!" he yells as 
another backhand sails into the stratosphere. Yes. Yes I'm afraid you're awake.

"I don't think that Federer is trying to keep the crowd interested by playing 
bad," says Raymond Starke. "I think he is just creating the illusion of losing 
for himself, so he can say to himself after the match: 'Wow, that was close. 
Men's tennis is really competitive! There is still so much to play for!'"

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), *3 - 2 No, no, that racket's not right 
either. Another change for Davydenko, and a forehand that pings nicely off the 
string but flies way past the baseline. Game Federer.

"Presumably as a writer for theguardian you must have an above average IQ, and 
yet you dedicate at least some of to your life watching celebrity big brother," 
says Jim Davey. "Bizarre." You're right. I did ignore it, until I saw about 10 
minutes of the ludicrous George Galloway. And now I can't stop watching him 
making a damned fool of himself night after night. The man makes me physically 
shake with rage. Now that's television.

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), 3 - 3* Clinical from Davydenko, rolling 
around a backhand volley and finding the lines with microscopic precision. He 
punishes Federer's move into the net with a whipped forehand pass, then smashes 
another desperate lob attempt through the floor.

While we're on the subject of CBB, can anyone explain how and why 23-year-old 
people qualify as "children"?

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), *4 - 3 The Fed Express is steaming back 
through town, it seems (he holds to love), but unless he takes a detour through 
Davydenko's serve, it's going to be another tight finish.

Keric Morris is back again. "With Fed Express looking like getting back on 
track, and big hair Baghdatis cruising through the bottom half of the draw," he 
says, "are we going to have a retro sixties beard and sideburns final?" It's 
the broadcasters' dream.

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), 4 - 4* Lethal serve to get things going 
from Davydenko, and the now standard long Federer forehand adds the second 
point of the game. He's getting angry again. Davydenko does himself out of a 
love service game with a wild forehand, then sticks a volley plum into the net. 
From 40-0 to deuce in the blink of an eye... and Davydenko looks, for want of a 
better way to express it to you, cream crackered. Luckily Federer's backhand 
looks similarly fatigued, and he survives a scare to hold.

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), *5 - 4 That's not a line call I'd have 
liked to have had to make, and it goes Federer's way when perhaps it shouldn't. 
He's not getting an easy ride though - his own mistakes, rather than 
Davydenko's effort, pulling it back to 30-30. Two top drawer serves take him to 
the hold, mind. Can Davydenko survive even the next game?

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), 5 - 5* Yes, is the answer. Federer capable 
only of putting the ball out of court or in the net. Suggestion is that he 
needs the pressure of the tiebreak to get his pecker up, but I'm not sure he 
can bank on being so lucky again. Easy hold for Davydenko.

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), *6 - 5 Federer's definitely looking to his 
serve to get him clear here, Davydenko's weary arms have no answer for the 
bullets hailing over the net. He'll need to do more than that - when Davydenko 
does get on the end of it, he's winning the points. He can't steal the game 
though.

Federer leads 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), 6 - 6* You can see Davydenko, like Federer, 
desperately wants to take the points with his serve, and he's enjoying 
reasonable success - Federer's return wellying straight into the net. He could 
do with some big serves - he shapes for a shot down the line and somehow sticks 
it into the net. Match point for Federer... rescued! Federer doesn't like the 
line call but Davydenko's whipped forehand definitely found some white - and he 
takes the advantage with a backhand on the same line! And holds with a stunning 
forehand! Tiebreak time, folks!

Federer wins 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), 7-6 (7-5) Federer claims the first point... 
then hands Davydenko the second with a wide backhand, 1-1... That line again 
for Davydenko! 2-1... just, just, just missed the baseline for 2-2... corking 
wide serve from Federer for 3-2... 4-2 with ease... the most amazing forehand 
cross-court pass! 5-2... but there's a stunner of a shot down the line from 
Davydenko for 5-3... 5-4! Davydenko's working him around the court again... but 
there's no answer for that wicked forehand, 6-4... first match point saved! 
6-5! Davydenko with a smashing smash! But there it is: finally, Federer finds a 
serve to beat Davydenko and he takes the semi-final place.

Thanks for all your emails and for following the game with GU. I'll be back to 
take you through Nalbandian v Baghdatis tomorrow morning.
 