
Anti-child abuse campaigners have urged federal and state governments to avoid 
playing political games with the national redress scheme, afterVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> said the federal 
government for “dragging its heels” and keeping survivors in the dark.

The council of Australian governments meeting early next month could be 
critical to the future of the national redress scheme, which was a core 
recommendation of the royal commission in September last year.


Social services minister Christian Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christian-porter> announced the 
proposed $4.3 billion model of redress earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/04/child-sex-abuse-survivors-150000-dollars-compensation-scheme>
, which allowed states, territories, and institutions to opt in or out. But 
most states and territories remain cautious and are yet to fully commit.

Child sex abuse survivors may get up to $150,000 in national compensation 
scheme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/04/child-sex-abuse-survivors-150000-dollars-compensation-scheme>
This week, NSW, Queensland, Victoria, and the ACT told Guardian Australia they 
were still waiting on further detail from the federal government on how the 
scheme would work.


South Australia had previously ruled out 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/state-politics/jay-weatherill-rules-south-australia-out-of-national-abuse-payouts/news-story/585e70f680ee379fcd4d245e25d5e3ef>
 participating, but now says it would consider a national scheme only if it was 
underwritten by the federal government.

South Australian attorney-general John Rau – whose government already operates 
a scheme ofex-gratia payments 
<http://www.agd.sa.gov.au/services/services-citizens/your-rights/ex-gratia-payments>
 to survivors – said such an approach did not appear likely.

“[South Australia] has maintained the view that if the Commonwealth – which 
has a very limited exposure itself – is prepared to underwrite a national 
scheme, we will be happy to talk further,” he said.

“That does not appear to be what was put on the table by the Commonwealth 
earlier this month.”

But anti-child abuse campaigners are urging federal, state, and territory 
governments to avoid a stand-off, and instead work together before COAG to 
“honour the royal commission” and its findings.


Blue Knot Foundation <http://www.blueknot.org.au/> president Dr Cathy Kezelman 
called on governments to “do the right thing”, and repay the faith survivors 
had put in the royal commission.


“So far, we’ve had the commonwealth announce a scheme for people who were 
sexually abused in commonwealth institutions,” Kezelman said.

“That’s a significant but small percentage of the 60,000 people that the royal 
commission predicts will come forward. So it’s really important that all the 
states and territories and relevant institutions sign up, so that it’s fair and 
equitable regardless of where a person was abused.

“It would be really critical for all governments to continue to honour the 
royal commission and its recommendations, and not play political games, and 
support a single uniform national redress scheme.”

Queensland already has its own redress scheme, and Premier Annastacia 
Palaszczuk <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk> 
said her government was “seeking more detail and assurance [the national 
redress scheme] is in the best interests of Queenslanders”.

Palaszczuk said she had repeatedly called on the federal government to 
institute a national scheme, saying Queensland had pursued such a course itself 
following the state’s 1999 Forde inquiry into institutional abuse.

“My government will be seeking more detail and assurance it is in the best 
interests of Queenslanders who have suffered from child sexual abuse in 
Queensland institutions,” Palaszczuk told Guardian Australia.

“My government will be holding the federal government to account that they 
will meet their responsibilities, just as we did in the Forde Inquiry. This is 
a matter I have raised at COAG, and I will be seeking more information and 
assurances from the prime minister on behalf of Queensland survivors ahead of 
COAG’s next meeting in December.”

Victoria, meanwhile, has made urgent requests for more detail from the federal 
government. It has been working on its own state-based scheme, but prefers a 
national redress system.

The state government wrote to Porter two weeks ago, asking for more detail 
about how it would work, including what the federal government’s financial 
contribution would be.

It was yet to receive a response by Tuesday, and attorney-general Martin 
Pakula accused the federal government of “dragging its heels” and keeping 
Victoria and survivors in the dark.

“The Commonwealth is dragging its heels on implementing a national redress 
scheme,” he said.

“Survivors continue to wait for recognition and compensation while Mr Porter 
keeps Victoria in the dark.”


NSW and the ACT governments have voiced their support for a national scheme, 
but both want to see more detail before making any final commitment.


Others have cast doubt on whether a national redress scheme would benefit 
survivors.

Porters Lawyers principal Jason Parkinson, who has represented hundreds of 
abuse survivors in civil claims, said he feared the scheme would rob victims of 
their rights to full and proper compensation for what were, typically, serious 
psychiatric injuries.


The government’s proposal would see compensation capped at $150,000, which 
Parkinson said was far below what many survivors were entitled to, and were 
achieving in civil claims.

He said he feared participation in the redress scheme may, in some cases, 
prevent survivors from taking civil action, something he described as the 
Catholic church’s “dream”.

“The church will be saving money every time someone with a common law claim 
avails themselves of the scheme – that’s not right,” he said.

“The only one who profits from this is the church, or the abusers.”


Parkinson said he fully supported the scheme in instances where the 
responsible institution no longer existed, or where it could not pay.
 