
Rules governing polling officials and scrutineers need to be tightened to 
avoid the mismanagement of ballot papers that led to the 2013 Senate election in
Western Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia>
 being rerun, a parliamentary committee has said.

And it recommends voters should have to produce identification before being 
given a ballot paper in future elections.

The joint standing committee on electoral matters on Wednesday handed down its 
final report into the federal election. It contains 24 recommendations.

The WA Senate result was invalidated due to the loss of 1,370 ballot papers, 
prompting a second election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/06/voters-punish-major-parties-in-western-australian-senate-election-rerun>
 months after the September 2013 poll.

The committee recommended that the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) 
develop formal qualifications or certification for polling officials. It said 
polling staff, many of whom are employed by the AEC on a casual basis, should 
undertake training before election day, and that key performance indicators be 
set to ensure that senior staff completed their duties appropriately.

Voters should show identification documents before having their names marked 
off the electoral role, similar to requirements in the last Queensland state 
ballot, it said. That might include a driver’s licence, passport, Medicare 
card, pensions card or recent utility bill.

In a dissenting report, three Labor committee members and Greens senator Lee 
Rhiannon said the ID requirements in Queensland had resulted in low voter turn 
out.

“It would appear that there may well be more serious implications for voter 
engagement for many groups of disadvantaged voters, including itinerant and 
Indigenous voters as well as those escaping domestic violence,” the dissenting 
report said. “It would be a pity to take actions that would impact on the 
involvement of these voters.”

The activist group GetUp warned that voter ID laws would adversely affect 
Indigenous voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/01/voter-id-push-opponents-say-laws-would-disenfranchise-the-disadvantaged>
.

There was “little evidence” that the measures would reduce voter fraud, the 
dissenting report said.

Other recommendations include making sure that the AEC provides pencils in 
polling booths, and that the broadcast media blackout on political advertising 
before elections be reviewed.

Voters should show identification documents before having their names marked 
off the electoral role, similar to requirements in the last Queensland state 
ballot, it said. That might include a driver’s licence, passport, Medicare 
card, pensions card or recent utility bill.

In a dissenting report, three Labor committee members and Greens senator Lee 
Rhiannon said the ID requirements in Queensland had resulted in low voter turn 
out.

“It would appear that there may well be more serious implications for voter 
engagement for many groups of disadvantaged voters, including itinerant and 
Indigenous voters as well as those escaping domestic violence,” the dissenting 
report said. “It would be a pity to take actions that would impact on the 
involvement of these voters.”

The activist group GetUp warned that voter ID laws would adversely affect 
Indigenous voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/01/voter-id-push-opponents-say-laws-would-disenfranchise-the-disadvantaged>
.

There was “little evidence” that the measures would reduce voter fraud, the 
dissenting report said.

Major political parties agree on voting changes targeting micro-parties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/09/major-political-parties-agree-on-voting-changes-targeting-micro-parties>
The committee released an interim report in May last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/09/major-political-parties-agree-on-voting-changes-targeting-micro-parties>
, which recommended the adoption of optional preferential voting in the Senate 
and the abolition of group ticket voting.


‘The report also builds on the committee’s two interim reports on Senate 
voting practices and electronic voting options released in 2014,” the committee 
chairman, Liberal MP Tony Smith, said.

Minor parties have raised protests over the recommendations, which they say 
aim to lock them out of winning seats.
 