
Annie Lennox Our challenge has to be: how do you create change? We have 
inherited a tremendous amount from our fore-sisters to have the right to 
equality, to education and access to reproductive healthcare. Unfortunately our 
consumeristic, celebrity-fixated culture has glossed over all those things so 
that we who are so resourced don't use our resources as we should. In Britain, 
we take what we have for granted, yet if you go to developing-world countries 
the disparity between men and women is enormous, and values and practices can 
go back to medieval times.

Beverley Knight, singer It's interesting that in the countries where women 
have the least power, the least equality, International Women's Day is much 
more treasured. Here in Britain, with our excess of everything, the very things 
that are so precious that the Emmeline Pankhursts gave their spirit and their 
lives to, we take for granted. We don't think about the struggle that other 
women have across the world.

VV Brown, singer and model I'm worried for young women, how everything is 
about how can I be famous, how can I make money quickly? We need to make sure 
that our role models are not just reality TV contestants, but doctors, judges, 
intellectuals.

AL There is this misconception that fame and celebrity is something to be had 
as a goal in itself and I'm outraged by the wastefulness of the movement of 
feminism, when we're just sitting on the couches, watching reality TV while our 
daughters are being brainwashed.

Jane Shepherdson, Whistles chief executive The majority of women in this 
country work in the caring professions, such as nursing, teaching, etc, and 
they're some of the worst-paid jobs, and a lot of those people will lose their 
jobs because of the coalition's cuts. Capitalism values making money above 
everything else. One would imagine that nurturing the next generation would be 
something we'd value highly. And that's something women do; whether it's 
because we're predisposed to it or not, women do do this.

BK I looked to my mum for everything, down to the fact that she wore glasses 
so I wanted to wear glasses… As I got older it was her strength of character I 
wanted to emulate. What would make someone of 16 years of age get on a plane 
from Montego Bay to Britain and be determined to make a new life for children 
she hadn't even had yet? Her strength, ambition, the grace that was needed to 
deal with people who were hostile to her being in the country. I look at her 
and I still think, "Wow."
 Jane Shepherdson. 
JS My mother was a biochemist, my father a mathematician, and there was no 
question that one partner in the marriage wasn't as equal as the other. I came 
home from school and my mother was at work and if people said it was a shame I 
had to come home and there was no one there I thought, why? Of course my mother 
should work. I think that has had a huge bearing on my life.

Katharine Whitehorn, journalist And it isn't just that you say, "I want to be 
likeher." My role models were actually men. It never occurred to my father to 
give me a worse education than my brothers, which was a rarity in those days; 
and George Seddon, who I worked with when he was women's editor of theObserver, 
changed things completely by making newspapers carry pieces that women were 
interested in.

Monica Ali, author There was a woman prime minister when I was at secondary 
school, the sex discrimination act had been passed already, and when I went to 
college women's rights was still a politicised issue. Given all that, why have 
we still such a long way to go in terms of pay, boardroom inequality, lack of 
women MPs, figures of domestic violence, percentage of housework and childcare 
done by women… Part of the answer is the tendency to blame biology. There's 
a tendency to shrug and say women have children so there's a career gap, 
instead of thinking well, in what ways can we make sure thatdoesn't 
disadvantage women?

JS We kind of go, oh great, there's two women in the cabinet. That's shocking. 
We are half the population, we're not a minority, and we're not represented in 
the way we should be.

MA Feminism has fallen off the agenda – 20 years ago at college it was in our 
discourse.

KW You forget how recent some of the victories are. We're taught in school 
that we have a right to be tried by a jury of our peers, and no woman had that 
until 1919 as there were no women on juries before that.
 Monica Ali. 
MA I have a daughter who's 10 and we walked past a billboard the other day 
advertising a TV programme. There was a row of men in suits and a woman in 
a thong. My daughter said, "Why is it like that? It's to sell it, isn't it?" 
She knows that already. I said, "Yes, it's a shame a young woman would want to 
be portrayed in that way," and she said, "But it's her choice, isn't it? Nobody 
made her do that." So how do you explain the Gramscian concept of hegemony to a 
10 year old? If the culture is so all pervasive that you can't think outside of 
it, how are you making genuine choices?

AL This incredible consumeristic culture comes in waves in the playground, you 
try and resist and the trouble is you end up feeling like you are the enemy. 
It's everywhere, the advertising is ubiquitous.

MA And it's dressed up in the language of empowerment of women! Proclaiming 
our sexuality and the freedom of the individual. So if you're seen to be 
against that then there's something wrong with you.
 Beverley Knight. 
BK Annie, VV and I come from a music industry where if you dare to stick your 
head above the parapet and say actually I don't really want to be defined as a 
musician in terms of the size of my breasts, instantly marketing managers will 
put you in the box marked as "trouble". "She's going to be difficult."

JS Oversensitive, irrational, all those labels… I've come up through an 
industry with men who are quite bullying, alpha-male characters. To succeed in 
any business, women have to be unafraid of confrontation. But a lot of women 
would rather avoid it and that tends to be a reason they don't succeed as they 
think: "You know what, it's not really worth the trouble, I'll just do this 
instead."

MA I felt great strides had been made in the literary world. After all, we all 
know women write. But I saw this letter inMs magazine, written to the New Yorker
. It said: "I was already alarmed when I flipped through the 2010 December 
double issue that three out of the 150 pages were penned by women. Again every 
critic is a man and 22 out of the 23 illustrators for that issue are men." An 
analysis of literary journals by Vidaweb, which counts the number of authors' 
reviews in 2010, shows the average is 75% male contributions to 25% female.Women
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> authors are not getting taken 
as seriously as men. It would be easy in the world I inhabit to say, there's JK 
Rowling, Hilary Mantel, look at the plaudits they get, there's no problem is 
there.

AL I never thought I was going to have to struggle with issues of equality. 
It's not people trying to put you down, it's more about mediocrity. When 
they're in an organisation, people have a small vision and a blinkered idea 
about what it means to be an artist, or successful, and they're looking for a 
cookie-cutter success. When I started wearing a man's suit, I understood what 
I was saying – but instead people questioned my sexual orientation. The issue 
got reduced to one of whether I was gay. And I'm not.

BK Certainly in music, the way people are perceived to be successful or doing 
well is how many "units" – not even albums – have you sold? And how can we sell 
this product? She's a woman: fastest way to do it S-E-X. If she doesn't have 
the formulaic, garden-variety look we're after she's going to be difficult. And 
you get women who embrace that, take that skewed image of what it is to be 
successful, basing it on looks, and regarding themselves as being empowered. 
When the Spice Girls talked about girl power, I thought, what power's that 
then? What are you talking about? It started the whole marketing-is-god 
downfall.
 VV Brown. 
VVB Perceptions need to be shifted back to there being substance in things. 
And that comes back to education. Encouraging girls to do something that means 
something to them – I want to be a lawyer because I want to help someone, 
I want to be a musician because I love the art, I want to be a better woman 
because it means something to me. My mum runs a school where there are just as 
many female mathematicians as male ones, as many women scientists as men. Why 
aren't there any female producers, music engineers?

AL There are very many other women who would identify a different type of 
challenge. We need to look at equality for all, not only, for example, for the 
14% rise we'd like to see in salaries to close the pay gap in the UK. I had an 
opportunity to see the situation inSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, and it changed my perspective 
so radically once I'd understood that I am living in a bubble and the majority 
of women around the world do not have the access to things I have taken for 
granted.
 Katharine Whitehorn. 
KW And it isn't just the inequality of this country with the rest of the 
world, it's the inequalitywithin this country. We harp on about that fact that 
there aren't enough women in boardrooms, but for educated women in Britain 
we're in incredibly good shape compared to 50 years ago. And yet there are 
thousands of genital mutilations done in this country every year.

AL In South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> it's a tidal 
wave of HIV. I was in the offices of theRolling Stone magazine at Christmas 
with lots of intelligent, informed writers and I asked them to put their hand 
up if they knew that one in three people in that country were carrying the HIV 
virus. No one put their hands up. You have thousands of people dying, millions 
of orphans and they don't know. It's incredible to me, that wake-up call I had, 
going into people's houses where women were dying because they couldn't get 
access to life-saving medication. How do you galvanise this sense of injustice?

MA There's a perception that as countries develop economically issues of 
gender and inequality will automatically get better, whereas the whole thing 
needs to be stood on its head so that gender inequality is at the very centre 
of it all. A lot of studies show that if you focus on women's rights that in 
itself is an engine for development. Female literacy rates strongly correlate 
with fertility rates, so if you educate women you will have fewer and healthier 
children. If you invest in women, the money they make will then be more likely 
to be invested in their families and local communities.Gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> isn't something to be dragged along 
behind.

BK To illustrate your point, when I went to Salvador to see what certain 
charity groups were doing to combat HIV, who was at the absolute heart of every 
single aspect of the fight? Women. It was the women who were educating other 
women, showing them pictures of different STIs and saying this is what can 
happen if you don't insist your husbands protect themselves. I went on a march 
through the streets with women protesting about murders that had happened, 
people killed because they had HIV. These women who were seemingly without a 
voice were getting together, marching through the streets singing. I came home 
a different person. I thought, how apathetic have I been my whole life? These 
women are way more empowered than me.

AL For me the anomaly is that the western countries are so resourced. I can 
identify with a woman losing a child. This happened to me, I lost a baby. But 
I'm living in a place where I can get medical treatment. A woman in Rwanda or 
Uganda or Bangladesh will deliver a baby on the floor and probably it won't 
survive and there's a good chance the mother won't either. Being conscious of 
this vast disparity between our experiences, I'm appalled the word feminism has 
been denigrated to a place of almost ridicule and I very passionately believe 
the word needs to be revalued and reintroduced with power and understanding 
that this is a global picture. It isn't about us and them.

MA Are you saying that despite the huge advances here we're in danger of 
forgetting, or not relating to, instances elsewhere?

AL Not in danger of… we do. We're not even aware because it's something you 
can't begin to imagine. It doesn't happen in your street.

MA So we need to get feminism back on the agenda in this country and one of 
the results of doing so will be that we can relate back to the people and their 
struggle elsewhere.
 Annie Lennox. 
AL Katharine mentioned genital mutilation. What about the young girl who is 
taken as a child bride, becomes pregnant, delivers a baby, everything is 
wrecked and she is incontinent, and she is the victim, she is the one displaced 
outside the village who no one will come near. Or the young girl in Bangladesh 
who is raped and then lashed to death? These are the injustices. How can I hear 
this and not do something about it?

BK But when you speak up about it you're the one who is labelled as combative, 
aggressive, because feminism is seen as some kind of putting on of a man's 
angry cloak. You're either laughed at or you're some woman with big bovver 
boots and a shaved head trying to be like a guy. That's the response you get. 
Feminism is neither of those two things. It's about women caring about other 
women, giving a voice to those who have no other voice.

Join Equal's Big Inequality Debate at weareequals.org <http://weareequals.org/>
. Annie Lennox and VV Brown will be appearing at the Royal Festival Hall on 11 
March as part of the Women of the World Festival, in association with Equals
 