
"Actually I can't make it on Sunday," joked Andre Agassi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> after reaching his fourth 
final here with a 6-2, 6-2, 6-3 victory over Wayne Ferreira that made shelling 
peas appear the most onerous of tasks.

The South African had lost all 10 of their previous meetings, dating back to 
1994, and had hoped to finish this match by telling the crowd that "nobody 
beats Wayne Ferreira 11 times". But Agassi's domination left him silent.

The 32-year-old American, winner of more hard-court titles (41) than anybody 
in the Open era, particularly loves the court in the Rod Laver Arena. The 
Rebound Ace surface suits his style to perfection, the ball sitting up at the 
perfect height for him to employ every variety of top, side and back spin that 
are an integral but sometimes overlooked part of his game.

For much of his early career Agassi ignored the Australian Open; he first 
played the tournament in 1995, when he defeated Pete Sampras in the final. But 
his real love affair began after his reincarnation of 1999, the year he won at 
Roland Garros to become only the fifth player to win all four grand slam titles.

In 2000 Agassi captured his second Australian Open title, defeating Russia's 
Yevgeny Kafelnikov, and then succesfully defended it, beating Arnaud Cl√©ment of 
France in the final. Last year, having arrived in Melbourne in search of a 
third successive title, he was forced to pull out on the morning of the opening 
day with a wrist injury and 11 days ago it became clear that he was determined 
to make up for that disappointment.

Earlier this week he revealed that he had struck a bet with his wife Steffi 
Graf that they would play mixed doubles at the French Open this spring if he 
won his fourth Australian title here and his eighth grand slam title in total.

Another part of the bet was that his Australian coach Darren Cahill would 
shave his head and that Gil Reyes, his long-time trainer, had to drink one of 
Agassi's cocktails. "But there's a string attached," said Agassi. "I still have 
to win."

Ferreira, whose only other grand slam semi-final was in Australia 11 years ago 
when he lost to Sweden's Stefan Edberg, had a break point for a 2-0 lead in the 
opening set, missed it and was barely in with a whimper, let alone a shout, 
thereafter. Agassi was merciless.

"I'm stronger and faster than I've ever been and I've 17 years' experience," 
said Agassi, who now has two days' rest before the final. "I'll try to relax 
with Steffi and my son Jaden. It's not the normal grand slam groove but I'll be 
ready come Sunday."

Agassi, who has now gone 20 matches at the Australian Open undefeated, hit the 
ball with absolute authority, taking control of the rallies and severely 
punishing Ferreira's weaker backhand side. The 31-year-old South African 
possesses a huge forehand but was reduced to a mere handful of winners by 
Agassi.

The Las Vegas legend's eyes are as sharply focused as ever while his minimal 
back-swing allows him to take the ball so early on the hard courts that he can 
transform defence into attack in an instant. In their 10 previous meetings 
Ferreira had won only one set and that was the way it stayed.

This was the first time in the Open era that two men aged 30 or more had 
contested an Australian Open semi-final. By the finish Agassi looked as fresh 
as he had when he played his first grand slam event, the US Open in 1986.
 