
Here we go again. After this year’s Cannes lineup offered up some fascinating 
oddities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/cannes-film-trends-fashion-2016> 
but precious few Oscar contenders, all eyes are eagerly aimed at the trifecta 
of festivals on the horizon.

Sex, ghosts, money and sainthood – now playing at Cannes 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/cannes-film-trends-fashion-2016> 
Venice kicks off at the end of next month, shortly followed by Telluride and 
Toronto, with schedules to be revealed in the next few weeks. But what films 
can we hope to see and which of those might end up dominating throughout awards 
season?

Dead certs

A United Kingdom
Belle director Amma Asante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/18/amma-asante-belle-bicultural-ghanaian-british-director-grange-hill>
’s new one, a chronicle of the real-life romance between Botswanan prince 
Seretse Khama (David Oyelowo) and English typist Ruth Williams (Rosamund Pike) 
has already been picked for a European premiere at the London film festival, so 
it’s bound to have been given a slot at Toronto and/or Telluride.

Queen of Katwe
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Flupita-nyongo-the-trailer-disney-queen-of-katwe-chess&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lupita%20Nyong%E2%80%99o%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20Disney's%20Queen%20of%20Katwe%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Flupita-nyongo-the-trailer-disney-queen-of-katwe-chess>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lupita%20Nyong%E2%80%99o%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20Disney%27s%20Queen%20of%20Katwe%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Flupita-nyongo-the-trailer-disney-queen-of-katwe-chess&media=>
Lupita Nyong’o in the trailer for Disney’s Queen of Katwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/may/11/lupita-nyongo-the-trailer-disney-queen-of-katwe-chess>
After her Oscar win for 12 Years a Slave, Hollywood has oddly kept Lupita 
Nyong’o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/12/lupita-nyongo-interview-star-wars>
’s face in the shadows (we were only allowed to hear her inStar Wars: The Force 
Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-review-a-spectacular-homecoming>
 andThe Jungle Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/the-jungle-book-review>) but 
she’s finally granted some much-deserved screen-time in Mira Nair’s Uganda-set 
fact-based drama, playing the mother of a chess prodigy. A European premiere at 
the London film festival suggests a Toronto or Telluride bow.

Nocturnal Animals
It’s been seven years since Tom Ford made perhaps the most successful yet 
transfer from designer to director.A Single Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/11/a-single-man-review> was a 
stylish and emotionally rich take on Christopher Isherwood’s memoir that bagged 
Oscar nods for Colin Firth and Julianne Moore. Ford will be hoping to go one 
better with his own adaptation of Austin Wright’s Tony and Susan starring – 
deep breath – Jake Gyllenhaal (in emaciated mode), Amy Adams, Aaron 
Taylor-Johnson, Michael Shannon, Isla Fisher and Armie Hammer.

Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk
Spectacle, military triumphalism, America the great (again). Ang Lee’s 
adaptation of Ben Fountain’s book – about an Iraq war hero paraded as part of 
the Super Bowl show – looks as timely as it does bombastic. Newcomer Joe Alwyn 
brings the requisite wide-eyedness to our Billy. Kristen Stewart, Vin Diesel 
and – cripes! – Steve Martin have his back.

American Pastoral
Ewan McGregor has chosen the slightly high-risk route for his directorial 
debut, taking on an adaptation of Philip Roth’s universally acclaimed 1997 
novel about the disintegrating life of an apparently successful family man. 
McGregor has cast himself in the lead role – no doubt a condition to get 
backing – and Dakota Fanning as the Patty Hearst-ish daughter Merry. It’s out 
in the US on 21 October, so a major festival appearance should be taken as read.

Denial
While The Lobster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/15/the-lobster-review-> was seen as 
a major comeback for Colin Farrell, it also brought Rachel Weisz back into the 
spotlight, and she’s set to continue her jog away from underwhelming franchise 
pics with four awards-season films. This drama from The Bodyguard and Volcano 
director Mick Jackson tells the true story of historian Deborah E Lipstadt’s
legal battle <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/apr/11/irving.uk> with 
Holocaust denier David Irving, played by Timothy Spall.

Sully
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fclint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clint%20Eastwood%E2%80%99s%20Sully%3A%20Miracle%20on%20the%20Hudson%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fclint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clint%20Eastwood%E2%80%99s%20Sully%3A%20Miracle%20on%20the%20Hudson%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fclint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer&media=>
Clint Eastwood’s Sully: Miracle on the Hudson – exclusive trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/30/clint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer>
Remember Flight <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/apr/11/irving.uk>, the 
Robert Zemeckis action drama in which Denzel Washington played a boozy pilot 
who pulled off an amazing mid-air saving manoeuvre in part because he was 
half-cut? Remember how it wasn’t based on real life? Well this is like that, 
but real (the daringHudson river landing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/15/us-airways-plane-crash-new-york-hudson-river>
 in 2009) and much more sober, in every sense. Tom Hanks suits up to play
another heroic captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/20/captain-phillips-review-mark-kermode>
, with trusty 86-year-old Clint Eastwood in the pilot’s seat.

Rules Don’t Apply
Another buzz around the Howard Hughes story, steered this time by Warren 
Beatty, who does everything bar serve the drinks as co-writer, director and 
star. Out of the window to your left you’ll see Alden Ehrenreich (recently cast 
as a young Han Solo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/06/alden-ehrenreich-han-solo-star-wars-harrison-ford>
) as an ambitious young driver to the stars. Lily Collins plays the innocent 
offering being launched into Hughes’s stratosphere.

The Founder
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DksLZEepQ0nA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DksLZEepQ0nA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DksLZEepQ0nA&media=>
Harvey Weinstein’s big hope for the awards season, this biopic of McDonald’s 
co-founder Ray Kroc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2016/mar/30/ray-kroc-the-wily-businessman-who-made-mcdonalds>
 will get everywhere it needs to be, festival-wise. Michael Keaton has another 
chewy role as the businessman who bought the franchise-burger-restaurant system 
from the McDonald brothers after working for them for several years. John Lee 
Hancock (Saving Mr Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/01/saving-mr-banks-review>) directs.

Lion
Another film getting a big awards push from Harvey Weinstein is this family 
drama fromTop of the Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/28/top-of-the-lake-box-set-review-moss-campion>
 director Garth Davis, starring Dev Patel as a man who finds his family via 
Google Earth. Nicole Kidman and Rooney Mara also star.

The Girl on the Train
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy5yk-HGqKmM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy5yk-HGqKmM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy5yk-HGqKmM&media=>
Emily Blunt gets her Rosamund Pike on for this moody, sexy, liquor-lashed 
adaptation ofPaula Hawkins’s bestseller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/08/the-girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-review-novel>
, directed by Tate Taylor and transplanted from the London suburbs to upscale 
New York. Comparisons withGone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/22/gone-girl-review-film-ben-affleck-rosamund-pike-david-fincher>
 are inevitable. David Fincher’s film opened the New York film festival, which 
feels a good fit for that, but this one opens early October, suggesting Toronto 
is a more likely launchpad.

Arrival
Sci-fi shenanigans from Sicario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/08/sicario-review-emily-blunt-at-the-sharp-end-in-war-on-drugs>
 director Denis Villeneuve in which alien spacecrafts that have landed on earth 
are scoped out by humanity’s brainiest boffins (read: Amy Adams and Jeremy 
Renner). Adams plays Dr Louise Banks, an expert linguist, who – according to 
Wikipedia – will “take a chance that could threaten her life, and quite 
possibly humanity”. Quite possibly! Eek!

Weightless
Not much is ever disclosed about in-the-works Terrence Malick films: this one, 
we know, features Ryan Gosling and Rooney Mara, is set in Austin and used to be 
called Lawless (until Malick gave the title awayto John Hillcoat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/09/lawless-cave-hillcoat-review-french>
). But the feeling is that the festival-catnip director is holding Weightless 
back for a prime slot in the autumn festivals, though exactly where it will end 
up is anyone’s guess.

The Mercy
One of the most obviously awards-friendly titles of the forthcoming festival 
season seesThe Theory of Everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/07/theory-of-everything-review-hawking-eddie-redmayne>
 director James Marsh assemble Oscar winners Colin Firth and Rachel Weiszto 
tell the true story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/28/colin-firth-biopic-donald-crowhurst-james-marsh>
 of Donald Crowhurst, the businessman whose attempt to sail around the world by 
himself ended in tragedy.

Free Fire
Ben Wheatley’s first US-set film had been tipped for Cannes this May; the 
heroic opening Toronto offered High-Rise last year makes us suspect they may 
premiere this hard-boiled crime drama set in Boston in 1978 in Canada. Brie 
Larson, Armie Hammer, Sam Riley and Cillian Murphy join Wheatley’s lucky charm, 
Michael Smiley. Early photos suggest a preponderance of big lapels and tight 
trousers.

The Secret Scripture
Jim Sheridan’s take on Sebastian Barry’s book about the reminiscences of 
Roseanne McNulty, a patient in an Irish mental hospital facing closure. Vanessa 
Redgrave plays McNulty old, Rooney Mara’s checked in as her younger self.

Voyage of Time
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYVyWObJY9FQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYVyWObJY9FQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYVyWObJY9FQ&media=>
The “other” Terrence Malick project of the moment – the Koyaanisqatsi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/dec/15/my-favourite-film-koyaanisqatsi>
-esque Imax documentary Voyage of Time – has a little more flesh on its bones 
than Weightless. After along-running lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/26/terrence-malick-settlement-voyage-of-time>
, it’s due be released on 7 October in the US, so it’s bound to be platformed 
at one or more of the autumn festivals; though as Malick likes to play his 
cards close to his chest, there’s no suggestion yet as to where.

Quite likely

Allied
Last year, Robert Zemeckis stumbled with his 3D wire-walking caper The Walk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/04/the-walk-review-vertigo-inducing-thrills>
, but he’s sticking to safer territory with this second world war thriller. 
Brad Pitt stars as a hitman who falls in love with a spy, played by Marion 
Cotillard, in what is reportedly a true story.

Silence
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff171e76a2c6a79def6d2c358bdc08e3e3047a28b%2F0_0_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Festival%20fever%3A%2040%20films%20we%20predict%20will%20premiere%20at%20Venice%2C%20Toronto%20and%20Telluride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Festival%20fever%3A%2040%20films%20we%20predict%20will%20premiere%20at%20Venice%2C%20Toronto%20and%20Telluride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff171e76a2c6a79def6d2c358bdc08e3e3047a28b%2F0_0_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Here’s one everyone’s waiting for: Martin Scorsese’s epic adaptation of 
Shusaku Endo’s novel about two Jesuit Portuguese Catholic priests (Andrew 
Garfield and Adam Driver) facing persecution on a trip to Japan to find a 
priest (Liam Neeson) who has lost his faith. Scorsese’s been working on Silence 
for 23 years – previous castings included Daniel Day-Lewis and Benicio del Toro 
– and production was strenuous, with cast members dropping scary amounts of 
weight, the shoot being hit by an earthquake anda construction worker killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/30/construction-worker-killed-martin-scorsese-film-set-silence-tapei-taiwan>
 after scaffolding collapsed on set.

20th Century Women
Mike Mills (Thumbsucker <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/oct/28/2>, 
Beginners <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/21/beginners-review>) 
returns with a 1970s-set drama about a group of women (Elle Fanning, Annette 
Bening, Greta Gerwig) set all a-flutter when a dishy handyman (Billy Crudup) 
rents a bungalow behind their boarding house. Likely to be more subtle and less 
sugary than it sounds.

War Machine
Brad Pitt follows up Fury with another war picture, this time as rock’n’roll 
US army general Stanley McChrystal, who was recalled from Afghanistan in 
disgrace after an article in Rolling Stone quoted his disparaging opinions of 
pols back home. With David Michod (Animal Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/24/animal-kingdom-review>) on board 
as director, this looks like a pretty classy project, more MASH than American 
Sniper, and Netflix may well put big money behind it for an awards push. A 
festival spot beckons.

How to Talk to Girls at Parties
Hedwig and the Angry Inch director John Cameron Mitchell’s latest sees him 
adapting a Neil Gaiman short story about an alien girl touring the galaxy who 
gets lost in Croydon. Elle Fanning, Nicole Kidman and Ruth Wilson star.

Brain on Fire
Produced by Charlize Theron, this adaptation of a memoir by a young journalist 
at the New York Post who wakes with no memory of the previous month is tipped 
to clean up at awards and signalChloë Grace Moretz’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/10/chloe-motetz-kick-ass-2>s 
transfer into adult acting. Jenny Slate, Will Poulter and Tyler Perry co-star.

HHhH
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F446615d4a75aea05960bbb908f97e6859b98d871%2F0_46_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Festival%20fever%3A%2040%20films%20we%20predict%20will%20premiere%20at%20Venice%2C%20Toronto%20and%20Telluride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Festival%20fever%3A%2040%20films%20we%20predict%20will%20premiere%20at%20Venice%2C%20Toronto%20and%20Telluride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F446615d4a75aea05960bbb908f97e6859b98d871%2F0_46_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Operation Anthropoid was the secret mission to assassinate 
SS-Obergruppenführer Reinhard Heydrich. Cooked up by the British Special 
Operations Executive but carried out by Czech soldier, the attack took place in 
Prague in 1942, leaving Heydrich with injuries from which he would later die. 
Your brave allies in this version of events are Jacks Reynor and O’Connell. 
Jason Clarke andRosamund Pike <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rosamund-pike> 
are on the side of the dastardly as Reinhard and Lina Heydrich. That title, in 
case you were wondering, is pronounced “HHhH”.

Gold
Matthew McConaughey leads the line in a Treasure of the Sierra Madre-style 
gold-hunting jaunt, apparently inspired by the spectacular mid-90s Bre-X fraud 
over fake gold samples in Indonesia. McConaughey’s career has sputtered a 
little since hisDallas Buyers Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/06/dallas-buyers-club-review> 
triumph, but he’s still got the major-league credibility that should see this 
safely into a big festival slot.

Planetarium
Grand Central  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/20/grand-central-review-intoxicating-love-story-tahar-rahim>
director Rebecca Zlotowski’s follow-up was originally touted as a Cannes 
possibility but it’s now looking like a potential Venice inclusion. In a 
strange, 30s-set supernatural drama/horror/romance/fantasy, Natalie Portman and 
Lily-Rose Depp play sisters who can speak to ghosts.

The Seagull
A Miss Julie- 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/miss-julie-review-erotic-strindberg-adaptation-jessica-chastain-colin-farrell>
style spot at Toronto surely beckons for this top-end adaptation of the Chekhov 
play starring Saoirse Ronan, Annette Bening, Elisabeth Moss and Corey Stoll. 
You want 19th-century Steppes dissatisfaction? Michael Mayer’s faithful-looking 
transfer promises just that in spades. That said, his big-screen track record 
is hardly flawless: A Home at the End of the World in 2004 was followed by 
straight-to-video family film Flicka (2006). And that’s it, until now.

Hacksaw Ridge
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42cfe16a3a6def82d6fce6c3048e0a3ffadc27c9%2F0_22_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Festival%20fever%3A%2040%20films%20we%20predict%20will%20premiere%20at%20Venice%2C%20Toronto%20and%20Telluride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Festival%20fever%3A%2040%20films%20we%20predict%20will%20premiere%20at%20Venice%2C%20Toronto%20and%20Telluride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42cfe16a3a6def82d6fce6c3048e0a3ffadc27c9%2F0_22_800_480%2F800.jpg>
A star-stuffed Mel Gibson war epic, meaning there will be plenty of dramatic 
collateral on standby to take a bullet for lead man Andrew Garfield. Garfield 
plays Desmond T Doss, a real-life medic who served in the battle of Okinawa 
despite refusing to carry a weapon because of his Seventh-day Adventist 
beliefs, and became the first conscientious objector to receive the medal of 
honour. Back to big, meaty film-making for Gibson. Likely to make a noise come 
Oscar time.

Wilson
This has flown under the radar: a Daniel Clowes graphic novel about a 
middle-aged, divorced misanthrope who reconnects with his drug addict ex-wife 
and finds out he has a daughter. Produced by Alexander Payne and with Woody 
Harrelson in the lead role, this has got some pedigree and – you’d think – more 
than a dollop of appeal to festival programmers.

Billionaire Boys Club
Ansel Elgort and Taron Egerton sell this crime thriller about a real-life 
money-making scheme that flipped from Ponzi to nasty. The duo play Joe Hunt and 
Dean Karny, the creators of an investment programme that made very rich young 
men of its founders in the early 80s, before the money ran out and they turned 
to more murderous ways to make moolah.

Brimstone
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecd05db4dada0827d0c6a744538ebb5c26cb0aad%2F2_0_1020_612%2F1020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Festival%20fever%3A%2040%20films%20we%20predict%20will%20premiere%20at%20Venice%2C%20Toronto%20and%20Telluride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Festival%20fever%3A%2040%20films%20we%20predict%20will%20premiere%20at%20Venice%2C%20Toronto%20and%20Telluride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2F40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecd05db4dada0827d0c6a744538ebb5c26cb0aad%2F2_0_1020_612%2F1020.jpg>
 Photograph: PR 
This looks terrific: a wild west tale of faith and retribution starring Guy 
Pearce as a demented preacher and Dakota Fanning as the damned young woman who 
must defeat him. Extra incentive is lent byKit Harington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/27/kit-harington-doctor-faustus-game-thrones-duke-yorks-theatre-london>
. But, the director, who is a Dutchman called Martin Koolhoven, was responsible 
for 2005’s Schnitzel Paradise, AKA one of the worst films we’ve ever seen. 
Let’s just pray he’s had a major conversion since then.

Frantz
First world war woe here as Françcois Ozon wraps grief in jealousy over the 
story of a widowed young German (Paula Beer) who has to deal with the 
appearance of a handsome veteran (Pierre Niney) at her husband’s graveside.

The Untamed
Mexican film-maker Amat Escalante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/15/amat-escalante-heli-cannes-mexico-violence>
 came from seemingly nowhere to win best director at Cannes in 2013 for his 
feature debutHeli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/16/heli-cannes-2013-review>; his 
followup – original title: La Región Salvaje, or The Wild Region – is a 
bizarre-sounding fable about “machismo, homophobia and repression of women”, 
inspired by a tabloid story about the drowning of a male nurse. Although it’s 
already been released in Mexico, this surely must find a festival berth.

If it’s ready

Passengers

A project that has undergone many iterations (Keanu Reeves was slated to 
star), this ambitious sci-fi romance now hasJennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence> and Chris Pratt, arguably 
the most SEO-friendly match-up of the year, play strangers brought together by 
a tech malfunction on a spaceship. It’s not released until late December and 
given its commercial nature, it might skip festivals altogether.

Patriots’ Day
The first film based around the Boston marathon bombings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/boston-marathon-bombing> is the one which 
most focuses on the cops coping with the aftermath and investigation – cops 
whose numbers here include Mark Wahlberg, JK Simmons and John Goodman. Director 
Peter Berg and Wahlberg have two real-life tragedy films due this year; the 
other being oil rig disaster movie Deepwater Horizon.

Fences
Denzel Washington takes directing duties for the first time since 2007’s The 
Great Debaters. Fences is based on the play of the same name by August Wilson, 
who insisted that any film version of his story be directed by a black person. 
Washington also stars as Troy Maxson, a former Negro League baseball player 
struggling to make ends meet as a garbageman in 1950s Pittsburgh.

Marshall
In the film industry’s current disquiet over its poor record on diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/18/hollywoods-race-problem-film-industry-actors-of-colour>
, this is likely to drum up attention. Reginald “Great White Hype” Hudlin has 
been immersed in TV for the last decade, but he’s back in film with a 
sober-sounding biopic of Thurgood Marshall, the first African American justice 
on the supreme court.Get on Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/20/get-on-up-review-james-brown-chadwick-boseman>
’s Chadwick Boseman is Marshall, and the film centres largely on Marshall’s 
defence of Joseph Spell, a black chauffeur accused of raping his white female 
boss in 1940. Reports suggest it’s still in post-production, though, so it may 
not make the deadline.

Miss Sloane
A timely drama here from John Madden, finally freed from the Marigold Hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/23/best-exotic-marigold-hotel-review>
 cinematic universe, who directs Jessica Chastain as an ambitious lobbyist 
putting her own life at risk to push for gun control. It’s got a December 
release date and production only wrapped earlier this year so it could be more 
of an AFI/NYFF choice.

The Yellow Birds
More war, this time starring Jennifer Aniston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-aniston> as Maureen, the 
worry-racked mum of a soldier fighting in Iraq. Tye Sheridan plays her boy over 
there, while – him again – Alden Ehrenreich plays the young squaddie who 
promises to bring him home safe. Based on the book by Iraq veteran Kevin Powers.

The Promise
The sexiest of shapes gets another airing as Christian Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/christianbale>, Oscar Isaac and Charlotte Le 
Bon make up the comely corners of a love triangle forming in the ferment of the 
last days of the Ottoman empire. Issac is a medical student living in Paris, 
Bale plays an visiting American journalist, while Le Bon’s publicised character 
traits include “beauty” and “sophistication”. Ho hum. Let’s hope the chemistry 
matches up to the geometry.
 