
Alasdair Gray  <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/alasdair-gray>as 
Nick, aka the devil.Will Self  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/will-self>as Fleck, a chemistry 
professor in contemporary Edinburgh to whom Nick promises unlimited wealth, 
power and sex. AL Kennedy as May, a student who woos the loveless don. 
Narration byLiz Lochhead, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/liz-lochhead> Scotland's Makar. 
Cameos fromJanice Galloway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/janice-galloway> as the Earth 
Spirit, Louise Welsh <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/louise-welsh> 
as May's best friend, andIan Rankin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/ian-rankin> as a lawyer.

That's the appetising line-up for the Edinburgh international book festival's 
grand finale tonight, the first public reading of Gray's verse version of the 
Faust story, The Comedy of Fleck, a mixture of acerbic satire, community panto, 
literary game, and the kind of all-star ensemble closing numbers that rock 
galas go in for.

 Licensed by a supercilious God (performed by the suitably white-haired Gaelic 
poetAonghas MacNeacail 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/aonghas-macneacail>) to offer 
Fleck a deal, shape-shifting, Earth-ruling Nick lures the Nobel prize-winning 
scientist out of his lab and inducts him into a demi-monde of bars and parties. 
Fleck's subsequent career allows Gray to take pot shots at the media, politics, 
the law and business, as he becomes consultant to a sinister corporation, with 
Nick as his spin doctor.

Self, who's known Gray for over 20 years, has said in an interview with the 
List that his friend - who was originally a dramatist, writing plays in the 70s 
before his first novel, Lanark - cast him as the Faust figure amidst a largely 
Scottish cast because he seemed "keen it should be a middle-class Englishman 
rather than a working class Scot", although other motives are inferrable.

Self calls it "an odd piece, but then everything Alasdair does is pretty odd. 
It's got all those elements you expect from him, including quite a bit of 
erotic interest, girls in various states of undress, a series of cheerfully 
embraced stereotypings and high-flown metaphysics.

 "It's simultaneously deeply heartfelt and quite sophisticated and kind of 
blindingly naive. To say that's his charm would be slightly damning with faint 
praise, but I mean charm on a stratospheric level."

Fittingly ending the book festival with a verbal fireworks display, Fleck 
promises to be rather special. When and where else could you come across
Alasdair Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alasdairgray> flipping between 
accents as he plays the devil - or posing as a Hogmanay reveller coaxing AL 
Kennedy and Louise Welsh, as tipsy students, to love-bomb a Faust played by 
Will Self?

Fleck is at 8pm tonight  
<http://www.edbookfest.co.uk/the-festival/whats-on/alasdair-gray-s-fleck>
 