
Be prepared, 31 January is the deadline for many charities to submit their 
annual return and accounts to theCharity Commission 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/charity-commission>. This is a 
vital way to remain accountable to the public, and96% of people say 
<http://cc-admin.charitycommission.gov.uk/news/trust-in-charities-remains-high/>
 it is important to them that charities provide the public with information 
about how they spend their money. Failure to file is taken seriously by the 
commission and grant funders.


All registered charities have exactly 10 months from the end of their 
financial year to file their annual return and other documents, depending on the
type of charity and/or their income 
<https://www.gov.uk/prepare-a-charity-annual-return>. Here are some top tips to 
avoid making mistakes when filing.


Charity Commission and the voluntary sector: what has gone wrong?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/14/charity-commission-and-the-voluntary-sector-what-has-gone-wrong>
1. Don’t leave it to the last moment. Failure to file on time is against the 
law – if you are ready to file, do it now. Deadline extensions are not offered, 
and if you fail to file on time youronline register entry 
<http://apps.charitycommission.gov.uk/showcharity/registerofcharities/RegisterHomePage.aspx>
 will be flagged red as being overdue. What charities need to submit depends on 
their income bracket. However, all charities must inform us of their income and 
expenditure. If you’re a charity with an income under £10,000, this is easily 
completed online, using your password. All charities must keep records of their 
accounts and provide them to the public if requested.

2. Use our new tool. You can now authorise your accountant, independent 
examiner or another person tofile the charity’s accounts online for you 
<https://www.gov.uk/authorise-a-charity-adviser-to-submit-accounts>. This new 
tool enables an easier process for third parties involved in the accounts 
process.

3. Income and expenditure figures must be recorded in whole pounds – not 
thousands of pounds, and no decimal points.

4. File your annual information online, using the online services 
<https://www.gov.uk/send-charity-annual-return>. Attempts to file by way of a 
letter notification or by email will not be processed and your charity’s online 
register entry will be marked overdue.

5. The annual return prompts you to tell us if your accounts are qualified. 
Many people tick this box without reading what it means. Accounts are marked 
qualified when the independent examiner or auditor has doubts or concerns about 
some aspects of the accounts. This does not relate to the fitness of the 
individual scrutinising the accounts.

What's the point of the Charity Commission? | David Walker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/07/what-point-charity-commission-voluntary-sector>
6. You need a password 
<https://www.gov.uk/charity-commission-services-log-in-or-get-a-password> to 
access the annual return and other online services. All trustees must ensure 
they know who has the password and that it is handed over if the possessor 
leaves, otherwise it can be a time-consuming process. It is the trustees’ 
collective responsibility to file, even if the task is given to one person.

7. All registered charities must have a correspondent with us. If the 
correspondent leaves the charity, their last action should be to use the 
password to change their details to those of the incoming correspondent. 
Failure can lead to significant delay.

8. The annual return prompts you to tick to confirm that certain facts you 
entered are correct. Make sure you have ticked the boxes.

9. The annual return asks you to declare if you have a serious incident to 
report – this can only be done by the trustees. If the trustees are unsure 
whether to report a serious incident, or they only have a suspicion that 
something serious has occurred, they should still report it.


Charity Commission: We have to deliver the goods but the sector has to change 
too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/22/charity-commission-deliver-goods-sector-change>
10. If you have all the information you need, completing your annual return 
should only take about 20 minutes – so get online, and file on time this 
January.

Got questions about annual information? Want to share how your charity remains 
accountable? Join in the Charity Commission’s live Twitter Q&A on Monday 26th 
January, 2-3pm. Tweet us with #fileontime. 
 