
It's a romantic week for us here at Film Weekly. Having embodied the 
wide-eyed, fairytale French fantasy in Amelie, actressAudrey Tautou 
<http://film.theguardian.com/interview/interviewpages/0,,561810,00.html> has 
embarked on several roles trying to shed that wholesome image.

Her latest film is Priceless <http://film.theguardian.com/trailerpark/>, in 
which she plays a gold-digging, high-class tart with a dubious heart, looking 
to snare herself a sugar daddy in the shallow world of Cote d'Azur millionaires.

We talk about slipping into haute couture, the economics of modern romance and 
the high stakes of being an international actress.

While Audrey's looking for love and money in Cannes, Monte Carlo and Nice, 
there's a similar, though less money-grabbing, spirit in that most unromantic 
and most money-mad of cities, Los Angeles.In Search of a Midnight Kiss 
<http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/392160/In-Search-of-a-Midnight-Kiss/overview> 
is one of the most likeable US indies in ages, a smart-talking, vulgar yet 
tender love story shot in ravishing monochrome and set in that oft-overlooked 
world of downtown LA, where crumbling vaudeville theatres and old banks have 
been populated by pigeons and the homeless for way too long.

Alex Holdridge's film 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/film/article4114305.ece>
 recalls Manhattan, Annie Hall and the long lost days of early Jim Jarmusch, 
Hal Hartley and even Kevin Smith's Clerks. Alex and his leading lady Sarah 
Simmonds join me to discuss filming on a shoestring and it's heartening to hear 
of their troubled journey to the big screen and that, despite rumours of its 
death, the indie scene is still ticking along in Austin, Texas. What were the 
best indies of all time? Let me know on the blog.

Also this week, I'm joined by Guardian style guru Hannah Pool to discuss the 
hit of season so far:Sex and the City 
<http://movies.nytimes.com/2008/05/30/movies/30sex.html?partner=rssnyt&emc=rss>
. Yes, I know it's been out for a couple of weeks already, but it's been a 
sensation at the box office, out-doing even Indiana Jones, and what with the 
secret screening policy and our David Lean special last week, we hadn't got 
round to reviewing it yet. Find out if it appealed to Hannah and me, and hear 
my thoughts on The Incredible Hulk and M Night Shyamalan's latest, The 
Happening, by listening to Film Weekly.

â€¢ Listen to this week's edition of Film Weekly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2008/jun/11/1>.
 