
Monday’s keynote at Apple’s worldwide developers conference was fairly packed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/13/apple-wwdc-keynote-key-points-at-a-glance>
. The company’s various executives spoke for two hours about the watchOS, iOS, 
tvOS and the newly-monikered macOS, but while we were all wowed by the changes 
to Messages, the facial recognition introduced in Photos, and, er, Swift 
Playgrounds, Apple left almost as many interesting things unsaid as they 
announced onstage. So here are our picks for what would lead the Keynote That 
Never Was.

You can now remove the Stocks app

In fact, you can now remove almost all of the apps that come pre-installed on 
an iPhone and iPad <https://support.apple.com/en-gb/HT204221>. The only ones 
that are still mandatory are the App Store, Camera, Activity, Wallet, Find 
iPhone, Health, Messages, Phone, Safari and Settings. Contacts can be removed 
on an iPhone but is has to stay on an iPad, and News “will be removable in a 
later version of iOS 10 beta”.

Apple warns that removing the apps isn’t quite a panacea, erasing them from 
your home screen won’t actually delete them. But if you have a folder of “Apple 
Crap”, you might be happy to see the back of them anyway.Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> says: “The apps built into iOS 
are designed to be very space efficient, so all of them together use less than 
150MB.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fapple-wwdc-didnt-announce-apps-game-center-wake-alarm-macos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50b6d106e03da92fad020d7eedbcc2aafb8c0e5f%2F467_91_1533_920%2F1533.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Finally%2C%20you%20can%20remove%20the%20Stocks%20app!%20What%20Apple%20didn't%20announce%20at%20WWDC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fapple-wwdc-didnt-announce-apps-game-center-wake-alarm-macos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Finally%2C%20you%20can%20remove%20the%20Stocks%20app%21%20What%20Apple%20didn%27t%20announce%20at%20WWDC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fapple-wwdc-didnt-announce-apps-game-center-wake-alarm-macos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50b6d106e03da92fad020d7eedbcc2aafb8c0e5f%2F467_91_1533_920%2F1533.jpg>
 A little catch up on the Nasdaq before checking Twitter? No thanks, I’m fine. 
Photograph: Marcio Jose Sanchez/AP 
The feature doesn’t quite feel fully baked yet, though, since there’s not 
actually any functionality built to let you mark replacements for the default 
apps. A mailto link, for instance, will still attempt to open the Mail app; if 
you’ve removed it, it will prompt you to reinstall, not open another mail app 
you may have installed.

RIP Game Center

You probably haven’t opened it for a few years, and if you’re unlucky, it’s 
been crashing almost every gamesince it broke for a high proportion of users 
<http://reverttosaved.com/2016/03/16/game-center-is-still-broken-after-six-months-and-thats-not-good-enough-apple/>
 a few months ago. Well, Game Center is dead, at least as we know it. The app 
has disappeared from iOS 10, with users managing friend requests in settings 
instead.

Wake Alarm

An extra little tab in the clock app will now help you get more sleep. Or at 
least, that’s the plan.


The next version of iOS lets you set a “Wake Alarm”: tell it what time you 
want to wake up, and it will ring at the appointed hour. So far, just a normal 
alarm, but it also asks how long you want to sleep for, and prompts you to go 
to bed too. For thequantified self 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/dec/02/psychology-human-biology> 
fans, the app will also start tracking how much sleep you get, albeit just by 
assuming you’re asleep once you stop using your phone.

There’s a new file system for macOS

This may seem deep in the woods of geekiness, but it’s actually a feature 
that’s been high up the request list for developers for years.

The file system of a computer refers to the way data is actually stored on the 
hard drive. Disks on Apple Macs are currently formatted using HFS+, which was 
invented by Apple way back in 1998. At the time, it was state-of-the-art, but 
in the years since, it’s started to show its age: perhaps most obviously, it 
literally cannot handle dates past 2040.

So the company introduced a new file system, called Apple File System 
(inventive name), which it touts as “optimised for Flash/SSD storage”, of the 
kind found in most Mac laptops today. Among its new features are space sharing 
(letting two partitions share the free space available to them, rather than 
having to decide in advance how much each half gets), snapshots (which let the 
system make rapid read-only backups) and cloning of files, which lets the 
system copy files simply by rewriting the location, but pointing to the same 
underlying data – something which should save both time and hard drive space.

How does this affect you? Future Macs should feel faster, fit more files on 
their drives, and recover more rapidly from massive crashes.

Turn off read receipts for that one needy friend

Some people use read receipts. Some people don’t. It’s a rather contentious 
point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/17/message-read-but-what-kind-of-weirdo-keeps-read-receipts-on>
. But if you do, and have one friend who’s just a bit too eager to ensure you 
reply the second you’ve read their texts, you can now turn them off just for 
that special person, or even for an individual conversation. Just tap on 
“details” in the top right, and you’d see a new option below Do Not Disturb 
that will let you toggle whether or not you send the read receipts.
 