
Having dominated 2013 with three massive singles (Daft Punk’s Get Lucky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/23/why-i-hate-get-lucky-daft-punk>, 
Robin Thicke’s Blurred Lines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/13/blurred-lines-most-controversial-song-decade>
and his ownHappy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/13/pharrell-williams-number-one-charts>
), Pharrell Williams has emphatically overcome a recent career slump that saw 
him working with the likes of Conor Maynard, Mika and Gloria Estefan. His 
forthcoming second solo album, G I R L – written in caps and with two spaces 
between each letter thank you very much – is the moment he cements that 
comeback with an audacious, almost-concept album celebrating women and aiming 
to highlight society’s gender imbalance.


Sitting on a massive white leather sofa in the Sony offices for the album’s 
playback and sporting his now-infamousVivienne Westwood Buffalo hat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/21/pharrell-williams-mountain-hat-sale-ebay>
, with a grin the size of the hat’s brim, this is an obviously very happy and 
content superstar. And from just one listen to the album, played at full volume 
in a plush record-label listening room, he has every reason to be.

Marilyn Monroe

Opening with a suite of opulent strings composed with Hans Zimmer and played 
by a 30-piece string section, Marilyn Monroe makes plain in bold letters this 
isn’t your average R&B record. Mixed by the same people that worked on Daft 
Punk’s immaculate-soundingRandom Access Memories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/dec/18/best-albums-2013-daft-punk-random-access-memories>
, it all sounds brilliantly expensive and filmic, Pharrell puncturing the 
classical introduction with the word “different” before a percussive, Off the 
Wall-era Michael Jackson beat kicks in and the song shifts through the last 40 
decades of music in six minutes. Based around the album’s theme of celebrating 
women, the chorus runs “Not even Marilyn Monroe or Cleopatra please/ not even 
Joan of Arc, that don’t mean nothing to me/ I just want a different girl”. 
Buffeted by scratchy funk guitar, handclaps and some typically lovely falsetto, 
it’s an undulating, head-swimmingly brilliant opening song.

Brand New feat Justin Timberlake

If Justin Timberlake’s flabby, self-indulgent The 20/20 Experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/14/justin-timberlake-2020-experience-review>
 proved anything it was that he needs to work with Pharrell again. Thankfully, 
Brand New goes some way to achieving all that. Opening with layers of 
beatboxing and snatches of vocals to build the beat, it soon morphs into a 
massive riot of falsetto, their two voices intertwining so much they seem to 
blend into one loved-up mass. In fact, on first listen the whole thing almost 
collapses under the weight of how busy it all is, with horns, funk guitar, 
beatboxing and the distant sound of the kitchen sink all battling for 
attention. But underpinning it is a palpable sense of joy at hearing them work 
together again. Lyrically, this one seems to be about how the love of a good 
woman can make you feel like a new person.

Hunter

After the breakneck pace of the opening two songs, the album shifts down a 
gear for the almost bluesy guitar riff that opens Hunter. Before he started 
playing the album, Pharrell seemed almost coy about the fact that some of his 
songs might be about sex. But Hunter – all breathy ad-libs and dirty-sounding 
guitars – is fairly obviously his ode to the horizontal hustle. In fact, at one 
point Pharrell coos “sex is calling” and the slightly more unsavoury “I ain’t 
smelt nothing like this before”. To continue with the album’s theme, the song 
is apparently written from the perspective of the girl singing back to Pharrell.

Gush

Continuing with the sex portion of the album, we move onto the 
disconcertingly-titled Gush. Pharrell pronounces it as ”goosh”, both in person 
and on the album’s chorus, which features the line “make it hot just gush”. The 
pace here is also slightly slower, and once again there are some amazing 
vintage Michael Jackson nods, especially in the way the pre-chorus lifts up a 
notch and sounds almost angelic. Reminiscent of the slower moments on the first 
N*E*R*D album and referencing 2003’sLight Your Ass on Fire 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1wQ5T6clm9s&feature=kp>, it has a slight 
throwback feel to it, until a massive string break bubbles up from nowhere and 
carries the song off in a different direction.

Happy 

This song’s ubiquity is such that even Pharrell says he wants to skip it at 
first: “I don’t want to bore you if you’ve heard it.” In the end, he’s 
convinced to play it by a handful of journalists who clearly just want a break 
from all the frantic note-taking. For what it’s worth, it fits perfectly in the 
context of the album.
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch Happy video 
<http://www.muzu.tv/pharrell-williams/happy-from-despicable-me-2-music-video/2143825/>
Come Get It Babe 


Having worked on a handful of country-tinged songs on Miley’s recent Bangerz 
album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/04/miley-cyrus-bangerz-review>, 
Pharrell lassos her in to repay the favour on Come Get It. Opening with a bit 
of a red herring in the form of a country-guitar riff, it quickly morphs into a 
futuristic R&B throb, with layers of chanted “heys” making up the beat. Again 
it’s a bit more of a groover as opposed to an all-out banger, with Miley adding 
backing vocals and taking on the middle eight. Lyrically it’s a melange of 
mixed metaphors, with Pharrell cooing: “You wanna ride my motorcycle … Take it 
easy on the clutch because I like you.” At one point he yells “wanna pop a 
wheelie?” which is probably euphemistic but I’m not sure what sexual act it’s 
referring to exactly. Like the Timberlake track, it’s busy but the production 
is immaculate, with each element sounding as bright and sharp as anything on an 
album made in a massive studio should sound.

Gust of Wind


While Daft Punk’s Random Access Memories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/dec/18/best-albums-2013-daft-punk-random-access-memories>
 had its moments, they tended to a) mainly be found on Get Lucky and b) be 
buried in amongst a lot of sonic waffle. Gust of Wind – which features the 
Robots, as Pharrell calls them – follows a similar line of 70s-tinged disco-pop 
but is infinitely more compelling, not least because it sounds like there’s a 
beating heart at the centre of it all. During the song’s chorus of “like a gust 
of wind, you lift me up sometimes” Pharrell sounds like he might explode from 
joy and there’s a brilliantly celebratory mood to the whole thing. There’s also 
an amazing bit where the beat stutters and a lovely string arrangement kicks in 
(Pharrell likes that bit so much that he stops the song and plays it twice), 
before a distant choir blows in like, you got it, a gust of wind.


Lost Queen

Having opened the album with at least four prospective singles, the second 
half is a little more experimental. None more so than Lost Queen, which 
Pharrell warns has “no real music”. Built almost completely around a looped 
sample of an indigenous male choir with some synths lying underneath it all, it 
harks back to some of his most strikingly minimal and experimental production 
work on the likes of Drop It Like It’s Hot and Milkshake. In anyone else’s 
hands it probably wouldn’t work but there’s something oddly compelling about it 
and on Sony’s probably-quite-expensive speakers it feels like it’s about to 
bring the roof crashing down. Lyrically it’s about Pharrell wanting to find 
that special someone and serve her peeled grapes on a plate or something.

Freq

Nothing says “you are definitely in the experimental phase of an album” quite 
like a mainly instrumental, slightly formless interlude. Built around the 
mantra of “you’ve got to go inside to experience the outer space that was built 
for you”, it’s also the album’s slowest song, with the sound of crashing waves 
morphing into bubbling synths. It’s all a bit self-help-lite too, with Pharrell 
intoning “individuality makes life better”, before R&B singer JoJo joins in for 
an actually rather lovely mid-section. Disconcertingly, in my notes I wrote 
down one of the lyrics as “it tickles your bum/ from the vibration of love”, 
which is certainly something.

I Know Who Your Are feat Alicia Keys

We’re back on slightly more stable ground with this almost reggae-tinged duet 
withAlicia Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aliciakeys>. “I know who you 
are and I know what you’re feeling” runs the bright, catchy chorus. It’s also a 
proper duet, with Pharrell doing the first verse, Alicia the second and the 
pair of them ad-libbing throughout the chorus. Mind you, Pharrell seems to know 
when to let Alicia shine and she dominates the song’s latter half, before the 
whole track comes to an abrupt stop just when you think it might meander into 
an instrumental coda.

It Girl

Fans of instrumental codas will find a lot to enjoy in the album’s closing 
track, It Girl. Pharrell tells us that this is the label’s favourite and that 
when they first heard it they asked him to change the middle section as it was 
a bit too depressing given what had gone before, so now the final third of the 
song sort of drifts along on a distorted guitar riff before ending on the 
repeated word ‘girl’. Before all that, it’s a song celebrating the love of his 
life (“you’re the it girl/ my inspiration”) over more funk guitar, while the 
song’s hook of “hold my hand, kiss on the lips” becomes hypnotic as the song 
moves into its fifth minute. As with some of the other, more loose jams, it 
feels like it could be edited down slightly to make it more cohesive – but 
apparently this one was created with a live show in mind, hence the guitar riff.
 