
Skiing – bah! It’s not for me. It’s posh and elitist and requires a ton of 
equipment, and hours spent putting on special, ugly puffy clothes that don’t 
really fit.

You are then given heavy long things that you attach to boots and then they 
put you in a chair that takes you up a cold mountain, then you are sort of 
tipped out of your chair and whoosh! It’s absurd. People die doing it. Or they 
kill others. Or they get injured. Or they get lost.


Skiing in Australia on the cheap: how to save money on the slopes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/03/skiing-in-australia-on-the-cheap-how-to-save-money-on-the-slopes>
It also costs a fortune and much of the time, in the beginning at least – you 
are on your arse, or on your way to being on your arse, and in the children’s 
nursery run, with calves that ache and a frozen hand due to a missing glove.

Which is why for years I wasn’t even remotely tempted to try it. 

But this year Australian slopes have enjoyed excellent snowfall  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/06/skiing-in-australia-i-was-a-novice-when-i-got-to-thredbo-but-i-left-a-confident-man>
and snow-lovers are talking about what a great season  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/13/queensland-gets-first-snow-in-two-years-as-nsw-waits-for-new-cold-front-to-hit>
it is, so I decide to check out Falls Creek, with good runs for beginners, in 
Victoria’s picturesque high country.

I fly from Sydney to Albury (a little over an hour) and stop at the Atura 
<https://www.aturaalbury.com.au/> in Albury for a big breakfast before meeting 
our guide, Heath Fallon, for a lift up the mountains. Fallon runs a local bus 
service, school tours andprivate shuttle  
<http://www.fallscreekcoachservice.com.au/>services up the mountains. 


There are seven of us on this ski trip. We troop into the ski rental place to 
get fitted up. There’s a lot of gear: jacket, pants with a waist that goes up 
to chest-height, helmet, goggles, gloves, apres-ski boots and then the dreaded 
ski boots – blocks of plastic that corset from the shins down. If you’ve never 
worn them, they feel like this: you owe the mafia don $1m and can’t pay up, so 
he’s made you these boots to wear in the Yarra.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffirst-time-skiing-in-falls-creek-what-joy-to-hand-back-my-skis-with-bones-intact%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F24%2F1440379487008%2Ff222006e-a10d-45c3-b18f-953064715033-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First-time%20skiing%20in%20Falls%20Creek%3A%20'What%20joy%20to%20hand%20back%20my%20skis%20with%20bones%20intact'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffirst-time-skiing-in-falls-creek-what-joy-to-hand-back-my-skis-with-bones-intact%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First-time%20skiing%20in%20Falls%20Creek%3A%20%27What%20joy%20to%20hand%20back%20my%20skis%20with%20bones%20intact%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffirst-time-skiing-in-falls-creek-what-joy-to-hand-back-my-skis-with-bones-intact%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F24%2F1440379487008%2Ff222006e-a10d-45c3-b18f-953064715033-2060x2060.jpeg>
 Writer Brigid Delaney gets fitted out for ski gear. Photograph: The Guardian. 
So, yes, they are heavy. When you try and walk in the slippery ice and snow, 
you won’t know how – so you will stand there frozen, actually literally frozen 
until someone comes up to you, asks if it’s your first time in the snow and 
tells you how to walk (heel first, digging your feet into the snow).

Help is also required entering and exiting the chairlift. You stand at the 
side in a queue with all your stuff (making sure your poles aren’t snagged to 
bits of yours or someone else’s clothing), then shuffle forward, then shuffle 
forward, then shuffle forward then – go! go! go! You have to stand on a line 
and sit with all your stuff while the chair is moving towards you (from behind) 
and you just have to trust that you don’t sit too early (or too late) and that 
you don’t knock out your neighbour’s eye with your ski poles and that you push 
the bar on the chairlift down so you don’t fall out of the lift at a great 
height.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffirst-time-skiing-in-falls-creek-what-joy-to-hand-back-my-skis-with-bones-intact%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82074c02f92ea59ac2e4bc69442ac26484d6c822%2F81_0_2025_2340%2F2025.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First-time%20skiing%20in%20Falls%20Creek%3A%20'What%20joy%20to%20hand%20back%20my%20skis%20with%20bones%20intact'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffirst-time-skiing-in-falls-creek-what-joy-to-hand-back-my-skis-with-bones-intact%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First-time%20skiing%20in%20Falls%20Creek%3A%20%27What%20joy%20to%20hand%20back%20my%20skis%20with%20bones%20intact%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffirst-time-skiing-in-falls-creek-what-joy-to-hand-back-my-skis-with-bones-intact%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82074c02f92ea59ac2e4bc69442ac26484d6c822%2F81_0_2025_2340%2F2025.jpg>
 An empty ski-lift. Photograph: Brigid Delaney for the Guardian 
All this before you’ve even “hit the slopes”. As we glide up in the chairlift, 
and I feel secure behind the bar – I’m struck by how beautiful the scenery is 
around me. It’s what the snow-people are calling a “whiteout”; black stalks of 
trees, white ground heaped with snow, the snow gums buried, their green-grey 
tops like shrubbery dusted in ice. And then there is the silence … the hush has 
a peculiar muffled quality, like being in a recording studio with headphones on.

Skiing in Australia: I was a novice when I got to Thredbo, but I left a 
confident man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/06/skiing-in-australia-i-was-a-novice-when-i-got-to-thredbo-but-i-left-a-confident-man>
Falls Creek is beginner/intermediate-friendly, with around 80% of the resort 
catering for snowboarders and skiers in this category. I am heading for the 
“nursery” (a hectic patch where three-year-olds wearing fluorescent bibs slide 
in zigzag lines) and adults – lumpy in their plastic clothes – wobble down the 
slight decline.

But first – getting off the ski lift. Most people ski off but as I’m carrying 
my skis, this is not an option. Go! Go! Go! I jump off but I’m not used to 
walking in these boots, so I am slow and narrowly miss being hit on the back of 
the head by another chair and people skiing by me. Also one of my gloves flies 
away in the wind. (It was a retrieved and returned to me by what I like to 
think was a Mr Darcy type but it’s hard to tell as he was wearing goggles and a 
balaclava.)

I’m here with another beginner skier. We find our instructor, Mark. Like all 
the instructors here he is wearing a bright-blue ski jacket, a name badge and 
town of origin. In my three days on the mountain I am taught by instructors 
from Germany, Sweden, Falls Creek and the Adelaide Hills.

The first thing Mark teaches us is how to slide on our skis in the snow. It is 
essentially just standing upright and moving a little bit forward without 
falling over. The next bit is surprisingly hard. It’s climbing up a hill 
sideways wearing your skis. There is a vicious wind on top of the mountain and 
visibility is poor; the skis are heavy and progress is slow. After spending 10 
minutes walking around five metres up a small incline, Mark points to a black 
blur somewhere in the distance and requests that I slide to that.

48 hours in the Snowy Mountains – what to do, where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/17/48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go>
By this time, my fellow beginner has retreated into the mountaintop Cloud 9 
cafe with excruciating shin pain that is only relieved by removal of the ski 
boots.


Down a longer run in the white, blurry conditions I become frightened of going 
too fast and falling over, so yell “Mark! Mark!” like a baby and he skis 
backwards while holding my hands – sort of like a human brake. It’s kind of 
awkward (not least for him, as he can’t see where he is going) but we manage to 
get to the bottom of the hill where we line up with all the children and go up 
an escalator, which makes me nervous because I still have my skis on and fear 
they could catch on a part of the escalator and mince my feet.


The escalator is a similar experience to the chairlift – necessary but fraught.

Down at the bottom of the mountain I am staying at the QT Falls Creek 
<https://www.qtfallscreek.com.au/hotel-rooms/?gclid=CMGChMLEwMcCFYeXvQod9pcIPw>
, which is mercifully very close to the chairlift. It only takes me 25 minutes 
to walk the 15 metres to my apartment.

But it’s so nice when I get there. The floor of the bathroom is heated and I 
lie down on it for a very long time. It’s actually better than a bath.

The three-bedroom apartment sleeps six and looks on to the ski fields. It’s 
spacious, beautifully furnished (with a kitchen if you wish to self-cater) and 
warm. There’s also a balcony with a jacuzzi.


I have a different instructor for my next lesson. He is German and not as nice 
to me as Mark. When I’m sliding down the hill and shout out for him to hold my 
hands like the other instructor did, he pretends not to hear me. I am yelling 
“Help! Help!” as I slide ever faster down the mountain. As I pick up speed I 
try to remember stuff ... poles: do I stick them in the snow like a brake? 
Skis: do I push them together to stop? I turn widely (and wildly) but somehow 
manage to avoid the group of children. I swerve again, terrified and still 
screaming before falling heavily on my side.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffirst-time-skiing-in-falls-creek-what-joy-to-hand-back-my-skis-with-bones-intact%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b836831b6b8804847893504cd5e69070b1b4c3d%2F0_0_4146_2478%2F4146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First-time%20skiing%20in%20Falls%20Creek%3A%20'What%20joy%20to%20hand%20back%20my%20skis%20with%20bones%20intact'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffirst-time-skiing-in-falls-creek-what-joy-to-hand-back-my-skis-with-bones-intact%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First-time%20skiing%20in%20Falls%20Creek%3A%20%27What%20joy%20to%20hand%20back%20my%20skis%20with%20bones%20intact%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffirst-time-skiing-in-falls-creek-what-joy-to-hand-back-my-skis-with-bones-intact%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b836831b6b8804847893504cd5e69070b1b4c3d%2F0_0_4146_2478%2F4146.jpg>
 Skiers take to the slopes. Photograph: Robert Cianflone/Getty Images 
Bizarrely, I am uninjured. But the spectre of injury is everywhere. People 
talk of large numbers at the fracture clinic over the weekend, and there are 
people in red jumpsuits with white crosses darting all over the mountains.

The best bit of the skiing lark is apres-ski. It’s so great! If this is the 
point of skiing then now I truly understand. The QT Falls Creek features a spa 
centre (spaQ) and I enjoy a one-hour massage that focuses on the muscles used 
in skiing. Then I slip on my 1980s moon boots and head to the restaurant, 
Bazaar, that forms part of the QT complex. The hunger! I can’t even remember 
even eating my first course of the buffet. It was starchy, hot and tasty. Then 
there’s cocktails after dinner at the Stingray lounge (also part of the QT) 
where they mix a very good Old Fashioned and also a range of delicious, hot 
brandies and boozy coffees. But I don’t linger long. It’s 8:30pm and I’m wiped 
out.


But it’s a good tired. I have fallen over. I have skied into children. I got 
on and off the ski lift four times and the elevator six times and have not 
killed anybody else or myself (yet).

I’m too sore to ski on my last day, but what joy to hand back my skis with my 
bones intact – I had so long assumed that my time on the slopes would end in 
plaster, that this feels nothing short of miraculous.

Plus, on the balcony of my apartment is a whirlpool bath, so on my last 
morning I sit in the steaming waters while snowflakes fall around me. I am 
planning the next trip. I will be back again to test my luck.
 