
Following his acclaimed animated documentary Waltz With Bashir, an exploration 
of Israel’s 1982 invasion of Lebanon, director Ari Folman is taking on another 
gloomy wartime tale in The Diary ofAnne Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-frank> – and the first images from the 
production have now appeared online.
 An Anne Frank puppet created for the production. Photograph: Passion Studios 
Published on the Israeli website Mako’s Cinemascope 
<http://cinemascope.mako.co.il/archives/20743>, the images show Folman at work 
on both traditional drawn animation scenes and those using stop-motion, where 
models of the characters which will be blended with animated backgrounds. Last 
year Folmansaid 
<http://www.denofgeek.com/movies/ari-folman/33053/exclusive-ari-folman-talks-about-his-anne-frank-stop-motion-film>
 he was hoping to make the entire film using stop-motion, but Cinemascope says 
the eventual production process will depend on the level of funding the film 
receives.

The film will focus on Kitty, the figure that Anne Frank wrote her diary 
entries to, living in Amsterdam during the second world war; the film imagines 
Kitty discovering the diary, and unfolding Frank’s story as she reads it.

Andy Gent, the puppeteer who worked on Wes Anderson’s Fantastic Mr Fox, is 
creating the models, while art director and illustrator David Polonsky, who 
helped craft the aesthetic of Waltz With Bashir and Folman’s 2013 sci-fi film 
The Congress. The preparatory work is going on at London’s Passion Studios.

Announcing the film in 2013 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/ari-folman-write-direct-animated-665256>
, Folman spoke of the “real need for new artistic material to keep the memory 
[of Frank] alive for younger generations.” His own parents were Holocaust 
survivors, who were sent to Auschwitz the day after they were married in the 
Jewish ghetto in Lodz, Poland.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F01%2Fari-folman-animated-anne-frank-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427885238608%2Fbdc4877c-3ef5-448b-bef5-77fabe712cf7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20look%20at%20Ari%20Folman's%20animated%20version%20of%20Anne%20Frank's%20diary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F01%2Fari-folman-animated-anne-frank-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20look%20at%20Ari%20Folman%27s%20animated%20version%20of%20Anne%20Frank%27s%20diary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F01%2Fari-folman-animated-anne-frank-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427885238608%2Fbdc4877c-3ef5-448b-bef5-77fabe712cf7-1020x612.jpeg>
 A concept image for the Anne Frank movie, featuring a miniature Frank walking 
inside a radio. Photograph: Passion Studios 
Cinemascope reports that the film could take years to realise, given its 
funding requirements and the length of time needed for the animation. The site 
says that Folman is lining up another as-yet-unconfirmed film to direct in the 
interim.
 