
Andrew Bolton is the new Grace Coddington
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-things-we-learned-from-the-first-monday-in-may%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3074011418fb7672bbb04ac8224906f2299ca6e%2F213_0_1062_1080%2F1062.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20The%20First%20Monday%20in%20May&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-things-we-learned-from-the-first-monday-in-may%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20The%20First%20Monday%20in%20May&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-things-we-learned-from-the-first-monday-in-may%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3074011418fb7672bbb04ac8224906f2299ca6e%2F213_0_1062_1080%2F1062.jpg>
 Andrew Bolton with Anna Wintour at the Tribeca Film Festival. Photograph: AP 
Obviously Anna Wintour <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour> runs 
the MET Ball and pretty much the entire fashion industry. However, as in The 
September Issue, when Grace Coddington stole the show, the undisputed star of 
TFMM is MET curator Andrew Bolton. His quiet yet warm demeanour is a worthy 
foil to Anna’s Ice Queen vibes.

Hailing from a small Lancashire town, Bolton has risen to the top job at the 
MET via the V&A in London. As the installation deadline looms closer and the 
museum looks in chaos, it’s Bolton in his Thom Browne cropped trousers who you 
are rooting for to pull the whole feat off.


Celebs are so cool, right? Wrong! 

When Rihanna jumps up on the banquet table to perform at the dinner/get the 
party started, the top table guests start busting some cringefest moves and 
dancing like your auntie at a wedding (but in slashed-to-the-thigh Versace and 
cutaway Balmain).

Fact: when it comes to enforced grooving and throwing some shapes on request, 
no one is immune from looking as if they’re at a mobile disco.

Don’t sweat the seating plan
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMRFCVG85X_s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMRFCVG85X_s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMRFCVG85X_s&media=>
As anyone who has ever had the headache of doing a large-scale seating plan 
will attest, it’s a political minefield. But let’s learn from Anna and put the 
coolest people on the no-man’s-land of the outer tables. Chloe Sevigny takes it 
on the chin in her JW Anderson dress when her table is switched so the H&M one 
can be closer to the action (money talks). “It’s like being back at high 
school,” she quips from the worse seat in the house.

Exercise caution with themed dressing

The most successful red-carpet looks were those that nodded to the theme 
rather than those that risked cultural appropriation accusations – see Georgia 
May Jagger in Gucci vs SJP, in a collaboration with H&M and a Philip Treacy 
headdress.

Baz Luhrmann emerges as the unlikely saviour in the appropriation/appreciation 
battle that wages between the Chinese artefacts department and Vogue.
 The Strictly Ballroom director saves the organisers from the cultural clanger 
of some ill-advised enormous dragon topiary at the entrance to the exhibition. 
Presumably his services won’t be needed for this year’s theme “Manus X Machina: 
Fashion in an Age of Technology”, unless someone offends droids.

You get what you pay for
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-things-we-learned-from-the-first-monday-in-may%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e88d72319bb46a584ad00eefa0a2f586bf034cd%2F0_170_4269_2563%2F4269.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20The%20First%20Monday%20in%20May&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-things-we-learned-from-the-first-monday-in-may%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20The%20First%20Monday%20in%20May&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-things-we-learned-from-the-first-monday-in-may%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e88d72319bb46a584ad00eefa0a2f586bf034cd%2F0_170_4269_2563%2F4269.jpg>
 Rihanna’s egg-cellent dress. Photograph: Mike Coppola/Getty Images 
There’s much discussion and debate about Rihanna’s fee from Anna’s office and 
Rihanna’s people, which is by all accounts huge. As with everything in life, 
you get back what you put in, so props to RiRi for holding out for top dollar 
because within approximately 35 secs of her egg yolk yellow dress by Chinese 
designer Guo Pei touching down on the red carpet, the internet had exploded 
into a sea of omelette-based memes and you couldn’t move on Instagram for 
Rihanna Met Ball hashtags.


 As Confucius probably once said ... you can’t make an omelette without 
breaking a few eggs, but you can break the internet with an omelette dress.
 