

3D printing



3D printing <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3d-printing> is set to 
revolutionise film-making from a production design perspective. Concept artists 
often design with computer-generated imagery (CGI) and computer-aided design 
(CAD) software, which lends itself perfectly to printing in 3D. Because the 
technology can also achieve such sophisticated levels of detail, print size and 
finish, props departments on big productions are embracing the flexibility and 
efficiency the process affords.

Propshop <http://www.propshop.co.uk/>, for example, is a production company at 
Pinewood Studios that has been instrumental in producing set pieces for many 
films that our studio has worked on, for example the night vision goggles in
Zero Dark Thirty <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k7R2uVZYebE> and a full-scale 
tank exterior for an action set-piece inFast & Furious 6 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l2h75LLhxM4>. Even the canopy of Peter Quill’s 
spaceship inGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d96cjJhvlMA> was 3D-printed. 

Recently released films such as Ex Machina 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tu1ajhotzj0> and Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MZoO8QVMxkk&index=40&list=PLK5HARgNfgj-aohotCZ6Bi6fkSouCbGuO>
 also used Propshops’ facilities, where entire spaceships and sets can be 
printed and assembled. It’s amazing to see in practice and while some issues 
are still to be refined, it’s a technology that has become part of the 
production designer’s toolkit.

Virtual reality

Everyone seems to be talking about virtual reality (VR), a technology that 
offers new and exciting ways to consume information and entertainment. As a 
non-linear medium, VR brings a very different viewing experience to the table. 
Appropriate applications for film are still being explored, but a number of 
players, such asOculus Story Studio <https://www1.oculus.com/storystudio/>, are 
working hard to define the best and most compelling VR cinema formats.

As a designer, I can see that VR offers exciting possibilities: as a dynamic 
new storytelling medium; as a rich narrative device within conventional film; 
and as a practical, time-saving preproduction tool. With the sheer amount of 
concept art and design that is now created in digital3D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3d> files, VR offers production 
designers a new way of showing a director a full set environment complete with 
props, before it’s built.

VR also offers new opportunities to create experiences that enrich the main 
cinematic event, helping to immerse the audience in a movie before it begins, 
perhaps through a behind-the-scenes tour, a character backstory, or even a 
virtual wander through the film environment.


Depth Sensors

Traditionally, 3D motion capture is an expensive investment, but we recently 
worked with a new format that seems to be revolutionising this space.

In a short film called Miles <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PlEHY8tQkXo>, we 
worked with VFX photographer Andrew Gant, who shot with a markerless 
motion-capture device called theDepth Kit <http://depthkit.tv/index.html>. 
Developed as a CGI-video hybrid, the software repurposes the depth-sensing 
camera from the Microsoft Kinect to capture and visualise the world as 
wireframe forms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Ffilm-technology-evolution-film-making-3d-printing-vr-motion-capture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434105275431%2F8777b6ca-9c63-44ef-a0c1-630d3518405c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20ways%20film-making%20is%20evolving%20thanks%20to%20new%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Ffilm-technology-evolution-film-making-3d-printing-vr-motion-capture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20ways%20film-making%20is%20evolving%20thanks%20to%20new%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Ffilm-technology-evolution-film-making-3d-printing-vr-motion-capture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434105275431%2F8777b6ca-9c63-44ef-a0c1-630d3518405c-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Depth Kit captures objects as a 3D sculpture. Photograph: Oliver Daly 
By syncing the Depth Kit to the camera with which he was shooting, Gant 
captured a 3D CGI sculpture for every frame of film, essentially giving us a 
file of 3D animation that perfectly lined up to the film’s characters and 
action. The thinking and process behind the Depth Kit is really indicative of 
how film-making is developing and evolving. While not appropriate for every 
film, it was perfect for our project, delivering powerful flexibility that 
allowed us to explore new ways to tell a story.

Film (it never went away)

Today, the flexibility and immediacy of digital filming makes a lot of sense, 
but while this format is still evolving, celluloid is a medium at the pinnacle 
of its technology.

With Interstellar shot on Imax 65mm and projected in 70mm, and the new round of
Star Wars <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ngElkyQ6Rhs> films committed to 
anamorphic 35mm <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P7i2SXGYmao>, the continuing 
impact of this well-developed technology should not be underestimated. While 
expensive and demanding, its unsurpassed image quality, rich colours, deep 
tones and textural details continues to attract passionate film-makers such as 
Christopher Nolan, Steven Spielberg, Quentin Tarantino and JJ Abrams, who are 
all fighting to save the format from obsolescence.

In a culture that is continually looking for smaller, faster and more 
convenient ways of doing things, we can often abandon a technology before it 
reaches maturity. Film is still technically superior in some ways and dedicated 
craftsmen are still refining it.

As a motion graphic designer working in film, I can appreciate that the rapid 
evolution and versatility of digital has revolutionised film-making, but as an 
artist passionate about craft, I’m reassured film still has its place and holds 
its own.

Cloud and collaborative workflows

As with any business activity, teamwork is at the heart of all good films. 
Digital <https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/digital> 
communication has made film-making a smaller, more efficient space that allows 
the director to draw on the best resources around the world. It’s not uncommon 
for us to work with a production team in Los Angeles, a film shoot in London 
and VFX teams in Romania, Canada or China. Managed well, this can bring 
specialisms to the fore, which benefits everyone. London’s reputation for 
artisanal traditions and emphasis on craftsmanship make our creative studios 
highly sought after in film.

As a creative studio, our reliance on sharing and managing files between 
multiple users working on one project means that we’re dependent on software, 
which can be frustrating. Software companies would do well to start thinking 
about designing software around collaborative teams, in addition to the 
individual. Software developed by people who really understand the dynamic of 
creative briefs and collaborative workflows could be a major game changer

David Sheldon-Hicks is co-founder and creative director of Territory Studio 
<http://www.territorystudio.com/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 