
Tyler, the Creator – Cherry Bomb (Odd Future) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/19/tyler-the-creator-cherry-bomb-review>

Why you should listen: Unexpected chillwave production flourishes, discordant 
piano lines and the odd instrumental interlude take centre-stage over Tyler’s 
potty-mouthed raps, on this surprise-released fourth album.

It might not be for you if… You think Tyler represents the worst of rap 
narcissism, filtered through needlessly violent and explicit lyrics.

What we said: “Juvenile shock tactics persist, but he’s now channelling his 
puckish energy into some thrilling experiments”,wrote Ben Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/19/tyler-the-creator-cherry-bomb-review>
, in the Observer. Read Paul Lester’s three-star first-listen review for the 
Guardianhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/13/tyler-the-creator-cherry-bomb-album-review>
.

Score: 4/5

Alabama Shakes – Sound & Color (Rough Trade) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/16/alabama-shakes-sound-and-color-review>

Why you should listen: The soul-rock band, once staunchly devoted to retro 
sonics, have expanded their sound on this second album. In turn, they’ve at 
least attempted not to lean on frontwoman Brittany Howard’s powerful voice for 
all the album’s stand-out moments.

It might not be for you if… You never understood the fuss about Alabama 
Shakes: they’re loved for making music that skips the past 40 years of pop? 
What of it?

What we said: “It all sounds fantastic, but that doesn’t quite cover up the 
fact that some of what’s here is a bit too vaporous,”wrote Alexis Petridis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/16/alabama-shakes-sound-and-color-review>
, in his lead review for the Guardian. Kitty Empire gave a more generous 
four-star lead review,in the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/19/alabama-shakes-sound-and-color-review'>
.

Score: 3/5

Jlin – Dark Energy (Planet Mu) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/16/jlin-dark-energy-review>

Why you should listen: Indiana’s Jlin splices together original compositions, 
and only the odd sample, on this debut album of jittering footwork.

It might not be for you if… You don’t listen to much footwork – and when you 
do, the late DJ Rashad’s made it.

What we said: “This is no sanitised version of footwork, though: the sound 
palette is still unremittingly brutal, with bpms whirling around the 190 mark,”
wrote Lanre Bakare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/16/jlin-dark-energy-review>, in the 
Guardian.

Score: 4/5

Speedy Ortiz – Foil Deer (Carpark) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/19/speedy-ortiz-foil-deer-review-carpark-records>

Why you should listen: The Massachusetts band are sticking to their 90s 
alt-rock roots and verbose lyrics, but vying for a cleaner, and more impactful, 
production sound.

It might not be for you if… It feels so 90s that it’s basically derivative.

What we said: “While it’s a nice retro bagatelle, a regrettable lack of 
originality really hampers Foil Deer”,wrote Kitty Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/19/speedy-ortiz-foil-deer-review-carpark-records>
, in the Observer.

Score: 3/5

Squarepusher – Damogen Furies (Warp) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/16/squarepusher-damogen-furies-review>

Why you should listen: Tom Jenkinson’s jackhammer electronic beats pound 
throughout this latest album of experimental dance music, made in the style of 
an improvised live set.

It might not be for you if… Squarepusher’s music gives you a headache.

What we said: “Squarepusher’s predilection for proggy jazz noodling is given 
free rein on Kontenjaz and Baltang Arg, while the slower Exjag Nives starts 
like a John Carpenter score before the eerie feel is buried under an avalanche 
of drills and bleeps,”wrote Jon Dennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/16/squarepusher-damogen-furies-review>
, in the Guardian. Ally Carnwath also gave the album three stars,in the Observer
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/19/squarepusher-damogen-furies-review-tom-jenkinson-stor-eiglass>
.

Score: 3/5

This week also sees new releases from turbo-pop band Passion Pit, math-rockers 
Built to Spill and noise-rock four-piece Girl Band. What are you looking 
forward to playing?
 