
Panda Bear – Panda Bear Meets the Grim Reaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/panda-bear-meets-grim-reaper-review>
 (Domino)

Why you should listen: Animal Collective co-founder Noah Lennox offers up 
squelching synths and reverb-drenched songs that ought to still please fans of 
his past solo work. See how well the album, which premiered track-by-trackon 
radio stations across the globe <http://dominorecordco.com/pbvsradio/>, shapes 
up as a cohesive whole.

It might not be for you if … You find Lennox’s layers of harmonised vocals and 
electronic psychedelia more exhausting than exhilarating.

What we said: “For all the reappearance of what you might call Panda Bear 
motifs – the multi-tracked harmony vocals, the crunchy electronic rhythms, an 
apparently bottomless supply of whooshing, gusting sound effects – Panda Bear 
Meets the Grim Reaper is still capable of springing surprises,”wrote Alexis 
Petridis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/panda-bear-meets-grim-reaper-review>
, in his lead review for the Guardian. Read Kitty Empire’s four-star lead 
review from the Observerhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/11/panda-bear-meets-grim-reaper-review-lennoxs-blithe-kaleidoscopic-side-uppermost>
.

Score: 4/5

Liam Hayes – Slurrup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/11/liam-hayes-slurrup-review-plush> 
(Fat Possum)

Why you should listen: This latest release from Hayes, more often known as 
Plush, takes 1960s-inspired poppy guitar riffs and scatters them over 
surprisingly upbeat, almost sunny, psychedelia-lite.

It might not be for you if … You’re happier with Plush’s finger-clicking, 
languid material – all this uptempo stuff feels a bit manic.

What we said: “This latest, fifth, surprisingly perky, psychedelic doodle on 
Hayes’s own great American songbook arrives in an uncharacteristic rush after 
last autumn’s only semi-expected Korp Sole Roller album,”wrote Kitty Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/11/liam-hayes-slurrup-review-plush>
, in the Observer.Click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/liam-hayes-slurrup-review> for 
Maddy Costa’s slightly less enthusiatic three-star review in the Guardian.

Score: 4/5

Stream Hayes’ album in full on the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/arts/music/pressplay.html?_r=0> site

Dan Mangan + Blacksmith – Club Meds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/dan-mangan-blacksmith-club-meds-review>
 (City Slang)

Why you should listen: Canadian singer-songwriter Mangan beefs up his act with 
a backing band here, touching on themes of self-medication over richly composed 
slices of guitar-driven experimental rock.

It might not be for you if … The beards. You just can’t see past those 
trendy-looking beards 
<http://i.guim.co.uk/static/w-620/h--/q-95/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/1/5/1420461149851/4f2ff8cb-aa61-4f91-bba3-9301d5679d58-620x372.jpeg>
 (though, to be fair, there is some beautiful music on offer here).

What we said: “Lyrically engaging and musically adventurous, with the 
arrangements here more ambitious than on [its] predecessor,Oh Fortune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/dec/01/dan-mangan-oh-fortune-review>,” 
wrote Tim Jonze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/dan-mangan-blacksmith-club-meds-review>
, in the Guardian. Paul Mardles also gave the album four stars, in hisObserver 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/11/dan-mangan-blacksmith-club-meds-review>
.

Score: 4/5

Joyce Moreno – Raiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/joyce-moreno-raiz-review> (Far 
Out)

Why you should listen: The Brazilian guitarist and singer-songwriter rolls 
through an ode to her musical beginnings, rejigging her favourite bossa nova 
and jazz classics.

It might not be for you if … You’re gutted that you don’t speak Portuguese, 
and thus can’t understand the lyrics.

What we said: “This is a celebration of Joyce’s Raiz (roots) in which she also 
includes favourites by Tom Jobim and Dorival Caymmi, and is backed by a trio 
including jazz pianist Helio Alves and her percussionist husband, Tutty Moreno,”
wrote Robin Denselow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/joyce-moreno-raiz-review>, in 
the Guardian.

Score: 4/5

Diagrams – Chromatics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/diagrams-chromatics-review-indie-electronic-woe-and-wonder>
 (Full Time Hobby)

Why you should listen: Sam Genders, ex-frontman of folktronica band Tunng, 
dives deeper into electronic elements, though still makes plenty of time for 
gentle acoustic guitar and insightfully observant lyrics.

It might not be for you if … This all just feels a little soft, and you were 
looking forward to something with more teeth.

What we said: “Foreboding as his lyrics often are, there is enormous hope at 
the heart of this music, and its gentle, almost Elbow-like melodies transform 
his worries into a warm, soft sanctuary,”wrote Harriet Gibsone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/diagrams-chromatics-review-indie-electronic-woe-and-wonder>
, in the Guardian.

Score: 4/5

Which albums are you keen to listen to this week? Share your choices in the 
comments, and help us all add something unexpected to our listening lists.
 