
Aphex Twin – Syro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/aphex-twin-syro-review-brain-bending-richard-d-james>
 (Warp)

Why you should listen: Aphex Twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aphex-twin> is back. After about 13 years. 
And no one really has a handle on batshit electronic music quite like he does, 
as Syro proves track after track.

It might not be for you if… The horrifying album artwork 
<http://i.guim.co.uk/w-620/h--/q-95/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/8/18/1408382192763/a22fff8d-07de-4940-ad79-528e3606d587-bestSizeAvailable.jpeg>
 put you off, and you wish he’d just released the recordgimmick-free 
<http://www.mixmag.net/words/news/aphex-twin-blimp-spotted-flying-over-london>. 
Let the music speak for itself, mate.

What we said: “By sounding simply like a series of Aphex Twin tracks, Syro is 
still utterly engrossing and remains, somewhat unbelievably, on a completely 
different planet to almost anything else that’s been released over the last 
decade and a half”,wrote Tim Jonze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/aphex-twin-syro-review-brain-bending-richard-d-james>
, for the Guardian.Head here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/21/aphex-twin-syro-review-richard-d-james>
 for Killian Fox’s four-star review in the Observer.

Score: 4/5




Perfume Genius – Too Bright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/perfume-genius-too-bright-review>
 (Turnstile)

Why you should listen: Perfume Genius’ Mike Hadreas produces another beautiful 
album, based around his personal experiences as former addict perpetually on 
the defensive against homophobic attacks. It’s not preachy, and ventures into 
new electronic territory for the artist.

It might not be for you if… You preferred the hushed, understated Perfume 
Genius <https://www.theguardian.com/music/perfume-genius> of 2010, and aren’t 
sure what to make of this bold new direction.

What we said: “In the spaces between the sedately familiar resides something 
glittering, defiant and avowedly queer”,wrote Maddy Costa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/perfume-genius-too-bright-review>
, in the Guardian.

Score: 4/5




alt-J – This is All Yours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/alt-j-this-is-all-yours-review-sublime-hooks-textures>
 (Sony)

Why you should listen: If you’ve been eagerly anticipating the follow-up to 
2012’s Mercury Prize winner, then this latest collection of vastly textured 
tracks – with a little less of An Awesome Wave’s clatter and clutter – should 
please.

It might not be for you if… You refuse to buy into the hype surrounding the 
trio, Miley Cyrus sample and all.

What we said: “Minus departed bassist Gwil Sainsbury, their second album 
exhibits the playful adventure Radiohead didn’t exhibit until their fourth, Kid 
A,”wrote Dave Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/alt-j-this-is-all-yours-review-sublime-hooks-textures>
, in the Guardian.

Score: 4/5




Leonard Cohen – Popular Problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/leonard-cohen-popular-problems-album-review#start-of-comments>
 (Columbia)

Why you should listen: Cohen releases this album as he turns 80, with his 
voice sounding stronger than it has in years and his poetic songwriting 
tackling death and mortality as deftly as ever.

It might not be for you if… You don’t like old poets who make art? Come on, 
now.

What we said: “A man who seemed to be running dry discovered he had much more 
to say musically and, moreover, that he was now broadcasting it from uncharted 
territory for rock music,”wrote Alexis Petridis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/leonard-cohen-popular-problems-album-review#start-of-comments>
, in his lead review for the Guardian. Kitty Empirealso gave the album four 
stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/21/leonard-cohen-popular-problems-review-full-of-surprises>
, in her Observer review.

Score: 4/5




Tweedy – Sukierae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/21/jeff-tweedy-sukierae-review-wilco>
 (dBpm/Anti)

Why you should listen: Wilco frontman Jeff Tweedy releases this double album 
of alt-country,meant to be enjoyed in full 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/jeff-tweedy-wilco-why-the-album-still-matters?CMP=soc_1945>
 and experienced like a flippable vinyl record.

It might not be for you if… You’re holding out for the next Wilco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/wilco> record. You’ll pass on this solo 
stuff for now.

What we said: “Not quite a solo effort (his 18-year-old son, Spencer, helps 
out on drums), Sukierae is another album to savour,”wrote Phil Mongredien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/21/jeff-tweedy-sukierae-review-wilco>
, in the Observer.

Score: 4/5


Which albums are you looking forward to hearing this week? Tell all in the 
comments section, and help us enrich one another’s listening lists.
 