
For the second year running, Macmillan Cancer Support 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2015/01/15/macmillan-cancer-support-tops-yougovs-2014-charity/>
 has been named the YouGov CharityIndex top brand. Through daily surveys on the 
YouGov website theCharityIndex tool 
<https://yougov.co.uk/find-solutions/brandindex/charityindex/> measures the 
public’s perception of charities across a wide range of areas – from whether 
people have noticed a brand in the news to whether they would donate to it. So, 
what makes a strong charity brand? We have looked at our data from the 
CharityIndex and other research to identify five things that help make a strong 
charity brand.


Online donation platforms should promote a charity's brand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2012/feb/23/charity-brands-online-donations-fundraising>
1. Know your audience

Different charities within the same area have very distinct audiences and it 
is important to make sure your brand resonates with the right people. A good 
example is the People’s Dispensary for Sick Animals. With a mission to care for 
the pets of people in need by providing free veterinary services, the charity 
speaks loudest to those on the lowest incomes. Not only is its reputation score 
highest among those earning less than £25,000 but the lowest earners are also 
the group most likely to donate to it.

2. Foster a relationship with your local supporters

The RNLI’s profile is maintained by the unique work it does and the way it 
communicates with its supporters and the public. The charity tends not to use 
hard-hitting campaigns, and it doesn’t have to. Instead, the RNLI focuses on 
talking to the local communities it serves about what it does. Barely a day 
goes past when the charity is not in the local news for a rescue, fundraising 
drive or the launch of a new vessel. This shows how the charity serves the 
local community and also the work local supporters do for the organisation.

Zoe Amar: Getting your brand right - on a budget
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2010/nov/18/rebrand-organisation>
3. Be prepared for viral fundraising opportunities 

 Viral fundraising is a relatively new phenomenon and – for the lucky 
charities involved – can lead to unexpected windfalls, both financially and in 
terms of brand strength. The key for a charity brand is to be prepared and 
react in the right way at the right time. Even though last year’s 
#nomakeupselfie campaign was not instigated by Cancer Research UK, the 
organisation realised almost immediately what it could do for the brand and got 
behind the campaign at an early stage, making sure that online buzz led 
directly to donations. Data shows that #nomakeupselfie crossed over to the 
mainstream and made an impact even among those who do not use social media. 
Non-Twitter and Facebook users’ consideration scores (how likely they would be 
to donate) rose from 40% at the start of the campaign to 47% in the two weeks 
after. This increased the campaign’s momentum and further boosted the charity’s 
brand profile.

4. Think like a brand

Although charities are altruistic in nature, the biggest and most 
high-profiles ones view themselves as brands and approach all their marketing 
efforts as any other business would. Around its World’s Biggest Coffee Morning, 
Macmillan used all the tools of the modern marketer, with great success. The 
organisation linked a social media campaign to print and digital efforts to 
both drive donations and awareness, all the while showcasing the grassroots 
efforts. Macmillan’s word of mouth exposure score shows that while 11% of 
people were discussing Macmillan before the event, in the two weeks after the 
event this figure rose to 17%.

5. Make the most of your time in the spotlight


Charity campaigns often take ownership of a particular day or event and it is 
important that organisations get everything they can out of their time in the 
spotlight. A good example of this is the Royal British Legion, which stages its 
major fundraising drive and awareness campaign around Remembrance Day. While 
its CharityIndex scores are always positive, the organisation has a pronounced 
spike around the anniversary of the Armistice. At the start of October its buzz 
score – which measures whether people have heard or seen anything about a brand 
in the previous two weeks – stood at 7.0 on 17 October, a figure that increased 
to 25.9 by 25 November.


Why Giving Tuesday will last longer than ice bucket challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/dec/02/givingtuesday-social-media-uk-launch-timing-creativity-icebucketchallenge>
Briony Gunstone is an associate director at YouGov <https://yougov.co.uk/#/>.


If you work in the charity sector, please join our free network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for charity professionals.


 <https://yougov.co.uk/find-solutions/brandindex/charityindex/>
 