
Flamenco originated in Andalusia in southern Spain no later than the 18th 
century and has endured as a folk art and gone global. But should it need help 
to thrive further, Flamenco Hoy is at hand: it's a razzmatazz blitz through 
flamenco's history and traditions which appears to claim other strains of music 
as its own, too: jazz, the rumba, tango. Those responsible have pedigree: 
producer Julio Marti didn't simply enlist the same costume designer that Pedro 
Almodovar used for films including Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown 
but brought in as director the distinguishedCarlos Saura 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/jun/24/carlos-saura-raise-ravens-franco-spain>
. If anyone ought to be able to distinguish different aspects of flamenco and 
related dances like thesevillanas <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sevillanas>, 
it's the auteur responsible for Blood Wedding, Carmen and El amor brujo, a 
triology of flamenco-inspired films in the 1980s.

It's is therefore strange to report that the most disappointing aspect of the 
production, which made its debut in New York in 2011 and received its 
Australian premiere as part of the Adelaide festival, was its staging. The 
evening was split into a series of distinct performances, with little seeming 
to link them, especially the episode at the end of the first half when the 
action moved to a dance class and the audience was invited to imagine that the 
fourth wall had been demolished so we could stumble into a rehearsal for a 
show. Even here, the set design wasn't particularly imaginative.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FReA2JKJ2HCs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FReA2JKJ2HCs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FReA2JKJ2HCs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It meant that the most successful vignettes were those that purported to be a 
juerga, a flamenco jam with the dancers joining in spontaneously. Under the 
aegis of the show's choreographers and leading dancers Rafael Estevez and Nani 
Panos, the evening sizzled here, particularly as the contrast between the two 
was so vivid – seeming spontaneity set against stiletto-sharp precision.

More in this vein would have been welcome, although excellent guitarist 
Antonio Rey – a figure who "is going to be the new Paco de Lucia" according to 
Julio Marti – also deserved his turn in the spotlight alongside the best of the 
three singers, Israel. Less could have been heard of the saxophonist who pulled 
the evening into the realm of a dinner dance; and while no-one would want to 
quarrel with the show's progenitors over the influence or adaptability of 
flamenco, for these tastes the lapses into jazz were just that.

It is instructive that Marti has likened this production to Riverdance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2010/oct/13/riverdance-16-years-old>, the 
Irish stepdancing phenomenon that for all anyone knows is now playing to 
tribesmen in the Kalahari. The audience in Adelaide gave Flamenco Hoy a 
standing ovation, testament as much to the strength of tradition as to its 
vaunted slickness.
 