
A Buk surface-to-air missile downed flight MH17, Dutch investigators have said 
as they unveiled a reconstruction of the plane that showed huge shrapnel damage 
to the cockpit and front section.

The MH17 report – a visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/oct/13/the-mh17-report-a-visual-guide>
Tjibbe Joustra, the chairman of the Dutch safety board, said the Malaysia 
Airlines plane was hit by a 9N314M warhead on 17 July 2014, as it flew at 
33,000ft (10,000 metres) above easternUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>. The warhead was fitted to a “9M28 
missile” fired from a Russian-built Buk missile system, he confirmed.


Speaking in front of the reconstructed plane – pieced together from parts of 
recovered debris, fitted around a metal skeleton – Joustra said all other 
scenarios to explain the disaster, which killed all 298 people on board, had 
been ruled out.

An animated video was shown to journalists at the Gilze-Rijen airbase in the 
Netherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>, where the plane 
was part reassembled over three months. It showed the Buk missile exploding on 
the left-hand side of the cockpit. Thousands of metal objects were ejected, 
with hundreds then penetrating the plane with tremendous force, Joustra said.

The impact and ensuing pressure drop killed the three pilots instantly,he 
said. On-board microphones captured the moment of impact – “a sound ping”. This 
allowed investigators to determine the devastating blast occurred on the 
upper-left hand side of the cockpit.

The damage was starkly visible. The front section of the Boeing 777 below the 
pilot’s port window was perforated with large shrapnel holes. Other parts were 
relatively unscathed. Five windows in the business class section were visible, 
together with a door where the passengers entered. The pilot’s seats had been 
remounted in the cockpit – a haunting sight.


The plane’s nose was missing, together with much of its upper front half. The 
colours of Malaysia Airlines – a red, blue stripe – were still visible. Exit 
holes left by shrapnel could be seen on the other right side; exploding 
fragments had ripped through the fuselage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmh17-crash-animation-russian-buk-missile-hit-plane-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444744010179%2FKP_538375_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Animation%20shows%20Russian%20Buk%20missile%20hit%20Malaysia%20Airlines%20MH17%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmh17-crash-animation-russian-buk-missile-hit-plane-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Animation%20shows%20Russian%20Buk%20missile%20hit%20Malaysia%20Airlines%20MH17%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmh17-crash-animation-russian-buk-missile-hit-plane-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444744010179%2FKP_538375_crop_640x480.jpg>
Animation shows Russian-built Buk missile hit Malaysia Airlines MH17 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/oct/13/mh17-crash-animation-russian-buk-missile-hit-plane-video>
According to Joustra, the passenger plane broke up mid-air. The cockpit and 
the floor of the business class tore away almost instantly from the main body 
and crashed. The rest of the plane continued flying for about five miles in an 
easterly direction, hitting the ground about a minute to a minuter and a half 
later. Debris was scattered over 50 sq km.

In a briefing on Tuesday morning to relatives of the victims, which took place 
in The Hague, Joustra said the passengers on board – two-thirds of whom were 
Dutch nationals – would have been unconscious within seconds.

The board had previously made clear its findings would not deal with blame and 
liability; a criminal investigation by the Dutch prosecutor’s office is 
scheduled to conclude in early 2016.
The flightpath of MH17 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/route_map-zip/giv-31114V5VbTdRuyHCX/>
Joustra said the Buk had been fired from a 320 sq km area of eastern Ukraine, 
the scene of a conflict between pro-Russia separatists backed by Moscow and 
Ukrainian government forces. He said “further forensic investigation” would be 
needed to determine the exact launch site.

The Netherlands, Ukraine and Russia had all carried out their own simulations 
into the missile’s probable trajectory.Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> was the only one of seven countries 
involved in the report’s preparation that dissented from its central 
conclusions, Joustra said, adding that Moscow believed “it was impossible to 
determine the type of missile or warhead with any certainty”.

It is widely assumed that Russia-backed separatists were responsible for 
bringing down MH17, but the US has stopped short of blaming Moscow directly. 
The Kremlin has blamed Kiev – variously suggesting that a Ukrainian military 
jet shot down the Boeing 777, or that a missile was launched from a 
government-held area.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Freconstruction-mh17-plane-wreckage-crash-unveiled-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444735926205%2FKP_538341_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malaysia%20Airlines%20MH17%20wreckage%20reconstruction%20unveiled%20by%20crash%20investigators%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Freconstruction-mh17-plane-wreckage-crash-unveiled-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malaysia%20Airlines%20MH17%20wreckage%20reconstruction%20unveiled%20by%20crash%20investigators%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Freconstruction-mh17-plane-wreckage-crash-unveiled-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444735926205%2FKP_538341_crop_640x360.jpg>
Malaysia Airlines MH17 wreckage reconstruction unveiled by crash investigators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/oct/13/reconstruction-mh17-plane-wreckage-crash-unveiled-video>
The Russian simulation includes areas under Ukrainian government control. The 
other simulations suggest the Buk was fired from separatist areas. Anopen 
source investigation by the website Bellingcat 
<https://www.bellingcat.com/tag/mh17/>, published last week, tracks the Buk 
from a Russian military base in Kursk. It was then smuggled across the 
Ukrainian border.


In Moscow, the makers of Buk missile systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/17/malaysian-airlines-plane-buk-missile>
, Almaz-Antey, gave a press conference on Tuesday morning, apparently to 
distract attention from the Dutch report.

The manufacturer said it had performed two experiments it says prove one of 
its missiles could not have been launched from areas under pro-Russia 
separatist control.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fflight-mh17-relatives-of-passengers-react-to-dutch-investigation-findings-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flight%20MH17%3A%20relatives%20of%20passengers%20react%20to%20Dutch%20investigation%20findings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fflight-mh17-relatives-of-passengers-react-to-dutch-investigation-findings-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flight%20MH17%3A%20relatives%20of%20passengers%20react%20to%20Dutch%20investigation%20findings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fflight-mh17-relatives-of-passengers-react-to-dutch-investigation-findings-video&media=>
 Relatives of passengers react to Dutch investigation findings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/oct/13/flight-mh17-relatives-of-passengers-react-to-dutch-investigation-findings-video>
The Dutch safety board report, published in English and Dutch, concedes that 
family members had to wait “an unnecessarily long period of time” for formal 
confirmation that their loved ones were dead. The Dutch authorities “lacked 
management and coordination”, he said.

The victims came from nine countries, including Malaysia and Australia, and 
with 10 victims from the UK.

Joustra also said there was a simple, “dispiriting” answer to the question: 
why was MH17 allowed to fly above eastern Ukraine? It had not occurred to 
anybody that the airspace was unsafe for civilian jets at cruising altitude, he 
said. This was despite 60 Ukrainian aircraft and helicopters had been downed 
since the start of the Russia-Ukraine conflict in spring 2014.

MH17 crash report: rival Dutch and Russian claims focus on Buk missile 
fragments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/mh17-crash-report-dutch-russian-claims-focus-buk-missile-fragments>
About 160 civilian planes flew over the area on the day of the disaster. Three 
were in “close proximity” when the Buk was fired, he said. Ukraine should have 
closed its airspace to civilian traffic, he added.





 