
Suffolk coast, December 9. There is a cold brittle-finger snap to the brisk 
south-easterly wind coming off the sea - woolly-hat weather - but it has not 
deterred the small group who, in almost surreal fashion, are playing out a 
cricket match. Crack. A leg-side hit by a young boy brings its own running 
commentary. ". . . And Freddie Flintoff hits Shane Warne for six more . . ." 
There are those who thought they would never live to see the day, but in this 
early-winter vignette of family recreational sporting life was encapsulated the 
legacy left by the most remarkable of all cricketing summers.

Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> captured the imagination 
of the public in a manner that hitherto could only be dreamed of. Matches were 
sold out and could have been many times over. Twenty thousand people set out to 
watch the final day of the third Test and were turned away, and the final Test 
at The Oval was anticipated like no match before in this country.

The incredible celebrations in an autumnal Trafalgar Square and the profile 
given to the England team and individuals since may have been nothing more than 
a memorable response to winning and the sheer drama that unfolded over the 
course of a couple of months - the national success in the most traditional of 
sporting rivalries, in other words, rather than a genuine rejuvenation of 
interest in cricket as a sport in its own right. Next summer may be revealing.

Lower down the chain, however, there is already anecdotal evidence that the 
game is indeed about to undergo a resurgence. Clubs and coaching courses for 
juniors are oversubscribed as never before and the increase in numbers of 
adults seeking coaching qualifications has been massive. Kit manufacturers have 
been overwhelmed by demand. In Billingshurst, where Joe Sillett turns out his 
Woodworm bats, it has been a constant struggle to keep up with demand for the 
sort of blade that Flintoff and Kevin Pietersen wielded to such effect. 
Already, advance ticket sales for next summer's Tests against Sri Lanka and 
Pakistan are exceeding even the most optimistic speculation. Flintoff's ghosted 
autobiography has flown from the shelves. A cricketer wins a reality dancing 
show. A loss on a demanding tour such as that just suffered in Pakistan cannot 
camouflage the fact that the Ashes series of 2005 was a watershed in the 
fortune and development of cricket in this country.

For sustained drama there has never been a series to match it. To sustain the 
level of competition over five matches in such a concentrated space of time, 
game after game to the limit, required remarkable levels of physical and mental 
stamina from both sides. For the most part it was a series played in a genuine 
spirit of sportsmanship in which quarter was neither given nor sought. 
Inflammatory incidents were few and, it has to be said, mostly instigated by 
England: Simon Jones's pick-up and wild throw that hit Matthew Hayden during a 
one-day match at Edgbaston - unacceptable behaviour in itself - and the 
subsequent unsavoury on-field spat were none the less used as a demonstration 
of the team's togetherness; Steve Harmison's first-over assault on Justin 
Langer at Lord's, and the lack of concern shown when the same bowler laid open 
Ricky Ponting's cheekbone added more fuel; the Australian captain's ire at 
perceived underhand tactics on getting run out by Gary Pratt, a substitute, at 
Trent Bridge, which even drew a smirk from the inscrutable Duncan Fletcher.

But set alongside the compassion shown in Birmingham by Flintoff in his moment 
of triumph for the drained, defeated but heroic Brett Lee it seems small beer. 
No other action perhaps in its history has demonstrated so publicly the 
embodiment of the spirit that is synonymous with cricket.

According to Matthew Hoggard that result at Edgbaston, coming as it did after 
the here-we-go-again thrashing in the first Test at Lord's, was the one that 
gained England the respect of their adversaries. After that they were able to 
compete as equals, a massive psychological shift: Australia don't do equals.

Even now, opinion is divided as to the true balance of power during the 
series. Australians have managed to airbrush the result as if the rubber had 
never existed and point only to their annihilation of the weak West Indies and 
England's hapless hop round Pakistan as signs that things are back to normal. 
Two more runs at Edgbaston, they say, and the stuffing would have gone from 
England. They were probably right. Three more wickets at Trent Bridge and the 
Ashes would have been retained.

Who knows what might have happened at The Oval had it been played to a 
conclusion or anyway if Shane Warne, the player of the summer who had almost 
single-handedly kept Australia in the contest, had held the catch that would 
have dismissed Pietersen while his historic innings was in its infancy. But 
deep down they know as well that such assessment is too simplistic.

That Australia got so tantalisingly close at Edgbaston was as much a function 
of fallible umpiring under pressure as anything. And even then they did not 
win. At Old Trafford, heavily rain affected, they were within one delivery of 
defeat and their subsequent celebration of the avoidance of such was used by 
England's captain Michael Vaughan as further motivation for his team. Trent 
Bridge was close but England battled through and in a full game might have won 
at The Oval as well. We should recognise that fortune smiled both ways: but 
with not too much further tilt in the balance towards England, Australia could 
have lost 4-1 and 3-1 would not have been unrealistic.

Where to start? It takes defeat - and often - to appreciate fully what it 
takes to win and ever since Allan Border's 1989 side regained the Ashes, 
Anglo-Australian contests have been largely one-sided. England have been 
demeaned and patronised in turn, forced to watch displays of arrogance towards 
them that bordered on disrespectful. In such a climate defeat becomes 
institutionalised.

The balance has slowly shifted as the Australian team began to age. Cracks 
appeared in the facade but there was little attention paid to repairs. 
Specifically the bowling attack, once without weakness, had begun to fall 
apart. England, meanwhile, under Nasser Hussain and Vaughan and guided by 
Fletcher's single-mindedness, had started to learn how to cope with tight 
situations and crucially had the nucleus of a sustainable, quality pace attack. 
And in Flintoff they had a talisman to provide the sort of focal point to their 
efforts supplied once by Ian Botham and then Darren Gough.

The first signs that England might no longer be the pushover of old came at 
Edgbaston towards the end of the 2004 season when, in the semi-final of the 
Champions Trophy, Steve Harmison's pace and bounce roughed up the bully-boy 
Hayden and forced him back into his crease from his habitual camp a yard down 
the pitch. If that warning sign was ignored then it was reinforced during the 
Twenty20 extravaganza at the Rose Bowl last July, a message sent out by Gough's 
hat-trick bouncer to Andrew Symonds and the extent to which England dismissed 
Australia's batsmen. Australia fobbed it off as inconsequential, but another 
point was made and the bandwagon of public support that was to sustain 
Vaughan's side through the coming months had started to trundle forwards.

Harmison's brutal bombardment of Langer on the first day of the series set out 
a stall for England, although the celebrations on dismissing Australia cheaply 
were premature. Glenn McGrath was irresistible, using the Lord's slope to his 
advantage as no other bowler in the world can. England lost their nerve. But in 
scheduling Lord's for the first Test - much criticised when the itinerary was 
published - the England and Wales Cricket Board had unwittingly helped England.

Hoggard for one had recognised that McGrath, mighty as he can be, is of an age 
where a series of such projected intensity might be an increasing struggle for 
ageing limbs. After Lord's, they reasoned, they had seen the best of McGrath 
and the spent force that was his partner Jason Gillespie.

What could not be foreseen was what happened an hour before a ball had even 
been bowled at Edgbaston. The errant pass with a rugby ball in the pre-match 
warm-up that led to McGrath turning his ankle on a stray cricket ball was a 
huge boost to England. But then Ponting and his advisors totally lost the plot.

With McGrath there was just a case for going against all advice and cashing in 
on England's fallibility by bowling first. With him out it was just feeble 
thinking to assume that Michael Kasprowicz could substitute adequately. The 
plan should have been changed; it was not and England enjoyed one of their most 
profitable opening days. Close the game may have been in the end, but Vaughan 
never let go. Flintoff's pyrotechnic batting and hostile bowling - no finer 
over was bowled all summer than that which removed Langer and Ponting to 
kickstart the decline in Australia's second innings - showed that after a slow 
start at Lord's he was starting to get the taste.

The force was with England now. Old Trafford brought Warne's 600th Test wicket 
and a defiant century from Ponting, but the batting of Vaughan and Andrew 
Strauss and Simon Jones's supercharged bowling put England in a position from 
which, but for the weather and an injury to Jones on the final day, they would 
have won again. Right at the end though, Harmison, who had flogged the final 
wicket from the Edgbaston pitch, managed only an insipid final over to 
Australia's last pair when it required supreme hostility.

At Trent Bridge, Flintoff's maiden Ashes hundred and more incendiary bowling 
from Jones saw Australia follow on for the first time in almost 17 years. 
England were to be left 129 to win and 8Â½ million people watched spellbound as 
Ashley Giles and Hoggard sneaked them home by three wickets after Warne had 
threatened to snatch the game from them.

And so to The Oval. For England a draw would suffice and there was bad weather 
forecast. The loss of Jones to an ankle problem meant no unchanged team for the 
series so they went for the belt-and-braces Paul Collingwood as replacement, 
the first sign of a backward step.

At the halfway stage it was level pegging, Australia having squandered the 
185-run opening stand between Hayden and Langer. The dingy weather helped 
England's cause - 134 overs lost to rain and bad light over the first four days 
- but that final day, which began with England 40 runs on, with nine wickets in 
hand but 98 overs possible, promised to be the most tense any of the side had 
experienced.

Few slept. Two moments turned the day. The first, a brilliant umpiring 
decision by Billy Bowden, deprived McGrath of a hat-trick and reprieved 
Pietersen first ball. The second came when the same batsman edged Lee to Warne 
at slip and the chance was spilled. Carpe diem. Pietersen seized the day, tore 
into Lee, and with Giles took match, series and Ashes from Australia.

It was not a series of perfect cricket for much of the batting on both sides 
was fallible to quality bowling. Brilliant catches were held but too many 
chances went begging. It was England's good fortune that their misses proved 
less costly. Vaughan enjoyed the sort of luck with the toss Steve Waugh and 
Mark Taylor used to have against England, winning the last three and being 
handed on a plate that at Edgbaston. Umpiring decisions tended to go their way, 
but by no means exclusively.

In the end England won because they were the better side, fought harder, were 
better prepared, understood reverse swing and just wanted it more. The years of 
hurt saw to that, retribution for all those who suffered in the past. And they 
will go to Australia next winter confident that, fitness permitting, they have 
an attack capable of dishing out more of the same to a side that was treading 
water in the pool of its own success and forgot how to swim.

Series by numbers

152

Number of wicketless balls bowled by Jason Gillespie before he finally took 
his first scalp of the series.

166

The series' highest innings, by England's captain Michael Vaughan in the Third 
Test at Old Trafford.

172

Total England Test dismissals by Shane Warne, right, who overtook Dennis 
Lillee's record en route to taking 40 wickets in five Tests.

240

The number of Red Stripe bottles (10 crates) delivered to England's dressing 
room at the end of the final Test.

23.2%

Channel 4's overall viewing share on the final day of the Ashes - the first 
time it was Britain's most watched channel across a whole day.
 