
• Click here for last night's results and scorers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2010/nov/02/matches> and here for the 
latest league tables <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=11&CPID=83>.

• The gulf between top and bottom of Division One grew wider last night. At 
the foot of the table, only three of the bottom ten teams avoided defeat, and 
two of those, Hartlepool United and Notts County, came courtesy ofan 
abandonment at The Vic following a deluge five minutes before kick off 
<http://www.journallive.co.uk/newcastle-sports/football-news/2010/11/03/hartlepool-s-hopes-of-home-win-hit-by-rain-61634-27590248/>
. Hartletpool's caretaker manager, Mick Wadsworth,told the club's website 
<http://www.hartlepoolunited.co.uk/page/NewsDetail/0,,10326~2205714,00.html>: 
"In thirty years of management and coaching I've never known a player seriously 
injured because of a wet pitch. The quality of the game suffers but I think 
football is about adaptability and dealing with the changing conditions." 
Depending upon when that match is rearranged, it could become a real relegation 
six pointer later in the season. The other lowly Division One team to avoid 
defeat wasPlymouth Argyle, who beat Bristol Rovers 3-1 with a pair from Bradley 
Wright-Phillips 
<http://www.thisisplymouth.co.uk/argyle/Argyle-win-home-Wright-Phillips-brace/article-2830626-detail/article.html>
.
• At the top of League One the top six - Brighton and Hove Albion, 
Huddersfield Town, Colchester United, Peterborough United, Charlton Athletic 
and Southampton - all won. More than 20,000 sawHuddersfield's 2-0 Yorkshire 
derby victory at Hillsborough 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/sport/Match-report-Sheffield-Wednesday-v.6610916.jp>
.

• There was another abandonment, in Division Two, where Cheltenham Town's 1-0 
lead against Southend United waswiped out by a fire in a fuse box which knocked 
out two of the four floodlights 
<http://www.southendunited-mad.co.uk/news/tmnw/shrimpers_match_abandoned_due_to_floodlight_failure_at_cheltenham_574996/index.shtml>
.

• Chesterfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> extended 
their lead at the top of Division Two with a 5-2 victory over Accrington 
Stanley. Second-placed Port Vale's problems in front of goal continued, but so 
did their watertight defence, leading to a 0-0 draw in the Staffordshire derby 
with Burton Albion. Bury missed a chance to go second, losing at home against 
Bradford City.

• In the commuter belt derby Stevenage won 3-0 at bottom club Barnet. Hereford 
United, continuing their recent unbeaten run, drew 2-2 with Aldershot.
Hereford's caretaker manager Jamie Pitman 
<http://www.hereford.vitalfootball.co.uk/article.asp?a=219542>, who was 
previously the physio, must be close to getting the job full-time after a run 
of two wins and three draws. Hereford's inability to win at home, however, 
continues to be a problem.

Have your say on all of last night's Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> action below ...
 