
The winner

Blazing skies across the UK and the two most-watched TV programmes of the year 
provided formidable alternatives to cinemagoing at the weekend. Box-office fell 
hard, especially on Sunday when the Murray-DjokovicWimbledon men's final peaked 
at 17.3m viewers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2013/jul/08/wimbledon-mens-final-bbc>. 
Murray's previous match, Friday's semi-final against Jerzy Janowicz, peaked at 
13.2m viewers.

Despicable Me 2 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155771/despicable-me-2> 
posted the smallest decline in the top 10 – down 60% from the previous weekend 
– for a 12-day cumulative total of £22.9m. That figure already puts the film 
ahead of the total lifetime gross of £20.2m for the original Despicable Me.

Despicable Me 2's decline compares unfavourably with many previous animated 
hits – Toy Story 3 fell just 29% in its second frame – although not many faced 
the particular challenges presented at the weekend. Based on the relative 
amounts grossed after two weekends of play and Toy Story 3's final figure, 
Despicable Me 2 now looks headed for £42m. But to achieve that total it will 
need to arrest its rate of decline, bringing it in line with Toy Story 3's 
gentle trajectory. Despicable Me 2 may receive a bump after schools break up 
for the summer holiday, althoughMonsters University 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155588/monsters-university> should 
provide significant competition when it arrives on Friday.

Despicable Me 2 is the eighth film to gross in excess of £20m so far this 
year, joining Les Misérables (£40.7m), Iron Man 3 (£36.9m), Man of Steel 
(£28.3m), The Croods (£26.2m), Star Trek Into Darkness (£25.7m), Fast & Furious 
6 (£25.1m) and Wreck-It Ralph (£23.8m). At this point last year, only six films 
– Avengers Assemble, Prometheus, The Hunger Games, Woman in Black, Men in Black 
3 and The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel – had reached the £20m milestone.

Despicable Me 2 has already overtaken the final gross for Disney Pixar's Brave 
(£22.2m) and is right behind WALL-E (£22.9m). Lifetime totals for numerous 
animated features have landed in the £20m-£25m range, and Despicable Me 2 will 
soon overtake Shark Tale, Madagascar 2, Wreck-It Ralph and Ratatouille.

The experiment

Generating significant advance publicity 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2013/jul/04/a-field-in-england-giving-away-the-plot>
 from the innovative nature of its release, Ben Wheatley'sA Field in England 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155966/field-in-england> surely scored 
highly on audience awareness metrics. Happily, the distribution partners on the 
film – Picturehouse, Film4 and 4DVD – have made an unprecedented amount of 
information available on the result, recognising industry interest in a bold 
experiment that saw the psychedelic English civil war genre trip arrive 
simultaneously in cinemas, on TV, on DVD and Blu-ray and video on demand. 
Theatrically, the film grossed £21,400 from 17 cinemas, although this was 
selected showtimes at each venue, and Picturehouse declares itself particularly 
pleased with the per-showtime number, especially given the tennis/sunshine 
factor, to say nothing of the competing platforms making the film available to 
its audience. The satellite-beamed premiere on Friday, which competed with the 
Murray-Janowicz match, grossed £10,800 from 14 screens – just over half the 
theatrical total. The exhibition market seems content: A Field in England 
retains 15 cinemas from this Friday.

On Film 4 on Friday night, the film attracted 288,000 viewers, which rises to 
357,000 when those who recorded and watched on Saturday and Sunday are added 
in, and 367,000 including those who watched on Monday. In industry jargon, 
these are part-consolidated figures; fully consolidated figures comprise seven 
days of viewings following transmission. This compares with a fully 
consolidated 345,000 viewers for Wheatley's Kill List when it premiered on 
Film4 last November. An earlier Wheatley film, Down Terrace, premiered on a BBC 
channel, and attracted a part-consolidated 76,000 viewers for its first Film4 
outing last Wednesday. Sightseers has yet to premiere.

DVD and Blu-ray sales over the weekend were relatively modest: 1,846 units 
sold. However during this period the disc was only available in HMV and on 
Amazon. The title hit the supermarket shelves on Monday, and has shipped over 
11,000 copies.

On video on demand, A Field in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-field-in-england> achieved a total of 1200 
transactions from Film4OD (to view) and itunes (to view or to own), and was the 
best-selling film of the week on the Film 4OD platform, from just three days' 
sales. Figures from other platforms including Virgin have yet to arrive.

All parties declare themselves happy with the numbers, although they are 
careful not to frame the context – it's a film that probably won't satisfy 
Wheatley's broadest audience – in ways that overly emphasise its intrinsic 
uncommerciality. Film4's own blog offers a fair assessment when it calls A 
Field in England "a film described by most critics as a psychedelic trip 
verging on the avant-garde" and "a low budget, independent film, which, had it 
not been for the additional buzz around the multiplatform release would have 
been released on around five screens".

The mainstream battle

Sandwiched between a weekend bringing Despicable Me 2 and another introducing 
Monsters University andPacific Rim 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jul/08/pacific-rim-review-guillermo-del 
-toro> to the market, and coinciding with the Wimbledon finals, the frame just 
ended did not attract any major blockbusters. The fallow session offered nimble 
distributors the chance to make a bigger splash with a medium-sized picture, 
and eOne will be plenty cheerful over £2.90m for magician caperNow You See Me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155486/now-you-see-me>, including £1.10m 
in previews. The ensemble picture lacked a major A-list star capable of 
delivering a guaranteed audience, so eOne sold a fun premise, plus names 
including Jesse Eisenberg, Isla Fisher, Mark Ruffalo, Woody Harrelson, Morgan 
Freeman and Michael Caine. It evidently added up to a more appealing package 
than rival offeringThe Internship 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155768/internship>, which reunited 
Wedding Crashers' Owen Wilson and Vince Vaughn. The fish-out-of-water buddy 
comedy opened on a so-so £1.25m including previews totaling £477,000. All these 
numbers would have been higher without the al fresco attractions of parks, 
gardens and barbecues.

Sofia Coppola's The Bling Ring 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154498/bling-ring>, landing in seventh 
place with £141,000 from 65 screens, achieved a screen average (£2,176) that's 
a little soft for a film in limited release, especially one garnering such 
widespread publicity for its real-life story, director and best-known cast 
element (Emma Watson). Tipping the film from the arthouse crowd into broader 
audiences that share the subjects' obsession with celebrity and fashion was 
always going to be a tricky challenge for skilful distributor StudioCanal.

The flops
 Fun in Fiji: rockers Status Quo in Bula Quo! 
Bula Quo! 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/jul/03/status-quo-action-movie-bula> – an 
action comedy featuring Status Quo witnessing a gang murder in Fiji – played on 
a bafflingly wide 166 screens, earning a predictably poor £26,000.

Gerard Butler's evident enjoyment of the Wimbledon final with pal Bradley 
Cooper presumably offered him comforting distraction from the opening number on 
his surf dramaChasing Mavericks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155974/chasing-mavericks>: £22,000 from 
108 cinemas. One of the biggest fallers – dropping from fifth to 20th place – 
was Jason Statham pictureHummingbird 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155967/hummingbird>, down 90% in takings 
from the previous weekend.

The future

After three successive weekends where numbers were well up on the year-ago 
equivalents, the frame just ended is 26% down on the same 2012 session, when 
The Amazing Spider-Man opened at the top with a previews-boosted £11.1m. 
Cinemas can reasonably hope for better from the coming weekend, when both 
Monsters University and Pacific Rim should enliven the market, and audiences 
may by then view sunny afternoons and warm evenings as slightly less-precious 
commodities. Also in the mix are Iain Softley'sTrap for Cinderella 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/156239/trap-for-cinderella> and Alex 
Gibney documentaryWe Steal Secrets: The Story of Wikileaks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jan/23/we-steal-secrets-wikileaks-review>.

Top 10 films

1. Despicable Me 2 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155771/despicable-me-2>, £3,996,837 from 
539 sites. Total: £22,914,407
 2. Now You See Me <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155486/now-you-see-me>
, £2,898,997 from 475 sites (New)
 3. The Internship <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155768/internship>, 
£1,248,431 from 409 sites (New)
 4. World War Z <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154512/world-war-z>, 
£837,347 from 485 sites. Total: £12,209,611
 5. Man of Steel <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148371/man-of-steel>, 
£802,763 from 471 sites. Total: £28,352,216
 6. This Is the End 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155492/this-is-the-end>, £502,946 from 
404 sites. Total: £3,028,722
 7. The Bling Ring <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154498/bling-ring>, 
£141,425 from 65 sites (New)
 8. Lootera <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/156092/lootera>, £69,153 
from 49 sites (New)
 9. Singam II, £65,806 from 14 sites (New)
 10. Behind the Candelabra 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154523/behind-the-candelabra>, £49,546 
from 149 sites. Total: £3,110,655

Other openers

Bula Quo! <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/156057>, 166 sites, £25,650
Chasing Mavericks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155974/chasing-mavericks>, 108 sites, 
£21,985
A Field in England 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155966/field-in-england>, 17 sites, 
£21,399
The Enigma of Kaspar Hauser 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/79532/enigma.of.kaspar.hauser>, 4 sites, 
£3,406 (rerelease)
Pussy Riot: A Punk Prayer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155522/pussy-riot>, 3 sites, £1,881
Paradise: Faith <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155692/paradise>, 4 
sites, £1,784
Out in the Dark <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/153656/out-in-the-dark>, 
2 sites, £1,577
 The Wall, 3 sites, £1,244
Paris-Manhattan <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150138/paris-manhattan>, 
3 sites, £1,201

Thanks to Rentrak
 