
Farce is in the ascendant right now. We've just had Feydeau's A Little Hotel 
on the Side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/22/little-hotel-on-the-side-review> 
in Bath,Ben Travers's Thark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/27/thark-review> is running in 
Finsbury Park andTerry Johnson's Hysteria is about to be revived 
<http://www.hampsteadtheatre.com/whats-on/2013/hysteria/> at Hampstead theatre.

For those of us who love farce and think A Comedy of Errors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/30/comedy-of-errors-theatre-review> 
every bit as good a play as King Lear, this is excellent news. But there are 
clearly others who regard farce as a vaguely inhuman or sexist sub-genre.

I was certainly given pause for thought after reading Fiona Mountford's review 
of Thark 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/theatre/thark-park-theatre-theatre-review-8785483.html>
 in the London Evening Standard. She objected not merely to stereotypes where 
the men are "priapic schemers" and the women are either "shrill battleaxes" or 
"ditzy bimbos". She also suggested that many other women critics shared her 
views and implied that farce was a specifically masculine preoccupation. Could 
this, I guiltily wondered, be true?

My first thought was that the heated division about farce has more to do with 
generation than gender. One of the fiercest champions of the genre wasPenelope 
Gilliatt 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1993/05/11/obituaries/penelope-gilliatt-61-film-critic-and-writer-for-the-new-yorker.html>
, who wrote about film and theatre for the Observer and the New Yorker in the 
1960s and 70s. In her brilliant book, Unholy Fools, which deals with "wits, 
comics, disturbers of the peace", Gilliatt devotes a whole section to farce, 
writing: "the world of archetypes that … Travers creates, the browbeaten 
husbands and dithering fiances and suspicious critical matriarchs called Bone 
or Twine, is mysteriously ripe and timeless".
 Antony Sher plays Sigmund Freud in Terry Johnson's Hysteria, soon to be 
revived at Hampstead theatre in London. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
The key word there is "archetypes". I readily concede that farce doesn't deal 
with human character at its subtlest or most refined. What it does, from 
Plautus onwards, is propel stock figures into a living nightmare of mistaken 
identities, thwarted lusts and spiralling invention. While the protagonists are 
often rantipole males, that doesn't make the genre automatically sexist: it is 
the men who lose their dignity and their trousers while the women 
conventionally preserve the proprieties.

And even the fact that men have mostly written farce is now happily under 
threat: Catherine Johnson in Dead Sheep and Shang-a-Lang, both originating at 
the Bush, showed a keen appetite for the genre.

I defend farce on two grounds. The first is that, to borrow a phrase I've 
frequently quoted fromEric Bentley 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/61180/Eric-Bentley>'s The Life of 
the Drama, it is "the quintessence of theatre". Its starting point is the 
actor's body and its culmination is a universal milling around in which chaos 
descends. My favourite moment in all farce is in Feydeau's Le Dindon when an 
aged doctor and his stone-deaf wife retire to their hotel bed, unaware that 
alarm bells have been secreted under their mattress, and find their peace 
violently shattered by a succession of intruders on the look-out for adulterous 
hanky-panky. That reminds me of Jonathan Lynn's description of farce as "the 
worst day of your life". Or, in this case, the worst night.

My other line of defence is that farce is an infinitely flexible form. If it 
achieved a new status in Britain in the 1960s, it was partly because of 
Bentley's intellectual advocacy and partly becauseComédie-Française 
<http://www.comedie-francaise.fr/> touched down in London with its superlative 
productions of Feydeau <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dAtEqPXerJ4>.

But British dramatists quickly showed the elasticity of the genre. Peter 
Shaffer's BlackComedy <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> (in 1965) 
breathakingly shows characters stumbling around a fully-lit stage during a 
supposed power-cut and, in the process, reveals their true selves. Joe Orton's 
What the Butler Saw (1968) uses all the stock ingredients of farce to question 
rigid definitions of sanity and gender. And Michael Frayn's Noises Off (1982), 
the most dazzling of modern farces, is more than a sustained joke about a 
stumbling rep company doing a play that goes to pieces. Like all of Frayn's 
work, it is about the thin line between order and chaos.

The list of modern British dramatists who've exploited the basic ingredients 
of the genre is a long one: Alan Bennett inHabeas Corpus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/jul/15/theatre>, Caryl Churchill in 
Cloud Nine <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/nov/02/theatre>, Alan 
Ayckbourn inBedroom Farce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/apr/04/bedroom-farce-review>, Terry 
Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/terryjohnson> in Hysteria and Dead 
Funny are just a few of the playwrights who've used it to express their 
distinctive views of the world. Farce, in short, is an extremely obliging form, 
and one we should fight to preserve.

Of course, one could dig up duff, dated examples that find foreigners and gay 
men funny. But, at its best, farce makes us laugh uncontrollably while showing 
human beings reduced to a state of desperation. Which is, after all, what drama 
is all about.
 