
There are two kinds of prophets: Cassandras and charlatans.

This is important because people are talking once again about AOL’s “digital 
prophet,” David Shing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/11/who-is-shingy-aols-digital-prophet>
. Shingy, as he’s exclusively known, rose to prominence earlier this year when 
heappeared on MSNBC <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9L6M-1_VGK4> and the 
vision of his hair fascinated the internet. (It’s a sort of mad ruff like the
Centauri 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=babylon+five+centauri&es_sm=91&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=0GxiVNWpL5PesASWo4K4Ag&ved=0CB8QsAQ&biw=1160&bih=596>
 on Babylon Five.) He has now reentered the public’s collective consciousness 
thanks toa story in this week’s New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/11/17/crystal-ball-3?intcid=mod-most-popular>
 – which, full disclosure, was written by my cousin, whom I had the pleasure of 
seeing attempt to explain Shingy to our 90-year-old grandma. From the story, 
it’s clear that Shingy’s job as a “prophet” involves quite literally 
rearranging deck chairs on AOL’s Titanic: He recently “rebooted” CEO Tim 
Armstrong’s office by replacing the desk with chairs, creating a future-forward 
environment in which, Armstrong says, “people don’t know where to sit”.

Perhaps the most memorable moment is when Shingy, who describes his job as “I 
fly around the world and go to conferences”, shows theAOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> chief marketing officer “a cartoon 
he had drawn of a bear wearing zebra-print pants and a shirt covered in ones 
and zeros”. “Love it, love it, love it,” she says. “I’m thinking of the bears 
more as a metaphor.” Your digital prophet at work, ladies and gents.

The internet’s initial takeaway from the current round of Shingy saturation is 
that, as a friend put it, “the man is a pulsar of bullshit”. But I’m not sure 
that’s entirely Shingy’s fault. Yes, he could be cynically preying on a company 
with revenues and subscriber numbers that have beentumbling 
<http://mashable.com/2013/05/09/netflix-aol-chart/> steadily for a decade – or 
maybe he’s just a genuine oddball who’s found the holy grail, a way to get paid 
six figures without really working. Either way, the real problem with Shingy’s 
propheteering is the tech world’s propensity for magical thinking and its 
hunger for oracles.

If you’re working – or even participating as a user – in an industry that’s 
hurtling forward at the speed ofMoore’s Law <http://www.mooreslaw.org/>, it’s 
very comforting to tell yourself that you can predict what’s around the next 
bend. Unfortunately, when it comes to technology, we’re notoriously bad at 
predicting the future. Remember that time the chairman of IBM said there would 
only be a market for five computers in the world, or when a Fox studio exec 
said televisions were a flash in the pan, or Time and Fortune and the New York 
Times and the Boston Globe and Financial Times all agreed that Apple was 
doomed? It’s OK if you don’t, becausethe internet remembers for you 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/pogue-all-time-worst-tech-predictions/>
 – despite the inventor of Ethernet’s prediction that the internet would 
“catastrophically collapse” by 1996.

The one constant of the future is that the future is slippery. Today’s big 
joke is tomorrow’s irreplaceable utility – ask anyone who scoffed at Twitter as 
a mere engine for broadcasting what you ate for lunch. And of course, today’s 
massive, secretive, world-changing project is tomorrow’sSegway 
<http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/11.03/segway_pr.html>.

Consistently, the only people who end up being right about the future are the 
ones shouting warnings at us not to repeat the past – and who, of course, are 
roundly ignored. These Cassandras could have told you about Snapchats not being
as secret as you thought 
<http://mashable.com/2014/10/13/the-snappening-photos-videos-posted/>, or hotel 
Wi-Fi beingvulnerable to attack 
<http://www.wired.com/2014/11/darkhotel-malware/>, or Facebook’s troubling 
real-name policy 
<http://online.wsj.com/articles/facebook-changes-real-name-policy-after-uproar-from-drag-queens-1412223040>
. In fact, theywere telling you, but you weren’t listening.

And if you’re AOL, you couldn’t be bothered to listen because you were 
following a prophet of your own. He was offering an optimistic, if confusing, 
future. He wasn’t a Cassandra. And, well, there are only two kinds.


Of course, part of the frenzied fascination with Shingy comes from a tiny pang 
of worry that he’ll prove himself a Cassandra after all. What if he’s right? 
What if the future of tech really isa bear with zebra pants 
<http://www.vox.com/2014/11/11/7190579/shingy-bear>? Maybe we just can’t or 
don’t want to buy into his vision. Mostly, people seem to be amazed at the 
chutzpah it takes to command a six-figure salary in exchange for having weird 
hair and drawing cartoons. Shingy, they reason, must be a master con artist. 
But like most charlatans, the “digital prophet” got to where he is because 
confused people are desperate for the comfort of a magical protector.

It’s become a running joke that job announcements for tech startups sound like 
someone putting together a D&D campaign – “wizard,” “guru,” “ninja”. It all 
contributes to the image of tech as a magical field, unapproachable by mere 
mortals. AOL’s self-styled “prophet” is just an extension of that idea. Not 
even his employer candescribe his job 
<http://www.details.com/culture-trends/celebrities/201412/shingy-aol-digital-prophet-interview?currentPage=2>
, but it doesn’t matter. Work is for Muggles. The prophet is a conduit for 
something mysterious and conveniently non-replicable. You can’t major in 
prophesying. It’s not a professional certification, and there are no enrichment 
classes. Prophecy is a gift bestowed upon you, and only you.

This mystification does a lot for Shingy and his ilk, but it hasn’t done a lot 
for AOL. The real vision of the future comes from the Cassandras – because 
they’ve witnessed and learned from the past. To see what’s coming, you don’t 
need a mystical gift, you just have to listen to the doomsayers. They’ve seen 
it all before.

When a company like AOL employs a “prophet”, it’s implying that its job is to 
outfit an uncertain future. That’s fine – but it also implies that this 
uncertainty can only be divined by a soothsayer, someone who can access 
precognitive knowledge that’s blocked from the average person’s view. That’s 
plain mumbo-jumbo, pure bears-in-pants stuff. And it may prevent the company 
from actually seeing what’s going on under its nose.

And when a company employs a “prophet” with a robust, quirky public image 
whose job it can’t describe? Well, it might not have a Cassandra on its hands.
 