
Avatar, James Cameron's blockbusting fable of space colonialism and 
interspecies romance, isbeing adapted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/30/avatar-james-cameron-cirque-du-soleil-show>
 into a Cirque du Soleil show, which will in no way look like a cosplay 
convention bankrolled by a bored fetishist playboy. Cirque has previously 
hosted such crossover successes as Love, which asserted that the Beatles' 
indelible expressions of universal human emotion lacked trampolines, so it's a 
pretty good fit. But Broadway and the West End are littered with the ghosts 
(and indeed Ghost) of stage adaptations of films that really should have been 
left on celluloid, of which these are merely the least insane.

Carrie
 The 2013 film version of Carrie, sadly without pig sacrifice scene. 
Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Stephen King's terrifyingly tense psychodrama, where the body horror of female 
adolescence is turned violently outward, was haemoglobically visualised with 
Sissy Spacek in 1976 and again in 2013. And what better subject than bullying 
and self-hatred to pack in the Broadway coach parties – especially if you 
inexplicably tailor the high school costumes to reference ancient Greece, 
complete with togas and studded leather, and include a pig-sacrifice scene 
(libretto sample: "It's a simple little gig / You help me kill a pig"). The 
composer Michael Goresaid 
<http://www.playbill.com/features/article/160348-Anatomy-of-a-Murdered-Show-Creators-of-Carrie-Talk-About-Musicals-Second-Coming/pg2>
 of the show's costly 1988 transfer to Broadway from the UK: "Every area, 
actually, did not resemble what we had in mind." The show's producer, spooked 
by a bad review, absconded and forced a closure after five performances.

Road House

The film featured Patrick Swayze, who as an alumnus of Ghost and Dirty Dancing 
is a reliable touchstone of stage transferral. But the movie Road House is a 
much tougher beast. The tale of a bouncer at a hick nightclub whose patrons' 
hearts are as stonewashed as their denim, dialogue includes the likes of "I 
used to fuck guys like you in prison!" So it's probably for the best that 
rather than a serious megabucks stage show, it became a tongue-in-cheek 
off-Broadway production called Road House: The Stage Version of the Cinema 
Classic That Starred Patrick Swayze, Except This One Stars Taimak from the 80s 
Cult Classic The Last Dragon Wearing A Blonde Mullet Wig.

Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark
 The apparently Rilkian Spider-Man: Turn Off The Dark. Photograph: Jessica 
Rinaldi/Reuters 
From its title that sounds like a toddler having night terrors to its tortuous 
182-performance preview period, the Spider-Man musical was on the back foot 
even before it opened. Bono, who wrote the music, cast the usual travails of 
chirpsing Mary Jane and battling the Green Goblin as high culture,saying 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/article/books-and-arts/art/magazine/81393/excellent-new-art>
 the show was working in the same realm as "Rilke, Blake, Wings of Desire, Roy 
Lichtenstein, the Ramones." In reality it was some people dicking about on high 
wires, and even that didn't work – after several injuries to actors, the show 
was hit with a workplace safety violation. It cost $75m, and is currently in 
limbo between New York and Vegas.

Big

As this parish's Hadley Freeman noted on her blog 
<http://hadleyfreeman.com/2013/02/24/big/>, Big is a really weird film. In a 
high concept that could have only happened in the 80s, a 13-year-old boy 
becomes an adult overnight thanks to a wish. He has a relationship with a 
30-year-old woman, before reverting back to his childhood self; everyone 
remains un-freaked out by the sexual duplicity. So Big: The Musical, its story 
already requiring you to suspend your disbelief, then requires you to 
positively catapult it as the characters also break into song. It's the sort of 
thing future civilisations will base entire academic departments around trying 
to understand.

Back to the Future
 Back to the Future, soon with added jazz hands. Photograph: Ronald Grant 
Archive 
A Back to the Future musical is currently in development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/31/back-to-the-future-musical>, 
putting on stage the story of Marty McFly's efforts to reroute a badly 
compromised space-time continuum with the songcraft of Chuck Berry. Scored by 
Forrest Gump and Avengers composer Alan Silvestri along with songwriter Glen 
Ballard, who wrote the songs for Ghost, it could be way more sentimental than 
it should. But the sight of a bug-eyed Doc Brown stalking the stage barking 
rhyming couplets about Libyan terrorism will surely be too good to pass up.
 