
It’s 2014, but flipping hell, clamshell phones appear to be making a comeback. 
Anna Wintour <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour>, 
editor-in-chief of American Vogue, was spotted with a flip phone during this 
summer’sUS Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/usopentennis>, as was Rihanna
 <http://s3.r29static.com/bin/entry/2bf/x,80/1327271/opener-28.jpg> in recent 
months.

Iggy Pop <https://www.theguardian.com/music/iggy-pop> has gone on record as 
saying he owns a flip phone. And it’s not just that people are rooting around 
in chest of drawers and pulling out old models – we all have backup phones 
after all – but current flip phones are stillavailable 
<http://www.phonerated.com/top-rated-best-overall-flip-phones-global> to 
purchase, andnew ones 
<http://www.techradar.com/news/phone-and-communications/samsung-and-at-t-are-launching-a-rugged-new-flip-phone-soon-1267976>
 are even in production.

It might seem strange that anyone would want to trade in a smartphone for a 
standard feature phone, but I can understand the appeal of clamshell phones.

Despite the fact that I’ve been a fully paid-up member of the iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> club since I first bought a 3G, 
I still hanker after a clamshell. Just like an occasional longing for an ex, I 
know that a flip phone could never meet my needs after all this time, but I 
can’t help but remember the good times.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F05%2Fiphone-samsung-galaxy-flip-phone-is-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417787037643%2F2c965302-94f8-4e68-898a-1e1f23f5bfa6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20Apple's%20iPhone%20and%20Samsung's%20Galaxy%2C%20the%20humble%20flip%20phone%20is%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F05%2Fiphone-samsung-galaxy-flip-phone-is-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20Apple%27s%20iPhone%20and%20Samsung%27s%20Galaxy%2C%20the%20humble%20flip%20phone%20is%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F05%2Fiphone-samsung-galaxy-flip-phone-is-back%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417787037643%2F2c965302-94f8-4e68-898a-1e1f23f5bfa6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anna Wintour, editor-in-chief of American Vogue, on her flip phone. 
Photograph: Alessandro Garofalo/Reuters 
A flip phone made me (erroneously) feel important in the way a non flip 
cannot. There was nothing more satisfying than the snap of the lid. It could 
speak of many things – purpose, annoyance, satisfaction. It was the perfect 
endpoint to a conversation, an onomatopoeic full-stop.

So even though I owned the rather quirky and fun Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> A300 
<http://hamariweb.com/mobiles/LargeImages/549_01.jpg> (the “washing machine” 
phone) and its successor, theS300 
<http://telecentremagazine.net/images/9/90/Samsung_S300.jpg>, as a schoolgirl, 
I soon moved on to the MotorolaRazr 
<http://i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/02458/7-razr-v3_2458920a_2458999k.jpg>
. I felt like a high-powered, sassy lawyer. Namely,Ally McBeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/apr/20/marklawson>. 

When flip phones graduated to colour and external screens on the lids, they 
became even more popular.

It’s interesting that the latest must-have models, such as the iPhone 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-6>, Blackberry Passport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/24/blackberry-launches-passport-smartphone>
,Google Nexus 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/05/google-nexus-6-review-lollipop-android-motorola-samsung>
 andSamsung Galaxy Note 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/15/samsung-galaxy-note-4-review-phablet-android-fingerprint-stylus>
 are getting bigger and bigger: it’s all about screen size and functional 
keyboards.

Back in the early 2000s, status was secured by having a device so small as to 
be almost invisible to the naked eye.

Clearly however, others feel the same way as I do, as aside from the celeb 
take up of actual flip phones, covers to disguise iPhones as flip phones are
buyable 
<http://www.ebay.co.uk/itm/Thumbs-Up-Retro-iPhone-4-4S-Case-90s-Motorola-StarTAC-Style-Cover-Flip-Case-/111352713849?pt=UK_MobilePhones_MobilePhonesCasesPouches&hash=item19ed239279>
.

I probably wouldn’t use a clamshell now, because I’m too attached to 
smartphones, with their abundance of apps and super-fast internet connection.


But there’s no doubt that flip phones are cheaper, often more durable, have a 
much better battery life and can fit in a jeans pocket (plus they don’t bend;
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> we’re looking at you).

The lid also means there’s never an opportunity to pocket call, otherwise 
known as the butt dial.

Celebrities have apparently taken to using them as a result of recent hacking 
scandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/01/nude-photos-of-jennifer-lawrence-and-others-posted-online-by-alleged-hacker>
 such as “The Fappening”. Although it’s debatable whether feature phones are 
actually all that more secure, given that most also have internet access and 
GPS functions.

Either way, flip phones are having a resurgence. File alongside cassette 
tapes, typewriters and film cameras.

• Clip Art is dead: five things we miss from 90s tech  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/05/clip-art-90s-tech-game-boy-tamagotchi>

• Google Nexus 6 review: big is beautiful, but not manageable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/05/google-nexus-6-review-lollipop-android-motorola-samsung>

• Samsung Galaxy Note 4 review: big, powerful and Samsung’s best yet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/15/samsung-galaxy-note-4-review-phablet-android-fingerprint-stylus>

• Apple iPhone 6 Plus review: it’s a very big phone and it feels great 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/17/review-iphone-6-plus-apple>
 