
Quality period costume drama is back on the BBC. Not just in War and Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/04/war-and-peace-deutschland-83-review>
, but now the return of what I would argue is the best of them all: the 1974 
seriesThe Pallisers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b043l0yx>, which has just 
started at lunchtimes on BBC2. (It’s not available on iPlayer, but if you want 
to catch up with the first couple of episodes, you can find them on YouTube.)

It is a dramatisation of six novels by Anthony Trollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonytrollope>, telling the story of 
Plantagenet Palliser, a rather austere and scrupulously honest Liberal 
politician, his vivacious wife, Lady Glencora, and their relatives and 
associates. It isn’t as dry as it sounds, involving a jewel theft, a murder, 
tortuous love affairs and much political intrigue.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> made 26 episodes, and watching 
them again reminds us how different television dramas were in the 1970s, and 
how much more enjoyable they are than most of today’s productions. Unlike, for 
example, Jamaica Inn, you can hear every word. The actors, of the Olivier 
school rather than today’s more realist style, all enunciate their lines 
properly. There are no clever camera angles to make us dizzy, and scenes last 
longer than 30 seconds.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxRcnU5B-bu0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxRcnU5B-bu0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxRcnU5B-bu0&media=>
The leading characters are nuanced – neither wholly good or wholly bad – and 
it’s not easy to predict how they will behave. One of the most memorable scenes 
is when Burgo Fitzgerald, who is love with Lady Glencora, but heavily in debt, 
is approached by a woman beggar in the street. Burgo is a bit of a waster who 
drinks too much. We expect him to brush the lady aside. When the lady says she 
has nothing he replies: “I’m a deal poorer, my girl. You have nothing; I have 
£30,000 worse than nothing.” But he reaches into his pocket and gives the woman 
a coin. “Will that get you a bed and a meal?” he asks. “I wish that I might see 
you again because you are so good and beautiful,” replies the beggar. Burgo 
walks off tipping his hat to the lady. It’s a very touching scene played with 
great tenderness, and without the expected emotional signposts.

War and Peace recap episode four: doom with a view
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/24/war-and-peace-recap-episode-four-doom-with-a-view>
There are great performances, and the dialogue is superior to what we hear in 
the average television drama today – even if modern audiences might find some 
of it stiff or unrealistic. Palliser is described as having “brains, ideas, an 
unshakeable application and impenetrable probity. But if only he could be a 
little sweeter”. In part two, George Vavasor is discussing mountaineering with 
his cousin Alice in Switzerland: “The Matterhorn can have no mystery for a man 
who’s been up it a dozen times. It’s like going behind the scenes at a ballet, 
or making a conjuror explain his tricks … To come too close to the mountains is 
to destroy their magic.” George is unreliable and disreputable, but he’s a 
philosopher too.

Of course, in a series lasting more than 21 hours, there are inevitably some 
flat moments – and the fake backdrops for Switzerland may also raise a snigger. 
But if The Pallisers was remade today, I doubt if it would be as good. Trollope 
himself said that a novel “should give a picture of common life enlivened by 
humour and sweetened by pathos”. There are arguments in The Pallisers, and 
plenty of sadness, but there is laughter and even euphoria too, just as in real 
life. By contrast, too much of modern drama is so unnecessarily dark and 
miserable – The Village, Broadchurch, Southcliffe, Happy Valley, Luther and so 
on – that it becomes unrealistic.

The Pallisers stands as a reminder of how satisfying television drama can be 
when writers, producers and directors concentrate on emotion instead of 
editing, and don’t underestimate their audience. Amid the Doctors and Loose 
Women of the lunchtime schedules, it is a magnificent gem.

 