
In the last few weeks ABC management has sliced off several areas of 
specialist content including the television science team on Catalyst, the 
four-hour religious program Sunday Nights with John Cleary and all but one of 
Radio National’s music programs. It has also reduced the output of RN’s 
award-winning documentary features unit, including Earshot. The staff cuts add 
up to at least 20 full-time specialist ABC staff plus contracted casuals. 
Disappearing from the RN schedule next year are The Inside Sleeve, The Live 
Set, The Daily Planet, The Rhythm Divine and Jazztrack. Other non-music shows 
to go are Soundproof, PocketDocs, Afternoons with Michael Mackenzie, The Body 
Sphere and TV Club.After Guardian Australia reported the pending cuts on 
Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/radio-national-to-lose-eight-staff-as-abc-cuts-several-programs-from-2017-schedule>
, the ABC confirmed conservative commentator and IPA adjunct fellow Tom Switzer 
had been given a second program – in addition to Between the Lines – and would 
replace Jonathan Green as host of Sunday Extra. Green is taking over Blueprint 
for Living.

Also losing a gig is Ellen Fanning who won’t be hosting Life Matters in 2017 
<https://radio.press.abc.net.au/ideas-network-rn-announces-2017-lineup>. 
Fanning has been replaced by Amanda Smith and the program’s focus is going to 
be narrower, specialising in family and parenting issues rather than wider 
social and political themes.

Joining the ABC next year is the former News Corp Australia chief executive 
Kim Williams 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/whatkeepsmeawake/kim-williams-on-the-state-of-education/7901926>
, who will host a show called What Keeps Me Awake. Williams applied to succeed 
Mark Scott as ABC’s managing director but lost out to Michelle Guthrie. The 
former Seven news reader Chris Bath has been given the evening slot on local 
radio in New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory, replacing 
Christine Anu. Anu is moving to a weekend slot.

The strategy behind these changes remains unclear, but the ABC’s director of 
radio, Michael Mason, did tell staff it was about attracting a bigger audience: 
“I want new audiences who are not currently experiencing RN content to discover 
it, and for us to build a stronger platform for the network in an environment 
of greater media choice and fragmentation.”

The ABC staff unions – the Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance and the 
Community and Public Sector Union – are thrown by yet another round of job 
losses, and are asking Guthrie why she said at Senate estimates last month 
there would be no redundancies. “The proposal appears at odds with recent 
assurances given by Guthrie to federal senators that no programming changes at 
RN were being considered,” the MEAA said.

Meanwhile there are new pleas to overturn the axing of the weekly science 
program Catalyst, with the astrophysicist Prof Paul Davies and the mammalogist 
and climate change expert Prof Tim Flannery just two of the64 eminent 
scientists who have petitioned Guthrie 
<http://handsoffourabc.org.au/handsoffourabc/ABC-science/> on her decision to 
sack the Catalyst team.

Guts, but no glory

Paul McGeough, the chief foreign correspondent for the Sydney Morning Herald, 
was closer than most Australian journalists to the action of the US election 
campaign. Based in Washington, the seasoned reporterhad watched the contest 
unfold and his “gut feel” told him Republican candidate Donald Trump would lose 
<http://www.smh.com.au/world/us-election/donald-trump-will-not-win-the-the-us-election-worse-still-hell-be-a-sore-loser-20161107-gska1r.html>
. So confident was McGeough of a Trump defeat he led his column on the eve of 
the election with the unequivocal prediction: “On Wednesday, Americans will 
awake from a nightmare. Donald Trump will not be their president.” No room to 
move there. Of course, McGeough is not alone in making a goose of himself over 
the surprising result. But 10 days later his Twitter account hadn’t been 
updated and was still leading with his confident prediction.
paul mcgeough (@paulmcgeough) 
Donald Trump will not win the US election, worst still, he'll be a sore loser 
https://t.co/UWZTssFavw <https://t.co/UWZTssFavw> via @smh 
<https://twitter.com/smh>
 <https://twitter.com/paulmcgeough/status/795793897091907584> November 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/paulmcgeough/status/795793897091907584> 


ABC backs Uhlmann over blackout complaints 

When the ABC’s political editor, Chris Uhlmann, went to air after the South 
Australian blackout and said 40% of the state’s power was wind generated and 
“that has the problem of being intermittent” he annoyed a lot of people. Along 
with his online piece on the same day that warned that if wind energy went 
unchecked “the entire nation might go to black”, Uhlmann’s commentary attracted 
at least 180 complaints from the audience. Several commentators also criticised 
him.Uhlmann hit back, calling them the “pitchfork crowd” and a “vigilante mob” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/15/abcs-chris-uhlmann-says-he-is-standing-up-to-vigilante-mob-try-criticised-for-bias-by-online-vigilantes-on-the-left-and-right>
. It’s a month later and the ABC is standing by its man. The ABC’s independent 
umpire, Audience and Consumer Affairs, hasinvestigated Uhlmann’s coverage of 
the power outage and concluded that he did not breach the ABC’s editorial 
standards <http://about.abc.net.au/reports-publications/code-of-practice/>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fformer-news-corp-ceo-wins-radio-national-slot-as-full-abc-cuts-revealed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bd411eba026f507f7f1573b0b82dc80c91ac5b3%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Former%20News%20Corp%20CEO%20wins%20Radio%20National%20slot%20as%20full%20ABC%20cuts%20revealed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fformer-news-corp-ceo-wins-radio-national-slot-as-full-abc-cuts-revealed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Former%20News%20Corp%20CEO%20wins%20Radio%20National%20slot%20as%20full%20ABC%20cuts%20revealed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fformer-news-corp-ceo-wins-radio-national-slot-as-full-abc-cuts-revealed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bd411eba026f507f7f1573b0b82dc80c91ac5b3%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Chris Uhlmann at the leaders’ debate in May. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the 
Guardian 
While the unit’s reports are not made public, one of the many complainants 
sent his response from the umpire to Weekly Beast so we can share it with you. 
The report said Uhlmann’s live interview with Senator Nick Xenophon on ABC News 
24 on 28 September was assessed against two requirements of the code – that 
material facts were accurate and presented in context and that news was 
presented with due impartiality. “Given the unique nature of South Australia’s 
power generation mix, it was appropriate for Mr Uhlmann to question whether the 
state’s heavy reliance on wind turbines might have increased the risk of a 
state-wide blackout,” the report concluded.

Mind the cut and paste 

The Australian has excelled itself in its latest attack on the ABC. In trying 
to pin ABC journalists as biased against Trump, the Oz even doctored one of 
Annabel Crabb’s tweets. The ABC’s chief online political writer had made a 
moderately lewd joke around the pussy-grabbing theme. But when reporters Darren 
Davidson and Sam Buckingham-Jones used Crabb’s tweet as evidence of their 
thesis they edited out her pussy joke to make it look like she was just being 
critical of Trump. The Australian: “Crabb wrote in mid-October: ‘Donald Trump 
makes his first post-debate appearance …. Where is the off switch for this 
campaign’.”


 Buckingham-Jones was also the reporter behind a story about the ABC News 
Breakfast co-host Virginia Trioli which blasted the presenter for saying 
Trump’s supporters needed an IQ test. Only the quote was completely wrong. 
Trioli: “Do you know there are people on Twitter this morning, and they’re 
deadly serious, who believe that I am formally spruiking here for Donald Trump 
to win? I mean you want to subject them to an IQ test, don’t you … And they’re 
serious.” Trioli was clearly saying that it was ridiculous to say she was 
spruiking for Trump. So how did they get it so wrong? Well, as is so often the 
case these days, the story was lifted from the New Daily which was first to 
wrongly report it.

It was picked up by the Oz and the Daily Mail, complete with the wrong quote. 
After hundreds of angry comments about Trioli were posted the websites, 
including the Oz, had to correct their stories. “An earlier version of this 
story reported Trioli had said Trump supporters needed to be subjected to an IQ 
test. The Australian has since learned that this was incorrect.”

Professor Westy has the last laugh

Earlier in the year the journalistic community was shocked when the Sydney 
Morning Herald top brass Greg Hywood (the $2.7m man), Sean Aylmer and Darren 
Goodsir chose to make the talented investigative business journalist Michael 
West forcibly redundant, one of several after they failed to get enough people 
to put up their hands.

Dozens of experienced Fairfax journalists have been shown the door in the past 
few years as the company focuses less on investigative journalism and more on 
maximising clicks on its digital platforms. West quickly made it public he had 
been sacked. “Last day today. Told my skill-set not aligned with Fairfax 
strategy going forward. #sacked”.

Just six months later West has established his own successful investigative 
journalism website <http://www.michaelwest.com.au/> focusing on investigations 
into big business, particularly multinational tax avoidance and the energy 
sector. This week “Westy”, as he is known, has become an honorary professor at 
the University of Sydney. As adjunct associate professor,Westy will be doing 
research with the Sydney Democracy Network <http://sydney.edu.au/arts/sdn/>, an 
initiative of the school of social and political sciences in the faculty of 
arts and social sciences. “I refuse to confirm or deny the speculation that the 
only people who will be required to use the appellation ‘professor’ when 
addressing the professor are G Hywood, S Aylmer and D Goodsir,” he told Weekly 
Beast.
 