
The first democratically elected president of the Maldives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/maldives> has warned that his country is 
reverting to dictatorship as he attacked Cherie Booth QC for representing the 
government that imprisoned him.

Mohamed Nasheed <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-nasheed>, who was 
freed to come to London for medical treatment, told a press conference on 
Monday that he has not yet decided whether to return to serve the remainder of 
his 13-year prison sentence.

“The question you all want to ask is: ‘Will I go back?’” said Nasheed, who 
went to university in Britain. “This has been more eloquently answered bythe 
Clash <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/23/the-clash-10-of-the-best> 
in 1982 when I was doing my A-Levels – ‘should I stay or should I go?’”

The international legal row over Nasheed’s terrorism conviction has reached 
the United Nations where a working group has ruled he did not receive a fair 
trial.


David Cameron 'will continue to push for reform in Maldives'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/23/david-cameron-will-continue-to-push-for-reform-in-maldives>
The dispute has also been presented as a battle between Booth, wife of Tony 
Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>, and Amal Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/09/amal-clooney-in-maldives-meets-jailed-former-president-mohamed-nasheed>
, wife of the Hollywood actor George Clooney, who is one of the lawyers 
representing Nasheed. Booth now runsOmna Strategy LLP  
<http://omniastrategy.com/>which provides “strategic counsel to governments, 
corporates and private clients”.

Nasheed, 48, who read marine studies at Liverpool John Moores University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/may/10/universityguide-liverpool-john-moores-uni>
, once held a cabinet meeting underwater to highlight the dangers of global 
warming to his low-lying nation.He was ousted in 2012 following opposition 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/08/maldives-president-resign-gunpoint>
.

Nasheed has now been freed for a month by the government of President Yameen 
Abdul Gayoom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/28/maldives-president-escapes-explosion-on-speedboat>
 in order to seek treatment for his back. Shortly after arriving in the UK last 
weekend, Nasheed met David Cameron in Downing Street to raise concerns about 
the deteriorating situation in the Maldives.

“I have spent a fair amount of my adult life in jail,” Nasheed said. “In my 
20s, I was tortured twice. So I have a chronic back problem. I will definitely 
go to the Maldives, there is no doubt about that. But only the question is how 
and when.”

More than 1,700 people are in jail or facing politically motivated charges, 
Nasheed added. “It’s easy to topple dictators but not so easy to uproot the 
remains of a dictatorship.”

President Yameen’s regime had witnessed a rising tide of religious extremism, 
with more than 200 people leaving to join Isis. “Per capita, the Maldives sends 
more fighters than any other country in the world,” Nasheed said.


There has also been increasing reliance on trade with China. “There’s a cold 
war brewing in the Indian Ocean. There’s an arms race in the Indian Ocean and 
the Maldives is strategically placed.”


Commenting on the role of Booth, Nasheed added: “It’s very sad that a Labour 
former prime minister’s wife has decided to work against the people of the 
Maldives.

“I would assume that Mrs Blair is now clearly aware of what’s happening in the 
Maldives and would reconsider her views on the best way forward. All I feel is 
that it’s very sad that Mrs Blair got the wrong end of the stick and dropped 
this catch.”

Ben Emmerson QC, another high profile member of Nasheed’s pro-bono legal team 
who is in Matrix chambers where Blair used to work, said: “Barristers are bound 
by [the cab rank] rule that they must take any case regardless of its merits, 
regardless of whether they would like to work on the other side.

“But that rule does not apply in international cases. So those who make a 
choice must act responsibly. I’m not going to speculate on the motives.” The 
conduct of Omnia, he added, had been “deeply disappointing”.

Emmerson said that the Maldives had now become a “hotbed” of fundamentalism 
and terrorism. “It is only a question of time before the Maldives witnesses an 
incident comparable to the tragedy that occurred on the beaches of Tunisia 
[where 38 tourists died] last year,” he added.

Current travel advice for British tourists going to the Maldives warns of “a 
general threat from terrorism”.


Amal Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amal-alamuddin>, the press 
conference was told, had been branded an “official enemy of the state” by the 
Maldives government. “The leader of every Maldives opposition party [is] in 
prison and the judiciary is crying out for reform,” Clooney said.

The Maldives government accused Nasheed of using his prison leave for 
publicity purposes. “It is now clear the former president has been disingenuous 
at best, and misleading at worst, in seeking medical leave in the UK,” the 
foreign minister, Dunya Maumoon, said in a statement.

“The government acted in good faith in allowing Mr Nasheed to travel abroad 
for treatment. Yet it is now clear his primary goal was to court publicity in 
the United Kingdom. This is not medical leave, but media leave.”

Responding to accusations against Booth, Omnia Strategy said it had been 
instructed to advise on legislative reform. It denied that she or Omnia had 
ever approached Nasheed’s team to offer their services.

“Our objective has always been to assist the government in improving 
transparency and accountability,” said a company statement. “It is important to 
note that the government came to power in 2013 through a democratic process 
accepted by all political parties and the international community ...

 “In the case of Maldives, the country’s institutions are not fully formed – 
multi-party democracy has only been in place for a decade. The work Omnia 
Strategy has undertaken is intended to bring tangible improvements to a young 
nation.”

The statement added that Omnia “is not currently instructed by the government 
of Maldives”. Some of the lawyers working for Nasheed, Omnia staff pointed out, 
had represented members of the Gadaffi family.

 