
Donald Trump has named an ex-Goldman Sachs partner, Hollywood financier and 
formerHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> 
supporter as his national finance chairman.

Steven Mnuchin brings with him an impressive list of contacts in Hollywood and 
Wall Street. The founder of film finance company Dune Capital, he backed action 
movies including the X-Men franchise and James Cameron’s box office 
record-breaker,Avatar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/avatar>.

Other entities financed by Mnuchin include Clinton’s presidential campaign 
during the 2008 election, when he and others at Dune gave liberally to the 
current Democratic frontrunner.


Mnuchin has also worked side-by-side with another leading Democratic party 
supporter: George Soros. After leavingGoldman Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> in 2003 he formed SFM 
Capital Management with the billionaire Clinton-backer.

“Steven is a professional at the highest level with an extensive and very 
successful financial background,” said Trump in a statement on his campaign 
website. “He brings unprecedented experience and expertise to a fundraising 
operation that will benefit the Republican party and ultimately defeat Hillary 
Clinton.”


Republicans plunged into five stages of grief over Trump's unstoppable rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/epublicans-5-stages-grief-donald-trump-anger-denial-depression->
Mnuchin has directly given more than $95,000 to political campaigns in the 
past 20 years, $8,200 directly to Clinton over the course of her campaigns for 
the Senate, and for the presidency in 2008. Separately, during Mitt Romney’s 
2012 campaign, Mnuchin contributed $22,500 to Romney Victory, Inc and more than 
$23,000 to various other ways to support Romney including the Republican 
National Committee.

Mnuchin is the son of Robert Mnuchin, famed New York gallerist and notable 
collector of abstract expressionist painters Willem de Kooning, Mark Rothko and 
Jackson Pollock according toa 2013 New York Times profile 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/27/arts/artsspecial/at-80-mnuchin-remains-a-passionate-promoter-of-postwar-art.html?_r=0>
. The younger Mnuchin amassed a personal wealth of a reported $46m working at 
Goldman Sachs between 1986 and 2003.


In October of 2014, Mnuchin joined one-time Hollywood powerhouse Relativity 
Media as co-chair of the “mini-major” film production company, at the time the 
third-largest independent producer-distributor of movies in the world.

When Relativity filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy10 months later, Variety cited 
sources 
<http://variety.com/2015/biz/news/relativity-steve-mnuchin-co-chairman-1201557256/>
 blaming Mnuchin for the company’s misfortunes. Just before Mnuchin left and 
the company filed for bankruptcy, Relativity paid debts to OneWest Bank of 
Pasadena, which Mnuchin once ran. An attorney for another creditor left unpaid 
in the bankruptcy told the trade the payments were “money the company could 
have used to preserve itself”.

OneWest is notable for its aggressive pursuit of foreclosures on properties 
owned by the over-leveraged banks that it began to buy up in 2008 after the 
housing market crashed. Detractors say the bank, run by Mnuchin, tried to push 
homeowners into foreclosure so it could benefit from loss-sharing agreements 
with the FDIC. Mnuchin disputed the claims ina Bloomberg profile 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-03-22/from-indymac-to-onewest-steven-mnuchins-big-score>
 in 2012.

Trump, who has long touted his wealth as evidence that he isn’t beholden to 
his backers,told the Washington Post 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-wont-self-fund-general-election-campaign-1462399502>
 on Wednesday that he will now create a “world-class finance organization” to 
back the campaign.

“It’s a great privilege to be working with Mr Trump to create a world class 
finance organization to support the campaign in the general election,” Mnuchin 
said in the Trump campaign’s statement.
 