
Who is Amber Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd>? Like 
Shirley MacLaine <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shirley-maclaine> or 
Nicole Kidman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolekidman>’s face, the new 
home secretary has had lots of past lives. One involved working as an 
investment banker and a venture capitalist. But she decided to drop that and 
enter politics to get “a grip on her life”. (We are reading that as “It’ll be 
fewer numbers and things, won’t it? I hate numbers.”) Another life saw her as an
“aristocracy co-ordinator” <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1010081/> on The 
Favourite Film of the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea (AKAFour Weddings 
and a Funeral <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0109831/?ref_=nm_flmg_msc_1>). This 
involved starring as an extra in a church scene and recruiting minor aristos 
Lords Burlington and Lord Woolton to the already capsizing-with-poshness cast. 
We can only speculate as to what the rest of the job involved, but we assume it 
saw her reading the pages of Tatler and its sister publication Teen Tatler 
(recent feature headline: “Keep calm and have a bath”).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fboris-johnson-humbled-to-be-appointed-foreign-secretary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson%20'humbled'%20to%20be%20appointed%20foreign%20secretary%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fboris-johnson-humbled-to-be-appointed-foreign-secretary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Johnson%20%27humbled%27%20to%20be%20appointed%20foreign%20secretary%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fboris-johnson-humbled-to-be-appointed-foreign-secretary-video&media=>
Boris Johnson ‘humbled’ to be appointed foreign secretary – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/14/boris-johnson-humbled-to-be-appointed-foreign-secretary-video>
We also predict that it has lots and lots to do with her role as home 
secretary and that it will see her castingTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>’s new cabinet in a remake of 
the Richard Curtis film. May herself would take on the role of the stoically 
fashionableKristin Scott Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kristin-scott-thomas>, Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> would glide into Hugh Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hughgrant>’s part (a complex role, but 
Johnson can act, as proved by the fact he was able to keep a straight facewhen 
he ascended to foreign secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/14/boris-johnson-humbled-to-be-appointed-foreign-secretary-video>
), and then Rudd, in another transformation, could pop up as acting vacuumAndie 
MacDowell <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andie-macdowell>. Inevitably, she 
will put her own spin on the classic dialogue. HerAndrew Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr>-ready response to any tough 
questions about immigration? “I hadn’t noticed.”
 