
The author of a highly critical report on the Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> justice system 
changed his recommendations after the broadcast of the Four Corners episode on 
Don Dale, because he knew “tinkering” with the system would not enough.

Keith Hamburger, the former head of Queensland corrections, was giving 
evidence tothe royal commission into the protection and detention of children 
in the Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>
 on Monday afternoon.

Hamburger had earlier told the commission that his “root-and-branch” review 
found that the new Don Dale youth detention centre in Darwin wasrun like a 
“human storage facility” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/don-dale-run-like-a-human-storage-facility-nt-royal-commission-told>
 that didn’t focus on rehabilitation.

Hamburger was required to report to the NT government by the end of July but 
on 25 July the ABC broadcast the Four Corners episode on alleged abuse inside 
juvenile detention,immediately sparking the royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/abu-ghraib-images-children-detention-australia-public-inquiry>
.

Don Dale run like a 'human storage facility', NT royal commission told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/don-dale-run-like-a-human-storage-facility-nt-royal-commission-told>
He told the commission the episode had prompted him to partially but 
significantly changehis recommendations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/01/northern-territory-under-pressure-to-close-don-dale-after-scathing-report>
. “Seeing the enormity of what happened on that show and the community reaction 
to it, really I felt we couldn’t just do some tinkering with the organisation, 
we had to have some sort of circuit breaker,” he said.

Hamburger geared his recommendations to push for comprehensive change which 
empowered Indigenous people to lead the future model of NT corrections.

“Recognising the fact that what we have in the NT is that the white 
correctional population is the minority, and the majority are Aboriginal 
people. And yet basically under the existing model, they are disempowered from 
providing leadership and solving those problems.”

“I felt [my recommendations] had the potential to galvanise Aboriginal people 
and key stakeholders that something … was about to occur.”

Hamburger had earlier told the commission he and his team were so horrified by 
what they had discovered during their investigation that he felt compelled to 
alert the corrections commissioner, Mark Payne, before they had finished. He 
said they had found a host of problems including multiple hanging points inside 
the facilities and inappropriate staff practices.

Staff were using separation as punishment rather than de-escalation, and 
misinterpreting an isolation directive of “up to 24 hours” to mean a full 24 
hours.

He also found a culture of complacency among management, namely around a lack 
of will to change things that were clearly unacceptable but said later 
inspections of Don Dale found some improvements.

Three days after the Four Corners broadcast Hamburger was called to a meeting 
with the then chief minister, Adam Giles, and several senior bureaucrats, 
including Payne.

When the meeting came about Giles had not yet read his draft report, although 
the head of the chief minister’s department had, Hamburger said.

He said he felt a lot of senior people at the meeting who weren’t involved in 
corrections were shocked at the “extent of disrepair” within the department and 
he was told the findings would cause a lot of concern for government.

From the Darling Downs to Don Dale: a litany of monstrous acts against 
Indigenous children | Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/30/from-the-darling-downs-to-don-dale-a-litany-of-monstrous-acts-against-indigenous-children>
In the weeks leading up to the August election Giles repeatedly and publicly 
said he would release the Hamburger report,but later reneged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/08/adam-giles-juvenile-detention-report-northern-territory-royal-commission>
. The newly elected Labor government released the executive summary and 
recommendations but not the full report, citing security and privacy reasons.

But after the full report was leaked to media last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/24/justice-minister-rejects-finding-darwin-prison-not-fit-for-purpose>
 the government released it with some redactions.

On Monday the commissioners rejected an application by the government’s 
lawyers to have parts of Hamburger’s statement excluded from examination. The 
paragraphs they wished to exclude questioned the decision of the previous Labor 
government to build a 1,000-bed prison and suggested it had ignored issues with 
juvenile offenders.

The royal commission continues.
 