
The Arizona Diamondbacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-diamondbacks> entered Wednesday 
night’s game at Chase Field with a record of 76-81, all but the OED definition 
of mediocre and a dozen games adrift of the first-place Dodgers in the NL West. 
They are a middling ball club riding out the string in a sport where nearly all 
of the 2,430 games played in a season will be quickly forgotten, even by the 
players on the field. Compelling theater this was not.


Perhaps it’s that late-season ennui that prompted the local broadcasting team 
of Bob Brenly and Steve Berthiaume to spend a full two minutes emptying their 
chambers when cameras trained on a group of women from the Arizona State 
chapter of the Alpha Chi Omega sorority snapping selfies during the middle of 
the fourth inning.
Your browser does not support iframes. 
“Do you have to make faces when you take selfies?” groused Brenly, a 
61-year-old man. “That’s the best one of the 300 pictures I’ve taken of myself 
today!”

Added Berthiaume: “Every girl in the picture is locked onto her phone. Every 
single one is dialed in. Welcome to parenting in 2015.”

And so forth. The cringeworthy exchange persisted even after Arizona’s David 
Peralta led off the bottom of the fourth with a base hit, the horse apparently 
not dead enough.

“Take a selfie with the hot dog, selfie with the churro, selfie just of the 
selfie!” Brenly quipped. “Here’s my first bite of the churro, here’s my second 
bite of the churro.”

Riffed Berthiaume: “Can we do an intervention? How about if we send Baxter 
(the Diamondbacks’ mascot) out there and he just collects all the phones. 
You’re not getting them back till the end of the game.”

On one hand baseball broadcasts, first on radio and later on TV, have long 
depended on light-hearted commentary of ballpark scenery to fill the many 
pockets of downtime during the average game. Yet something about Wednesday’s 
paternalistic rant felt creepy and excessive beneath its bouncy veneer.

From a fan standpoint, the failure to hang on every pitch of meeting between 
two also-ran clubs that have been out of playoff contention for weeks is hardly 
a mortal sin. But even if Wednesday’s outcomehadn’t been utterly devoid of 
consequence, it’s hard to imagine the commentary team targeting a gaggle of 
rowdy finance bros inhaling $12 beers while ignoring the action on the field. 
Because that never happens.

Is it Ian Cohen asking Genie Bouchard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/21/eugenie-bouchard-embarrassed-interviewer-twirl>
 to “give us a twirl” orStephen A Smith blaming a goal 
<http://screengrabber.deadspin.com/stephen-a-smith-blames-wwc-goal-on-not-wanting-to-mes-1710894127>
 at the Women’s World Cup on the German players “not wanting to mess up their 
hair”? Surely not. But even the most seemingly innocuous episodes of everyday 
sexism reinforce the idea of sports as a boys’ club, an outdated notion that 
serves no one. Certainly not a traditional sport whose problems attracting 
younger, more progressively minded fans are as thoroughly documented as the 
Mitchell Report. The median age of last year’s World Series viewer was 55.6
according to Horizon Media 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/business/business-news/audience-aging-shrinking-baseball-more-valuable-ever-n336496>
, up from 49.9 only five years ago. That’s an alarming trend for baseball’s 
power brokers even as revenues and franchise valuations soar.

Worse, these patterns embolden misogynists, like the third-rate aggregator who 
demeaned Wednesday’s offenders 
<http://nesn.com/2015/10/sorority-girls-take-endless-selfies-at-diamondbacks-game-get-mocked-video/>
 as “future world leaders” who got the dressing-down they deserved.

Once Fox Sports realized that grown men mocking young women for enjoying 
themselves might not be a good look, the network ran damage control by offering 
the women of Alpha Chi Omega tickets to Thursday’s game. Rather than endure a 
second Diamondbacks game in two nights, the sororityasked the team to give the 
tickets <https://www.facebook.com/axoasu/posts/950038358385816> to families at 
A New Leaf, a local non-profit that offers homeless and domestic violence 
services, thus leveraging their unsolicited momentary fame to spotlight a 
worthy cause. Well played.

Perhaps the NFL with its bulletproof popularity can afford to be tone-deaf 
when it comes to alienating the women thatstudies indicate 
<http://www.sportsbusinessdaily.com/Journal/Issues/2013/10/14/Leagues-and-Governing-Bodies/NFL-women.aspx>
 account for 45% of football fans. But when it comes how it treats the paying 
customers who turned out for a meaningless game during the dying days of 
September, baseball might be wise to take a look in the mirror.
 