
Who is François Fillon – the man who ended Sarkozy's dream?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/who-is-francois-fillon-the-man-who-ended-sarkozys-dream>
François Fillon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-fillon>, the 
socially conservative former French prime minister promising a pro-business 
“electric shock” for France, was seen as the winner of a TV debate against his 
more moderate rival, Alain Juppé, ahead of Sunday’s vote to nominate the French 
right’s presidential candidate.


The two-hour live TV stand-off was surprisingly mild-mannered after days of 
savage attacks between the two candidates, in which Fillon complained of being 
called a “medieval reactionary” for his plans to roll back certain adoption 
rights for gay couples and his private beliefs on abortion, and Juppé 
complained he had been labelled an Islamist “Ali Juppé” for supporting the 
diversity ofFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.

Fillon said this week that France had never been so rightwing and that he was 
the best candidate to tap into that rightwing shift. He told the TV debate he 
felt he had won the “ideological battle”. He promised to cut half a million 
public sector jobs while returning France to full employment in five years – a 
huge promise in a country that has battled with mass unemployment for three 
decades, including during Fillon’s recent five-year stint as prime minister. 
Fillon also said there needed to be more privatisation in the French health 
service and that France’s cherished social model – its vast security net 
including pensions, unemployment benefit and the health system – was defunct 
and had to be overhauled.

Juppé warned against what he called brutal reform that wouldn’t work. 

Sarkozy has gone, but this is not good news for French liberals | Pierre Haski
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/nicolas-sarkozy-french-liberals-francois-fillon-thatcherite>
Juppé insisted that their stances on abortion should be clarified. Fillon, who 
has been emphasising his Christian faith as he attempts to appeal to a hardline 
Catholic vote, has said he was personally opposed to abortion. But he said in 
the debate that he would do nothing to change French abortion laws introduced 
in 1975. Juppé said, for him, abortion was a fundamental right.

The two candidates differed on the scale of economic reform and public 
spending cuts, but both proposed tax cuts and public-sector-job cuts.

They also differed on the identity of France. “No, France is not a 
multicultural nation,” Fillon said, adding that foreigners who came to France 
must assimilate. “When you come to someone’s house, by courtesy, you don’t take 
over,” he said.

Juppé said France’s identity came from its rich diversity which should be 
celebrated and that he wanted to bring people together.
 