
I was sitting on the New York subway a few years ago when a voice popped into 
my head. A sarcastic, teenage, yeah whatever, shoulder-shrugging voice. She 
said: “You’d think after my brother the snake was born they’d have stopped at 
one.” I recognised her immediately. It was (cue scary music) Hel, the Norse 
goddess of the dead.


 I grabbed a pen, and scrawled that sentence in my notebook. The whole book 
came to me in that moment, and that sentence is how The Monstrous Child begins. 
So it’s actually true what I’ve been telling kids all this time: you never know 
when you’re going to get a good idea.

Guardian children's fiction prize book club: The Lost Gods by Francesca Simon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/aug/05/francesca-simon-lost-gods-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize-book-club>
I was in the middle of writing The Sleeping Army, my first book set in an 
alternate Britain where Christianity never happened, and everyone worships the 
old Anglo-Saxon and Viking Gods. So perhaps it’s not that surprising that I 
heard Hel’s voice so clearly. But this is the first time I’ve ever written in 
the first person, and the first time a character has spoken to me directly. I 
alwayslisten to my characters speaking when I’m writing, but Hel just appeared 
without being summoned. I often felt like I was channelling her, which was 
occasionally rather creepy and depressing, as this young goddess, human from 
the waist up, and a decaying corpse from the waist down, has been hurled by 
Odin into the Underworld and forced to rule the dead. But it’s amazing how 
quickly you get used to writing about life - or rather, death - in a gigantic 
tomb. My father read the book in manuscript, and told me: “It’s your best book, 
but a few ‘putrids’ and ‘rotting corpses’ go a long way.” (Don’t worry, I’ve 
cut back on the revolting rotting stinking stench stuff…)

How real Viking objects inspired Francesca Simon's new series – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2014/may/28/viking-exhibition-francesca-simon-lost-gods>
I imagined Hel as a depressed teenager, who has painted the walls of her room 
black, lying face down on her unmade bed. My starting points with the book 
were: Why is she so depressed? What was she like before? I always ask myself 
questions when I write, but this time she gave me the answers. I also 
discovered as I wrote, that Hel, sadly, has a lot to say to young women who 
find their bodies disgusting, and fear they are unlovable.

The Lost Gods, review – a mythical romp from the Horrid Henry author
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/22/lost-gods-review-francesa-simon-horrid-henry-author>
I loved writing in first person. There is something exhilarating about seeing 
the world exclusively from someone else’s point of view, especially someone as 
funny and sarcastic and angry as Hel. I also enjoyed creating a world where the 
gods were the bad guys, and the giants the good guys, as Hel definitely 
identifies more with her giant mother than her god father. I have always loved 
mythology, and it was great fun to retell a myth in a way that no one else has 
before, by making Hel the main character. The Monstrous Child is definitely my 
favourite book, and Hel my most fascinating character.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Ffrancesca-simon-i-love-writing-in-the-first-person%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d42c9c39b1d571594450c3e2874ef1485b139a9%2F0_0_746_994%2F746.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Francesca%20Simon%3A%20'I%20love%20writing%20in%20the%20first%20person'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Ffrancesca-simon-i-love-writing-in-the-first-person%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Francesca%20Simon%3A%20%27I%20love%20writing%20in%20the%20first%20person%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Ffrancesca-simon-i-love-writing-in-the-first-person%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d42c9c39b1d571594450c3e2874ef1485b139a9%2F0_0_746_994%2F746.jpg>
 Photograph: PR 
Buy The Monstrous Child at the Guardian bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/392777/>
 