
François Fillon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-fillon>, the 
socially conservative former prime minister who plans to shrink the French 
state, has won the primary race to become the French right’s presidential 
candidate next spring.

Fillon, 62, gained support in the final days of the primary race after writing 
a book on the dangers of “Islamic totalitarianism” in the wake of recent 
terrorist attacks in France and defendinga tough line on French national 
identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/23/francois-fillon-french-right-favourite-election>
. He beat the more moderate centrist,Alain Juppé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/alain-juppe-france-prophet-happiness-presidential-wows-rally-crowd>
, the 71-year-old mayor of Bordeaux.

With 95% of ballots counted, Fillon had garnered 66.5% of the votes while 
Juppé trailed with 33.2%.

Who is François Fillon – the man who ended Sarkozy's dream?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/who-is-francois-fillon-the-man-who-ended-sarkozys-dream>
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>’s two-round presidential 
elections in April and May are being watched as the next possible shakeup of 
the political system, after Donald Trump won the US presidency this month.

Polls in France have consistently shown that the far-right Front National 
leader,Marine Le Pen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>, will 
make it to the final round runoff but that it would be difficult for her to 
win. Fillon is now the favourite to face her and win the presidency next year.

In his victory speech, Fillon said the Socialist François Hollande’s 
presidency had been “pathetic”. France “wanted action” and had to be overhauled 
in a way that it “hasn’t been for 30 years”. He saidFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> had a huge need for respect, pride 
and, overall, authority.

After a campaign in which he defended French national identity, he said people 
had voted for him because he represented “French values”. He said “I will 
defend those values and we will share them with everyone who, with their 
differences, loves France.”

On the campaign trail, Fillon, who will stand for the Republican party, argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/23/francois-fillon-french-right-favourite-election>
: “France is more rightwing than it has ever been,” and that he was the only 
one able to tap into that mood and win France’s “ideological battle”.


He warned that France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> was “on the 
verge of revolt” and said his plan to slash half a million public sector jobs, 
reduce the welfare state, cut taxes for the rich and loosen business 
regulations was the only possible response for a demoralised country struggling 
with mass unemployment, a sluggish economy and a major terrorist threat.

“I’ll do everything for entrepreneurs!” he declared at his final rally in 
Paris, promising to free up business and create jobs to tackle a stubbornly 
high unemployment rate of about 10%.

Juppé, after losing what was a battle for the soul of the French right, 
described himself as a “free man” who had never compromised on his beliefs. He 
congratulated Fillon and asked his own supporters to work for “calm and 
reconciliation” in France.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffrancois-fillon-on-course-to-win-french-primary-to-be-candidate-for-the-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf5043ed299cdb595f237a00ff09e67d2ab6d926%2F0_191_2538_3171%2F2538.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Fillon%20wins%20French%20primary%20to%20be%20candidate%20for%20the%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffrancois-fillon-on-course-to-win-french-primary-to-be-candidate-for-the-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Fillon%20wins%20French%20primary%20to%20be%20candidate%20for%20the%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffrancois-fillon-on-course-to-win-french-primary-to-be-candidate-for-the-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf5043ed299cdb595f237a00ff09e67d2ab6d926%2F0_191_2538_3171%2F2538.jpg>
 François Fillon casts his ballot in Paris. Photograph: Eric Feferberg/EPA 
Fillon, a career politician for 35 years and a symbol of the traditionalist 
provincial right, is a fan ofMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>. But his economic 
programme – though radical in terms of breaking with the statist traditions of 
the French right – falls far short of Thatcher’s.

He does not intend to privatise state companies and France’s traditionally 
high public spending will remain significant. Fillon served as prime minister 
from 2007-2012 under the unpopular presidentNicolas Sarkozy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicolas-sarkozy>, playing a key role in an 
administration that promised economic reform but failed to deliver.

Yet he has successfully convinced the rightwing electorate that he represents 
radical change.

Fillon is a Catholic traditionalist who deliberately appealed to the 
conservatism of the religious right and wants to increase state benefits for 
families.

He complained about being attacked as a “medieval reactionary” during the 
campaign because, having voted against France’s recentintroduction of same-sex 
marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/nov/07/french-government-same-sex-marriage>
, he promised to roll back certain parental rights for same-sex couples. He said
it was his private belief that abortion was not a fundamental right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/fillon-beats-juppe-in-tv-debate-ahead-of-vote-on-presidential-candidate>
 but promised not to change French abortion law.

How François Fillon became the French right's new hope
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/23/francois-fillon-french-right-favourite-election>
Fillon, who is on first-name terms with Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> after they served as prime 
ministers in the same period, has advocated a stridently pro-Putin policy 
towards Russia. He said Russia was no threat, should be a partner in Syria and 
that European sanctions against Russia should be lifted. He said the fight 
against Islamic State meant France should not rule out cooperating with Syria’s 
Bashar al-Assad.

Fillon has taken a hard line on Islamic extremism as well as the place of 
Islam in France, warning that “radical islam is corrupting some of our Muslim 
fellow citizens”. Over the summer, he said he was in favour of banningburkinis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/nice-france-burkini-ban-response-after-bastille-day-truck-attack>
, or full-body swimsuits, from French beaches.

 “No, France is not a multicultural nation,” Fillon said during the final TV 
debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/fillon-beats-juppe-in-tv-debate-ahead-of-vote-on-presidential-candidate>
, adding that foreigners who came to France must assimilate. He said: “When you 
come to someone’s house, by courtesy, you don’t take over.”

Sarkozy came third in the right’s first round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/nicolas-sarkozy-defeated-primary-french-rightwing-presidential>
 vote last week, leaving the field open to Fillon and Juppé.

The spotlight will now fall on the governing French Socialist party, which is 
yet to choose its presidential candidate and which will hold its own primary 
race in January.

The bitterly divided party has been galvinised by Fillon’s nomination, hoping 
to unite voters against a “French Thatcher”, saying he threatens France’s 
cherished social model, the wide-ranging social safety net of generous 
unemployment benefits, pensions and healthcare.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffrancois-fillon-on-course-to-win-french-primary-to-be-candidate-for-the-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac6ee2adcccd8c712fb35d370029b45c83bb7cf3%2F0_76_3128_1877%2F3128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Fillon%20wins%20French%20primary%20to%20be%20candidate%20for%20the%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffrancois-fillon-on-course-to-win-french-primary-to-be-candidate-for-the-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Fillon%20wins%20French%20primary%20to%20be%20candidate%20for%20the%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffrancois-fillon-on-course-to-win-french-primary-to-be-candidate-for-the-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac6ee2adcccd8c712fb35d370029b45c83bb7cf3%2F0_76_3128_1877%2F3128.jpg>
 Alain Juppé votes at a polling station in Bordeaux. Photograph: Romain 
Perrocheau/Getty Images 
Hollande <https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande> is expected to 
announce within days whether he will stand for re-election. His party is in 
disarray and there are serious doubts among Socialists about Hollande’s chances 
of even making it past the first round. He is the least popular French 
president since the second world war, withhis satisfaction rating in one recent 
poll as low as 4% 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/politique/article/2016/10/25/hollande-une-impopularite-record_5019914_823448.html>
.

Divisions were evident when the prime minister, Manuel Valls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/manuel-valls>, on Sunday left his options 
open as a potential challenger to Hollande. Valls told the French weekly 
Journal du Dimanche that he wanted to dispel the idea that the left had no 
chance of retaining power.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnicolas-sarkozy-concedes-defeat-in-french-primary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicolas%20Sarkozy%20concedes%20defeat%20in%20French%20primary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnicolas-sarkozy-concedes-defeat-in-french-primary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicolas%20Sarkozy%20concedes%20defeat%20in%20French%20primary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnicolas-sarkozy-concedes-defeat-in-french-primary&media=>
Nicolas Sarkozy concedes defeat in French primary. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/21/nicolas-sarkozy-concedes-defeat-in-french-primary>
Emmanuel Macron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/emmanuel-macron-outsider-bid-french-presidential-race-election>
, Hollande’s rebellious former economy minister, has also launched an 
independent, centrist, outsider bid for the French presidency, promising to 
lead a people’s “democratic revolution” against the “vacuous” political system.

 The hard-left candidate Jean-Luc Mélenchon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/06/jean-luc-melenchon-campaign-interview>
, who this weekend won the backing of the French Communist party, is also 
likely to draw votes away from the Socialists.
 