
François Fillon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/23/francois-fillon-french-right-favourite-election>
, the former French prime minister promising to introduce “electric shock” 
economic reform, has rounded off his campaign for the right’s presidential 
nomination by lashing out at what he called the small-minded liberal Paris 
elite who warned he was a dangerous social reactionary.


The socially conservative, rightwing Fillon – who remains favourite to beat 
the more moderate, centristAlain Juppé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/alain-juppe-france-prophet-happiness-presidential-wows-rally-crowd>
 in the final vote on Sunday – has complained of being depicted as a “medieval” 
retrograde. His campaign emphasised his Catholic family values in order to 
appeal to supporters on the religious right who opposesame-sex marriage and 
adoption rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/nov/07/french-government-same-sex-marriage>
 introduced in France three years ago.

François Fillon beats Alain Juppé in presidential candidacy debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/fillon-beats-juppe-in-tv-debate-ahead-of-vote-on-presidential-candidate>
Pierre Bergé, the French businessman and partner of the late fashion designer 
Yves Saint Laurent <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/yves-saint-laurent>, 
tweeted that a vote for Fillon was a vote for “reactionary France”, likening it 
to a return to the days of the Nazi-collaborationist Vichy regime. In a radio 
interview, Fillon slammed Bergé’s comments as “the ridiculous frenzy of a tiny 
microcosm who think they know everything and want to impose their vision”.
Pierre Bergé (@pvgberge) 
Voter Fillon c'est voter pour la France réac, la Manif pour Tous, qui m'a 
menacé de mort. LaFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> pétainiste. 
Quand va-t-on à Vichy?
 <https://twitter.com/pvgberge/status/801727985422372864> November 24, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/pvgberge/status/801727985422372864> 
Although Fillon has vowed not to overturn the 2013 law introducing same-sex 
marriage, nor make any change to abortion law, he has promised to roll back 
certain parental rights for same-sex couples.

Fillon, an admirer of Margaret Thatcher, has promised to slash 500,000 public 
sector jobs in five years, cut public spending, lower taxes and break the power 
of trade unions. He is regarded as having won thefinal TV debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/fillon-beats-juppe-in-tv-debate-ahead-of-vote-on-presidential-candidate>
 on Thursday night against Juppé, which attracted a record audience of 8.5 
million viewers.

Both candidates are former rightwing prime ministers who share a broadly 
similar economic programme to cut public spending and trim France’s large 
social welfare model. But they differ on scale. Fillon said reform must be 
quick and decisive. Juppé said structural reform needed to be done gently, 
accusing Fillon of going too far in a brutal, punishing manner.

Fillon has raised the question of identity politics, stressing that French 
national identity must be protected. “France is not a multicultural nation,” he 
said during the debate, adding that foreigners who came to France must 
assimilate. Juppé replied that he thought France’s identity came from its 
diversity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffrancois-fillon-attacks-paris-elite-before-final-nomination-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F091b17021cdf8fb662710811923dee55d74207ad%2F0_92_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Fillon%20attacks%20'Paris%20elite'%20before%20second-round%20primary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffrancois-fillon-attacks-paris-elite-before-final-nomination-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Fillon%20attacks%20%27Paris%20elite%27%20before%20second-round%20primary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffrancois-fillon-attacks-paris-elite-before-final-nomination-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F091b17021cdf8fb662710811923dee55d74207ad%2F0_92_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 The moderate Les Republicains candidate Alain Juppe in Thursday’s TV debate. 
Photograph: Eric Feferberg/EPA 
The often heated final-round campaign between the two has also centred on 
foreign policy.

In a jibe at Fillon’s closeness to Vladimir Putin, Juppé said: “This must be 
the first presidential election in which the Russian president chooses his 
candidate – that slightly shocked me.” This week Putin praised Fillon as a 
“great professional” and “very principled person”.

Fillon, who is on first-name terms with Putin after they served as prime 
ministers in the same period, has advocated a stridently positive policy 
towards Russia, saying it is no threat, should be a partner in Syria and that 
European sanctions against Russia should be lifted.

 “We need to be much firmer and clearer with Russia,” Juppé told the Ouest 
France newspaper in an interview this week, accusing his opponent of 
“over-indulging” Putin. Fillon said this was a caricature of his position and 
he simply wanted a more constructive relationship with Moscow.

French presidential elections: share your thoughts on the country's politics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/french-presidential-elections-share-your-thoughts-on-the-countrys-politics>
If Fillon does win the right’s nomination, he is expected to face the 
far-right Front National’s Marine le Pen in the presidential final round. Le 
Pen has also shown a pro-Russia stance, condemning western sanctions against 
Moscow.

Fillon and Juppé have also clashed on Syria, with the former saying the fight 
against Islamic State meant France should not rule out cooperating with Syria’s 
president, Bashar al-Assad. During the TV debate, Juppé condemned Assad for the 
brutal repression of Syrians and said he “could in no case be seen to embody 
the future of the country”.

 This Sunday’s final-round open primary vote to choose the right’s candidate 
marks the start of a new phase in the runup to France’s presidential election 
in April and May.

The spotlight will now fall on the French left. The deeply unpopular Socialist 
president, François Hollande, has yet to announce whether he will stand for 
re-election. His party is deeply divided and there are serious doubts among 
Socialists about Hollande’s chances of making it past the first round. His 
satisfaction rating in one poll was as low as 4%.

 However, an Hollande bid for a second term seemed to edge closer this week 
after a slight fall in the number of unemployed people in October. Hollande has 
said he would only stand again if he could make a credible reduction in 
unemployment by the end of his mandate. France has been struggling with mass 
unemployment for decades. Hollande said the figures showed his economic policy 
was beginning to pay off.
 