
The teacher in charge of a group of French schoolchildren who were hit by an 
avalanche on a closed ski run in the French Alps has been placed in police 
custody and will be questioned over manslaughter.

Two schoolchildren aged 14 and 16 were killed by the vast snow-slide that 
struck while they were on a difficult black-rated ski run that had been closed 
for safety reasons amid avalanche warnings. The teacher, who was seriously 
injured in Wednesday’s accident, is in hospital in nearby Grenoble but will be 
questioned by police as part of an inquiry for manslaughter. A Ukrainian skier 
not linked to the group also died.

“We have to interview the hospitalised teacher as soon as we can,” the 
Grenoble prosecutor Jean-Yves Coquillat said earlier today. “The question is, 
why were they skiing on a closed piste?”

The prosecutor has called for anyone present on the slopes to come forward. He 
said a Romanian had already come forward to say that a group of 10 to 15 people 
had been skiing above the school group, cutting across the snow. The Romanian 
said that shortly afterwards, he heard a noise like an explosion and the 
avalanche began.

The teacher’s role and the exact order of events remains to be determined. One 
French official said that the school students may have skied ahead of their 
teacher.

At least two other members of the school group were found in a state of 
cardiac arrest and were also transferred to the hospital in Grenoble.

The avalanche happened just before 4pm in Les Deux Alpes in Isère, about 30 
miles (50km) from the Italian border. A large sheet of snow broke off above a 
black-rated run that had been closed following several days of heavy snowfall.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Favalanche-closed-piste-les-deux-alpes-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aftermath%20of%20avalanche%20on%20closed%20piste%20in%20Les%20Deux%20Alpes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Favalanche-closed-piste-les-deux-alpes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aftermath%20of%20avalanche%20on%20closed%20piste%20in%20Les%20Deux%20Alpes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Favalanche-closed-piste-les-deux-alpes-video&media=>
Aftermath of the avalanche in Les Deux Alpes – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/14/avalanche-closed-piste-les-deux-alpes-video>
A spokesman from the Isère prefect’s office told France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> Info radio that the school group 
should “probably not” have been on the closed piste. He said an investigation 
would have to take place into whether warning signs had been correctly in 
place. There had been an avalanche warning in the surrounding area after heavy 
snowfall.

The young skiers were from the Lycée Saint-Exupéry, a large high school in the 
centre of Lyon where sports staff regularly run day trips to the ski slopes on 
Wednesdays. The prefect of Isère, Jean-Paul Bonnetain, told AFP: “It appears 
that everyone from the school trip has been found but the searches are 
continuing to be sure that there were no other victims outside the school 
group.”

Dominique Létaing, head of the national agency for the study of snow and 
avalanches, told Le Monde that what stood out was the number of people hit 
“when we are constantly repeating that skiers must go one by one when there is 
an unstable layer of snow”. He said the avalanche risk was very high – at a 
level 3 out of 5. “That ski run had not been opened this season because there 
had been too little snow. It was not skiable.”

Three dead after children engulfed by avalanche on closed piste in Les Deux 
Alpes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/schoolchildren-caught-up-in-avalanche-in-french-alps>
The radio station France Bleu 
<https://www.francebleu.fr/infos/faits-divers-justice/une-avalanche-aurait-enseveli-trois-personnes-aux-deux-alpes-1452700261>
 said a large amount of unstable snow had fallen on the mountainside at an 
altitude of 2,500 metres. Local media reported that hundreds of tonnes of snow 
had slid down the mountain during the avalanche. The local paper, theDauphine 
Libéré 
<http://www.ledauphine.com/isere-sud/2016/01/13/les-deux-alpes-une-avalanche-aurait-fait-un-blesse-grave-et-plusieurs-disparus>
, said there had been a known avalanche risk in the area.

About 100 rescuers including mountain teams, search dogs and helicopters with 
heat cameras designed to seek out survivors were mobilised as night fell. The 
search mission was said to be complex.

The French president, François Hollande, gave his “sincere condolences” to the 
families of the victims and said the nation stood “in solidarity” with them. 
The prime minister, Manuel Valls,tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/manuelvalls/status/687329625018642433> his “great 
sadness”, saying France’s thoughts were with the victims. The education 
minister will travel to Lyon to support the school and the families.

Since the start of January, four people have been killed in avalanches in 
France – two Lithuanians, a Spaniard and a Czech skier.


In September, seven people were killed by an avalanche in the Massif des Ecrins
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/15/french-alps-avalanche-kills-climbers>
, one of the country’s worst snowslides in a decade. The avalanche struck three 
groups of roped climbers on an easily accessible 4,000-metre (13,000ft) 
mountain.

In January last year, six members of the French Alpine Club aged between 50 
and 70 were killed in an avalanche in the Hautes-Alpes.
 