
France’s ratings system is due to be overhauled to strengthen the country’s 
national film board, the CNC, in response to recent attacks by conservative 
pressure group Promouvoir.

According to Variety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/french-culture-minister-vows-to-reform-ratings-system-1201718138/>
, the recently installed culture minister Audrey Azoulay plans to scrap a 
recent amendment stating that any film showing unsimulated sex must 
automatically be given an 18 rating. She also wants to shorten the duration of 
legal appeals that can be brought against the board, a process that can see the 
rating of a film change during its run.

ABC refuses to show Carol ad featuring lesbian love scene
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/29/abc-carol-ad-lesbian-love-scene-cate-blanchett-rooney-mara>
Promouvoir, a rightwing organisation that purports to strengthen 
“Judeo-Christian values”, recently achieved high-profile wins in their appeals 
against films by directors such as Gaspar Noé andAbdellatif Kechiche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/27/abdellatif-kechiche-interview-blue-warmest>
. Noé’s film, Love, which contains explicit 3D sex scenes, had itsrating raised 
to an 18 certificate three weeks after release because of the pressure group’s 
campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/06/gaspar-noe-3d-sex-film-love-raised-age-rating-certificate>
. Kechiche’s Palme d’Or-winning lesbian drama,Blue Is the Warmest Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/21/blue-is-the-warmest-colour-review>
, had its 12 rating removed by a Paris court after another Promouvoir appeal, 
while Lars von Trier’s Antichrist, a psychological horror that includes scenes 
of genital mutilation, wasrecently banned in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/03/lars-von-trier-antichrist-banned-france-promouvoir>
, seven years after its release.

Azoulay, who is working from a report from CNC president Jean-François Mary, 
plans to clarify France’s rating rules, potentially making it less easy for 
groups such as Promouvoir to appeal for tougher censorship. The daughter of an 
adviser to the Moroccan King Mohammed VI, she is the third culture minister to 
be appointed by the French president François Hollande since he took office in 
2012.
 