
Netflix Australia

Film: The Jungle Book <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-jungle-book> 
(2016, US), directed byJon Favreau – out 17 January

The Jungle Book review – spectacular revival of Disney's family favourite
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/the-jungle-book-review> 
A rare wonderful big-budget Hollywood film, The Jungle Book is full of life, 
lucid in expression and rich with ideas about the ecological world and our 
place within it. If there’s one thing Hollywood is still good at, it’s striking 
a balance between making films for children that also resonate with adults: 
films which walk that fine line between simple and non-simplistic.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjqmUoteadZI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjqmUoteadZI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjqmUoteadZI&media=>
This remake of the 1967 animated classic recasts the original’s themes through 
an environmental lens, crafting an optimistic conservationist classic for the 
contemporary era. Intricately imagined with the perfect blend of live-action 
and CGI, Mowgli’s new jungle world is a place of danger and awe – and a 
cinematic haven for children and adults. Great school holiday viewing.

Film: Strangerland (2015, Australia) directed by Kim Farrant – out 15 January
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv3Kj1VmbJiw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv3Kj1VmbJiw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv3Kj1VmbJiw&media=>
For me, this small, unusual film was one of the Australian standouts of 2015. 
On the surface, Strangerland is a missing-child mystery of the 
slowburn-psychological-family-drama variety. But delve deeper and it is an 
oblique political statement that follows in the tradition of Picnic at Hanging 
Rock – another film in which the Australian landscape steals away white 
children.

Nicole Kidman and Joseph Fiennes are the parents of the missing children, with 
Hugo Weaving as the police officer following the clues; as the case progresses, 
a sandstorm descends on their remote desert mining town. That red dust renders 
the outback, generally so wide-open on film, an usually tightly-sealed world — 
a hazy claustrophobic space in which writer-director Kim Farrant evades easy 
certainties about what it means to raise families in a continent defined by 
colonialism, fossil-fuel capitalism and ancestral disconnection.

Film: Captain America: Civil War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-civil-war> (2016, USA), 
directed by Anthony Russo and Joe Russo – out 31 January
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdKrVegVI0Us&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdKrVegVI0Us>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdKrVegVI0Us&media=>
In the world of Captain America: Civil War, after a rampaging superhero 
disaster causes countless civilian deaths, the US government introduces a Hero 
Registration Act: a law that limits superheroes’ actions, causing a deep rift 
between them all. OK! It’s almost as if Marvel has been forced to admit the 
Avengers are essentially an elite killing squad dropping buildings on civilians 
and getting away with brutal violence to serve an abstract American greater 
good.

Captain America: Civil War review – an aspartame rush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/20/captain-america-civil-war-review-an-aspartame-rush>
From today’s war-ridden, refugee-afflicted vantage point, the whole “save the 
world using boys and bullets” mandate of superhero films evidently doesn’t 
really fly anymore.

With everything from a crime-fighting spider manboy in a onesie to fairly glib 
themes of good and evil and the nature of revenge, the film makes subzero 
sense. But as a non-nerd I appreciated its levity and buoyancy — so many 
comic-book movies have such a self-serious weight hanging about them. The most 
fascinating aspect is the new Black Panther character: an African king and 
warrior with a wonderful leopard-y costume.His role here anticipates his own 
full movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/22/ava-duvernay-black-panther-marvel>
, which could make the Marvel Universe deeper and richer. It’s almost enough to 
make you forget the film is essentially a $200 million ad for games and toys 
and backpacks and other licensed merchandise. Yay for deep-fried, lobotomised 
entertainment!

TV: Crazyhead season one (2016, UK), created by Howard Overman – out now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Djs4kMm1HZzg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Djs4kMm1HZzg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Djs4kMm1HZzg&media=>
Buffy The Vampire Slayer secured the place of kick-arse teen demon hunters in 
popular culture forever. A mash-up of genres, Netflix’s new original series 
moves the same basic idea to contemporary England, with sly British humour and 
zippy present-day vocab to match.

Crazyhead: the teen demons taking over TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/18/crazyhead-e4-teen-demons-misfits-creators-comedy-horror>
Our heroines Amy and Raquel are a classic crime-fighting pair: ostensibly 
mismatched but with kindred spirits. Having both been diagnosed by pale male 
psychiatrists as psychotic, they realise their hellish visions are real, and 
therefore even scarier than mental illness. Though the opening shot references 
cinema’s king of art-house psychological horror, David Lynch, the vibe here is 
much more youthful – think of the weird comedy of Ghostbusters crossed with 
Trainspotting — with the series’ wry sideways comment on mental-health 
treatment, and its focus on female friendship, deepening its message.

Honourable mentions: Freaky Friday (2003) (film, 4 January), A Series of 
Unfortunate Events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/nov/17/first-look-at-lemony-snickets-a-series-of-unfortunate-events-for-netflix-video>
 (TV, 13 January), Fargo: Season 1 (TV, 26 January)

Stan

Film: Y Tu Mama Tambien (2001, Mexico), directed by Alfonso Cuarón – out 4 
January
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpdh8Va2oDKk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpdh8Va2oDKk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpdh8Va2oDKk&media=>
Stan <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/stan> continues its mandate of 
programming reliable, contemporary art-house classics.


Upon its 2002 release, the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/apr/12/1> called Alfonso Cuarón’s 
coming-of-age drama, in which two testosterone-rattled teens take an older 
woman on a road trip, “an exhilarating adventure in narrative, eroticism and 
social commentary ... combining social analysis, political insight and an 
unflinching glimpse into the secret lives of these apparently ingenuous young 
boys. It is as if the American Pie DVD had a director’s commentary by Susan 
Sontag or JK Galbraith.”

Y Tu Mama Tambien
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/apr/12/1> 
Perhaps viewers and critics at the time were less scandalised by the film’s 
depiction of masturbation, group sex and infidelity than Cuaron’s refusal to 
morally judge his characters for what others might see as promiscuity. From the 
perspective of 2017, Y Tu Mama Tambien was far ahead of its time in discussing 
sex as a normal part of life – an attitude carried forward today in screen 
stories including Transparent, Elle and Blue is the Warmest Colour.

Film: Hunger <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hunger> (2008, UK/Ireland), 
directed by Steve McQueen – out 3 January
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMw7WJLZmVF4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMw7WJLZmVF4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMw7WJLZmVF4&media=>
Dramatising the 1981 hunger-strike of Irish dissident Bobby Sands, the debut 
film of Turner Prize-winning artist Steve McQueen is not an easy-viewing choice 
for a night in, but an affecting one for its refusal to either romanticise or 
condemn those at the heart of the political struggle.

“[An] explicit, but icily brilliant and superbly acted film,” wrote Guardian 
critic Peter Bradshaw in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/31/hunger>. “It is a lacerating 
portrait of an agonised period of British and Irish history…. [which] paints 
the hunger strike as tragic but quite without tragic grandeur. The movie shows 
Sands himself as an intelligent, motivated man, but one who long ago hardened 
heart and mind to the consequences of violence.”

Film: Amour (2012, France), directed by Michael Haneke – out 11 January
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF7D-Y3T0XFA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF7D-Y3T0XFA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF7D-Y3T0XFA&media=>
That septuagenerian Michael Haneke’s film Amour begins with a crime scene says 
much about the art-house auteur’s perverse perspective on his central theme.

Most films about love show the beginning or the break-up of a relationship. 
This one, which won five-star reviews and the Palme d’Or prize at Cannes Film 
Festival upon its 2012 release, is about the end of a life: a portrait of a 
relationship in the face of ageing and illness. How you see it will depend on 
your existing worldview. I see it as equal parts romance – showing small 
moments of kindness and devotion between an elderly couple nearing the end of 
their time together – and anti-romance, in that it recognises “forever” has an 
end date.

Amour – review
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/15/amour-review> 
Haneke’s long, static shots are the perfect vessel for his steadfast vision of 
love without idealism, in a filmthe Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/15/amour-review> painted as “a 
passionate, painful, intimate drama”.

Honourable mentions: Antichrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/16/antichrist-lars-von-trier-feminism>
 (film, 17 January), Swimming Pool (film, 31 January).

Foxtel Play

Top of The Lake season one (2014, UK/NZ), created by Jane Campion – out 5 
January
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTujPm45jhLw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTujPm45jhLw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTujPm45jhLw&media=>
One of the most acclaimed series in recent years, Top of the Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-of-the-lake> is an 
emotionally-spooky crime mystery – and the product of yet another filmmaker 
migrating to television to explode her storytelling vocabulary.

In this missing-girl mystery, young detective Robin (Elisabeth Moss) returns 
to her misty mountain hometown to solve the disappearance of a pregnant 
twelve-year-old, and confront her own history of abuse. Creator Jane Campion 
positions women as the engine of a genre which has traditionally revolved 
around men.


Top of the Lake: an engaging crime drama that pushes females to the fore – box 
set review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/28/top-of-the-lake-box-set-review-moss-campion>
The Guardian’s David Renshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/28/top-of-the-lake-box-set-review-moss-campion>
 wrote: “With films such as The Piano on her CV, Campion is renowned for 
pushing strong female characters to the fore, as well as boasting an 
eye-catching visual style and a tendency to veer toward the more esoteric end 
of story-telling. Top of the Lake is no different and sees Elisabeth Moss 
deliver a stunning central performance as an idealistic detective hunting for 
the truth in a male-dominated world.” Brush up before season two’s release.

Honourable mentions: Westworld season one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/06/the-guardian-view-on-westworld-science-fiction-fresh-look-at-the-present>
 (TV, out now),Hunt for the Wilderpeople 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/18/hunt-for-the-wilderpeople-review-unpolished-charm>
 (film, out now).

Dendy Direct

Deepwater Horizon (2016, USA), directed by Peter Berg – out 18 January
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS-UPJyEHmM0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS-UPJyEHmM0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS-UPJyEHmM0&media=>
Sunrise, a wide-shot of an oil drilling rig, all semi-submersed concrete and 
spindley cranes rising from the silvery Gulf of Mexico. As day turns to night 
on 20 April 2010, pressure builds in the rig, culminating in the release 
millions of tonnes of mud and oil. The explosion generates the worst oil spill 
in history and the death of a dozen workers.

Deepwater Horizon <https://www.theguardian.com/film/deepwater-horizon> may 
sound like an environmental doco, but instead it’s a $70 million action drama 
in the tradition of 1990s disaster films such as Armageddon, Deep Impact and 
Twister. The threat is not an earthquake, or an alien invasion, but a fossil 
fuel company (BP) personified by a chronically irresponsible manager played 
with evil relish by John Malkovich, with the good guys framed as all-American, 
working class boys, headed up by Mark Wahlberg.

The 'well from hell' – my fight with BP to film Deepwater Horizon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/04/the-well-from-hell-my-fight-with-bp-to-film-deepwater-horizon>
As the ecological foundations of multinational capitalism grow ever more 
unstable, Hollywood is raiding what might have been fringe political material 
for art-house filmmakers of previous generations. The result is a smart, taut 
action film (with a salty slug of US patriotism, of course) – a great antidote 
to the CGI-driven comic-book franchises that usually dominate this genre.

Honourable mentions: Cleverman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/27/i-created-cleverman-for-my-son-because-we-need-more-aboriginal-superheroes>
 (TV, out now),Sully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/12/sully-clint-eastwood-hudson-river-plane-crash-ntsb>
 (film, out now),Girl Asleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/09/girl-asleep-review-rosemary-myers-bethany-whitmore-harrison-feldman>
 (film, out now),Louder Than Bombs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/24/louder-than-bombs-review-isabelle-huppert-joachim-trier>
 (film, out 11 January).

SBS On Demand

TV: Shaun Micallef’s Stairway To Heaven (2016, AU) – weekly from 18 January
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ffrom-captain-america-to-crazyhead-the-best-film-and-tv-new-to-australian-streaming-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe84c04900cc35822e9576ecbc3652888639cd798%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Captain%20America%20to%20Crazyhead%3A%20the%20best%20film%20and%20TV%20new%20to%20Australian%20streaming%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ffrom-captain-america-to-crazyhead-the-best-film-and-tv-new-to-australian-streaming-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Captain%20America%20to%20Crazyhead%3A%20the%20best%20film%20and%20TV%20new%20to%20Australian%20streaming%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ffrom-captain-america-to-crazyhead-the-best-film-and-tv-new-to-australian-streaming-services%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe84c04900cc35822e9576ecbc3652888639cd798%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Shaun Micallef visits Casa De Dom Ignacio, Brazil, in the second episode of 
season two of Shaun Micallef’s Stairway to Heaven Photograph: SBS 
There’s a touch of the Louis Theroux approach to this documentary series by 
self-described “semi-professional comedian” Shaun Micallef. Both men take the 
persona of an affable, perplexed outsider, embedding themselves in worlds of 
extreme beliefs and fringe scenarios. But Catholic-raised Micallef’s brand of 
dry, sceptical humour allows for a bit more incisiveness, and is ideally suited 
to this series about religion.

The first episode of the three-part second series sees Micallef fly to Salt 
Lake City, Utah, home of the USA’s biggest homegrown religion, the Mormon 
Church, which believes Jesus Christ visited America, and that the Garden of 
Eden was somewhere in Missouri. But rather than just presenting Mormons as 
people on the margins of mainstream society, Micallef shows the Church of Jesus 
Christ of Latter-day Saints to be a powerful and controlling institution with 
vast resources and economic power (and its own PR department, of course) — only 
a few steps away, one suspects, from the full-blown Scientologist scale.

Film: Bulkland (2015, China), directed by Daniel Whelan – out now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtX-qOFmwW0k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtX-qOFmwW0k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtX-qOFmwW0k&media=>
Did you know that the plastics industry has been one of the biggest 
beneficiaries of the global financial crisis? As the top-end of the retail 
market has fallen away and demand for cheaper goods has risen, trinket-laden 
dollar value stores have doubled in number in the USA, and now outnumber 
pharmacies.

This scary, clever feature-length TV documentary scratches underneath the 
“Made in China” label, examining the free market’s addiction to disposable crud 
by tracing the plastics industry backwards to Yiwu, China: the world’s largest 
small commodity wholesale district, and essentially a plastics city.

The doco is careful not to blame China, instead showing how nonsense goods – 
such as life-sized, singing Santa Clauses – are being produced for the West, 
and interviewing the Western importers who have made their riches from this 
increasingly unstable market. In exposing the industrial origins of conspicuous 
consumerism, Bulkland shows the unimaginable scale, fake abundance and 
absurdity of a market dedicated to producing goods destined for sudden landfill.

Honourable mentions: This is Australia 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/movies/this-is-australia> film collection, 
featuringErskineville Kings 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/369526339635/erskineville-kings> and Mad 
Dog Morgan <http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/614750275643/mad-dog-morgan> 
(out now, with further releases throughout January).

ABC iView

Comedy Next Gen: Zoë Coombs Marr (2016, Australia) – out now 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/comedy-next-gen/LE1602H006S00>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ffrom-captain-america-to-crazyhead-the-best-film-and-tv-new-to-australian-streaming-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8f7782a421d8d67f2e484e982d9b1e973e3eccf%2F0_0_2824_1956%2F2824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Captain%20America%20to%20Crazyhead%3A%20the%20best%20film%20and%20TV%20new%20to%20Australian%20streaming%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ffrom-captain-america-to-crazyhead-the-best-film-and-tv-new-to-australian-streaming-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Captain%20America%20to%20Crazyhead%3A%20the%20best%20film%20and%20TV%20new%20to%20Australian%20streaming%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ffrom-captain-america-to-crazyhead-the-best-film-and-tv-new-to-australian-streaming-services%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8f7782a421d8d67f2e484e982d9b1e973e3eccf%2F0_0_2824_1956%2F2824.jpg>
 Zoë Coombs Marr’s “weird meta theatre comedy creation” Trigger Warning, 
featuring her alter-ego Dave Photograph: James Brown 
For those like me who missed this show in its live incarnation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2016/jul/20/zoe-coombs-marr-why-an-angry-lesbian-in-her-30s-should-be-person-of-the-year>
, this ABC2 comedy special sandwiches Zoë Coombs Marr’s weird meta theatre 
comedy creation, Trigger Warning, with interviews with the artist.

Zoë Coombs Marr at Edinburgh festival review – thrillingly silly meta comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/09/zoe-coombs-marr-at-edinburgh-festival-review-underbelly-cowgate>
Her character is Dave, a deluded comedian and male bogan idiot who Coombs Marr 
uses to satirise stand-up comedy’s aggressively blokey culture. Dave sees 
himself as a good bloke and upholds “battle of the sexes” jokes as the pinnacle 
of comic thought. He’s equal parts affable and fragile, an out-of-his-depth 
dinosaur descending into madness as the show catapults forward, departing the 
usual conventions of a one-hour comedy format.
 