
We live in terrible times: straight off the street and plunged into a very 
dark room in Gateshead. Maybe I’ve been kidnapped without noticing. It is black 
as a coal-hole in here. Snagging my trousers on a busted wooden clothes airer, 
colliding with an oil drum, mangling my knee on the hulk of an old television 
lying screen-down among unnameable junk, almost tripping on a clutter of stuff 
on the floor. All this wreckage, as well as the floors and walls, are covered 
in tarry black paint. The only visible light is spilling through little holes 
in a painted drape sagging above my head.

Who knows what this place is. Perhaps it’s a metaphor for Britain today. 
Perhaps it is Britain today and we don’t need metaphors. Through a low door and 
up some stairs are paintings of dinosaurs, with titles such as A Kind of 
Sinister Magnificence and A Frightful Feeling of Impotence and Despair. I know 
that feeling, though I think thePortuguese artist Hugo Canoilas 
<https://vimeo.com/123824193> is quoting French 19th-century anarchist 
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon’sPhilosophy of Misery 
<https://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/proudhon/philosophy/>, 
along with Plato’sAllegory of the Cave 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LTWwY8Ok5I0>, and George Orwell’s thoughts on 
the links between poverty and dirt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01813326618090ac3db3487ee97b888730c8257d%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Marx%20to%20Brexit%3A%20Tyneside's%20AV%20festival%20paints%20the%20whole%20world%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Marx%20to%20Brexit%3A%20Tyneside%27s%20AV%20festival%20paints%20the%20whole%20world%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01813326618090ac3db3487ee97b888730c8257d%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Lava-grotto by Hugo Canoilas at AV festival. Photograph: Colin Davison 
“We are living in a world in which nobody is free, in which hardly anybody is 
secure, in which it is impossible to be honest and to remain alive,” wrote 
Orwell, in his 1937 bookThe Road to Wigan Pier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/20/orwell-wigan-pier-75-years>. 
“Meanwhile, what about socialism?” Orwell’s question returns, as the title of
the month-long AV festival <http://www.avfestival.co.uk/>, staged in venues 
across Newcastle and Gateshead. Well, what about it?

The AV festival brings together past and present, history and archive, art and 
documentation from right across the world. Here, everywhere is local. As we 
wade through piles of rubbish, we are dinosaurs on the road not to Wigan pier 
but to extinction. Photographs of the 1936Jarrow Crusade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/century/1930-1939/Story/0,6051,127027,00.html> 
meet the documentation of Tim Brennan’s 1996 walk, in which he retracedthe 298 
mile march from Jarrow to London 
<http://www.avfestival.co.uk/programme/2016/events-exhibitions/tim-brennan-crusade>
. Along the way, Brennan met Tony Benn, and marched the last half mile to 
parliament with Ken Livingstone.

'Socialism' the most looked-up word of 2015 on Merriam-Webster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/16/socialism-most-looked-up-word-2015-merriam-webster-bernie-sanders>
In the Lit and Phil <http://www.litandphil.org.uk/>, home of Newcastle’s 
Philosophical Society, are the tokens of 18th century radicalThomas Spence 
<http://www.fitzmuseum.cam.ac.uk/dept/coins/exhibitions/spence/index2.html>, 
little coins he distributed as political propaganda, now in vitrines in the 
library. Spence was expelled from the society for publishing a speech attacking 
landowners. The coins rail against tyranny and unfair taxes, against war and 
slavery. Their little pictures of asses and pigs and a starving man gnawing a 
bone in jail are now barely legible, sorrowful little things.

The 50 volumes of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels’s collected writings run the 
length ofVane gallery <http://vane.org.uk/> in Newcastle town centre, like an 
errant Carl Andre floor sculpture. The book jackets contain only bricks. You 
can’t read them, but they’d be handy in a fight down at the New Left Book Club.


This is the work of Claire Fontaine <http://www.clairefontaine.ws/bio.html>, a 
pair of Paris-based artists who name themselves after a French stationery 
chain, and part of a series called Brickbats. Submachine guns lean casually 
against the walls, along with a taser and a bunch of Motorola radios. They 
aren’t real, but red-coloured replicas whose weight and heft correspond to the 
real thing, and are used, we are told, for “training purposes”. The phrase has 
a horrible ring.

Claire Fontaine’s 2011 Situations 
<https://www.crousel.com/home/artists/Claire%20Fontaine/works> is an 
instructional DVD of unarmed combat moves. This is fun, a tutorial in how to 
crush an assailant’s face, break people’s limbs and knee them in the groin. The 
violence all looks so effortless and clean, a choreography of major injury. The 
tutor never breaks into a sweat, even as his hired muscle set about him, in 
what looks like a white-walled gallery. He takes them apart and interrupts the 
action to give us handy tips and observations. I cannot stop fantasising. What 
about socialism, I ask, idly deflecting a sucker punch by clapping my cupped 
palms over my imaginary assailant’s ears, making his eyes roll up into his 
skull and his brains ooze out through his nostrils.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd99ac1fd58b6d8e4d3e40c22a68de5edc8fba890%2F0_70_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Marx%20to%20Brexit%3A%20Tyneside's%20AV%20festival%20paints%20the%20whole%20world%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Marx%20to%20Brexit%3A%20Tyneside%27s%20AV%20festival%20paints%20the%20whole%20world%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd99ac1fd58b6d8e4d3e40c22a68de5edc8fba890%2F0_70_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
 Dan Perjovschi, No Graffiti on Barbwire Walls, at the AV festival. Photograph: 
Colin Davison 
That’s the idea, anyway. Dan Perjovschi <http://www.perjovschi.ro> is well 
known for his little cartoons and agitprop graffiti, which he has scrawled on 
gallery walls and windows around the world. He started doing them on his 
apartment walls in Ceausescu’s Romania. He has run riot in the NewBridge 
Project Space, a retail unit in Newcastle town centre, but the passing shoppers 
don’t seem to notice. He is at heart more genial than biting, I think.

The AV festival: from here to eternity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/mar/07/av-festival-as-slow-possible>
One wall is covered with his annotated newspaper pages. “Everybody bombs 
Syria,” he writes on top of one front page, “its like a global sport.” It goes 
on. “Cap Capitalism” and “Brexit Brex my heart.” Well OK. Perjovschi’s drawings 
are a modern equivalent to Spence’s tokens. Both proceed by a kind of stealth, 
like a rumour.

In the Mining Institute Library, on a collection of monitors, voices tell 
stories of a world that’s gone, though in Newcastle, its traces are everywhere. 
Here’sT Dan Smith 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/insideout/northeast/series2/tdansmith_newcastlepolitics.shtml>
, firebrand socialist and councillor, who was done for corruption through his 
deals with architect and businessmanJohn Poulson 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/march/15/newsid_4223000/4223045.stm>
. Between them, they carved up the city. Other elderly men talk of fighting in 
the Spanish civil war. There’s hours and hours of this footage, recounting 
memories of political struggle and fractious meetings in the Socialist Cafe in 
the Royal Arcade, demolished in Smith’s redevelopment projects in the 1960s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd68f4d7a501a26d1f7dfcbd963590bdc540e0697%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Marx%20to%20Brexit%3A%20Tyneside's%20AV%20festival%20paints%20the%20whole%20world%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Marx%20to%20Brexit%3A%20Tyneside%27s%20AV%20festival%20paints%20the%20whole%20world%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd68f4d7a501a26d1f7dfcbd963590bdc540e0697%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Haim Sokol, Testimony, 2015, at the AV festival. Photograph: Haim Sokol 
At Tyneside Cinema a man in a hi-vis jerkin swabs black rubber boots with blue 
and yellow paint. Row after row of boots. Another man in a furry jacket and red 
gloves wipes the paint off again, with a rag and a bucket of water. Both these 
absurd actions take for ever. Coming in part way through the film, I have no 
idea what’s going on. Shot in a former Soviet paper factory in Moscow, the two 
protagonists perform a number of similarly dismal rituals, swabbing and 
sweeping and lining things up, putting on wretched old shoes and taking them 
off again, then trying other pairs, pair after pair after pair.

The work of Russian artist Haim Sokol 
<http://www.avfestival.co.uk/programme/2016/events-exhibitions/haim-sokol-testimony>
, Testimony goes on for two hours. There is a great deal of emptiness in the 
dark beyond the spotlit actors. One, I read, is the Angel of History, the other 
the Migrant, but which is which? It feels like a lifetime and I suppose it’s 
meant to. If I watched at home I could cheat and fast-forward, looking for the 
juicy bits. There aren’t any. But you need the big screen, the thunderous echo, 
to get the requisite sense of portent and time lost. The film ends with a 
cratered and bullet-holed army helmet, a light going on and off under its dome, 
with an almost festive air.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F116363382&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F116363382>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F116363382&media=>
 Watch video of No Place for Fools by Oleg Mavromatti 
More frightening, and compelling, was Oleg Mavromatti’s film made from YouTube 
footage byMoscovite blogger  <https://vimeo.com/116363382>Sergey Astahov, 
produced withBoryana Rossa <http://boryanarossa.com/about/> and shown among 
one-off screenings and performances taking place every weekend of the festival. 
These are probably the most vital part of the festival. Living with his 
alcoholic parents, Astahov is a profoundly confused pro-Putin activist, an 
Orthodox Christian and a gay man struggling to reject his sexuality. Cooking 
and eating, wandering supermarkets and the streets, Astahov’s blog grows ever 
more unsettling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feef48b69f5889b17aeeaadc55eda87ddf7be84b2%2F0_0_1434_1059%2F1434.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Marx%20to%20Brexit%3A%20Tyneside's%20AV%20festival%20paints%20the%20whole%20world%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Marx%20to%20Brexit%3A%20Tyneside%27s%20AV%20festival%20paints%20the%20whole%20world%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fnewcastle-gateshead-av-festival-meanwhile-what-about-socialism-art-video-film-george-orwell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feef48b69f5889b17aeeaadc55eda87ddf7be84b2%2F0_0_1434_1059%2F1434.jpg>
 Sergey Astahov, from No Place For Fools. Photograph: Oleg Mavromatti 
We watch a terrible accident on the highway and a woman dancing in a square. 
We see someone die horribly and listen to the blogger praising the state and 
living in fear of returning to psychiatric care. And then more cooking, and 
talking and performing to camera. Sometimes he wears an Orthodox cross on a 
chain around his forehead. Sometimes he wears lipstick. No Place for Fools is 
an accidental testimony, revealing far more even than it intends, as we watch a 
life and a world unfolding before us in Russia today.

Meanwhile, what about socialism? What about everything, I ask. 

• The AV festival <http://www.avfestival.co.uk/> is in Newcastle and Gateshead 
until 27 March

• This article was amended on 6 March to correct the name of Friedrich Engels 
– he was previously referred to as Joseph. Artist Haim Sokol is Russian, not 
Ukrainian.
 