
All Tomorrow's Parties draws to a close this weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/25/all-tomorrows-parties-as-the-final-weekend-approaches-share-your-atp-memories-with-us>
, after 13 years of holiday camp-hosted, artist-curated festivals. In 1999,
Belle and Sebastian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/aug/21/belle-sebastian-third-eye-centre-stream>
 and I decided to set up the Bowlie weekender, a festival that was to be the 
precursor to ATP. Bowlie was partly born out of boredom. I was never very 
interested in actual festivals; I was a bit bemused by them. I couldn't 
understand why anyone would want to spend three days in a field, knee-deep in 
mud. One day, I was driving around England with our manager, Neil, and our 
drummer, Richard, looking for suitable venues for Belle and Sebastian to play 
at. We're really fussy about that. While passing through Nottingham, I spotted 
a young indie type with broken spectacles trying to cross the road. For some 
reason it occurred to me that we should give this person somewhere to go. I 
thought: "What chance has this guy ever got at getting a girlfriend? I mean, I 
find it hard enough to get a girlfriend, but this guy – he has no hope! So 
let's put him together with like-minded people."

Bowlie never seemed hard to organise. Good ideas, the ones that are really 
meant to work, come together quite easily. We worked as a team: it was me, 
Neil, and our promoter,Barry Hogan 
<http://www.clashmusic.com/feature/atp-week-a-brief-history-with-barry-hogan>, 
who went on to found ATP. I'd worked at a holiday camp in Ayr, in Scotland, in 
the 1980s, so I knew that kind of venue would work. We couldn't get the site in 
Ayr, so we chose the Pontins in Camber Sands, on the south coast of England, 
instead. Each of us, consulting with the rest of Belle and Sebastian, picked a 
third of the bands. At the top of my list were theVelvet Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/27/lou-reed-velvet-underground-dies>
, Blondie andMorrissey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/17/morrissey-auobiography-10-things-we-learned>
. But we couldn't book any of them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F81bVbbHY4oo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F81bVbbHY4oo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F81bVbbHY4oo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=81bVbbHY4oo>

We weren't fancy back then. We took the train, with all our instruments. We 
got off at Rye station, and that's when we first clocked all the indie kids, 
milling about, not quite sure where to go or what to do. With their suitcases, 
labels, and ill-fitting overcoats, they looked like second world war evacuees. 
That's when I thought, "Oh God, what have we done?"

There was a huge queue to get into the site, so Stevie Jackson, Belle and 
Sebastian's guitarist, and I decided to busk some tunes for everybody who was 
waiting. Now, with the internet, there's more of a democracy between bands and 
fans. But there wasn't back in 1999. We'd spent all this time organising an 
event for a bunch of people, so it was great to meet them face to face. The 
music biz likes to build high walls between the bands and the punters, but we 
wanted to break them down. When people got inside the camp, they realised how 
integrated the festival was; that their chalet was right next toMercury Rev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/jan/14/popandrock.shopping5>'s, which 
was right next to Mogwai's.

It wasn't until the actual festival began that we realised how hands-on we all 
had to be. I didn't stop for the whole weekend. I felt like Mother Superior 
running about, and by the time our gig came around it was a bit of a struggle 
to play; we were already rushed off our feet trying to make sure everything 
else was going to plan.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FF223FrAc8-s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FF223FrAc8-s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FF223FrAc8-s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F223FrAc8-s>

We had a specially programmed TV station showing in the campsite's chalets, 
and Pontins gave me a guy called George to help out with making it work. George 
was a young guy who worked at the camp and he didn't really know what the hell 
was going on. I told him: "You're going to keep the TV station running. All you 
have to do is sit here, look at the programme and put the tapes in at the right 
time." But I don't think he'd been out very much, and he got swept up in the 
whole festival experience. Every time I turned on the bloody television there 
would be either a blank screen or the wrong programme would be showing. So I 
kept on having to run back, find George and sit him back down in the office.

Over the years, I've watched a lot of great performances at ATP and the two 
Bowlie events. In terms of my favourite memory, it would be hard to see past
Edwyn Collins' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/mar/18/edwyn-collins-understated-stream>
 show at the second Bowlie event in 2010, when members of Franz Ferdinand 
joined him on stage. It was terrific; it sounded like all my old records of 
his. At the first Bowlie we invited Camera Obscura. This was when they were a 
fledgling band. I remember them being beautiful and fragile, playing to about 
three people. That was great.

I guess our reason for putting on Bowlie was akin to the Butlins motto: "Our 
true intent is all for your delight." We wanted to give the indie guys and 
girls a delightful weekend! By the time we came back to curate Bowlie 2, the 
spirit was still intact – except everything was cleaner and the films and the 
TV channels were all working. Everything about Bowlie seemed like a very 
natural thing for us, and Barry did a great job with ATP afterwards. But I 
think that the navel-gazing element, with the curators going on about their 
favourite bands, can prevent new things from happening, so I think it's fine 
that it's ending. Maybe Barry will come back with an even crazier scheme. In 
fact, we've been talking about different things already. Who knows, maybe in 20 
years someone will think about starting it up again.

• Stuart Murdoch was talking to Harriet Gibsone
 