
Ancient Greece and Rome make awesome settings for children’s books, as anyone 
will know if they’ve read Rick Riordan’s Percy Jackson books, The Roman 
Mysteries by Caroline Lawrence, or Rosemary’s Sutcliff’s The Eagle of the 
Ninth. But while these books are very clearly inspired by the classical world, 
many other children’s books have also been influenced by the legends and 
language of Greek and Rome, in ways you may not have imagined…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438950844773%2F0a8cfc27-f13a-40e5-8378-e2f530652d2e-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children's%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children%27s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438950844773%2F0a8cfc27-f13a-40e5-8378-e2f530652d2e-2060x1374.jpeg>
 Many of our best loved children’s books were inspired by ancient Greece and 
Rome, though you may not realise it at first. 
1. The Harry Potter Series 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/harry-potter-boxed-set-the-complete-collection-adult-paper.html>
 by JK Rowling

JK Rowling actually studied classics and French at university, so it’s 
unsurprising the Harry Potter books are packed full of classical references. 
Most of the exotic sounding spells are really just simple commands translated 
into Latin – for example “crucio” means “I torture”, “evanesco” translates as 
“I vanish” and “accio” means “I summon”. Rowling also drew on the ancient world 
when naming many of her characters. For instance, “dolor” means “grief” in 
Latin, while “umbra” means “shadow”, and what could be more appropriate for the 
exquisitely nasty Dolores Umbridge? As for Draco, not only does his name mean 
“serpent” or “dragon”, but in ancient Athens there was a famously vicious 
lawmaker called Draco who put people to death for stealing fruit or just being 
lazy - no wonder he inspired our word “draconian”. Draco’s mother, Narcissa 
Malfoy, is named after the vain Narcissus, the mythical youth who starved to 
death while gazing at his own reflection, whereas Professor McGonagall is named 
after the Roman goddess of wisdom, Minerva. Another fun name is the vampire 
Sanguine, who Harry meets at one of Slughorn’s parties and whose name comes 
from the Latin word for blood, “sanguis”. Even more accurate would have been 
“sanguisuga” - bloodsucker!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438950034041%2F17cbd1c2-c652-470e-85ea-042141fb0497-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children's%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children%27s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438950034041%2F17cbd1c2-c652-470e-85ea-042141fb0497-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Tom Felton as Draco Malfoy in Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince 

2. The Hunger Games series 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hunger-games-trilogy-classic.html> by Suzanne 
Collins

 You might have already spotted that the Hunger Games are rather like Roman 
gladiatorial contests, but did you know that the dystopian state of Panem is 
named after a Latin quotation? The Roman poet Juvenal complained that the Roman 
people only cared about “panem et circenses” - “bread and circuses”. Bread was 
the free corn dole given out to all Rome’s poor by the emperor, while circuses 
referred to all the chariot races and gladiatorial games paid for by the 
emperors to keep their people happy and prevent rebellion - the similarities 
with Collins’ dystopian state are clear to see. What is more, President Snow is 
named after the harsh Roman general Coriolanus, who showed utter contempt for 
the Roman poor, while the mythical founder of Rome, Romulus, gives his name to 
Romulus Thread, the violent Head Peacekeeper of District 12. The Head 
Gamemakers, Plutarch Heavensbee and Seneca Crane, are named after two Roman 
writers - Plutarch, who wrote biographies of famous heroes, generals and 
politicians, and Seneca, playwright, politician and tutor to the infamous 
emperor Nero. Nero later forced Seneca to commit suicide, just as Seneca Crane 
is locked in a room with nothing but a bowl of poisonous nightlock berries. 
While many who support Panem are named after members of the Roman establishment 
– emperors, generals, politicians – some of those who challenge the regime are 
also given appropriate Roman names. Cinna’s name, for example, recalls Lucius 
Cornelius Cinna, who rebelled against two successive Roman dictators.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438948933831%2F687debef-bae0-4387-b4ee-9e7dd9ffbc90-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children's%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children%27s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438948933831%2F687debef-bae0-4387-b4ee-9e7dd9ffbc90-2060x1236.jpeg>
 President Coriolanus Snow in the film of Suzanne Collins’ novel, Catching Fire.

3. The CHERUB series 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=robert+muchamore&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 by Robert Muchamore

Although the word Cherub comes originally from the Hebrew, the Cherub logo 
actually resembles the Roman god Cupid who the Roman poet Apuleius describes as 
“a winged boy … who is armed with flames and arrows”. The God of desire, Cupid, 
is at first glance a sweet little boy with wings, but his arrows can infect 
anyone, god or mortal, with maddening, destructive love. So despite his 
innocent exterior, he is actually one of the most dangerous and feared gods - a 
suitable model for the CHERUB agents.

4. The Artemis Fowl series 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/artemis-fowl-3.html> by Eoin Colfer

LEP Recon agent Holly Short is similarly sweet to look at but unexpectedly 
deadly - appropriate given that Cupid was her great-grandfather. Holly’s 
brusque commander, Julius Root, is named after the famous Roman commander 
Julius Caesar, and as for Artemis Fowl, he says himself that Artemis is 
“generally a female name, after the Greek goddess of the hunt. But every now 
and then, a male comes along with such skill at hunting that he earns the right 
to use the name. I am that male. Artemis the hunter.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438952362882%2F82597547-bd68-447d-b339-63edf36a8ba3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children's%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children%27s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438952362882%2F82597547-bd68-447d-b339-63edf36a8ba3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Detail of Cupid from Galatea by Raphael Photograph: Araldo de Luca/Araldo de 
Luca/CORBIS 
5. Kidnapped <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/kidnapped-15.html> by Robert 
Louis Stevenson

Stevenson’s classic tale follows a model set around 2800 years ago by The 
Odyssey, a Greek epic poem normally attributed to Homer. Both Odysseus and 
David Balfour were dramatically shipwrecked, and follow a winding path home 
around Greece and Scotland respectively, running into various dangers along the 
way but also helped by the kindness and hospitality of strangers. When David 
Balfour returns home he must reclaim his family home from his uncle Ebeneezer, 
just as Odysseus needs to challenge the men who have taken up residence in his 
house, hoping to marry Odysseus’ wife Penelope.

6. Winnie the Pooh 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/winnie-the-pooh-collection.html> by AA Milne

“If anyone knows anything about anything,” said Bear to himself, “it’s Owl who 
knows something about something.” Owls are normally wise in children’s books, 
although Owl in Winnie the Pooh can sometimes get a bit confused about how to 
spell words like measels or buttered toast. This link between owls and 
intelligence comes from Greek mythology, for Athena, the goddess of wisdom, had 
an owl as her symbol and was often described as γλαυκῶπις (glaukopis), which is 
normally translated as “bright-eyed” or “owl-eyed”. The clever owl in TH 
White’s Sword in the Stone is actually named after an ancient Greek scientist, 
Archimedes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438950639356%2F0c3c3cf6-cdca-448b-935c-7e4448e7fcb2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children's%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children%27s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438950639356%2F0c3c3cf6-cdca-448b-935c-7e4448e7fcb2-2060x1236.jpeg>
7. Aesop’s Fables <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/complete-fables.html>

Most people have heard of Aesop’s fables, but it is easy to forget that these 
popular children’s stories are more than 2000 years old and that some of them 
are about real historical characters - for example The Astrologer Who Fell Into 
the Well is inspired by Thales of Miletus, a Greek philosopher who was so 
intent on stargazing one night that he really did fall straight down a well. 
The ancient historian Herodotus mentions a slave called Αἰσώπου τοῦ λογοποιοῦ - 
Aesop the storyteller - who may be the author of many of the tales, and later 
all ancient Greek fables were attributed to Aesop.

8. The Chronicles of Narnia 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/complete-chronicles-of-narnia.html> by CS 
Lewis

When Lucy first stumbles into Narnia she meets Mr Tumnus the faun, half man 
and half goat. In Roman mythology fauns were followers of Bacchus, the god of 
wine, and Mr Tumnus says that Bacchus used to visit them in Narnia, and “the 
streams would run with wine instead of water”. The children meet other 
creatures based on classical myth - centaurs, minotaurs, satyrs and dryads. In 
The Last Battle, the final book in the series, a donkey dresses in an old lion 
skin and pretends to be Aslan - just like Aesop’s fable of The Ass in the 
Lion’s Skin. At the end of The Last Battle, we find out that both Narnia and 
the Britain where the Pevensey children grew up are merely the “shadowlands” 
and the “real Narnia” is revealed. The children are amazed, but Professor 
Digory Kirke cries out “It’s all in Plato, all in Plato: bless me, what do they 
teach them at these schools!” Plato was a Greek philosopher who argued that the 
world we live in is only a shadow of the real world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438949514181%2Fa0eb2b1b-eef0-4077-a612-d2a3a1412c0a-2060x1359.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children's%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Harry%20Potter%20Latin%20to%20Hunger%20Games%20Rome%3A%20the%20classical%20jokes%20hiding%20in%20your%20favourite%20children%27s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fgreek-gods-and-latin-jokes-hiding-in-your-favourite-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438949514181%2Fa0eb2b1b-eef0-4077-a612-d2a3a1412c0a-2060x1359.jpeg>
 Patrick Kake as a centaur in the film version of CS Lewis’ novel, The Lion, 
the Witch and the Wardrobe. 
9. The Amber Spyglass 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/amber-spyglass-266221.html> by Philip Pullman

Lyra and Will’s journey to the land of the dead is very like a journey to 
Hades, the ancient world of the dead. Harpies, the half-bird, half-woman 
creatures of Greek mythology, terrorise Pullman’s underworld, and the boatman 
is described as “aged beyond age, huddled in a robe of sacking bound with 
string, crippled and bent,” closely resembling Seneca’s description of the 
mythical Charon as “a filthy old man who conveys the terrified ghosts” across 
to Hades. A ghost tells Lyra and Will that there is “no hope of freedom, or 
joy” in the land of the dead, just like in the Odyssey, when a ghost tells 
Odysseus that Hades is ἀτερπέα χῶρον (aterpea choron) – a “land without joy”. 
Lyra herself is named after the Greek λύρα (lyra), which means lyre, song, or 
poetic genius – appropriate for Lyra, whose chief gift is to spin stories and 
lies to beguile her listeners. By telling stories she enchants the cruel 
harpies, just as the Greek hero Orpheus tamed wild animals by singing and 
playing on his lyre. Orpheus also voyaged to the world of the dead to seek for 
his dead wife, just as Lyra journeys there to rescue Roger.

10. The Discworld novels 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/first-discworld-novels.html> by Terry 
Pratchett

Pratchett plays with mythology from all over the world in his novels, but 
several of his books deal with classical mythology in particular. InThe 
Wintersmith <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wintersmith-2.html>, for example, 
Roland must save the Summer Lady from the underworld, in the same way as 
Demeter travelled to Hades to rescue Persephone, the Greek goddess of 
springtime. Meanwhile Tiffany Aching is given the cornucopia, or horn of 
plenty, created by the god Blind Io from the horn of a goat, just as the Greek 
god Zeus created a cornucopia from the horn of a goat who nursed him as an 
infant. InSmall Gods <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/small-gods.html>, Brutha 
meets several philosophers who have counterparts in ancient Greek history, 
while inPyramids <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pyramids.html>, the hero 
Pteppic meets a sphinx who asks him the famous riddle, “what walks on four legs 
in the morning, two legs at midday and three legs in the evening?”. This comes 
from the Greek myth of Oedipus, the first to successfully solve the sphinx’s 
riddle, although ancient accounts differ on exactly what riddle the sphinx 
asked. Needless to say, in Pratchett’s version Pteppic solves the riddle by 
pointing out various flaws in the sphinx’s reasoning - indeed throughout 
Pratchett’s books, Greek myths are generally reinterpreted to show what they 
would be like if they happened in a more realistic manner, rather than in the 
dramatic mode of mythology and legend. So while Troy was burned to the ground 
by ancient Greek soldiers, on Discworld the city of Tsort is destroyed when the 
accident-prone wizard Rincewind knocks over a lamp by mistake.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books> 