
Exhibition 

Georgia O’Keeffe’s first solo show in the UK for a generation arrives at the 
Tate Modern in London in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/27/tate-modern-okeeffe-and-rauschenberg-shows-2016>
. The “mother of American modernism” is famous for herlush, sensual paintings 
of flowers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/20/georgia-okeeffe-painting-world-record-price-art-woman>
 such as Black Iris and Oriental Poppies, but she also excelled as a landscape 
artist. After making annual pilgrimages to New Mexico, she moved there for good 
following the death of her husband, the photographer/gallery owner Alfred 
Stieglitz, in 1946. It was this rugged desert landscape that inspired such 
starkly glowing works as Black Place and White Place. The Tate’s ambitious 
summer retrospective of her work promises to range widely and deeply, showing 
how influential O’Keeffe was to artists of her own generation and those that 
came after. This show offers a fantastic opportunity to dive into the life and 
work of one of the 20th century’s most important – and intriguing – artists.

Film 

Anomalisa <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa> is the story of Michael 
Stone, a lonely self-help author who checks into Cincinnati’s Al Fregoli hotel 
(as in Fregoli delusion, a psychiatric disorder that causes the paranoid 
sufferer to believe everyone in the world is the same person), where he 
experiences an existential crisis alongside cocktails at the bar and in-room 
TV. Tender and sinister by turns, this uncanny new work from American auteur 
Charlie Kaufman (Being John Malkovich, Synecdoche) is played entirely by 
puppets. David Thewlis voices Stone, Tom Noonan Stone’s wife, ex-girlfriend, 
taxi-driver, concierge and everyone else – apart from Lisa, a shy woman Stone 
meets at the hotel (played by Jennifer Jason Leigh). There’s something 
undeniably weird about watching latex puppets sit on the toilet, masturbate and 
have sex. But the overall effect is not only eerie but peculiarly touching.

Television

It is a truth universally acknowledged that a classic novel in possession of a 
good plot must be in want of sexing up by Andrew Davies. The screenwriter who 
put Colin Firth in a wet shirt for Pride and Prejudice now turns toWar and Peace
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/29/incestuous-affair-bbc-war-and-peace-helene-anatole>
, improving on Tolstoy with an incestuous love affair between siblings Hélène 
and Anatole Kuragin. Controversy aside, any adaptation by Davies (who also made 
Bleak House for TV) is worth watching, and with a cast that includes Gillian 
Anderson, Paul Dano, Stephen Rea and Jim Broadbent, this promises to be epic in 
every way. For those who like to supplement their costume dramas with dark, 
twisty police thrillers the return of Jed Mercurio’s contemporary TV classic 
Line of Duty will be just as exciting. Vicky McClure and Adrian Dunbar are back 
as police internal affairs squad AC-12 investigates an armed response squad led 
by Sgt Danny Waldron (the excellent Daniel Mays).

Memoirs 

Towering memoirist or insufferable narcissist? Karl Ove Knausgaard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/01/karl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark>
 divides opinion but there’s no denying that the latest instalment of My 
Struggle, his series of fictionalised memoirs, will be one of the big books of 
the year. After some serious navel-gazing on his childhood, adolescence and 
time spent teaching on a remote island, this chapter of his exhaustive 
autobiography explores Knausgård’s early days as a writer. If the relentless 
and forensic self-examination of the Norwegian miserablist doesn’t appeal, then 
there’s memoir of a different kind from Canongate, whose My Old Man, edited by 
Ted Kessler, pulls together tales of paternal experience from people including 
Florence Welch and Paul Weller. The sons and daughters of Leonard Cohen, Ian 
Dury and Roy Castle are among those reflecting on their fathers.

Theatre

A new era dawns at Shakespeare’s Globe as Emma Rice takes up the reins as 
artistic director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/01/shakespeares-globe-emma-rice-new-artistic-director>
. The dynamic director of the Cornish company Kneehigh is known for her punchy, 
visual, physical theatre so she should bring something radically new to the 
open air playhouse. Although the programme will not be announced until 5 
January, Rice is already talking about slashing the plays’ lengths, more 
relaxed performances and losing the doublet and hose. Meanwhile, in Stratford, 
Paapa Essiedu is taking the title role in a new RSC production by man of the 
moment Simon Godwin. After making his name at the Royal Court, the director 
behind the National Theatre’s acclaimedMan and Superman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/26/man-and-superman-review-ralph-fiennes-national-theatre>
 should bring a fresh, vigorous sensibility to the Prince of Denmark.
 