
The piercing cold breath of the snow-covered mountains, which persuaded the 
man from BT to accept that cup of tea, may have saved the life Blaenavon's 
first ever literary festival.

Jane White, who owns Former Liptons cafe (it was formerly Liptons) and several 
other buildings in town, poured the tea and sent a frantic message to James 
Hanna, founder of the Blaenavon booktown experiment. He sprinted up and down 
the main street urging on the frozen men perched on ladders against the 
street's telephone poles.

And by the time the tea was finished, all trace of the festival banners that 
had been adorning said telephone poles was gone. A warning from BT that the 
banners were unauthorised, and would be liable to a Â£50 fine per pole, had been 
speedily heeded.

The festival - taking place this week - was a glimmer in Jo Wyborn's eye when 
she returned from Bath after the Christmas holidays. It has been pulled 
together in only seven weeks, out of small change, inspiration, blackmail, and 
the calling in of every possible favour owed.

The whole thing is being organised on a budget that wouldn't pay for a round 
of after-speaker's drinkies at the starry Hay-on-Wye Festival, just over the 
mountain and a world away. The poster fines would have tipped the infant 
festival from the possibility of breaking even into the certainty of losing 
money.

Stop-press events are being added by the hour. The university academic who is 
converting Nappyland into a travel bookshop - very slowly - was feeling a 
little left out, and has offered to do a spot of fly-posting.

Jonathan-the-clock, whose face says "closed" on the rare occasions when the 
sign on his door does not, is hosting a whole improbable series of workshops in 
his half-built shop, including bodhran drumming and wire jewellery making.

Wayne Lewis, proprietor of the wondrous Morris butcher's shop, is having what 
his fellow traders insist on calling a cheese signing, a demonstration of 
recipes with local ingredients.

And Blaenavon has a new witch. There seems to be something in the local air 
that doesn't agree with witches - possibly it's the number of chapels. Louise, 
the town's first witch and fortuneteller, had to close her shop due to 
unforeseen circumstances. Now there is a new shop, Spirit of the Green where 
the latest witch, Jan McDonald, is due to read from and sign her new book. Due 
however to unforeseen circumstances, barring a spot of magic, Cottage 
Witchcraft won't be back from the printer's in time.

There are hammering noises from behind the sodden chipboard blanking a narrow 
shop window. It is historic chipboard. According to local gossip, this is the 
very last vacant shop sold in the town, for a price that would have bought a 
whole terrace two years ago.

At the bottom of the hill a handsome double-fronted stone building housed a 
thoroughly traditional firm of solicitors, Watkins and Gunn. The notice in 
their window gives a vivid snapshop of the old life of the town. "Miners 
compensation. Did you, your father, or grandfather work for British Coal on or 
after June 4, 1954? Did they suffer from a respiratory problem?" Now another 
notice has joined it. The firm, a pillar of the town for as long as the mining 
fathers and grandfathers can remember, has closed. Clients are referred to the 
branch at the next town down the valley. The building will probably be sold. 
"This decision has not been taken without a great deal of thought."

James Hanna, who had been peering into the Chinese takeaway wondering if it's 
just opening late or has actually closed, is ripe for conversion. He has given 
the notice a great deal of thought. He had been looking for what, being 
American, he calls an attorney: instead he wonders if he has found his next 
bookshop.
 