
The play was called Don’t Judge Me, a satire that poked fun at tabloid 
stereotypes of British Muslims. It was written, directed and produced by a 
15-year-old fromBrighton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton> named Amer 
Deghayes, who had taken inspiration from some of the less considered headlines 
of the Daily Mail and the Sun. “They were so ludicrous they made me laugh,” he 
told one of the adults who helped with the production. “The way they called 
young people feral, wow!” The play, which was set to a rap soundtrack performed 
by Amer’s own group, Blak n’ Deka, toured theatres on the south coast in 2010, 
winning awards and plenty of plaudits.

Amer, who had his sights set on becoming a serious journalist, was the eldest 
son in his family. Two of his brothers were twins, Abdulrahman and Abdullah, a 
year younger and both keen footballers. Next was Jaffar, a studious, slight 
13-year-old who had always wanted to become a fireman. The brothers bonded 
through kickabouts in their local park and swimming, running across shingle 
beaches headfirst into the English Channel. On Facebook, pictures show a 
grinning Amer pretending to swallow a starfish beside Brighton pier.

When he wasn’t spending time with his family, Amer hung out with his best 
friend, Ibrahim Kamara, a refugee from Sierra Leone. They did everything 
together, often writing rap tracks and politicised film scripts. Their last 
joint project was to have been a documentary exploring the insecurities of 
adolescence, titled Me, Myself & Before. In a fundraising pitch from November 
2012, Amer and Ibrahim wrote: “It is a time in life when we are uncertain of 
the future, when some feel different, isolated and lonely. Teenagers are often 
confused and feel like outcasts.”

Their request for funds was made by Cultures Club, a Brighton youth arts 
organisation, and approved by the Heritage Lottery Fund. But by the time the 
funding was confirmed in the summer of 2013, it was too late – Cultures Club 
had lost all contact with Ibrahim and Amer.

In fact, in October 2013, Amer left Brighton for Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, where he joined a radical Islamist 
militia fighting Bashar al-Assad’s army. Ibrahim soon joined him, along with 
two of Amer’s younger brothers, Jaffar and Abdullah. Two years later, only Amer 
is still alive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fwhat-makes-a-bunch-of-teenagers-from-brighton-go-to-syria-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20makes%20a%20bunch%20of%20teenagers%20from%20Brighton%20go%20to%20Syria%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fwhat-makes-a-bunch-of-teenagers-from-brighton-go-to-syria-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20makes%20a%20bunch%20of%20teenagers%20from%20Brighton%20go%20to%20Syria%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fwhat-makes-a-bunch-of-teenagers-from-brighton-go-to-syria-video&media=>
What makes a bunch of teenagers from Brighton go to Syria? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/31/what-makes-a-bunch-of-teenagers-from-brighton-go-to-syria-video>
The young men left behind a large group of friends in Brighton, many of whom 
also appear to have been radicalised. Among them, police identified at least 20 
people they deemed likely to travel to Syria; most of them were under 18, and 
at least half were converts from non‑Muslim backgrounds. Together, these 
teenagers so alarmed the authorities that Brighton’s senior police officers and 
council chiefs held secret meetings in early 2014 to discuss the possibility of 
a terror attack from its residents – and the seaside city was placed on the 
register of areas requiring extra support under the government’s 
counter-extremism strategy.

The question of what motivates young British men and women to leave their 
homes and join jihadist groups fighting in Syria has been the subject of heated 
public debate. The prevailing orthodoxy cites Islamist ideology as the 
principal driver – and it is obviously a necessary element, if not always the 
predominant motivation. What has been less understood is the process by which 
young people grow alienated with their own country, and seek the validation of 
their identity in a faraway civil war.

The story of Amer Deghayes, his brothers and best friend provides unusual 
insight into the radicalisation of young men

Based on detailed testimony from family, friends, police, social services and 
counter-terrorism officials, the story of Amer Deghayes and his brothers 
provides unusual insight into the radicalisation of young men in Britain. Their 
journey from the south coast to Syria cannot be reduced to a single factor, but 
it involves racist abuse, allegations of police neglect, and the collective 
failure of numerous authorities – both those charged with protecting vulnerable 
young people, and those charged with preventing radicalisation.

Their story echoes what we know of the young European Muslims involved in the 
recent terror attacks in Paris and Brussels – namely, a culture of delinquency 
that evolves into extremism, as well as a connection between radicalised 
siblings. It poses a difficult question about integration in Britain: if 
multiculturalism is faltering in what is regarded as one of the UK’s most 
liberal cities, then what hope is there for other places? Above all, it 
confirms how poorly we understand what drives young Britons to the battlefields 
of Syria.

In the summer of 2008, the Deghayes family arrived in Saltdean, a coastal 
village a few miles east of Brighton’s city centre. They had spent the previous 
two years in Libya with their extended family, who lived a comfortable 
middle-class existence in Tripoli. But Amer’s mother and father, Einas and 
Abubaker, missed England and decided it was time to return.

Omar Deghayes <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/omar-deghayes>, Abubaker’s 
brother and Amer’s uncle, had recently returned to Brighton. Omar was arrested 
while living in Lahore in April 2002, and deported to Guantánamo Bay, where he 
was tortured. One incident, in which a US guard violently attacked him, left 
Omar blind in his right eye. Omar was never charged with any crime. According 
to his lawyers, the US had initially identified him as a jihadist who had 
fought in Chechnya, and said it had videotape of him brandishing a Kalashnikov. 
After obtaining the footage, the lawyers said it was a completely different 
person, a Saudi jihadist who had died in 2004. (The British government 
requested his release, along with four other British residents detained at 
Guantánamo Bay, in August 2007.)

Abubaker and Einas wanted to build a new future in Saltdean. Amer and the 
twins, Abdulrahman and Abdullah, were sent to Longhill High, a school whose 
pupils came from some of Brighton’s most deprived areas. According to family 
friends, the Deghayes boys, who were among a tiny minority of Muslim pupils, 
were mercilessly targeted. Taunts of “Paki” and “terrorist” followed them 
around the playground. In one incident, students poured water on the twins in 
the canteen. Saltdean Oval, the park where the boys played football on summer 
evenings, soon became a place they feared.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F698c7846d1697722a3f4f168a464f9f769f6668a%2F0_114_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Brighton%20to%20the%20battlefield%3A%20how%20four%20young%20Britons%20were%20drawn%20to%20jihad%20%7C%20Mark%20Townsend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Brighton%20to%20the%20battlefield%3A%20how%20four%20young%20Britons%20were%20drawn%20to%20jihad%20%7C%20Mark%20Townsend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F698c7846d1697722a3f4f168a464f9f769f6668a%2F0_114_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 The Deghayes family live in Saltdean, near Brighton, East Sussex. Photograph: 
Andrew Hasson 
Over time, the attacks escalated. Anti-Muslim graffiti was painted on a 
seafront promenade in Saltdean only 200m from the Deghayes family home. On 1 
June 2009, according to police logs, the words “Behead all Muslims” were daubed 
in foot-high capital letters beside beach huts that lined the coastal path. As 
soon as council workers scrubbed away the words, they would reappear.

The threats were not merely the work of local kids. Sussex police had received 
intelligence that the neo-Nazi National Front had set up a chapter in Saltdean 
in order to target the Deghayes family. “Other organised rightwing groups were 
also believed to have targeted the family,” the logs stated, citing the 
anti-Muslim English Defence League and Casuals United, a network of far-right 
football hooligans, who view themselves as a “ready-made army” against radical 
Islam. Both groups invited similarly minded individuals to target the family’s 
Saltdean home, publishing the “addresses of the mosque [that the family 
attended] and homes on rightwing websites with a call for action”, according to 
a police intelligence assessment.

Police logs documenting a single month, September 2009, reveal the extent to 
which the family was targeted. On 3 September, the windscreen of the Deghayes’s 
family car, parked outside their detached home on Arundel Drive East, was 
smashed. On 7 September, the twins, Abdulrahman and Abdullah, were racially 
abused at school and the perpetrators were overheard insulting the boys’ 
mother. (The twins retaliated violently and were suspended.)

Less than a week later, Einas was travelling on the number 27 bus from 
Brighton with Amer and his brothers when a group of youths surrounded them. 
Leaning towards the family the mob made throat slitting gestures and told them: 
“You are dead.” On 11 September, shortly after nightfall, a large group of 
youths congregated in the front garden, hurling bottles, bricks and stones at 
the house, smashing the dining room window. On 14 September, one of the twins 
received anonymous threats on Facebook and the Deghayes’s house and car were 
attacked again. On 22 September, when walking home from school, the twins were 
ambushed by a group wearing balaclavas. During the assault, Abdullah was 
stamped repeatedly on the head and kicked in the ribs.

The police record for the month of September 2009 ends there – but there is an 
addendum stating that the family “did not report many other incidents during 
the same month”.

Across Brighton, Amer’s best friend, Ibrahim Kamara was enduring his own 
nightmare. He had arrived in Britain with his mother in 2004 as a refugee from 
Sierra Leone. When he was one year old, anti-government rebels from the 
Revolutionary United Front had attacked their village outside the capital, 
Freetown. “I picked my baby up and we ran for our lives. Violence is not a joke 
to me. I’ve lived it, I’ve seen what it can do,” Ibrahim’s mother Khadijah told 
me when we spoke earlier this year.

Ibrahim met Amer at al-Quds mosque on Dyke Road in Brighton, where Amer’s 
father was an influential figure. The two teenagers clicked immediately: in a 
milieu where toughness was valued, both were almost conspicuously laid-back; 
they brushed off the taunts of racists and bullies, and were regarded as 
likable popular boys. Plus, they were considered decent rappers – among the 
best of their peers. “They were well-liked, funny guys,” said their friend 
Tommy Simmons, now 19. “Ibrahim made everyone laugh, someone who made you feel 
better.” When he wasn’t rapping, Ibrahim helped his mother out at her charity 
shop, Strive in the Name of Allah, on Lewes Road in Brighton.

In the spring of 2010, Ibrahim was savagely beaten on the streets of 
Bevendean, north Brighton. According to his mother, the father of a teenager 
who had earlier made racial taunts against her and her son “paid somebody to 
beat Ibrahim”. Her son was in hospital for days. “They used to call us Paki, 
nigger, all sorts,” she recalled.

In 2010, social services officials charged with looking after the Deghayes 
family concluded that racism eroded the family’s “coping capacities”. While the 
twins, Abdullah and Abdulrahman, became mired in daily battles with their 
tormentors, Amer kept his cool. “My position, even with the racism, was to deal 
with such things in a non-violent way. I didn’t let it affect me, I didn’t let 
it bring me down,” he told me in an interview earlier this year.

The family sought protection from the police. During the sustained attacks on 
their home in 2009, seven arrests were made but no one was charged. Other 
incidents of alleged racist abuse involving the Deghayes boys were not pursued 
by the Crown Prosecution Service, in some cases because of insufficient 
evidence, and in others because they were not considered in the public interest.

In March 2010 the twins, Abdulrahman and Abdullah, told social workers they 
felt racism existed within the police and that not enough was done in response 
to their reports of harassment and antisocial behaviour. They felt their 
reports were “not investigated”. Jackie Chase, a friend of the family, told me: 
“The authorities became something threatening rather than supportive.” In 2010, 
the boys’ father, Abubaker, told police that “his sons were being radicalised 
by the lack of police activity about the complaints”.

Sussex police does not divulge dealings with individual members of the public 
but said that it investigated all complaints against the force. However, it 
would not be until the end of 2011 that the force arranged for a non-white 
officer to meet the Deghayes boys and officially discuss why they felt the 
police had treated them unfairly.

Subject to sustained racism and uncertain whether they could trust the 
authorities, the Deghayes boys must have been tempted to retreat into the 
stability of the family home. But life within the whitewashed walls of their 
detached house in Saltdean was far from serene. For years, the police received 
allegations that the family had also endured the violent temper of Abubaker. 
Reports of the conflict within their home surfaced again in November 2010 when 
a concerned third party contacted a charity for help.

As the authorities investigated, further allegations emerged, including one 
that Abubaker had whipped his sons with electrical cables. Scarring and 
numerous bruises were reportedly identified on the children’s backs. Abubaker 
strongly denies these allegations.
 Amer Deghayes on Brighton beach. Photograph: facebook 
On 23 November 2010, at a child protection case conference, social workers, 
police and healthcare workers concluded that Amer, Abdulrahman and Abdullah, 
and Jaffar, “were subject to actual, emotional and physical harm”.

Although the officials drew up child protection plans for the boys, it seems 
that the authorities again failed to effectively protect them. Abubaker was 
arrested and subsequently released. His stringent bail conditions prohibited 
him from visiting the family home, and even Saltdean itself. Yet the father 
“persistently broke” his bail conditions and continued to visit the boys, 
according to the police. During one visit Abubaker allegedly prevented calls 
for help by disconnecting the landline.

Eventually, the boys retracted their initial statements against their father 
and no charges were brought. “The children provided letters withdrawing their 
support for a prosecution. They [later] told police that they had been told 
what to write by Abubaker,” according to police logs.

Abubaker has always strenuously denied any acts of violence against his wife 
or his sons. He says such allegations were part of a racist vendetta propagated 
by his enemies.

For Amer and his brothers, the cumulative impact was profound. The council’s 
team for helping troubled families believed that the boys had suffered 
“significant emotional abuse”. Their alleged exposure to violence was 
considered so deleterious that they might have suffered “symptoms of 
post-traumatic stress”.

In early February 2011, Einas and her sons fled Saltdean for Brighton. Their 
emergency accommodation, in Preston Drove, was a Victorian maisonette among the 
neat rows of suburban terracing near Preston Park. The house, supplied by the 
council, was riddled with damp, and water dribbled down the wall when it 
rained. It was so draughty that the heating costs helped push the family into 
debt.

One official from the council’s Integrated Team for Families, who made a 
routine visit in March 2011, described a wretched scene. The entire family were 
ill in their beds. “The house was freezing and water was leaking from a ceiling 
light socket on Jaffar as he tried to sleep in his sodden bed.”

The family continued to suffer racist abuse, according to social services, as 
did Ibrahim Kamara and his mother Khadijah. In total, Khadijah says she was 
forced to move her family 11 times over six years after being targeted by 
racists. “We had to move to a place in Seaford where there was no fridge, no 
kitchen. My kids and I had to live on junk food,” she told me last December. 
For eight weeks in 2013, Ibrahim and his mother slept on the floor of her 
charity shop. “Having to move because of racial harassment affected my children 
greatly and because of that it affected me,” said Khadijah.

Amer focused his energy on his studies, completing a work placement at 
Saltdean library. The twins, however, had started fighting back. During the 
spring of 2011, Abdullah and Abdulrahman won a series of street brawls against 
their former bullies. By the summer they had secured the respect of other 
troubled teenagers, many of whom were already known to the city’s social 
services and police.

The 15-year-old twins soon became the leaders of a gang of about 20 teenagers 
that was feared throughout Brighton. Abdullah mugged passersby for mobile 
phones and shoplifted. He was also investigated for an alleged violent assault 
on an Italian student. The southern stretch of London Road, a down-at-heel 
strip containing pound shops and amusement arcades, became the gang’s turf.

Amer watched helplessly as his other brother, Jaffar, 13, was sucked into the 
violence. Towards the end of 2011, staff from social services observed a 
dramatic turnaround in Amer’s brothers, who had gone from being victims to 
perpetrators: “The boys are enforcers/bullies across the city, looking for a 
belonging and ending up in gang culture.” Police at the time regarded the three 
younger boys as a “one family crime wave”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2e4005d7543003b641b80cb48767dcd403e57e%2F432_565_4493_2696%2F4493.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Brighton%20to%20the%20battlefield%3A%20how%20four%20young%20Britons%20were%20drawn%20to%20jihad%20%7C%20Mark%20Townsend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Brighton%20to%20the%20battlefield%3A%20how%20four%20young%20Britons%20were%20drawn%20to%20jihad%20%7C%20Mark%20Townsend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2e4005d7543003b641b80cb48767dcd403e57e%2F432_565_4493_2696%2F4493.jpg>
 Abubaker Deghayes, whose three sons went to fight in Syria, at home in 
Saltdean. Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
By November 2011, the twins had become so notorious that the Brighton Crime 
Reduction Partnership, a coalition of police and council officials, agreed an 
exclusion notice that banned Abdullah and Abdulrahman from a large area of the 
city, stretching from the city centre to the marina 3km away.

With their father no longer living with them, the twins began to take control 
at home, inviting other members of their gang to stay with them. The new 
lodgers lied to Einas to exploit her kindness – telling her they were homeless 
and hungry. One housing official described witnessing the twins “barking 
orders” at their mother. Police received frequent reports of missing teenage 
boys, only to find them living at the Deghayes’s family home. Throughout 2012, 
neighbours reported loud music until the early hours, doors banging, people 
coming and going throughout the night.

Einas, who is described as loving and generous by those who know her, is 
understood to have become profoundly exhausted, looking after her own sons and 
the other teenagers who would come to stay in her house. Throughout this period 
she had one key ally: Amer. While his brothers were constantly causing trouble, 
Amer never came to the attention of the police. Faced with the mounting 
disorder, social services described him as a rock, offering unstinting support 
to his mother and acting as a replacement for his father by trying, with great 
difficulty, to put boundaries in place. This left him vulnerable and heavily 
outnumbered: according to social workers, Amer’s brothers “bullied” and 
“assaulted him”.

The 15-year-old twins soon became the leaders of a gang of about 20 teenagers 
that was feared throughout Brighton

Observations from family liaison officials in early 2012 describe a 
17-year-old fully engaged with society, blossoming at City College where he was 
popular, and also cementing his reputation as a skilled rapper. Focusing on his 
business studies course, Amer was determined to go to university. He had also 
started attending al-Quds mosque more frequently, along with Ibrahim; their 
deepening commitment to religion was viewed by social services as pious rather 
than doctrinaire.

By contrast, Amer’s brothers were not doing well. In their final year at 
Longhill, the twins rarely attended classes, although they sometimes turned up 
for free school meals. Staff at the school reported that they were reluctant to 
confront the twins, fearing that they would be accused of racism for doing so. 
Other pupils at the school feared “reprisals” from the gang. A spokesman for 
the city council, speaking on behalf of the school, said they would not comment 
on specific claims while they were cooperating with an ongoing serious case 
review by Brighton’s Local Safeguarding Children Board.

Jaffar, meanwhile, had transferred to Varndean school in north Brighton to 
avoid the racism experienced by his older brothers, but the same problems 
emerged at his new school. On one occasion, Jaffar, who was then 13, was 
hospitalised following a playground fight. Despite this and his involvement in 
the twins’ gang, Jaffar was viewed by social services as the brother most 
likely to escape “gang culture”. Social workers noted that he had begun to see 
Amer as the male role model he wanted to emulate. A school report from the 
2012-2013 academic year portrayed Jaffar as a well-adjusted teenager “who is 
pleasant to talk to … and enjoys talking to adults”. Despite an attendance rate 
of just 59%, his teachers were sympathetic, aware that he was kept awake by the 
nightly commotion at the family home.

Nonetheless, Jaffar was eventually banished from mainstream education for 
violence and sent to the city’s Pupil Referral Unit (PRU), which provided 
special classes for “troubled” children.

Jaffar sat his GCSEs at the PRU the following June. His former teachers at 
Varndean had predicted that he would get at least eight GCSEs. In the end, he 
passed only three. “That hit him hard, being sent to the PRU had the undesired 
effect of alienating him from future career opportunities,” a family friend who 
did not wish to be named told me. “You could see the hope drain from him.”

Shortly before the 2012 summer holidays, Jaffar’s behaviour deteriorated 
rapidly. In July, he was arrested with one of the twins, Abdulrahman, for 
allegedly assaulting and robbing foreign students from the University of 
Brighton’s International College. Staff at the PRU were shocked, describing his 
violence as “completely out of character”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71c8f0f42db75f373142da3635b7b7a60acf2cdd%2F212_38_3056_3816%2F3056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Brighton%20to%20the%20battlefield%3A%20how%20four%20young%20Britons%20were%20drawn%20to%20jihad%20%7C%20Mark%20Townsend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Brighton%20to%20the%20battlefield%3A%20how%20four%20young%20Britons%20were%20drawn%20to%20jihad%20%7C%20Mark%20Townsend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71c8f0f42db75f373142da3635b7b7a60acf2cdd%2F212_38_3056_3816%2F3056.jpg>
 Abdullah Deghayes. Photograph: Family handout/PA 
Amer offered Jaffar support, encouraging him to attend the mosque. Yet police 
records from this period show that Jaffar and his brothers, except for Amer, 
were at risk of becoming prolific offenders. In May 2012, police recorded 15 
incidents with the Deghayes brothers. The twins were viewed by police as a 
criminal double act, skilled at evading prosecution by exploiting the fact that 
neither the police nor their victims could tell them apart.

Summarising the behaviour of Abdulrahman, Abdullah and Jaffar during the 
second half of 2012, Brighton’s Youth Offending Service concluded that “from a 
criminal point of view the boys have all amped up and cannot be ignored”.

During the early evening of 16 September 2012, police received reports of a 
teenager staggering about The Level, a small park near the centre of Brighton, 
where students would congregate to kick off nights on the town. It was Jaffar. 
Clearly drunk, the 14-year-old was in an aggressive mood, yelling sexist abuse 
and threatening passersby. “Allah will seek his revenge for me,” the teenager 
yelled to a crowd that had formed around him. “Do what you want to me. See what 
happens when judgment day comes. You will all go to hell.”

Police officers seem to have dismissed his tirade. Jaffar’s outburst does not 
appear to have been referred to the Prevent programme – the principal strand of 
the government’s counter-terrorism strategy, which is intended to stop people 
being drawn into radicalisation and violence. (Despite presiding over a 
population of 275,000, Brighton and Hove city council only employs one 
full-time member of staff to work on Prevent.)

There is little hint that the authorities believed the Deghayes boys were at 
risk of becoming radicalised – even though allegations had been made to police 
in 1997 that their father, Abubaker, had been preaching in a manner that might 
“incite racial unrest” and “reflected strong al-Qaida sympathies”. Abubaker has 
strongly denied these claims.

More recent, and more obvious, was the experience of the boys’ uncle, Omar, at 
Guantánamo Bay. In an interview earlier this year, Amer cited Omar’s 
mistreatment in prison, and his uncle’s first-hand accounts of the brutal 
injustices of the Bush administration’s reaction to 9/11 – backed by British 
complicity – as having first planted doubts in his mind about life as a Muslim 
in the west. “The war on terror was obviously a war on Muslims, the Islamic way 
of life,” Amer told me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8310a9e33f59692ff9352f4c0853fe4a3bc077ae%2F51_0_985_1231%2F985.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Brighton%20to%20the%20battlefield%3A%20how%20four%20young%20Britons%20were%20drawn%20to%20jihad%20%7C%20Mark%20Townsend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Brighton%20to%20the%20battlefield%3A%20how%20four%20young%20Britons%20were%20drawn%20to%20jihad%20%7C%20Mark%20Townsend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8310a9e33f59692ff9352f4c0853fe4a3bc077ae%2F51_0_985_1231%2F985.jpg>
 Ibrahim Kamara was killed in Aleppo. Photograph: internet 
In January 2013, the first meeting in Brighton of Channel, a Home Office 
initiative designed to protect vulnerable people from being drawn into violent 
extremism, was held. The month before the Channel meeting, Amer’s father 
travelled from Brighton to northern Syria with an aid convoy, although, at that 
time, travelling to help the Syrian people cope with its brutal civil war was 
uncontroversial. The Deghayes boys do not appear to have been discussed at the 
Channel meeting.

The following month, February 2013, one of Jaffar’s friends, a Muslim teenager 
who I will call Kadeem, was spotted by staff at Varndean school leaving the 
school’s prayer room during lunch. The teacher noticed something odd: Kadeem 
was accompanied by two pupils who were not Muslim. The pair were reminded that 
it was forbidden for non-Muslims to use the facility. Kadeem stepped forward 
and explained that he had converted them and was teaching them how to pray.

The teacher listened as Kadeem ran through a long list of names of friends who 
had recently converted and who, he said, “will all go to heaven and be safe”. 
Amer, he told the teacher, was his right-hand man, tasked with ensuring that 
youths attended al-Quds mosque. Kadeem, who became increasingly animated 
throughout the conversation, also showed the teacher video footage on his 
mobile phone of what he said were “Jews attacking Palestinians”.

Alarmed, the teacher contacted the council’s community safety team. However, 
it is understood that community safety officials told staff that they had no 
concerns regarding al‑Quds mosque, adding that the school should remember that 
Amer was the “sensible one of the family”.

During the first half of 2013, social workers began to hope that Jaffar, who 
was now 16, was starting to settle down. He began taking Arabic classes at the 
weekends, and in his spare time he watched religious lectures on his laptop. In 
the summer he observed Ramadan voluntarily for the first time.

As Jaffar became calmer, Amer was becoming increasingly agitated by the war in 
Syria. A decisive moment came on 21 August 2013, when Assad’s forces fired 
rocketscarrying chemical weapons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/10/syria-chemical-attack-assad> 
into the crowded suburbs to the east of Damascus, killing hundreds. A few hours 
later, footage appeared online of children frothing at the mouth, their skin 
blue. “I saw the chance in Syria to help and a chance to remove [Assad’s] 
secular Ba’athism,” Amer told me. “I don’t want to be the person standing on 
the sideline and watching.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F498ac3e637e5738db57c9833680ce2e650a2bc6f%2F150_115_5466_3279%2F5466.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Brighton%20to%20the%20battlefield%3A%20how%20four%20young%20Britons%20were%20drawn%20to%20jihad%20%7C%20Mark%20Townsend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Brighton%20to%20the%20battlefield%3A%20how%20four%20young%20Britons%20were%20drawn%20to%20jihad%20%7C%20Mark%20Townsend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fbrighton-to-battlefield-how-four-young-britons-drawn-to-jihad-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F498ac3e637e5738db57c9833680ce2e650a2bc6f%2F150_115_5466_3279%2F5466.jpg>
 Omar Deghayes was imprisoned in Guantánamo Bay for more than five years and 
subjected to torture that left him blind in his right eye. Photograph: Teri 
Pengilley 
Shortly after, Ibrahim’s mother Khadijah remembers her son mentioning Syria 
for the first time. It was a lunchtime towards the end of August 2013, the end 
of the school holidays, which Ibrahim had mostly spent with Amer, getting fit 
in the gym and praying at the mosque. Khadijah recalls Ibrahim and Amer talking 
animatedly about the suffering of the Syrian people. “I told them you have no 
money, you haven’t finished school. I thought they were going through a phase,” 
she said.

When, on 29 August, parliament rejected UK military action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/29/cameron-british-attack-syria-mps>
 against Assad to deter the use of chemical weapons, Amer’s belief that the 
west did not care about Muslims hardened. “He kept asking why isn’t the west 
helping? He saw it as a betrayal of the Syrian people, of Muslims,” said a 
former school friend.

Meanwhile, Jaffar, who had just returned from a brief trip to Libya to visit 
relatives, also seemed to have developed strong political views. In September, 
a youth offender officer found the teenager strikingly distant. But when the 
turmoil gripping Libya was mentioned, Jaffar’s mood instantly changed, and he 
denounced “all Americans as terrorists”. After this incident, Jaffar was 
referred to the Channel counter-terrorism programme.

In mid-September, when Jaffar enrolled on a sport and public service course at 
City College, officers on the police Prevent team contacted staff at the 
college to request that they “flag any concerns that they may have re 
radicalisation” involving Jaffar. Instead, they received reports of a popular 
“alpha-male figure”, who was respectful towards women and challenged peers who 
he felt were not.

On 28 September 2013, Sussex Police decided to wind down Operation Blower, an 
initiative that had been introduced six months earlier to dismantle troublesome 
gangs of young people in Brighton, among them the group that included 
Abdulrahman and Abdullah Deghayes. Senior officers deemed the operation a 
success, observing they found “no concerns regarding radicalisation” with any 
of the Deghayes boys. Around the same time, the council’s troubled families 
team decided to cease its work with the Deghayes family, noting that there had 
not been enough progress to justify keeping the case file open.

Not long after, on 15 October, dressed in black, Amer set out for Syria. The 
authorities had no knowledge of Amer’s journey.

It was not until the following month that police learned that Amer had left 
the country, and even then it was believed that he was undertaking an aid 
assignment. On 11 November 2013, the Prevent case management committee – 
including some of the city’s senior police officers, council officials and 
social workers – met in a terraced building near Brighton’s Royal Pavilion to 
discuss Jaffar. The panel concluded that he “showed low risks of being drawn 
into extremism”, noting that he had stopped smoking cannabis and drinking, 
seemingly oblivious that such behaviour might suggest a hardening of his 
beliefs. The panel decided that Jaffar should not be considered as a candidate 
for the Channel process – which could have led to his entering a 
deradicalisation programme.

Something crucial did emerge during the meeting, however. Social workers had 
heard that Amer had travelled to either Libya or Turkey on a humanitarian 
mission. Sussex police admitted they had not known about this, but agreed to 
advise the Prevent officials of any “emerging risks” emanating from Amer’s 
travels, a possible reference to the potential impact on his brothers.

On 3 December, police discovered a Facebook account registered in Libya, which 
they soon determined was linked to Jaffar. Called the Youth Empowerment Society 
South East Division for Islam, it contained a weblink that led to a picture of 
boxing apparatus labelled “The brothers gym”. Investigators identified it as 
the gym at al-Quds mosque. Scrolling deeper into its timeline, officers found 
an image of balaclaved men sitting on horseback in a desert. Fluttering in the 
background was a black flag adorned with white script, the “black flag of 
jihad”.

Syria's civil war: five years of Guardian reporting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/syria-civil-war-five-years-guardian-reporting>
But once again no action was taken. Jaffar was never referred back into the 
Channel programme, while the mosque’s gym does not appear to have been 
investigated. Jaffar’s school, it appears, did have concerns over Amer’s “youth 
group”, but believed the gym was linked to criminality rather than 
radicalisation.

No one appeared to know that Jaffar was in touch with Amer, who had safely 
arrived in northern Syria and enrolled with Jabhat al-Nusra, the Syrian 
affiliate of al-Qaida, the most powerful Islamist group fighting Assad at that 
time. Speaking to Jaffar on Facebook, Amer told his younger brother that the 
food and shelter in Syria were better than he had expected. There were other 
British fighters with him, he said, and Muslims from every corner of the world. 
“We are part of something here, part of something bigger, trying to bring back 
Islam and justice to the land of Muslims,” he told Jaffar.

In the first week of 2014, an official from the Youth Offending Service 
described his astonishment at Abdullah’s fragile appearance. “He is very 
vulnerable and would always look sad and lost, like a little boy.” What the 
Youth Offending Service did not know was that in mid-January, Abdullah had 
stolen his passport from his mother’s handbag. In less than a week he would be 
heading to Syria. Unlike Amer, he would not be travelling alone. Jaffar, 16, 
was coming, along with Amer’s best friend, Ibrahim.

At this point in time, up to 500 Britons were suspected to have travelled to 
Syria to fight, and UK border controls were on high alert. Yet on 26 January 
2014, three teenagers from Brighton – one of whom, Ibrahim, was carrying the 
passport of his 15-year-old younger brother, who did not look much like him – 
walked through Luton airport and boarded a £59 one‑way direct flight to 
Istanbul, the gateway city to the Syrian frontlines.

It appears that counter terrorism officers failed to inform Sussex police that 
they were watching the family – a notification that was only made on 14 
February 2014, 19 days after Ibrahim, Abdullah and Jaafar left Britain. Vital 
intelligence that could have stopped the boys from travelling was never shared.

When Jaffar, Abdullah and Ibrahim arrived in Istanbul at the end of January 
2014, they caught an overnight bus to Antakya, on the Syrian border. From 
there, a dust-streaked coach took them across the Bab al-Hawa crossing and into 
northern Syria. The territory they had entered was held by Jabhat al-Nusra. To 
join the Islamist militia the three teenagers had to prove they could speak 
Arabic. They also needed someone who could vouch for them. Amer paved the way.

Back in Brighton, senior police officers were stunned by the discovery that 
four local teenagers had gone to fight in Syria. They realised they would have 
to scramble to prevent more young residents from following the Deghayes 
brothers. According to an intelligence report, dated February 2014, “the police 
began to receive intelligence and calls from parents who were concerned about 
their children associating with the Deghayes and also their conversion to Islam 
and going to Syria”.
 Jaffar Deghayes. Photograph: internet 
Police soon discovered that a fifth young man, Mohammed Khan, had also left 
Brighton for Syria. In fact, he had travelled with the same aid convoy as Amer. 
Khan, who is from Brighton’s Bengali community, was regarded by security 
services as a “clean skin”, because had never previously come to the attention 
of the authorities. Counter-intelligence officials believe that Khan, 22, has 
become a senior commander in Jabhat al-Nusra, directing operations in the Idlib 
area.

Within weeks of learning that Ibrahim, Abdullah and Jaffar had left Britain, 
Sussex Police identified a group of 20 other young people – at least 13 of them 
under 18 – who they deemed likely to attempt travel to Syria . Many had been 
among the gang of runaways who stayed at the Deghayes home in Preston Park. 
“Extremism was like a contagion among this group of friends,” a source familiar 
with the case said.

On 11 March, alarmed at the prospect of two dozen radicalised teenagers in 
Brighton, police chiefs, community safety officials and the chief executive of 
the city council met “to consider counter-terrorism related to a number of 
young people in the city”. On 2 April – seven weeks after Jaffar, Abdullah and 
Ibrahim left the UK – the identities of the five young Brighton residents in 
Syria were passed onto the council’s head of community safety.

Two thousand miles to the east, one of them, Abdullah, was finalising combat 
training ahead of an al-Nusra offensive to push back pro-Assad militias near 
the town of Kessab in northwestern Syria. Eleven weeks after arriving in Syria, 
on 14 April 2014, Abdullah went into battle. He was killed by a sniper while 
chasing retreating enemy forces. A photograph posted on Facebook by Jaffar 
shows Abdullah lying on his back, in combat fatigues, eyes closed, mouth open.

Back in Brighton, Abdulrahman, still grieving from the death of his twin, was 
referred to probation officers on 9 June over “wider extremism concerns 
relating to the family”. Soon after, Abdulrahman was arrested after allegedly 
assaulting a couple with a knuckleduster. He was remanded to Lewes prison in 
east Sussex.

On 23 September 2014, US president Barack Obama announced that a cruise 
missile attack had targeted a cell of “seasoned al-Qaida operatives” in Syria’s 
Idlib province. Ibrahim Kamara was killed in one of the strikes. His mother 
Khadijah says that she cannot excuse her son’s actions, but she has forgiven 
him. “You love him, he was your child. I loved him so much, a gentle child. 
He’s still my son.” Amer told me: “All I can say is that her son loved her and 
it affected him that she didn’t speak to him much.” He rationalised his best 
friend’s death as the price of fighting for what they believed in. “Islam comes 
with a responsibility. If Islam is under attack, our duty is to help.”

The following month, the final member of the trio who had left for Syria in 
January was killed. Jaffar was shot by Syrian government troops during a 
close-range firefight amid the ruins of Idlib. He was 17.

The deaths of the Brighton boys, and the threat of more young people following 
in their footsteps, has prompted considerable soul-searching in Brighton. A 
series of meetings were held throughout 2014 between police, leaders of the 
city’s mosques, council officials and counter-terrorism officers. In November 
2014, the council launched an awareness campaign to stop more city residents 
heading to Syria.

A serious case review is currently investigating the state’s interaction with 
the Deghayes family and is expected to be published next month. It is expected 
to highlight failures in communication between the police, council, teaching 
staff and children’s services as reasons why five young men from Brighton were 
able to slip through the net. “They each knew only 20% of the problem, they 
were making decisions without anything remotely close to the full picture,” 
said a source.

Others believe that responsibility for what happened should be more widely 
shared. “The boys were failed all the way along, by everybody,” Jackie Chase, a 
friend of the family, told me. “I feel the boys went to Syria because they 
wanted brotherhood, they felt excluded. They were just unhappy. They didn’t 
know where they were going here.”

The story of Amer and the others might also identify a deeper issue. Brighton 
is often seen as a liberal city, but representatives from its Muslim 
communities claim that this is far from the truth. Mohammed Asaduzzaman runs a 
market stall near where the Deghayes boys once hung out, has lived in the city 
since 1966 and is a prominent figure among its Muslim population of 6,000. He 
accuses the city council of exploiting its black and ethnic minority community 
by using their support to attract funding. “They use and then forget us. We are 
not part of the decision-making process,” said Asaduzzaman. (A spokesman for 
the council denied this allegation. “This is absolutely not our approach and we 
are unclear as to what this claim is based on. All applications are treated on 
their individual merits.”)

A series of meetings were held last year to discuss integration in Brighton. 
According to internal notes, they found that many members of the city’s Muslim 
community felt “marginalised”, with disproportionately poor access to public 
services. The council does not employ a single full-time official to deal 
specifically with the needs of Brighton’s Muslim community.

In early February, I was able to contact Amer, who was stationed just over 
four miles from the frontline between Aleppo and Idlib. Despite the deaths of 
two brothers and his best friend, Amer said he felt content and liberated to 
have left behind the materialism and soullessness of a secular society. “I 
don’t think people realise they are being enslaved,” he said. There was no 
question, said the 21-year-old, that he felt more “belonging” on the Syrian 
battleground than he ever had in Brighton. “I feel like I’m doing something 
valuable and important compared to if I was in Brighton, living a normal life, 
having a normal job. I always used to ask myself what am I doing for the 
purpose of life.”

I feel like I’m doing something valuable and important compared to if I was in 
Brighton, living a normal life
Amer Deghayes 
Amer described himself as a member of the “mujahideen” instead of an al-Nusra 
fighter. “I offer my services for the whole of the Muslim nation. I’m not 
working with any particular group.” He insisted that he would never join Isis, 
however: “Their beheadings have caused harm to the mujahideen, the rebels. 
Their pictures should be showing the mercy of Islam.”

At the time of the interview, Islamist groups were embroiled in a vicious 
rearguard action to protect their territory in the north-west of Syria. Backed 
by Russian airstrikes, Assad’s forces were gaining ground. Amer confirmed his 
unit was getting “pushed from all directions” and, during one interview on 12 
February, admitted he was anxious about the direction of the conflict.

A few weeks earlier, in January, his father had arrived in Idlib province, 
begging him to come back to Brighton. Amer told his father no, he will never 
return. “The moment my right foot left Britain it wasn’t home any more,” Amer 
said, although he admitted that he missed the seaside.

Then, the line crackling with interference as it faded in and out, Amer said 
he was hoping to die. “Of course, one of the main reasons I am doing this is so 
Allah gives me martyrdom and I get killed doing the most honourable thing in 
this life. You can call it selling your life for his religion, for his way of 
life.”

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 