
Mr A Fenner Brockway, presiding on Saturday at the annual conference of the No 
More War Movement at Birmingham said that those who desired to prevent another 
war must work in two directions. The first was to remove the causes of war by 
constructing a new social and international order based on justice and freedom. 
The second was to create such a spirit of antagonism to war that, if disputes 
arose before this first object wasÂ achieved, the peoples would resist any call 
to war by organised refusal to fight.

The task of abolishing war was formidable. It was a challenge to the history 
of the human race, and apparently to instincts that were deep-routed in human 
nature. But progress was always a challenge to history, and the human instincts 
which found expression in war could, by education and social organisation, be 
directed to good instead of evil. Just as the duel and private war had been 
abolished by national organisation in national interests, so could war between 
States. It was true that national laws were imposed by force in the last 
resort, but the vast majority of people observed them from a sense of social 
obligation rather than from a fear of police or imprisonment. Such crime as was 
committed by normal people was predominantly the result of an evil environment, 
and if a just social condition were established the use of force could be 
restricted to rare cases of mental abnormality. Similarly, by the development 
of international law and the establishment of a just international order, war 
could be abolished.

Those who desire peace must face the fact, however, that the nations were 
still a long way from accepting peaceful methods of settling disputes, and that 
international relations were based on intolerable injustices. There was a grave 
danger, too, that war would occur before the influences making for peace had 
succeeded in substituting law for war, and a just international order for 
Imperialist exploitation.

Consequently those who sincerely desired to prevent war must also prepare to 
resist war should it threaten. The No More War Movement was distinctive among 
peace societies in advocating actual resistance to war. Its members were 
pledged to refuse all war service, and through the War Resisters' 
International, it was associated with organisations in twenty different 
countries with a similar basis. The Movement realised, however, that refusal of 
war service by a comparatively small number of individuals would not prevent 
war. It, therefore, advocated massed resistance.
 