
“The jungle consumes everything,” says a character in The Legend of Tarzan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/legend-of-tarzan>. “It preys on the old, the 
sick, the wounded. It preys on the weak – but never the strong.” And now, 
thanks to modern film-making technology, you can consume the jungle back, 
without having to get your hands dirty, or bitten off.

The Legend of Tarzan is the second time in a matter of months that Hollywood 
has taken us back to the jungle, after Disney’s reworking of The Jungle Book. 
One suspects this has less to do with a newfound interest in the tropics and 
everything to do with the awesome possibilities of special effects. Those 
fraught, dangerous location shoots with hours of laborious animal-wrangling are 
no longer necessary – you can do it all on a computer! And there’s more to 
come: Andy Serkis is developing his own “darker” motion-capture version of The 
Jungle Book. Before that, we’ve got a Tom Hiddleston-ledKong: Skull Island 
<http://www.legendary.com/legendary-and-warner-bros-pictures-announce-cinematic-franchise-uniting-godzilla-king-kong-and-other-iconic-giant-monsters/>
, which promises to take us deep into the giant ape’s “treacherous, primordial” 
domain.

The problem with jungle films is that creaky old colonial myths literally come 
with the territory. Fuelled by the tales of explorers and adventure novelists, 
the jungle was the equivalent of outer space to the popular imagination of the 
late 19th and early 20th century. It was so exotic and alien, we had to borrow 
a foreign word to even describe it. The jungle was danger and excitement, it 
was disorderly and unfathomable. We still use the word in that sense, to 
describe the Calais migrants’ camp, for example, or high-tempo 90s breakbeat 
music. The jungle was everything “civilisation” wasn’t, though the people who 
actually lived there probably didn’t see it that way.

The Legend of Tarzan review – an inherently problematic remake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/29/the-legend-of-tarzan-review-an-inherently-problematic-remake>
That’s not the ideal message for a modern global blockbuster so, along with 
the special effects, these stories have needed updating. Especially Tarzan – 
the creakiest old colonial myth of all. He’s essentially a white-supremacist 
superhero. The implicit message is: “Put a white man in the jungle and he will 
rise to the top.” In Edgar Rice Burroughs’s racist-stereotype-filled fiction, 
Tarzan is not just king of the beasts, his superior Anglo-Saxon genes make him 
smarter, stronger and nobler than any native African he encounters. It’s a 
narrative that plays out again and again in“white man in the jungle”  
<http://weareorlando.co.uk/page13.php>stories, from Kurtz in Joseph Conrad’s 
Heart of Darkness to Sam Worthington in Avatar.

To its credit, The Legend of Tarzan confronts its colonial legacy head-on. It 
is set in 1880s Congo, under the exploitative regime of Belgium’s King Leopold 
II. Luckily, our decent, gentrified Lord Greystoke (played by Alexander 
Skarsgård) returns to free the enslaved nation from those nasty Belgians, aided 
by his tribal African buddies (who look up to him as their leader, of course) 
and a menagerie of CGI gorillas, lions, wildebeest and crocodiles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e9d1dd3e8db3c5b6543266745ec4174010d368a%2F0_94_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tarzan%20to%20Avatar%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20'the%20white%20man%20in%20the%20jungle'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tarzan%20to%20Avatar%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20%27the%20white%20man%20in%20the%20jungle%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e9d1dd3e8db3c5b6543266745ec4174010d368a%2F0_94_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Djimon Hounsou as Chief Mbonga in The Legend of Tarzan. Photograph: 
Allstar/Warner Bros 
Never mind that Britain’s own white-supremacist hero Cecil Rhodes 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cecil_Rhodes> was slicing off a huge flank of 
Africa for the empire around this time, or that the groundwork for the 
real-life Belgian Congo was laid by our very ownHenry Morton Stanley 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Morton_Stanley>. This rewriting of history 
takes some swallowing and the special effects don’t help. No real animals seem 
to have been harmed – or even consulted – during the making of this movie. 
Despite being digital, Tarzan’s simian buddies still manage to look like people 
in gorilla suits.

Jungle films have never really toed the ideological line of these colonial 
creation myths, however. They’ve always been more interested in getting bums on 
seats – and on screens, if possible. When pondering Tarzan’s enduring screen 
popularity, the potential for depicting male beefcake cannot be discounted. 
Acting skills are a bonus for the role; a great physique is non-negotiable. As 
a result of such casting limitations, Tarzan was transformed from the 
cultivated leader of Burroughs’s writings to a Neanderthal hunk, unburdened by 
reams of dialogue, challenging facial expressions or cumbersome garments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49a7293ac39b9a1995ec18894d7ddb8373fcb6c9%2F0_3_2935_1761%2F2935.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tarzan%20to%20Avatar%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20'the%20white%20man%20in%20the%20jungle'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tarzan%20to%20Avatar%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20%27the%20white%20man%20in%20the%20jungle%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49a7293ac39b9a1995ec18894d7ddb8373fcb6c9%2F0_3_2935_1761%2F2935.jpg>
 Johnny Weissmuller and Maureen O’Sullivan in Tarzan and His Mate (1934). 
Photograph: Allstar/MGM 
Jungle movies are as much about westerners throwing off the trappings of their 
civilisation as putting them on to others. The Legend of Tarzan is tame. In 
1934’s Tarzan and His Mate, there’s a scene where Johnny Weissmuller rips off 
Maureen O’Sullivan’s skimpy dress and they have anextended skinny dip 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Bc7KDyLV80>, captured in a rather lovely 
underwater sequence (which was snipped out by the censors before release). Jane 
wears next to nothing throughout the movie, she even sleeps naked with Tarzan. 
Like Mowgli and Baloo, they live a carefree Edenic existence: no work, no 
clothes, they’re not even married. Forget about your worries and your strife. 
Not for nothing were Tarzan and Jane eventually saddled with “Boy” to create 
the semblance of a respectable family.

Tarzan’s animal sex appeal has rarely been done justice since, but it’s always 
been there.Bo Derek <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cBTRGd0QZVE> and Miles 
O’Keeffe took it into softcore realms in the absurd 1980s Tarzan And Jane, Hugh 
Hudson’s Greystoke politely cuts away when Christopher Lambert starts making 
ape noises in Andie MacDowell’s boudoir. Even Disney’s cartoon Tarzan curiously 
lifts up Jane’s petticoats when he first encounters her. Rumours were widely 
circulated that The Legend of Tarzan was to feature a raunchy animalistic sex 
scene, and that Margot Robbie actually punched and bruised Alexander Skarsgård 
filming it. If anything really happened, it has been consigned to the 
cutting-room floor. All we get is a few “mating calls” and a chaste, perfume-ad 
snog – then cut to the morning after.

The jungle was still messing with white men’s minds as they set about making 
films about how it messed with their minds

Those primitive urges the jungle unleashes often manifest themselves not as a 
carefree return to nature but as scenery-chewing madness. Even in colonial 
times, there were those who recognised how the jungle said more about “us” than 
“them”. Not least Heart of Darkness, in which a journey to the interior of “the 
dark continent” also hones in on the savagery of rogue colonial commander Kurtz 
and the evil inside all men. (Conrad’s real-life inspiration for Kurtz, by the 
way, was a Belgian commissioner named Léon Rom – who’s also the 
moustache-twirling baddie of Legend of Tarzan, played by Christoph Waltz).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdf45632ee57ec94d3ea5a9c2300d3e862fa48a4%2F22_23_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tarzan%20to%20Avatar%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20'the%20white%20man%20in%20the%20jungle'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tarzan%20to%20Avatar%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20%27the%20white%20man%20in%20the%20jungle%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdf45632ee57ec94d3ea5a9c2300d3e862fa48a4%2F22_23_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Christoph Waltz as Captain Rom in The Legend of Tarzan (2016). Photograph: 
Allstar/WARNER BROS. 
Orson Welles’s debut feature was to be an adaptation of Heart of Darkness 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4QSbuhmLC9s>. Welles had written a script 
(which made allusions to Hitler). He planned to shoot and narrate it from the 
point of view of Marlow – the river boat captain in search of Kurtz. He’d play 
both Marlow and Kurtz. “I think I’m made for Conrad,” he once said. But the 
studio got cold feet about the budget – and a planned interracial romance 
element – and pulled the plug. We got Citizen Kane out of it so we can’t 
complain.

The jungle was still messing with white men’s minds in the 1970s and 80s, even 
as they set out to make films highlighting how the jungle messed with white 
men’s minds. Francis Ford Coppola’s Apocalypse Now was more successful in 
transposing Conrad on to the big screen, and on to the Vietnam war, but not 
without a struggle. Coppola gave us one of greatest war movies ever and one the 
greatest “making of” documentaries ever: Hearts Of Darkness, which details 
Coppola’s parallel descent into Kurtz-like megalomania off screen, brought on 
by logistical nightmares, tropical weather, his wayward cast and his own 
delusions of grandeur. “There were too many of us, we had access to too much 
equipment, too much money, and little by little we went insane,” says Coppola. 
So much for Kipling’s “law of the jungle”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fc4aa7b6dd381e864f5ec1f350550f16a13c2b2%2F0_0_3667_2200%2F3667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tarzan%20to%20Avatar%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20'the%20white%20man%20in%20the%20jungle'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tarzan%20to%20Avatar%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20%27the%20white%20man%20in%20the%20jungle%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fc4aa7b6dd381e864f5ec1f350550f16a13c2b2%2F0_0_3667_2200%2F3667.jpg>
 Sam Bottoms in Apocalypse Now (1979). Photograph: Allstar/MIRAMAX/Sportsphoto 
Ltd./Allstar 
Werner Herzog might have been able to warn Coppola off a jungle shoot, having 
undergone similar experiences making Aguirre, Wrath of God and later 
Fitzcarraldo –in both of which difficult locations, difficult personalities 
(chiefly leading man Klaus Kinski) and Herzog’s masochistic obsession with 
virtually unfilmable stories all lead to a collective madness.

Samuel L Jackson: ‘I was a drug addict but I showed up on time and hit my 
marks’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/amuel--ackson--was-a-drug-addict-out-of-my-mind-but-showed-up-on-time-and-hit-my-marks>
But, demented as they are, Herzog’s jungle films were a bracing affront to the 
imperialist nonsense that had gone before. The revisionism continued through 
the 1980s. Roland Joffe’s The Mission told another tale of European 
“civilisation” bringing more harm than good to godless Amazonians, albeit in a 
more restrained fashion. The Mosquito Coast gave us a modern-day attempt, with 
obsessive inventor Harrison Ford rejecting American consumer society to 
establish his own jungle utopia. He’s a white guy in a jungle -- what could go 
wrong? And even the Italian cannibal movies of the era, racist and gory though 
they often were, regularly pointed the finger back at the savagery of the white 
man.

What’s missing from all these movies is the point of view of the people who 
actually live in the jungle – or rainforest, to use a less loaded word. Too 
often they are treated as exotic set-dressing, given nothing to do but stare 
threateningly at their European interlopers, do their manual labour for them 
and die by their weaponry – and if they get a single line of dialogue they’re 
lucky. The Legend of Tarzan does little to rectify this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5d4a7ef4f046750129e8f179919386ad0929ce1%2F0_191_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tarzan%20to%20Avatar%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20'the%20white%20man%20in%20the%20jungle'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tarzan%20to%20Avatar%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20%27the%20white%20man%20in%20the%20jungle%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fwhy-the-white-man-in-the-jungle-film-wont-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5d4a7ef4f046750129e8f179919386ad0929ce1%2F0_191_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 Embrace of the Serpent, directed by Ciro Guerra. 
Thankfully, world cinema is starting to offer alternatives. In the films of 
Thailand’s Apichatpong Weerasethakul, jungles are strange and mysterious, but 
serenely captivating and generally benign. They’re steeped in both Buddhist 
folklore and modern history, and could be populated by strange spirits, 
reincarnated royals, or perhaps simply rural nurses on their lunch break.

Embrace of the Serpent views the 'white man in the jungle' experience from the 
point of view of an indigenous shaman

The recent, Colombian-made Embrace of the Serpent, meanwhile, viewed the whole 
“white man in the jungle” experience from the point of view of an indigenous 
shaman Karamakate, who guides two different explorers up the Amazon, 30 years 
apart. The film is like a reverse Heart of Darkness. Karamakate observes his 
guests’ materialism, their duplicity, their destructiveness and, of course, 
their madness, as he travels through a landscape ravaged by their interventions 
– not least an upriver Christian mission that’s devolved into a messianic cult 
with a Kurtz-like leader.

Karamakate has his own concerns – his lost tribal identity and the lack of 
successors on to whom he can pass his traditional knowledge. Embrace of the 
Serpent incorporates Amazonian storytelling and symbolism to hallucinogenic 
effect, but it’s not just another jungle head-trip, it’s also a defence of a 
culture on the verge of extinction. Its indigenous hero already knows what 
generations of intrepid western explorers and film-makers failed to grasp: it’s 
not the jungle that’s alien and threatening and “other”; it’s them.

 * This article was corrected on 6 July 2016. It originally named the director 
of The Mission as Hugh Hudson, rather than Roland Joffe.  