
Beijing

The RSC are in Beijing <https://www.rsc.org.uk/press/releases/rsc-in-china> 
with Gregory Doran’s productions ofHenry IV Parts I and II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/17/henry-iv-parts-i-and-ii-review-antony-sher-falstaff>
 andHenry V 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/23/henry-v-review-alex-hassell-royal-shakespeare-theatre>
, plays more or less unknown in China. We are a massive operation: 72 people in 
total, including actors, musicians and staff, and 48 tonnes of scenery and 
equipment. All this is made possible by sponsorship from the British 
government, the Chinese Ministry of Culture and JP Morgan. Our ambassador, 
Barbara Woodward, tells us we follow the 2015 year ofBritish-Chinese Cultural 
Exchange <http://www.britishcouncil.cn/en/programmes/arts/2015YOCE>, while the 
British Council is currently running the global programmeShakespeare Lives 
<http://www.shakespearelives.org/>. We and Shakespeare are cogs in some 
intricate diplomatic mission.


Henry V review – Alex Hassell catches the conscience of the king
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/23/henry-v-review-alex-hassell-royal-shakespeare-theatre>
We become tourists at the Great Wall, the Forbidden City and the beautiful 
Lama Temple with its 55-foot sandalwood Buddha. We are playing at theNational 
Centre for the Performing Arts <http://www.chncpa.org/ens/>, a vast new complex 
housing an opera house, a concert hall and our theatre, rightly nicknamed the 
Egg (think the Sage Gateshead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/may/20/the-gig-venue-guide-sage-gateshead>
, only three times bigger). We share lifts withPeking Opera dancers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/08/chinese-opera-uk-tour-national-peking-opera-behind-the-scenes>
. Everything has to be relayed to the Chinese crew through interpreters, so 
technical progress is slow at first.


As I am not in Henry IV Part I, I sit in the audience and find myself 
appraising this very familiar play afresh. It suddenly seems strange and 
daring. It starts with rebel warlords opposing the King (very Chinese), and 
then Falstaff (Antony Sher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/07/how-do-actors-learn-their-lines-antony-sher-falstaff-diaries>
), this figure of anarchy and vice, takes over what had set out to be a history 
chronicle – though the audience sometimes laugh at the surtitles before he can 
deliver his punchlines. We have been told that the audience might talk, phone, 
film and eat, but in fact they are silent and intent. There is much applause 
and cheering. We seem to be a success.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Froyal-shakespeare-company-china-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9872e6d0553c2def96aeda6ad0e171ffdb2e5cf3%2F113_334_2096_1257%2F2096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Stratford%20to%20Shanghai%3A%20the%20Royal%20Shakespeare%20Company%20tours%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Froyal-shakespeare-company-china-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Stratford%20to%20Shanghai%3A%20the%20Royal%20Shakespeare%20Company%20tours%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Froyal-shakespeare-company-china-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9872e6d0553c2def96aeda6ad0e171ffdb2e5cf3%2F113_334_2096_1257%2F2096.jpg>
 Oliver Ford Davies (with the red scarf) and members of the Henry V company 
backstage at the Shanghai Grand theatre with staff from the theatre.
 Photograph: RSC 
Shanghai

Next it’s Shanghai, that intriguing mix of Chicago, Leicester Square, 1930s 
art deco, finance architecture 60 stories high and working-class alleys (street 
food £1.50). Another huge theatre complex in the beautiful People’s Park, 
formerly the Old Racecourse, a symbol of western decadence. We are part of a 
Shakespeare Season: the Shanghai Ballet in Hamlet, relays of the Met’s Macbeth 
and NT Live’sCumberbatch Hamlet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/oct/16/benedict-cumberbatch-hamlet-nt-live-barbican>
, Mark Elder and the Hallé.

The Lyric theatre seats 1600, though the acoustic is very sharp. Our four 
performances are sold out and the audiences respond more readily than in 
Beijing, sometimes surprisingly – they find Henry IV (Simon Thorp) having his 
crown stolen and then dying in the wrong Jerusalem very funny. They love the 
French Princess (Jennifer Kirby) mispronouncing English parts of the body, and 
when she takes the initiative and kisses the wooing Henry (Alex Hassell) – it’s 
usually the reverse – the women in the audience go wild.


We have a question-and-answer session after one performance, and after the 
usual questions about rehearsals and stage fright, a young man asks why we make 
fun of the French – difficult to answer briefly. I think of neighbouring 
countries the Chinese might delight in laughing at, but decide that’s a 
diplomatic minefield.


We visit the Shanghai Kunqu Opera, where its director, Gu Haohao, explains 
that she was so moved by our Shakespeare that she wants to share China’s own 
quarter-centenarian, Tang-Xianzu (died 1616). They put on a special short 
performance for us, and then show us how they rehearse 600-year-old movements. 
Fascinating.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fantony-sher-henry-iv-rsc-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F4%2F1423055106324%2FAntony-Sher-as-Falstaff-i-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antony%20Sher%20in%20Henry%20IV%20Parts%20I%20and%20II%3A%20'Give%20me%20a%20cup%20of%20sack!'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fantony-sher-henry-iv-rsc-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antony%20Sher%20in%20Henry%20IV%20Parts%20I%20and%20II%3A%20%27Give%20me%20a%20cup%20of%20sack%21%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fantony-sher-henry-iv-rsc-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F4%2F1423055106324%2FAntony-Sher-as-Falstaff-i-001.jpg>
 Antony Sher as Falstaff: ‘Give me a cup of sack!’ 
Hong Kong

After cold Beijing and springtime Shanghai, it’s sub-tropical Hong Kong. Our 
hotel is surrounded by building sites, but then Hong Kong is a continuous 
building explosion. The 1985 Norman Foster masterpiece, the HSBC building, is 
now dwarfed, though not upstaged. I was last here in 1989 and the city seems to 
have quadrupled in size.


We are playing the more intimate Lyric theatre in the Academy for Performing 
Arts. The audience is of course more British and English speaking, who know the 
plays, particularly Henry V, and are therefore more judicious, though generous 
in their appreciation. Justice Shallow (myself) and Jim Hooper’s Silence at 
last begin to get laughs at their ruminations on mortality.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Froyal-shakespeare-company-china-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f8255f13c832fd79165bd7115b1faf7d36798a3%2F98_31_1019_1505%2F1019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Stratford%20to%20Shanghai%3A%20the%20Royal%20Shakespeare%20Company%20tours%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Froyal-shakespeare-company-china-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Stratford%20to%20Shanghai%3A%20the%20Royal%20Shakespeare%20Company%20tours%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Froyal-shakespeare-company-china-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f8255f13c832fd79165bd7115b1faf7d36798a3%2F98_31_1019_1505%2F1019.jpg>
 Advertisement for the RSC’s King and Country cycle in Shanghai 
We had worried before leaving Britain that we might be playing exclusively to 
upper-middle class Chinese, who might be viewing Shakespeare more as a literary 
status symbol than as entertainment. Audiences – or rather Shakespeare – have 
proved us wrong. The Chinese know a few plays well – Hamlet, Macbeth, Romeo and 
Juliet and a surprising favourite, The Merchant of Venice – but their response 
to these little-known history plays has been instinctive and empathetic.


So many characters prove universal – the sleepless king, the playboy prince 
turned responsible leader, the reckless warlords, the madcap Hotspur and his 
loving, grieving widow, the braggart soldier and coward Pistol, the amoral vice 
figure of Falstaff and his gullible tavern mistress – and the Chinese respond 
to them as if they were their own. Shakespeare’s universality is not just a 
school-room truism, but a global reality.

 * The RSC’s Henry IV Parts I and II and Henry V continue at Hong Kong Arts 
festival <http://www.hk.artsfestival.org> until 13 March
 