
Pierce Brosnan came to fame playing poised and imperturbable characters such 
as 007 andRemington Steele, the suave private investigator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/aug/12/television2> of the hit 1980s 
television series. But as a teenager he was a lonely Irish exile in south 
London, with limited expectations.

That early life in England was changed completely by his contact with the 
Ovalhouse theatre club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/feb/04/deborah-bestwick-ovalhouse-theatre-interview>
, an arts organisation he still supports and that later also helped develop the 
careers of playwright David Hare, actors Tim Roth andMeera Syal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/meera-syal> and musician Nitin Sawhney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/02/nitin-sawhney-ronnie-scotts-buzzes-with-life-and-joy>
.

Brosnan, 63, first joined a drama workshop at Ovalhouse in the 1960s and now, 
in response to an appeal for an extra £2m of funding, he has made a short film 
in support of the organisation. The small arts centre in Kennington, near the 
Oval cricket ground, is about to move to anew home in neighbouring Brixton 
<http://www.ovalhouse.com/MovingToBrixton> and has secured an initial £130,600 
Arts Council grant (as part of a potential £3m) and raised more than £6m.

The Hollywood star is supporting the venue not just because it shaped his own 
future, he says, but because he is determined to make sure that opportunities 
in performance arts are available to all children, and are not seen as a luxury 
item. “I certainly don’t see theatre as bourgeois elitism,” he said. “It is a 
way to bring a community together and to inspire people. Lives are so fractured 
now, in spite of all the technology that supposedly connects us, and there is a 
lot of isolation.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6TySue92E_c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6TySue92E_c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6TySue92E_c&media=>
 Watch Pierce Brosnan’s short film in support of Ovalhouse. 
He continued: “I was a young man in south London, trying to find a direction. 
It [Ovalhouse] was a place that completely altered my life and expanded my 
horizons, allowing me to find myself. I don’t see it as a luxury – it’s an 
essential part of everybody’s life. It is essential to wider society too. These 
creative places feed ideas into science and maths, too.”

At the time Brosnan first went to Ovalhouse he already had a job as a trainee 
commercial artist, he recalled. “One wintry morning I was hanging up my coat at 
the studio in Putney when a friend said I should go along to this place later 
that day. I had always loved films, so I went to a workshop, joining around 40 
other people in this black box of a room. I had no idea what a workshop was, 
but I relished it all, whether we were rolling on the floor or whatever. It was 
mind-expanding for this fellow that I was back then.”

Brosnan, who grew up in Co Meath, north of Dublin, had originally come from 
Ireland to go to school in Putney, following his mother, who had taken work in 
Britain as a nurse some years earlier.

“From that evening on I went along to Ovalhouse pretty much every day after 
work. It was such a huge pot of creativity, with poets and writers as well. I 
was captivated and found it all so invigorating.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fpierce-brosnan-ovalhouse-theatre-appeal-james-bond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30f0882649f2b155d9d82951e3d405bf24303853%2F635_0_2193_1316%2F2193.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Brixton%20with%20love%3A%20Brosnan%E2%80%99s%20new%20mission%20is%20to%20save%20community%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fpierce-brosnan-ovalhouse-theatre-appeal-james-bond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Brixton%20with%20love%3A%20Brosnan%E2%80%99s%20new%20mission%20is%20to%20save%20community%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fpierce-brosnan-ovalhouse-theatre-appeal-james-bond%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30f0882649f2b155d9d82951e3d405bf24303853%2F635_0_2193_1316%2F2193.jpg>
 The current Ovalhouse centre in Kennington, south London 
Drawn into the world of 1970s experimental theatre, Brosnan travelled to 
Europe with Ovalhouse productions before leaving to take formal acting training 
at London’s Drama Centre.

The director of Ovalhouse, Deborah Bestwick, has worked there for 20 years and 
says the nature of the work in the venue means few plays are ever repeated. “We 
are always showing and supporting the next new thing in theatre, so I often 
joke that it has been a bit like drowning, because all theatrical life has 
passed in front of my eyes,” she said. “I have had a ringside seat. That is why 
it has been possible to stay here so long. It’s not something I would 
necessarily recommend in other cases.”

Bestwick said the planned move to Brixton would make the venue accessible to 
more people. “We have little or no street presence at the moment, and in 
Brixton we can become a beacon. We have close links with lots of local groups 
and have always relied on word of mouth as well, which is the way Pierce came 
to us. We also have some specifically targeted groups, such as refugees and 
migrants.”

In the 1990s the actor, writer and comedian Syal and her husband, Sanjeev 
Bhaskar, first performed together at the venue –alongside Kulvinder Ghir and 
Nina Wadia – as the Secret Asians, winning a rave review inTime Out that drew 
the attention of the BBC.

“At the moment we have Ambreen Razia, on tour with Black Theatre Live and her 
Diary of a Hounslow Girl 
<http://blacktheatrelive.co.uk/tours/the-diary-of-a-hounslow-girl>,” said 
Bestwick. “After university Ambreen wrote her first play at the age of 22, and 
we were able to give her a little money to support her as an artist.”

The new Ovalhouse in Brixton will have two auditoriums, seven rehearsal 
studios and a cafe for community use. Building work is due for completion in 
2018. “The move to Brixton will be a great thing,” said Brosnan. “It will tap 
into the energy and life force of that area, and then be the making of many a 
young man and woman who is keen on dance or theatre.”
 