
What difference will government plans to replace Asbos with 'Crimbos' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/shortcuts/2012/may/22/passnotes-3180-the-crimbo?INTCMP=SRCH>
 make for the housing sector as it struggles to tackle the blight of antisocial 
behaviour on the UK's estates? We asked two experts to review the new legal 
powers in practice.

Chris Grose is antisocial behaviour adviser to the Chartered Institute of 
Housing <http://www.cih.org/>

After a much anticipated consultation response, we have now seen the detail of 
the reform to the antisocial behaviour (ASB) toolkit proposed by the Home 
Office. Social housing providers play a vital role in tackling ASB and have 
been successful in resolving the majority of cases through early intervention 
with disruptive residents.

However in the minority of cases there is a need for tough action, and making 
sure that housing providers have the right tools to do that job is essential.

It is welcome to see government reducing the number of tools used to tackle 
the problem, providing more clarity for the judiciary and for officers on the 
ground.

The new crime prevention injunction (CPI) is similar to an antisocial 
behaviour injunction (Asbi) â€“ but with a different name. Asbis were very 
popular and many people didn't want to see them scrapped, but the Home Office 
has listened to the housing sector's concerns. I'm pleased that the CPI will 
retain the lower threshold of evidence required (in short, evidence of nuisance 
or annoyance) and will still be heard in the county courts, which are used to 
dealing with civil law and housing.

Partner organisations such as the police, local authorities and health 
services will also be able to use the CPI. This is a fundamental change and one 
that will need careful co-ordination among partners. Of course, the change 
provokes a number of new questions: who will take the lead? Who will pay? Who 
will monitor? However, an injunction that can be used by partners as well as 
landlords has to be a good thing.

The CPI will also see the introduction of "positive requirements", aimed at 
tackling the root causes of why an individual is behaving badly or causing 
disruption to their neighbourhood. This is a good thing as it is aimed at 
bringing about lasting change. Though again there will be some things to 
consider: how can the positive requirements be resourced? Will these be 
enforced if breached? How will progress be measured?

The reforms also offer landlords an alternative route to repossession of a 
property that will reduce the burden on victims to give evidence in different 
court cases and avoid waiting months, sometimes years, for the perpetrator is 
evicted. This is a welcome introduction that puts the needs of the victim first.

It's good to see that social landlords have been referenced many times in the 
news coverage of these new legal powers, highlighting the great strides that 
the housing sector has made in ensuring that our voices and opinions are heard.

Helen Tucker is housing litigation partner at Anthony Collins Solicitors 
<http://www.anthonycollins.com/>

Initially, the new reforms will be met with some reluctance. Among social 
landlords there is the view that "if it ain't broke, don't fix it". The current 
set of tools and powers have worked well for years, and agencies and the courts 
know how and when to use them. New powers mean re-training, new forms and new 
processes; new court rules and regulations; appeals over the first few years, 
as we test how the powers will work.

Nevertheless, the loss of the Asbo will not be greatly mourned. The new 
injunction and criminal behaviour order made on conviction will cover the same 
ground. They also allow for more positive work with the perpetrator to be 
included, such as mandatory participation in rehabilitation programs.

Dispersal and closure powers, meanwhile, are largely about consolidating and 
simplifying the tools that landlords already had to streamline the process of 
evicting disruptive tenants.

The new CPI may operate in the same way as the current Asbi, but it has one 
major benefit: it can also now be brought against a minor, hopefully stopping 
bad behaviour at the source and drastically reducing the number of young people 
being sent to prison for more serious convictions in later years.

Future legislation will contain no guidelines on what action should be taken 
by local authorities once the 'community trigger' threshold has been reached, 
and gives autonomy to each authority to decide what their processes should be. 
Inconsistency may be a problem, with each area potentially setting a different 
level of trigger and response.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the housing 
network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2011/oct/10/join-guardian-housing-network>
 for more analysis, best practice and thelatest job vacancies 
<http://housingjobs.theguardian.com/> direct to you
 