
The opening scenes of London Spy, BBC2’s spenny new autumn drama which started 
last night, begins withBen Whishaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ben-whishaw> entering Hidden, a club in 
the arches of London’s Vauxhall, and exiting hours later, pooped and sweaty, 
before he wanders on to Vauxhall bridge and starts making some calls. The scene 
is familiar and well executed, and ends with one of those perfect human 
interactions that never happens. But that aside, my first thought was: who has 
battery the morning after? Then I realised it was a flip phone.

When Adele used a flip phone in the video for her new single, Hello, social 
media exploded. Why was Adele – clearly loaded and clearly in need of better 
signal – using a flip-phone? While the video, directed bywunderkind Xavier Dolan
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/11/xavier-dolan-canada-tom-at-the-farm>
, grafts plenty of outdated references (including a phone box and a location 
house without Wi-Fi) on to the retro scenography, it did seem weird. A bit like 
Audrey Hepburn™being resurrected for the Galaxy chocolate adverts 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gx9eDoS76LM>. Dolan responded, telling the LA 
Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/movies/moviesnow/la-et-mn-adele-hello-video-song-flip-phone-20151023-story.html>
: “I’m like, ‘Guys, get over it. It doesn’t matter,’” before explaining that he 
“never like[s] filming modern phones or cars. They’re so implanted in our lives 
that when you see them in movies you’re reminded you’re in reality”, and that 
modern techology is “anti-narrative”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffrom-rihanna-to-london-spy-how-flip-phones-were-called-back-into-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47ccb3733d3e75ec75f4570459f33b70ec81df21%2F0_0_1993_3000%2F1993.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Rihanna%20to%20London%20Spy%3A%20how%20flip%20phones%20were%20called%20back%20into%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffrom-rihanna-to-london-spy-how-flip-phones-were-called-back-into-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Rihanna%20to%20London%20Spy%3A%20how%20flip%20phones%20were%20called%20back%20into%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffrom-rihanna-to-london-spy-how-flip-phones-were-called-back-into-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47ccb3733d3e75ec75f4570459f33b70ec81df21%2F0_0_1993_3000%2F1993.jpg>
 Anna Wintour at fashion week in 2007, at the start of her flip-phone revival. 
Photograph: Michael Loccisano/FilmMagic 
We haven’t really seen flip phones since the burners in The Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire>, or Frasier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/apr/16/frasier-your-next-box-set>
 – Niles Crane regularly slammed shut his clamshell phone on ex-wife Maris. 
Smartphones weren’t really around then, of course. Plus, flip phones as plot 
devices make sense. Chances are, Whishaw’s character was on pay-as-you-go 
anyway. Or had had his previous iPhone nicked. Or knew it was going to be a 
late one and knew the battery life on a flip phone is incomparably better than 
an iPhone. And Adele was probably on a digital detox following her breakup. 
Still, the intermittent appearances of flip phones in real life, too – on 
fashionable people who can afford iPhones – suggest they could be coming back.

“The chicest thing,” Phoebe Philo  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/phoebe-philo>once said, “is when you don’t 
exist on Google. God, I would love to be that person!” which goes a long way to 
flag up how cool, how on point it now is, to keep a low-tech profile. With 
Instagram fallingout of favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/04/essena-oneill-deletes-instagram-account-social-media>
 in the past week following following her admission that she was being paid to 
present a perfect life, we could be moving towards an Insta-less world with 
flip phones a starting point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffrom-rihanna-to-london-spy-how-flip-phones-were-called-back-into-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feeec59896a43e7fa1f1abb6f84a32272d5dbb85c%2F0_0_2157_1295%2F2157.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Rihanna%20to%20London%20Spy%3A%20how%20flip%20phones%20were%20called%20back%20into%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffrom-rihanna-to-london-spy-how-flip-phones-were-called-back-into-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Rihanna%20to%20London%20Spy%3A%20how%20flip%20phones%20were%20called%20back%20into%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffrom-rihanna-to-london-spy-how-flip-phones-were-called-back-into-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feeec59896a43e7fa1f1abb6f84a32272d5dbb85c%2F0_0_2157_1295%2F2157.jpg>
 The flip phone from the video for singer Adele’s latest single Hello. 
Photograph: Screengrab 
In the wake of last year’s celebrity hacking scandal, which saw nude photos of 
Jennifer Lawrence and others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/01/nude-photos-of-jennifer-lawrence-and-others-posted-online-by-alleged-hacker>
 leaked and posted on 4chan, Reddit, Twitter and Tumblr, there is an argument 
for the preemptive strike that is using phones without cameras. Last November, 
Rihanna was spotted in New York with one.Kate Beckinsale uses 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/27/style/are-flip-phones-having-a-retro-chic-moment.html?_r=0>
 hers while getting a pedi. Scarlett Johansson, too. Anna Wintour – Queen of 
the fashion industry and a woman who sets trends in her sleep – was 
photographed last year at the US open reading a message on her flip phone.

Samsung is due to launch the much-hyped Samsung SM-W2016 
<http://www.gsmarena.com/samsung_smw2016_leaks_online-news-14573.php>, 
ostensibly a smartphone that looks like a flip phone. A spokesperson for 
Carphone Warehouse explains that a resurgence is entirely possible, citing the 
retroDoro PhoneEasy 612 flip phone 
<http://i.testfreaks.co.uk/images/products/600x400/195/doro-phoneeasy-612.33719747.jpg>
 as one that’s gradually creeping back in fashion as a “statement phone”.

“Low-tech living” is pretty trendy in the US, too. Sat somewhere between 
living off grid andFomo resistance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/apr/17/hephzibah-anderson-fomo-new-acronym>
, this is a vague new trend that includes and encourages people to own and use 
tablets and non-smartphones simultaneously, meaning you could separate work 
from family conversations. If that’s the case, perhaps pared-back tech does 
have merit, since there have beennumerous problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/28/iphone-6s-bent-scratched-dropped-dunked-in-water-how-durable>
 with almost every iPhone model released. Still, asIggy Pop told the New York 
Magazine 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2014/10/iggy-pop-on-skinny-jeans-and-flip-phones.html#>
, he calls his flip-phone a “Rugby”, “because you can drop it a lot and it 
won’t break”. Reason enough, really.
 