
The Financial Services Authority has ordered an inquiry into Prudential's bid 
for Asian rival AIA, which collapsed last yearleaving its shareholders with a 
£377m bill. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/mar/31/prudential-aia-tidjane-thiam-bonus>

Pru officially called a halt to the ambitious $35.3bn (£21.3bn) deal in June 
last year after a series of embarrassing setbacks, shareholder opposition and 
stock market turbulence.

The City regulator has now told the Pru to commission lawyers to analyse the 
advice that the insurer was given by its investment bankers at Credit Suisse, 
JP Morgan and HSBC.

The FSA used its so-called "Section 166" powers to demand that Pru appoint a 
"skilled persons report", which will be paid for by the insurer, but have its 
information shared with the regulator. Pru has appointed lawyers at Clifford 
Chance.

None of the parties involved, including the FSA and the Pru, would comment.

Such Section 166 reports can be used as the basis for any disciplinary 
measures that the regulator feels are necessary – but can also be used to rule 
out the need for any potential action.

The FSA has been commissioning more Section 166 reports as part of its efforts 
to be more intrusive, following the criticism it received following the banking 
crisis. Last year it commissioned 140 such reports, up from 88 the previous 
year and around the 50 the year before that.

From the moment the deal was leaked  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/mar/01/prudential-record-rights-issue>
in March it was greeted sceptically by investors in the Pru, which needed to 
tap its shareholders for £13.5bn of cash to fund the deal.

But it took Pru two months to produce the full financial details behind the 
transaction and then incurred regulatory delay when the FSA questioned whether 
the enlarged group would have enough capital to withstand stressful market 
conditions.

Tidjane Thiam <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tidjane-thiam>, the chief 
executive, had £50,000 docked from his bonus for 2010 as a penalty for the 
anger created among shareholders for the botched deal. His total pay deal still 
totalled £5m.

AIA was the Asian arm of the troubled US insurer AIG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig>, which refused to lower the price to 
enable Pru to continue with the deal and eventually floated the business in 
Hong Kong.

In an unexpected twist in the failed takeover battle, Mark Tucker was 
appointed chief executive of AIA in July last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jul/18/aig-prudential>. Tucker was 
chief executive of the Pru immediately before Thiam, who had previously been 
finance director of the Pru.
 