
Leading shares moved higher again after reasonable eurozone and US data, with 
mining shares among the main risers.

Ahead of the latest European Central Bank meeting on Thursday and the US 
non-farm payrolls data on Friday, theFTSE 100 edged up 6.43 points to 6659.04, 
a new three week high. Alastair McCaig, market analyst at IG, said:
 Hopes of stimulus from both China and the EU have continued to bolster the 
courage of the risk-on traders as they have once again driven the FTSE higher. 
The macro issues have hogged the limelight ahead of Alcoa once again kicking 
off the US reporting season next week.

Mexican silver miner Fresnillo was the day's biggest riser in the leading 
index, up 31p to 877p, whileAntofagasta added 17p to 856.5p as mines in Chile 
seemed to emerge unharmed from the major earthquake in the area.

With riskier assets in focus, Barclays was 5.3p better at 242.75p and Royal 
Bank of Scotland rose 5.8p to 322.9.

But Reckitt Benckiser was down 51p at £48.55 after JP Morgan Cazenove cut its 
target price from £44.50 to £42.50 with a neutral rating, a day after a 
positive note from Morgan Stanley.

GlaxoSmithKline slipped 10.5p to £15.83 after another drug disappointment. The 
company has stopped a high profile clinical trial using the Mage-A3 vaccine to 
treat lung cancer, after deciding it would not be possible to find a subgroup 
of patients who might benefit. The news follows an admission that the treatment 
did not help patients with non-small cell lung cancer in phase 3 trials.

Tesco fell 0.75p to 292.65p and Morrisons lost 3.6p to 207.2p after HSBC 
issued downbeat notes on both supermarkets. On Tesco, the bank has cut its 
earnings forecasts for next year by 7% and for 2015 by 10%, ahead of figures to 
be announced on 16 April. It has also reduced its price target from 300p to 
260p. OnMorrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons>, HSBC said 
it could not see long term growth, and has cut its target price to 160p from 
200p:

A number of companies went ex-dividend, including Resolution, down 15.3p to 
288.4p,Pearson, 30p lower at £10.14, and Aviva, down 4.3p at 487.8p.

Among the mid-caps Amec added 29p to £12 after Morgan Stanley raised its 
recommendation from underweight to equal weight and its price target from £11 
to £12.35.

FirstGroup, hit on Tuesday by a Bank of America Merrill Lynch downgrade, 
slipped 1.7p to 137.3p following a trading update.

The bus and rail group said operating profits for the year would be £14m lower 
than expected due to recent severe weather conditions, especially in the US 
which affected its First Student and Greyhound operations.

Its UK rail business was also hit by flooding, but like for like passenger 
revenue growth is expected to rise 5.9% for the year. The company is currently 
negotiating extensions for First Capital Connect, Great Western and 
TransPennine Express. UK bus revenues are set to climb by 1.8%.

Finally Litebulb, which has grown from developing rape alarms for Marks & 
Spencer to supplying a wide range of products and gifts to major retailers, 
lost 1.5% to 0.975p after reporting a £1.6m loss for the 18 months to December 
2013.

The company - which develops products for franchises such as Star Wars and 
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles and counts entrepreneur Nigel Wray and Betfair 
founder Andrew Black as shareholders - also unveiled the acquisition of Go 
Entertainment and the issue of £2m of convertible loan notes. It is paying 
£0.5m and issuing 182m shares for Go Entertainment, which designs and develops 
consumer goods such as DVDs, books, magazines and other gift products.

House broker finnCap said:
 The group's final results were in line with forecast and included the 
announcement of another acquisition, further expanding the group's portfolio of 
brands and products. We upgrade our forecasts and retain our 1.5p share price 
target, implying 52% upside.

2013 was a transformational year for Litebulb and included the acquisitions of 
Bluw, Rizon and Meld, significantly enlarging the group's product, customer and 
revenue base. In the second half, the group generated £6.7m of revenue compared 
with £1.4m in the first half and a pretax profit of £0.05m compared with a loss 
before tax of £0.96m in the first half.  