
Leading shares ended the week on a positive note despite uncertainties ahead 
of the UK general election and the drawn-out talks to solve Greece’s financial 
crisis.

The latest PMI manufacturing index for the UK came in much lower than expected 
in April, following poor GDP figures earlier in the week. In the US the figures 
were also fairly weak. Earlier, Chinese manufacturing data showed no 
improvement on the previous month, but with hopes that the country might 
introduce more stimulus to boost the economy, that was still enough to support 
the mining sector.

So Anglo American added 60p to £11.65, helped by speculation of a possible 
break-up bid, whileRio Tinto rose 112p to £29.97 and BHP Billiton was 46.5p 
better at 1607.5p.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished at 6985.95, up 25.32 points. There was no 
guidance from European markets, closed for the May Day holiday, but on Wall 
Street the Dow Jones Industrial Average was around 130 points better by the 
time London traders clocked off.

Chris Beauchamp, senior market analyst at IG, said:

With Europe mostly out of action for May Day, it was a quiet day in London, 
but at least the traditionally weak period for equities has started off on the 
right foot. Miners continue to dominate the top end of the FTSE 100 on revived 
hopes that the Chinese government will be hustled into fresh stimulus measures 
by the general lack of strength in economic data.

Lloyds Banking Group led the FTSE 100 risers, up 5.49p to 82.87p after better 
than expected results, butBarclays dipped 0.95p to 254.35p after Berenberg 
analysts moved from hold to sell.


Insurer Admiral added 38p to £15.96 as Barclays’ analysts raised their target 
price from £10.90 to £15.23.

But Hargreaves Lansdown was down 31p to £11.99 as HSBC issued a reduce rating 
but moved its price target from 810p to 890p, whileAberdeen Asset Management 
fell 12p to 463.1p despite the same bank lifting its target from 510p to 530p.

Elsewhere Smith & Nephew added 26p to £11.43 after Thursday’s announcement of 
a 3% rise in third quarter revenue, as Credit Suisse suggested the company’s 
share price took no account it could be a target for a larger rival.

Lifting its target price on the artificial hip specialist from £11.15 to 
£11.30 but with a neutral rating, the bank said:

We cut our 2015/16/17 estimated sales by an average of around 1% owing to more 
adverse foreign exchange (from negative 6% to 7%), and lower our respective 
earnings per share estimates by an average of around 2%. Considering our 
stand-alone valuation (£11.30) and the value of potential synergies (around 
250p-300p), we estimate that Smith & Nephew’s stock price currently implies 
almost no probability of an industry merger.

There is ongoing M&A activity and industry consolidation in orthopaedics. In 
this process, Smith & Nephew holds potentially strategic value for certain US 
companies that have business overlap in large joints, trauma and sports 
medicine.

US group Stryker reportedly looked at the company last year, but news of a 
$2bn buyback plan in March dampened speculation it could return for a second 
bite.

Lower down the market Begbies Traynor, the consultancy group, fell 13% to 42p 
after it said its full year results would be below market expectations. It 
blamed a drop in the number of insolvency appointments in the first quarter, 
with corporate insolvencies down more than 11% compared to the previous year.

But Pure Wafer, which provides reclaim services to semiconductor 
manufacturers, surged 88% to 107.5p. It promised to return funds to 
shareholders after it reached a “satisfactory” settlement with its insurers 
following a fire at its Swansea premises in December 2014. It will receive cash 
to cover part of the replacement costs of property, plant and equipment and 
three years’ of business interruption.

The company said it would not rebuild the Swansea plant but continue its 
operations in Arizona and return surplus funds to shareholders once it had 
settled any outstanding liabilities. It said this was likely to be at a 
“significantly higher” value than the average price of 59.59p at which the 
shares have been trading since a refinancing in November 2012 and 29 April, 
although it is unlikely to be more than 125p a share.
 