
Mining and banking shares are leading the way as the market holds steady at a 
three week high.

But leading shares are being held back by a number of major companies going 
ex-dividend and a downgrade ofReckitt Benckiser.

So overall, ahead of a number of key economic figures between now and the end 
of the week, theFTSE 100 is up just 8.28 points at 6660.89. Later comes a US 
ADP jobs survey ahead of Friday's non-farm payroll numbers, while on Thursday 
the European Central Bank meets to decide whether to authorise negative 
interest rates or bond buying to push down the euro and attempt to cope with 
deflationary fears.

Among the risers Mexican silver miner Fresnillo is up 22p at 868p, while 
Antofagasta has added 14p to 853.5p. Barclays is 1.7p better at 239.15p and 
Royal Bank of Scotland has risen 1.7p to 318.8p.

But Reckitt is down 53p at £48.53 after JP Morgan Cazenove cut its target 
price from £44.50 to £42.50 with a neutral rating, a day after a positive note 
from Morgan Stanley. JP Morgan said:
 We believe Reckitt is at a strategic turning point with several balance sheet 
catalysts (RB Pharmaceuticals and over-the-counter M&A). Yet, we believe a lot 
of these are already positively reflected in the shares' 25% premium rating to 
the sector. Conversely any setback on these events could lead to a 10%-15% 
downside, with missing on the OTC deal as the biggest potential risk. At the 
operating level, we expect the first quarter to be weak and core earnings 
growth slowing to [an estimated] 1.0% compound annual growth rate 2014-16E.

As chief executive Rakesh Kapoor has vied to consolidate the OTC market, the 
potential acquisition of Merck OTC would be welcomed though the share rerating 
suggests the market seems to price a successful yet expensive deal (at $11bn, 
around 7% earnings per share accretive). Yet we argue that Pharma groups 
Novartis and Bayer have a strong hand as they can bargain with their animal 
health assets, a more value creative option for Merck than mere cash. Losing 
out on the deal would be a setback with important de- rating risk.

[There is] uncertainty ahead [for RB Pharmaceuticals]. We expect a tough year 
as share erosion and potential competitive entrance should dent profit by 20%. 
As the market awaits management's update on RB Pharmaceutical's 'strategic 
review', we believe a spin off looks increasingly most likely, with a fair 
value of £1.3bn (185p a share).


The FTSE 100 ex-dividend companies include Resolution, down 10.6p to 293.1p, 
Pearson, 29p lower at £10.15, and Aviva, down 4.1p at 488p.

Among the mid-caps Amec has added 27p to £11.98 after Morgan Stanley raised 
its recommendation from underweight to equal weight and its price target from 
£11 to £12.35. The bank said:
 We see a positively skewed risk-reward around [Amec's] firm offer for Foster 
Wheeler. We expect the stock to re-rate as the deal completion becomes likely 
due to potential synergies. Alternatively, we believe the deal not progressing 
could trigger a £400m buyback.
 