
Despite the turmoil in Russia with the slump in the rouble, and continuing 
weakness in the crude price, investors seem to have decided oil company shares 
have fallen far enough.

After recent weakness, Tullow Oil rose 22.6p to 381.4p, Royal Dutch Shell B 
shares bounced 105p to £20.9,BG was 32.1p better at 827.2p, and oil services 
groupWeir was up 72p at £17.82.

Along with weak UK inflation figures which seemed to push any interest rate 
rise further into the distance, the recovery in the oil sector helped lift the
FTSE 100 by 149.11 points or 2.41% to 6331.83. This is the first rise for the 
index after six trading days of decline.

European markets were also boosted, thanks to positive German confidence 
figures and reasonalble purchasing managers reports, while Wall Street also 
recovered after manufacturing data which suggested no early increase in 
borrowing costs. Ahead of the latest US Federal Reserve decision on Wednesday, 
the Dow Jones Industrial Average added more than 200 points by the time London 
closed.

Investors shrugged off not just the Russia crisis but also weak data from 
China which indicated a slowdown in the country’s growth and initially took the 
shine off mining shares.

But the only miners in decline were Randgold Resources, down 54p at £40.40 and 
Fresnillo, which fell 7.5p to 704.5p, as silver slipped back and gold barely 
moved higher.

There was a rouble effect on Coca Cola Hellenic Bottling, down 11p at £12.21 
on concerns about its operations in Russia, andBurberry, 4p lower at £15.90, 
which had been looking for growth in emerging markets.

BT added 7.4p to 405.4p after Monday’s news it was in exclusive talks about a 
£12.5bn deal to buy mobile group EE, even though shareholders will probably 
have to pay some of the purchase price via a cash call.

Among the mid-caps Afren added 3.04p to 35.93p after discovering oil onshore 
Madagascar whileAmec Foster Wheeler rose 42.5p to 832p and Wood Group was 15.5p 
better at 581p after Chevron awarded the two companies contracts to expand its 
Captain field in the north sea.
 