
With markets starting the week on the back foot despite a reasonable 
performance from Asia, one exception isRandgold Resources.

Mining stocks have, as is well known, been rather volatile in recent weeks and 
precious metal miners are no exception. But Randgold has reported better than 
expected results despite turbulence in the gold price and commodities 
generally. Full year profits fell 11% to $572.2m as gold fell for the third 
year in 2015. But earnings per share of $2.03 were better than the expected 
$1.95 and the company has also raised its dividend by 10%.

Chief executive Mark Bristow said 2015 was one of the best year’s in the 
company’s history:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fmarketforceslive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fftse-falls-on-economy-fears-but-randgold-rises-as-it-beats-forecasts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F182612d886a613186b35fdf7d496fcbf47470afe%2F0_0_2621_3931%2F2621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FTSE%20falls%20on%20economy%20fears%20but%20Randgold%20rises%20as%20it%20beats%20forecasts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fmarketforceslive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fftse-falls-on-economy-fears-but-randgold-rises-as-it-beats-forecasts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FTSE%20falls%20on%20economy%20fears%20but%20Randgold%20rises%20as%20it%20beats%20forecasts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fmarketforceslive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fftse-falls-on-economy-fears-but-randgold-rises-as-it-beats-forecasts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F182612d886a613186b35fdf7d496fcbf47470afe%2F0_0_2621_3931%2F2621.jpg>
 Mark Bristow. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
It’s easy to achieve when the stars are all aligned but it’s a lot more 
difficult in a market as challenged as this one, which makes these results even 
more pleasing.

Randgold shares have risen 140p or 2.6% to £54.40, and analyst Hunter Hillcoat 
at Investec said:

Randgold produced 1,211,000 ounces in 2015 at cash costs of $679 an ounce, in 
line with guidance, to deliver earnings of 203 cents per share (Investec 193 
cents per share) and leave it with cash of $213m, up from $83m at the end of 
2014. Randgold is one of the few companies to still generate earnings growth on 
our forecasts, while its investment discipline has left it well placed to 
withstand the current environment. Consequently, it trades at an ever 
increasing premium to its peers. Our forecasts are under review, pending 
incorporation of the results.

Meanwhile Mexican precious metals miner Fresnillo has followed suit, up 5p at 
793p.

But otherwise there are few risers in the FTSE 100, which has fallen 86.42 
points to 5761.64. Investors are still concerned about the global economy, with 
mixed signals from Friday’s US non-farm payroll numbers and recent weakness 
from China. Downbeat confidence surveys from BDO in the UK and Sentix in Europe 
are adding to the gloom. Alastair McCaig, market analyst at IG, said:

Stock markets <https://www.theguardian.com/business/stock-markets> in Europe 
are in full retreat... continuing the theme from last Friday.

There will be considerably less chance of any monkey business from Asian 
markets as China enjoys a week off celebrating the start of a new year with its 
spring festival. The day’s economic data releases are almost non-existent, with 
only this morning’s European Sentix investor confidence and this afternoon’s US 
Labor Market conditions data worthy of note.

With so few stimuli to confuse the picture, today should be a day for calmer 
heads and smoother market conditions. Of course, that would have been the case 
if the disappointing Sentix figures hadn’t triggered a mid-morning selloff. As 
the market continues to downgrade the chances of interest rate rises in the US 
– or anywhere else for that matter – gold has enjoyed a return to favour as its 
lack of income appears comparatively less of an issue.

Chip designer Arm is down 50p at 933p ahead of this week’s results and after 
falls in US technology shares. It was not helped by a warning of a slowdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/08/imagination-technologies-to-sell-pure-digital-radios>
 from smaller rivalImagination Technologies, which is 4.75p lower at 127p after 
saying it would make an operating loss this year and its chief executive was 
stepping down.

Among the mid-caps, G4S has fallen 12.4p to 197p as Jefferies cut its 
recommendation from hold to underperform. Its analysts said:

Emerging market headwinds could offset self-help initiatives in 2016, prompt 
S&P to reintroduce a negative outlook and requireG4S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/g4s> to repair its balance sheet again. 
This isn’t our central case but, when the path is credible and the margin for 
error is slim, a nervous equity market will start to discount it.
 