
Leading shares fell to their lowest level for two months, as fears that the US 
Federal Reserve would soon turn off the money taps refused to go away.

The FTSE 100 fell 62.47 points to 6445.25, the worst it has been since 10 
October.

Positive US economic news, and this week's signs of agreement over the 
country's budget, have prompted increasing speculation the Fed might trim its 
$85bn a month bond buying programme. Even higher than expected US weekly 
jobless claims could not quell the growing feeling the Fed could act at this 
month's meeting, rather than in the new year.

David Madden, market analyst at IG, said:
 Equity markets are edgy ahead of next week's US Federal Reserve meeting; 
judging by the sea of red on trading screens, investors are pointing towards a 
taper.
Traders know they were lucky with the September meeting and now they are 
cashing in their chips before Ben Bernanke throws in his two cents. The deal 
that was struck between the Democrats and the Republicans over the Federal 
budget reminded traders that all is not well in Washington; the ceiling debt 
talks will again rear their ugly head in the new year. 
Defensive stocks were in demand, unsurprisingly given the market's recent 
weakness.United Utilities was up 11p at 655.5p while National Grid rose 4p to 
750p.Severn Trent ended 5p better at £16.74.

Meanwhile AstraZeneca added 11p to £34.58, additionally helped by news that US 
regulators had partially approved the experimental drug metreleptin, developed 
with Bristol-Myers Squibb, for treating disorders involving loss of body fat.

But Sports Direct International led the FTSE 100 fallers after its half year 
results came in slightly lower than expected and it revealed a disagreement 
with Adidas over selling Chelsea replica football kits.

Energy services company Wood Group lost 79p to 718p following a warning that 
profits at its engineering business would fall 15% next year after project 
delays and problems in Canada.

The news hit sector peers Amec, 55p lower at £10.49, and Petrofac, down 47p at 
£11.42.

Perform was, ironically, one of the day's worst performers. Its shares slumped 
58% to 180p after the sports rights company warned 2013 earnings would be well 
short of expectations. It blamed a shortfall in its advertising and sponsorship 
division, especially in Germany and the US.

Elsewhere chip designer Imagination Technologies fell another 20.5p to 169.5p 
following Wednesday's disappointing update, prompting a number of brokers to 
downgrade their price targets. Credit Suisse said:
 [After a] weak set of numbers from Imagination, we lower our 2014 revenue and 
earnings per share estimates by 9% and 35%, respectively. For 2015 and 2016, we 
reduce our already below consensus estimates by another 4%-6%, resulting in 
earnings per share forecast reduction in the range of 25%-30%. As such, we 
lower our target price to 175p (down from 235p) and reiterate our underperform 
rating.
 