
As markets hold fire ahead of the day’s European Central Bank meeting, where 
more stimulus measures are expected,Aviva has gained ground after its full year 
figures.

The insurer has added 24p to 483.6p as it beat forecasts with a 20% rise in 
operating profits and said its strong capital position meant it could make 
bolt=on acquisitions or return cash to shareholders. Last year it paid £5.6bn 
for Friends Life, and said it would achieve its integration target in 2016, a 
year ahead of schedule.Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> 
analysts said:

The company expects to achieve £1.2bn of capital synergies from the Friends 
deal of which £400m of diversification benefit is already achieved. As a result 
Aviva expects its UK life company to remit £1bn of cash over and above its 
normal run-rate over the next three years. The chief financial officer 
suggested that ifAviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> 
does not need the money to reinvest, the company will consider additional 
distributions to shareholders.

Goldman Sachs analyst Ravi Tanna said:

 Aviva has reported a good set of 2015 numbers this morning. Its operating 
earnings are 7% ahead of consensus, owing to a broad-based ‘beat’. Its dividend 
growth of 15% is marginally below consensus expectations of 17% year on year, 
but the group expects £1.2bn of capital benefits, which will translate in an 
additional £1bn of cash remittances from UK life to group over the next 3 
years. Its Solvency 2 position of 180% is ahead of our 160-170% expected range, 
and management actions should add 5 to 10 points to this over 2016. It also 
expects to achieve its £225mn cost synergy target by end 2016, a year ahead of 
target.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 7.04 points at 6139.28, but much of that is due 
to companies going ex-dividend. These includeBarclays, down 4.25p at 163.95p, 
Direct Line, 15p lower at 371.1p and CRH, off 43p at £18.74.

Royal Bank of Scotland is 4.6p lower at 226.8p as Bernstein cut its 
recommendation from outperform to market-perform and slashed its price target 
from 450p to 230p. It said:

The macro outlook in the world (and the UK specifically) has deteriorated 
significantly and in the same time, legal settlements / disposals which were 
the prime drivers of excess capital have been pushed out. We still like the 
franchise but the next 12 months will be an uphill task with deteriorating 
earnings fighting against elusive excess capital.

Ashtead is the biggest FTSE 100 faller on worries about the equipment rental 
group’s exposure to the US economy. Deutsche Bank began coverage with a sell 
rating, saying:

We have bearish on the US for some time, and we do not consider the 
non-residential market [Ashtead’s largest end market] immune from our concerns. 
Furthermore, analysis shows that the top 10 oil states contributed to an 
average of 48% of incremental construction spend (excluding power, 
communication and railroad) in 2012-14, driving further concerns over the US 
construction end markets.

We consider Ashtead <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ashteadgroup> to 
have reached peak returns on capital. We expect competition in US equipment 
rental to intensify, as small to mid-sized players gain increased access to 
cheap bank lending. As such, we anticipate Ashtead’s returns on capital to 
reduce over the coming years.

We think investors interested in the compelling longer term structural growth 
story that Ashtead has to offer should wait for a more interesting entry point.

Rolls-Royce is down 17p to 683p as Goldman Sachs moved from buy to neutral 
after its recent share price rise.


Among the mid-caps Amec Foster Wheeler has added after the oil and gas 
services group said it would sell its Global Power Group and halve its net debt 
of £946m in the next 15 months. Canaccord Genuity said:

Amec <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> Foster Wheeler has delivered 
in-line full year results on earnings and dividend, but the excitement is in 
the debt line and the outlook: net debt of £959m at year-end is more than £100m 
better than our expectation (set with the November trading update), thanks to 
strong working capital inflows, the target is to halve that debt over the next 
15 months in part from a disposal of GPG, and there is an outlook statement 
that implies EBITA for 2016 broadly in line with existing consensus.

We believe this is a very solid set of results and despite the recovery in the 
stock over the past two weeks we continue to see substantial upside. We are 
buyers with a 640p target.
 