
Leading shares lost early gains after an opening fall on Wall Street, with 
energy shares hit by a new fall in the oil price.

Initially Rolls-Royce bucked the trend, after the aero engine business 
revealed it was starting its £1bn buyback programme with an initial £250m 
purchase. The shares will be bought with the proceeds from the recent sale of 
its energy gas turbine and compressor business to Siemens.

But news that a planned delivery of an Airbus A350 - powered by Rolls engines 
- due for this Saturday had been delayed with no new date set took the shine 
off Rolls shares. They closed down 4.5p at 856p.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 29.43 points lower at 6500.04, having touched 
6565 earlier, as Brent crude fell to a new five year low below $64 a barrel 
after Opec cut its demand forecasts for next year. Investors were also 
unsettled by the prospects for Greece prompting a new eurozone crisis, 
following a decision to bring a presidential vote forward to next week, which 
could lead to an impasse and snap elections next year.

Following the decline in crude prices, oil services group Petrofac led the 
fallers, down 25p at 717p, while BG lost 26.4p to 872.4p despite the £3bn sale 
of its Australian pipeline business.Royal Dutch Shell B shares lost 56p to 
2098.5p whileBP dropped 6.35p to 399.6p.

But airlines benefited from the prospect of cheaper fuel costs, with British 
Airways ownerInternational Airlines Group up 2.5p at 460.5p and easyJet 18p 
better at £16.43. Cruise companyCarnival climbed 25p to £27.44 as Numis raised 
its target price from £25.50 to £29.50.

Positive results from equipment hire group Ashstead pushed its shares to the 
top of the leading index, up 98p at £11.75, while among the mid-caps, retailerN 
Brown rose 23.1p to 350.2p following a rebound in sales after a weak September 
due to unseasonable weather.

But Standard Chartered fell 10.3p to 934p as US regulators extended monitoring 
of the bank, which was fined $667m for violating sanctions on Iran and other 
countries, by three years to 2017. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/10/standard-chartered-management-us-regulators-investigation-sanctions 
http://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/10/standard-chartered-management-us-regulators-investigation-sanctions 
http://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/10/standard-chartered-management-us-regulators-investigation-sanctions 
http://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/10/standard-chartered-management-us-regulators-investigation-sanctions>
 The bank announced it had set up a board committee responsible for financial 
crime compliance.

Carillion, the support services and construction group, closed down 4.2p to 
341.8p as it said it expected a slowdown in the award of UK government 
contracts ahead of next year’s general election. It also refused to comment on 
speculation it might launch a new bid for rivalBalfour Beatty, down 0.6p at 
189p.


Finally Quindell, the troubled services group, crashed 12.75p or 28% to 32.75p 
after news that former boss Robert Terry had sold some £8m worth of shares to 
take his stake down to just 2.99% from 8.73%.

As the shares plunged the group announced it had renewed contracts with 
Swinton for motor claims and insurethbox for its policy administration system, 
as well as a new deal with a UK mototor cycle insurer. This helped bring it 
back from its low of 25p.
 