
Leading shares are on course for their biggest weekly rise for nearly four 
years, with stock markets buoyed by the hope that central banks will continue 
to support a struggling global economy.

A week ago weaker than expected US jobs figures convinced traders that the 
Federal Reserve was unlikely to raise interest rates this year and overnight, 
minutes from the September meeting seemed to go along with that belief. The 
meeting - which took place before the poor employment data - showed the Fed 
concerned about low inflation and the global slowdown in the wake of China’s 
problems.

So the FTSE 100 has jumped another 29.15 points to 6404.97, its eighth day of 
rises. This week the index has gained 4.55% so far, its biggest weekly rise 
since December 2011, and it is set for its highest close since 18 August. As 
well as the Fed, investors are also hoping for further stimulus measures from 
the European Central Bank and perhaps the Chinese authorities.

Gloomy forecasts for the global outlook from the International Monetary Fund 
have added to the feeling that central banks will keep acting to try and boost 
growth.

With metal prices recovering, mining shares are among the leading risers. 
Glencore, a volatile stock these days to say the least, is up 6.35p or 5.2% at 
127p, the biggest riser in the leading index.

Anglo American has added 30p to 707.5p while Fresnillo is up 28p at 732.5p. In 
all, six of the top ten risers are mining shares.

Elsewhere Admiral has climbed 49p to £15.79 after a survey showed quarterly 
car insurance premiums rose by 4.8%, the biggest rise since 2010. Peel Hunt 
said:

The Confused Towers Watson Motor index was published this morning showing some 
further signs that UK motor rates continue to rise, reflecting a gradual turn 
in the UK motor cycle. Rates increase by 4.8% quarter on quarter bringing the 
year on year rate trend to a positive +8.1%. This...will start to earn through 
into the insurance industry’s earnings in the second half of 2016 and fully in 
2017.

But the rising oil price - Brent crude is up another 0.8% at $53.51 at the 
moment - has left transport companies lower on worries about higher fuel costs. 
Cruise companyCarnival is down 19p at 33.16 while easyJet is 14p lower at 
£16.90.
 