
Leading shares are flagging on continuing concerns about the global economy 
and the effect of a number of companies going ex-dividend.

The biggest faller in the FTSE 100 is Inmarsat, down 41.5p or 4% to 924.5p 
after the satellite communications group warned of tough trading this year. It 
has been hit by cutbacks in government spending as well as slowdown in the 
maritime market.

It recently completed its Global Xpress satellite network, allowing it to 
offer broadband services to corporate customers such as airlines. But it is 
planning to spend $500m to $600m this year and each of the following two years 
to upgrade older satellites and supply new equipment for airline broadband. 
This was around $100m more than many analysts had been expecting.

The news came as the company reported full year pretax profits down from 
$342.3m to $338m on flat revenues of $1.27bn.

The FTSE 100 is currently down 2.90 points at 6144.16, but the companies 
quoted without the right to their dividend have knocked around 13 points off 
the index.

These include HSBC, down 12.15p at 459.45p and RSA Insurance, 8.3p lower than 
439p.

Whitbread has fallen 97p to £39.52 after its results disappointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/03/costa-whitbread-mild-weather-high-street-growth-weak>
, butAdmiral Group is up 122p to £18.82 following the insurer reporting better 
than expected profits of £377m, up 6%.

CRH has climbed 4.7% to £19.37 after the Irish cement maker reported a 35% 
rise in earnings to €2.2bn and issued a positive update for the current year.

Mining shares are moving higher despite a dip in Chinese service sector data 
and a slowdown in the eurozone, withAnglo American up 15.9p to 540p as copper 
hit a three month high.

Among the mid-caps Thomas Cook is down 4.5p at 103.9p as Barclays cut its 
target price from 122p to 110p and its earnings forecasts. It said:

Post its 2015 results, we update our model. 2016 earnings before interest and 
tax goes to £339m from £370m, meaning our 2016 earnings per share forecast 
decreases by 15% to 10p (Bloomberg consensus 10.7p). Our 2017 earnings per 
share forecast is reduced by 13% to 12.4p (Bloomberg consensus 13.3p), and we 
introduce our 2018 earnings per share forecast of 16p (Bloomberg consensus 
15.3p). We note there is a large consensus earnings range forThomas Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup>. We use a consistent 
valuation methodology (applying the average Tour Operator PE of around 11 times 
on 2016 EPS) and our price target moves to 110p from 122p.
 