
Fears that London market would open heavily down on fears of political 
instability in the wake of the death ofNorth Korean leader Kim Jong-il 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/dec/19/kim-jong-il-north-korean-leader-dies>
 proved ill founded. The FTSE 100 index opened down 30 points – versus 
expectations of a fall as low as 69 points – demonstrating that traders tend to 
be far more relaxed about the prospect of political unrest outside key 
oil-producing states. By 9.30am the FTSE was down only 10 points at 5377.

Looking across the sectors it was quickly clear market attention was mainly 
focused on the Vickers report 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2011/dec/18/cable-accepts-vickers-banking-reform?INTCMP=SRCH>
, with Lloyds Banking Group and Barclays respectively down 0.45p at 24.05p and 
down 2.6p at 168.9p. Royal Bank of Scotland was also a faller, down 0.17p at 
19.83p. Reports over the weekend suggested the government was toughening its 
resolve to push through the recommendations of Vickers, designed to protect 
retail depositors from the risks associated with investmeny banking operations.

Woes continued at online retailer Ocado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> – down 5.2p at 66p, almost a third 
of its 180p float price – after it blamed continued teething problems at the 
group's Hatfield warehouse for constraining the company's delivery capabilities 
towards the end of the financial year. That means ebitda for the year to 27 
November will be in the range of £27.5m to £28.5m. Consensus expectations had 
been for ebitda of £34m.

Panmure Gordon analyst Philip Dorgan described the profits warning as a 
"significant miss".

"We don't see Ocado as special and we believe that it has a tough competitive 
environment ahead of it. We also see execution risk increasing as a consequence 
of this announcement. We believe that Ocado will struggle to make money before 
2013. We therefore reiterate our Sell recommendation and target price of 50p."

City investors are losing patience with Ocado management and the fact that it 
has taken them over three weeks to update on such a profit warning will not 
enhance their reputation.

Elsewhere in the online world, slots and poker operator 888 Holdings nudged up 
1.75p at 38.25p, after the group reported a strong end to the year, suggesting 
operating profits will be a good way ahead of current market expectations. Next 
year is expected to be a big one for the regulation of online gambling firms.

Ashtead <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ashteadgroup> Group was among 
the FTSE 250 risers, up 6.6p at 216.2p, as analysts discussed whether the US 
and UK equipment hire business might make a likely takeover target. The 
speculation followed an announcement on Friday from United Rentals, the world's 
largest equipment rental group, revealing it is to acquire rival firm RSC 
Holdings in a $1.9bn (£1.2bn) takeover.
 