
An early rally on stock markets has soon fizzled out, as oil once again goes 
into reverse.

Among the fallers is Lloyds Banking Group, down 2.05p or 3% at 64.81p as JP 
Morgan cut its price target on the bank from 98p to 90p but kept its overweight 
rating. It reduced its forecast for Lloyds’ net interest margin, saying it 
could decline further in 2016 in the absence of interest rate rises. Last week 
Bank of England governor Mark Carney saidnow was not the right time to raise 
rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/bank-of-england-mark-carney-rules-out-uk-interest-rate-rise>
.

But although JP Morgan said Lloyds was best positioned in the sector, and any 
fall could be a buying opportunity, that has cut little ice in a volatile 
market.

The FTSE 100, having climbed as high as 5933 in the wake of rises in Asia and 
Friday’s gains, is now on the slide again, currently down 24.45 points at 
5875.56.

Commodity companies are falling back as Brent crude drops nearly 3% to $31.22 
on renewed fears of oversupply, with Iran back in the export market and Opec 
set against cutting production. Tony Cross at Trustnet Direct said:

We’ve got a rather troubling start to the European session with crude oil 
having sold off quite sharply over the last hour or so. We remain well up on 
the prices posted at the middle of last week, but this weakness could unsettle 
equity markets which soared last week as oil prices appeared to find something 
of a foot-hold.

BP is down 7.55p at 345.15p while as copper weakens again, Antofagasta has 
fallen 6.4p to 365.8p.

Kingfisher is currently the biggest loser, down 14.7p at 330.3p after the DIY 
group’s strategic update 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/25/bq-owner-aims-to-fix-ailing-share-price-with-500m-a-year-profit-boost>
 disappointed.

But Arm has added 18.5p to £10.14 ahead of this week’s figures from key 
customer Apple.

As investors head back to gold and silver, Randgold Resources has risen 79p to 
£46.34 and Mexican precious metals minerFresnillo is up 11.5p at 673p.
 