
Climate change could be "the biggest global health threat of the 21st 
century", according to clinicians in a 2009Lancet report 
<http://www.thelancet.com/climate-change> and faced with this threat, the case 
for the health profession to take action on emissions is compelling.

In 2010, the NHS had an annual carbon footprint of some 20m tonnes, which is 
more than 3% of total UK emissions. In line with binding national targets under 
the Climate Change Act, the NHS must cut its emissions by 34% from 1990 levels 
by 2020, and eventually by 80% by 2050. Current forecasts by the NHS 
Sustainable Development Unit suggest that theNHS is on track for only a 9.8% 
reduction by 2020 <http://www.sdu.nhs.uk/healthcheck2012>, so clearly there is 
much work to be done.

Guy's and St Thomas' <http://www.guysandstthomas.nhs.uk/Home.aspx> is one of 
the busiest NHS foundation trusts in the country, with two large acute 
hospitals, more than 12,000 employees and more than 1m patient contacts each 
year. This means that energy bills run into the millions and that we need to 
take action on our energy usage. In 2006, we became one of the first 
organisations to join theCarbon Trust's public sector carbon management 
programme 
<http://www.carbontrust.com/client-services/advice/public-sector-advice>. This 
enabled us to measure our emissions and develop a strategic approach to carbon 
management and energy efficiency.

It helped us to devise a single campaign to engage staff across internal 
divisions, and implement initiatives across the trust. This unified approach 
proved instrumental in achieving support from our board to take action and 
saved energy and carbon which also saves us money, which can be invested in 
patient care.

The biggest single change that we made was installing two 3MW combined heat 
and power (CHP) engines, which save energy by generating both electricity and 
heat when fuel is burned. These generate all heating and hot water needed in 
the summer, and half of the heating in winter, as well as about half of the 
electricity required year round.

Although the CHP engines cost £10m, they resulted in an annual saving of £1.7m 
and 11,000 tonnes of CO2 per year.

We invested in many other carbon reduction initiatives, such as installing 
energy efficient lighting and sensors along almost 15 miles of corridors across 
our sites. We are now rolling out software to automatically shut down our 7,000 
PCs when not in use.

Nonetheless, as our services and patient numbers grow we know that there are 
more opportunities to cut energy bills and minimise our climate impact. This is 
why we are working with the Carbon Trust againon the new collaborative 
implementation programme 
<http://www.carbontrust.com/client-services/advice/public-sector-advice>, which 
helps public sector organisations develop carbon management strategies. It will 
also help us to evaluate new projects and unlock savings.

We are just one of 24 public sector organisations working with the Carbon 
Trust on carbon management programmes this year, alongside universities, local 
authorities, police forces, central government bodies and other NHS trusts. It 
goes to show how the public sector can work together to take the lead in 
helping the UK become a low carbon society, and deliver greater value in 
services provided to the public.

Alexandra Hammond is sustainability manager for Guy's and St Thomas' NHS 
foundation trust <http://www.guysandstthomas.nhs.uk/Home.aspx>

This article is published by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Join the Guardian 
Healthcare Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2012/jul/16/become-member-guardian-healthcare-network>
 free to receive regular emails on the issues at the top of the professional 
agenda.
 