
Just how good European principles were in re-energising Hindu 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/hinduism/> thinking which had gone 
moribund in India during colonial times may be gauged when you look into the 
infuriatingmess <https://www.theguardian.com/pakistan/Story/0,,2148308,00.html> 
that is Pakistan today.

India was capacious enough to digest the best of the west but retain the best 
of itself. When talking of an independent Pakistan, its founderMuhammad Ali 
Jinnah <http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/jinnah_mohammad_ali.shtml>
 said: "You are free, you are free to go to your temples, you are free to go to 
your mosques, or to any other place of worship in this state of Pakistan. You 
may belong to any religion or caste or creed - that has nothing to do with the 
business of the state."

Arguably, India's constitution 
<http://www.servat.unibe.ch/law/icl/in00000_.htm> that guarantees secularism, 
in my opinion, has saved India from the handbrake that continues to restrict its
Islamic <http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/islam/> neighbour.

Sadly for Jinnah, liberalism and democracy has not had the chance to develop in
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, so far. I was talking to 
a few young businessmen and lawyers in a trendy bar called The Shack in south 
Delhi earlier this summer about their perception of Britain.

The answers were mainly "stagnated economy", "polite people" and "Lord's 
cricket ground". In short, young Indians are more interested in going to 
university and making money than recriminations aboutpartition 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/modern/partition1947_01.shtml>. The 
fall-out from partition is now George Bush's problem.

Today, the emerging relationship between Britain and India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> is based on mutual trust and 
co-operation. This is the future. India's economic growth post-independence was 
likened to an elephant moving with a stately tread to the notes of a dirge, 
saddled with a multitude of responsibilities, bureaucracy and blanket 
protectionism.

But this was also a period of seedtime because people were educated in India's 
nationalised sector, particularly in technology. Despite its past deficits, the 
country is reaping an abundant harvest. Theeconomic reforms 
<http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/bl10/stories/2004012800401000.htm> in the 
early 1990s - when India was near insolvent - lit the touchpaper. An 
entrepreneurial energy, so evident in British Asians, was released in India.

Today, the elephant is galloping 
<http://money.theguardian.com/investments/fundsbondstrusts/story/0,,2146205,00.html>
 at an 8% growth rate. However, India will remain intransition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/comment/story/0,,1732922,00.html> for some time to 
come. One problem in India is that only a small proportion of the population 
pays tax. The government must find a mechanism to ensure that some of the 
wealth generated by the economic boom can provide social mobility to its vast 
under-employed.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 