
The anonymous message-board site 4chan <http://www.4chan.org/> has come to 
represent the darkest corners of internet subculture, rife with the misogyny, 
web taste and the politically incorrect humor of the alt-right.

Now it appears to be in financial trouble, according to the site’s new owner, 
Hiroyuki Nishimura, whosaid <http://boards.4chan.org/qa/thread/706294#p706331> 
on Sunday that the site can no longer afford “infrastructure costs, network 
fee, servers cost and CDN [servers that help distribute high-bandwidth files 
such as video]”.

The post begins: “Thank you for thinking about 4chan. We had tried to keep 
4chan <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/4chan> as is. But I failed. I am 
sincerely sorry.”

Nishimura outlined three options for the future of the site: halving traffic 
costs by limiting upload sizes and closing some boards, adding many more ads 
including pop-up ads, or adding more paid-for features and “4chan pass” users.

An unlikely savior for the site may have already emerged in the form of Martin 
Shkreli <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ>, the controversial former 
CEO of Turing Pharmaceuticals, who rose to fame after his company bought the 
patent to an HIV drug and raised its price from $13.50 to $750 per pill, 
causing mass outrage.

Punch Martin Shkreli – it's for a good cause
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/28/punch-martin-shkreli-good-cause>
Shkreli announced on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/MartinShkreli/status/782649157404229633> that he was “open 
to joining the board of directors of 4chan”. He then reached out to Nishimura 
directly, whoresponded 
<https://twitter.com/hiroyuki_ni/status/782730299574714368>: “I have replied 
your DM. Thank you for supporting 4chan @MartinSkreli.”

4chan was founded in 2003 by an American schoolboy, Chris Poole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/07/chris-poole-4chan-google-hire-social-media>
, as an English-language version of popular Japanese image-sharing board 2chan, 
and split into a number of sub-category boards based on interest, many of the 
most popular ones pornographic.It was sold by Poole to Nishimura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/23/4chan-founder-moot-christopher-poole-goodbye>
, the founder of 2chan, in 2015.

Nishimura did not respond to requests by the Guardian to comment.


The site’s influence in shaping the identity and culture of the internet as we 
know it today is vast. It is the internet’s sweaty engine-room.

It has birthed global movements: the hacktivist group Anonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> originated here, and the 
group is named for the “Anonymous” tag attached to 4chan posts.

More recently its anonymous message boards, especially the far-right leaning 
politics board /pol/, gave early succor to GamerGate and its spawn, the 
so-called alt-right movement, which have emerged in 2016 to ally themselves 
with Donald Trump’s presidential campaign.

It produced Pepe, the frog meme that was picked up by white supremacists and 
trolls and was later condemned by the Southern Poverty Law Center asa hate 
symbol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/pepe-the-frog-alt-right-mascot-racist-anti-semitic>
.

Pepe the Frog: yes, a harmless cartoon can become an alt-right mascot | Oren 
Segal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/pepe-the-frog-alt-right-mascot-racist-anti-semitic>
Pepe is by no means the only meme 4chan has produced. Rickrolling (the 
practice of tricking someone into clicking on a link leading to a video ofRick 
Astley’s Never Gonna Give You Up <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ>, 
leading to nearly 250m views on YouTube and an unlikely revival of Astley’s 
career), LOLcats, and innumerable other memes and slang and inside jokes 
originated here.

It is the internet’s id, a place where anonymity runs free in its purest form. 
The true nature of mankind can be glimpsed there, in all its horror and glory 
and depravity.

Predictably, the response to Nishimura’s message on the site was mixed. 
Posters from some boards – many of which have loyal, almost tribal user-bases – 
called for other boards to be closed.

One suggestion was to close /b/, the wildly popular random topic board, to 
which other users expressed immediate worry that /b/ users would spread to 
other boards. “Oh god”, one posted.

“HOW MANY PORN BOARDS DO WE NEED? NOT THIS MANY” read another post. Some 
heatedly discussed the perils of pop-up advertising, while a few suggested 
merchandising as a way to solve the site’s revenue problems.

Others just seemed worried. “Please don’t fuck this website up for us,” one 
user plaintively posted. Another wrote: “Hiro please. Don’t ruin this for us. 
This is our only home.”
 