
Most introductions to classical music focus on the big classics from the 
baroque through to the romantic eras (such as the BBCsTen Pieces 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p034rxy4> project, which I do recommend 
checking out). Regrettably, many people see classical music as an historic art 
form, composed by people who died centuries ago, so I’m going to select five 
pieces from composers who are all actually alive today. I’ve selected some 
modern classics alongside some lesser-known favourites that all have a 
connection to contemporary popular culture.


Arvo Pärt’s Fratres (1977) is probably one of the biggest hits of contemporary 
music of the last 40 years, and deservedly so. Even if you haven’t heard this 
work, you will have definitely heard film and TV music that has been “strongly 
inspired” by its slow, emotive, spacious string chords. I was fortunate enough 
to actually be present at the recording session of this performance by Daniel 
Hope. It was in the East Berlin Radio studios which has an amazing acoustic. 
When Daniel and the orchestra came into the control room to listen back, it was 
a really magical moment.

Maya Beiser performs the cello version of this at the Barbican’s Sound Unbound 
weekend on Saturday, 8pm 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/soundunbound/timetable_satEVE.html>.

Influential minimalist composer Steve Reich’s New York Counterpoint (1985), 
performed by Evan Ziporyn, is another modern classic. Reich happens to be a big 
fan ofArvo Pärt (calling him the “most important living European composer”). 
It’s the second of Reich’s Counterpoint series, in which a live performer plays 
along to multitrack recording of themselves (in up to 12 layers), in this case 
with clarinets and bass clarinets. Reich recycles the same chord patterns and 
melodic loops in many of his works, but I think New York Counterpoint works 
particularly well, with the 3rd movement sounding like an eccentric mix between 
dixieland and bouncy techno.

Scott Lygate will perform this at the Nonclassical club in Sound Unbound, 
Saturday 9.30pm <http://www.barbican.org.uk/soundunbound/timetable_satEVE.html>.

I first heard Giovanni Sollima’s Alone (1998), performed by Boris Andrianovat 
a one-off non-classical night I co-curated with him in Moscow a few years ago. 
Sollima, who is a cellist himself, has created a simple, yet stunningly rich 
texture with just a single solo cello. The harmony is uncomplicated, but the 
energy and emotion of the piece keeps the listener engaged, and the fast middle 
section is like a cross between a heavy-metal guitar solo and an irish fiddle 
virtuoso.

Håkon Samuelsen will perform this at Sound Unbound, Sunday 4.30pm 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/soundunbound/timetable_sunPM.html>.

When you ask a composer for a top five, it’s hard for them not to include one 
of their own works! This piece, Jerk Driver (2011), performed by Peter Gregson 
is from Cello Multitracks, a suite for nine multi-tracked cellos that I 
composed four years ago. The multitrack approach was done partly in response to 
Steve Reich’s work, but I also wanted to explore various techniques and 
rhythmic ideas from electronic dance music – in a classical form, and show how 
the Cello can be just as grimey as any bass synthesiser, and make heads nod as 
much as any hip-hop beat.

Gabriel Prokofiev performs live remixes of Cello Multitracks with Matthew 
Barley at the Nonclassical club in Sound Unbound,Saturday 9.30pm 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/soundunbound/timetable_satEVE.html>.

Klavikon’s Wave (2015), performed by Leon Michener, is the perfect closing 
track, from Klavikon’s debut album which was released this year. Michener, the 
pianist/composer behind it, spent years developing a contemporary approach to 
the piano, which involves him putting an array of strange objects inside the 
instrument (“preparing” it in a similar way to John Cage), but he also uses 
pick-ups and microphones to amplify it – turning it into an electronically 
enhanced acoustic music machine. I recommend checking out the whole album, 
which very successfully blurs the boundaries between modern classical, 
electronica and techno.

Klavikon perform at the Nonclassical club in Sound Unbound, Saturday 9.30pm 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/soundunbound/timetable_satEVE.html>.

 * Sound Unbound <http://www.barbican.org.uk/soundunbound/> is at the 
Barbican, London on 31 October and 1 November from 11am to midnight.  