
Have you ever had the feeling that you’ve been completely wrong about 
something your entire life? Perhaps you’ve seen through superficialities to the 
truth of the thing. Perhaps you’ve had a sudden moment of perception, a sort of 
X-ray vision that enables you to reconsider the foundations upon which your 
life is built. I’m sure you’ll agree it’s terrifying, disorienting, 
discombobulating and really rather thrilling.

The gentle magic of gardening, where human art and nature’s anarchy meet | 
Giles Fraser: Loose canon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2016/aug/18/the-gentle-magic-of-gardening-where-human-art-and-natures-anarchy-meet>
Which is how we arrive at what to many will be the unpromising topic of 
gardening. Now, if gardening can ever be said to have a “big weekend”, in the 
manner ofRadio 1 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e2f9rz>, then this coming bank 
holiday is surely it. It’s not only the last chance many of us will have to 
breathe some late-summer life into our wilting flora; it happens to be pretty 
much bang on the 300th anniversary of the birth ofCapability Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/23/capability-brown-300th-anniversary-garden-design-genius>
, a man whose influence is writ large in English gardens everywhere. Yet were I 
now the same person I was at the year’s dawn, the whole thing would have just 
passed me by.

You see, it’s not so much that I was wrong about gardening, as that gardening 
was wrong about itself. Because it’s taken me 37 years to learn that it’s not 
really about life and light and colour and that sort of thing at all. No; it’s 
about wanton annihilation. Which, as any civilised person will know, is 
infinitely more endearing.

I had long nursed an animus towards gardeners and their gardening. I used to 
believe it was effectively a form of species fascism practised by subscribers to
Reader’s Digest <http://www.readersdigest.co.uk/>. To my mind, its 
incarnational manifestation and Grand Vizier wasAlan Titchmarsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/15/alan-titchmarsh-favourite-tv>
, who I considered to be theanti-Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/07/moment-that-changed-me-david-bowie-hunky-dory>
. And my antipathy towards it wasn’t merely philosophical and aesthetic, but 
practical: I learned from an early age that I’m a sort of inverse ET, killing 
flowers at touch.

Then, a few months ago, I was confronted in my back yard with what I can 
describe only as Satan and his legion of demons, who had adopted the earthly 
form ofRussian vine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2009/sep/24/gardens1>. 
This, for me, was a moment of epiphany. I realised that the point of gardening 
isn’t really growing things, but killing things. It’s creative destruction. For 
every beautiful bloom, you must lay waste to countless other organisms.

Gardening is creative destruction. For every beautiful bloom, you must lay 
waste to countless other organisms

This realisation has revolutionised gardening for me. It’s brought out the 
cold-blooded, dead-eyed killer within: I can spot an enemy life form at 50 
paces, and it tends to be powerless against my instruments of destruction (sort 
of hooked scissor things). At last, I can reconcile gardening with those really 
quite violentcomputer games <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aMzyUrmmARs> I 
used to play. It’s the circle of death. Phew.

Lest you deem me a brute, let me reassure you of my sagacity, for, amid the 
merciless obliteration of unwanted greenery, I am visited by the occasional 
moment of contemplation. “Perhaps this plant is a cure for a horrendous 
disease,” I may muse, sometimes adding: “If we found just one shoot of this 
growing on another planet, it would be the greatest discovery in the history of 
humankind.” And then I forget about all that and proceed with the massacring.

It is with some shame that I look back on my attitude to gardeners. I now 
appreciate just what a fearsome force they are, and abundantly creative with 
it. But best of all has been the bridging of the Bowie-Titchmarsh chasm. 
Observers at the garden centre that day would surely have wondered what had 
prompted my wild behaviour. I can now reveal the cause: I had discovered that a 
variety of weed suppressant is called, with no hint of pop-cultural awareness,
Ground Control. 
<http://www.screwfix.com/p/apollo-ground-control-fabric-roll-50-x-2m/35551> 
Ground Control! It’s a sign! It’s all OK!“This ain’t rock’n’roll! This is ... 
pesticide!” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=36lWAcY9IXE>

There were concerns earlier this year that youngsters weren’t being taught 
gardening, that there was alost generation of gardeners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/mar/03/how-do-we-spark-a-gardening-revolution>
. Well, no wonder. Tell kids it’s all about nurturing and caring and 
beautifying and they won’t care. Tell them it’s about extermination, and watch 
their eyes light up as they ask for implements of devastation (spades, forks 
etc) for birthdays. For years we’ve been trying to sell the outside to 
youngsters, making out it’s all someSwallows and Amazons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/24/swallows-and-amazons-review-kelly-macdonald-rafe-spall-arthur-ransome>
 idyll, the perfect setting for wholesome japes and natural adventure and 
whatnot. Turns out the best way to get them out of the house is for a 
corporation to tell them there arepretend cartoon monsters over the road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/22/pokemon-go-health-service-silly-mobile-phone-game-parenting-holy-grail>
. Gardening is surely due the same rethink.

Alan Titchmarsh is wrong – young gardeners just need a bit of nurturing | John 
Foley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/01/alan-titchmarsh-young-gardeners-nurturing>
So that’s what I’ll be doing this coming bank holiday: killing stuff. Join in, 
kids. You’ll help some lovely plants to grow, yes. But, more to the point, 
you’ll never feel so alive.
 