
Outsiders consider Sydney to be something of a queer mecca: a city that hosts 
wildly popular events such as theannual Mardi Gras parade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gallery/2015/mar/08/sydney-gay-and-lesbian-mardi-gras-2015-in-pictures>
, celebrates exhibitionism on dozens of packed beaches, and charms visitors of 
all stripes with progressive culture and laid-back locals. In many respects, it 
is one of the best places in the world to be queer, boasting a proud history, a 
vibrant alternative arts movement, and strong legal protections for minorities. 
Same-sex marriage is apparently just around the corner.

But Sydney’s LGBTQI scene is in the midst of upheaval – and it has left some 
newcomers bewildered. In recent years, conservative governments at state and 
federal levels have emboldened Sydney’s less-tolerant residents. Meanwhile, the 
introduction oflaws that restrict late-night socialising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/10/sydneys-lockout-laws-kings-cross-resets-as-community-calls-for-self-regulation>
 in central Sydney’s party precincts has severely damaged Oxford Street, the 
city’s traditional gay strip. The edgier queer hub of Newtown, in Sydney’s 
inner west, has suffered from an influx of mainstream revellers who have been 
displaced by the same laws that harmed Oxford Street. Many Newtown residents 
say they now feel less comfortable in the area – and a recent, highly-publicised
assault on a transgender woman 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/newtown-bashing-of-transgender-woman-stokes-fears-among-lgbti-community-20150608-ghjd8v.html>
 at a Newtown venue has compounded their unease.

As a result, queer culture in Sydney is dispersing and heading underground. 
Venue operators are seeking spaces in emerging precincts such as Marrickville 
and Redfern, and some promoters have adopted a nomadic stance, moving their 
events from club to club as the situation evolves. The queer arts scene is 
strong, with many young practitioners embracing a DIY ethos in response to the 
uncertainty (local community radio remains a lifeline for those looking to hook 
in to the arts scene). And, while Oxford Street is definitely hurting, a 
handful of Sydney’s “traditional” queer venues continue to thrive there in 
spite of the challenging climate.

Male-focused and mixed
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f7c9cadf8442e677bfa7c78d005dcd543d99223%2F0_0_960_639%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f7c9cadf8442e677bfa7c78d005dcd543d99223%2F0_0_960_639%2F960.jpg>
 Tokyo Sing Song basement bar. 
By Patrick Abboud <https://www.facebook.com/PatrickAbboudOnline>, a 
documentary filmmaker and television presenter who co-hosts and produces for 
the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras

The biggest challenge for visitors who want to explore Sydney’s LGBTQI scene 
is that only the old, mainstream options tend to be listed in travel guides. 
There’s more diversity in the community – and it’s worth seeking out. I tend to 
go to places that celebrate that diversity more, such asTokyo Sing Song 
<http://www.tokyosingsong.com.au/>. It’s a basement bar in Newtown that hosts 
queer parties like Voguey Bear and performances by people likeMatt Format 
<https://www.facebook.com/matt.format>, a bearded beauty who does wonderfully 
strange drag that challenges mainstream drag shows. The parties at Tokyo Sing 
Song change frequently but the venue is consistently interesting. It’s a 
popular hangout for legendary queer DJs, including my favourite duoStereogamous 
<https://www.facebook.com/stereogamous>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F482cfb8b7616bebec2233019801a1a5083e0b099%2F0_0_1200_800%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F482cfb8b7616bebec2233019801a1a5083e0b099%2F0_0_1200_800%2F1200.jpg>
 Queer-friendly but not exclusive: The Bearded Tit. Photograph: Dean Tirkot 
Photography 
The Bearded Tit <http://thebeardedtit.com/> is a fantastic bar that also 
doubles as a creative space. It’s a great example of a venue in Sydney that’s 
queer-friendly but not exclusively queer. The events lineup is diverse with 
plenty of LGBTQI content. It’s in Redfern, which is one of the best parts of 
Sydney for more left-of-centre bars and nightlife. The incredible interior is 
worth the visit alone: tapestry, taxidermy and wax-fruit-clad walls lead you to 
an old caravan out the back in the beer garden.

Of the mainstream options, a couple stand out. Palms on Oxford Street is the 
best place to go for super-fantastic pop every Friday and Saturday night. It’s 
known for its karaoke-style vibe and shitty dive-bar sound system. Palms 
attracts mostly guys, but girls who love trashy pop come along, too. It may not 
be the most sophisticated venue, but it’s an institution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10d94d859cd9f210e283d6720c41c12b3ae87079%2F0_0_2048_1134%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10d94d859cd9f210e283d6720c41c12b3ae87079%2F0_0_2048_1134%2F2048.jpg>
 Sundays at The Beresford are legendary locally. 
Sundays at The Beresford 
<http://merivale.com.au/whats-on/event/beresford-sundays> are also legendary 
among locals. It’s a mixed crowd culturally and age-wise – you’ll find guys who 
identify as twinks, bears and everything in between. The main attraction at the 
Beresford is the expansive beer garden. On Sundays it plays crowd-pleasing 
house, electro and indie-pop.

The two most mainstream venues for gay guys are Stonewall 
<http://stonewallhotel.com/> and Arq <http://arqsydney.com.au/>. Stonewall has 
been around for years and is a popular pick-up joint on Oxford Street. It plays 
chart hits and commercial dance music and also hosts regular drag shows. Arq is 
definitely a “shirts-off” kind of venue for Sydney’s muscle boys and their 
fans. The music here is trance and dance anthems.

Lesbian-friendly
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F449ff864c3020a611fbd65c14d504f64948afb4d%2F0_0_1920_1280%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F449ff864c3020a611fbd65c14d504f64948afb4d%2F0_0_1920_1280%2F1920.jpg>
 The Heaps Gay monthly roving queer party. 
By Georgia Verkuylen, strategy and partnerships manager at Archer magazine 
<http://archermagazine.com.au/>, the Australian journal of sexual diversity

Lesbian-focused venues can be hard to find in Sydney. The community tends not 
to go out every night – it’s more about monthly club nights and one-off events. 
That said, there are some bars and clubs that draw lesbian crowds.The Oxford 
Hotel <http://theoxfordhotel.com.au/> on Oxford Street has long been a 
favourite of the lesbian community and is perfect for a lazy Sunday afternoon 
drink. It’s also where the roving queer partyHeaps Gay 
<https://www.facebook.com/heapsgayparties> has been held for the past couple of 
months. Heaps Gay is a massive event that draws in queer folk of all ages, 
sexualities and genders. The vibe is charged and the music is reliably fun.

I’ve been going to The Courthouse in Newtown 
<https://www.facebook.com/Courthouse-Hotel-149929195046366/> since I was 18 but 
only in the past few years has it become a lesbian institution. It’s a great 
fallback for when there are no lesbian club nights taking place. Newtown has 
changed recently, and a prime example of that is theNewtown Hotel 
<http://newtownhotel.com.au/#/boards/keystonelove> on King Street. It underwent 
a renovation a couple of years ago and the management swapped the drag shows 
that used to take place here for cinema screenings, which gives you an idea of 
the new vibe.

For something wild, try Unicorns <https://www.facebook.com/UnicornsParty/>, an 
under-the-radar lesbian night with a big reputation. The venue changes 
according to whatever warehouse is available at the time but the wonderfully 
whimsical vibe is always consistent. Couches line the room and there are stages 
for contortionists, pole dancers or whatever else has been found for that 
particular evening. The crowd is loved-up and quirky, and everyone enjoys 
stripping off.

Then there’s Lemons With A Twist at Slide Bar <http://slide.com.au/>. The 
event is held on the first Friday of every month and is marketed as after-work 
drinks for lesbian professionals. It provides a relaxed, safe place to network 
or hang out with other women. DJs and performers take to the stage later on and 
the vibe transforms from professional to dancey.

On the margins
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F861dce69b33673cf3302a2c11594f470260fd0fa%2F0_0_1504_1000%2F1504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F861dce69b33673cf3302a2c11594f470260fd0fa%2F0_0_1504_1000%2F1504.jpg>
 The Red Rattler sees some of Sydney’s most avant-garde work. 
By Justin Shoulder <http://www.justinshoulder.com/>, a performer and visual 
artist who co-produces events and parties in Sydney, including Monsta Gras, FSU 
League and Club Ate

The Red Rattler <http://www.redrattler.org/> theatre in Marrickville, also 
known as The Rat, is the baby of five local queer artists who wanted to create 
a legal warehouse venue. It is volunteer-run and you really feel how loved the 
space is as soon as you enter – it has such an aura. I have seen some of the 
most avant-garde work in Sydney within this space, attended surreal and 
energised parties, including the annual costume ball Monsta Gras, and 
participated in workshops, forums and film screenings.

Club Kooky is a queer institution that has existed for around 20 years. Going 
to Kooky when it was at Club 77 (now closed) was a formative experience for me 
creatively and socially. It was here that I met future collaborators, the love 
of my life and a community of very good humans. The best part is the 
intergenerational nature of the community – I think communities like that are 
harder to find in other cities in Australia. Recently, Kooky has been at the
Sydney Theatre Company Wharf Bar 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/your-visit/the-theatre-bar-at-the-end-of-the-wharf>
, at theOpera House Studio 
<http://www.sydneyoperahouse.com/the_building/venues/studio.aspx> and at The 
Rat. The next Kooky is happening on New Year’s Day 2016.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f3cedaccfba14ca9e141e218f5ccdbfdd74da47%2F0_0_1575_1050%2F1575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f3cedaccfba14ca9e141e218f5ccdbfdd74da47%2F0_0_1575_1050%2F1575.jpg>
 Club Kooky has been going for at least two decades. Photograph: Morgan 
Carpenter 
Bad Dog <http://baddog.net.au/> also moves to different locations. I remember 
being asked by another promoter why so many people attend these events and my 
response was that the core of them is family. Bad Dog is run not for capitalist 
intention but to draw together queers who love to dance in beautiful spaces – 
most recently the St George Sailing Club. You jump on a bus with a family of 
good freaks and head to a ridiculous location with a strong sea breeze. Dancing 
with the elements – it’s divine.

There are some fantastic LGBTQI events that focus on creating safe spaces for 
expression, includingTroppo Galaktika <https://www.facebook.com/troppogalaktika>
 at The Red Rattler and the Club Ate series, which was recently at the Addison 
Road Community Centre in Marrickville. Club Ate began with a focus on 
performances by the Filipino diaspora but has since grown, and now acts as a 
creative hub for many from the suburbs west of Sydney’s city centre.

Arts and performance
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42268e11243a04dc03b231513d5df065b9172b3a%2F0_0_1024_683%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42268e11243a04dc03b231513d5df065b9172b3a%2F0_0_1024_683%2F1024.jpg>
 Sydney Mardi Gras 2015. Photograph: Julian Chung for the Guardian 
By Frances Barrett <http://francesbarrett.com/>, artist, and presenter of 
Canvas onFBi Radio <http://fbiradio.com/>, and Nick Coyle 
<https://twitter.com/nickcoyles>, writer and performer

Frances Barrett
The Mardi Gras <http://www.mardigras.org.au/> is a must-do. It hosts engaging 
events such as Queer Thinking, which brings together queer artists, academics, 
activists and historians to discuss new frontiers in queer thought and 
practice. For film, it’s worth touching base withQueer Screen 
<http://queerscreen.org.au/>, the organisation behind the annual Mardi Gras 
Film Festival <http://queerscreen.org.au/mgff/> (February/March) and the Queer 
Screen Film Fest (September). In addition to these events, the group presents 
screenings and talks throughout the year at various venues. There’s also the
Perv Film Festival <http://pervfilmfestival.com/>, which takes place towards 
the end of each year and is dedicated to the queerotic moving image. It 
presents a spectrum of screen-based work that ranges from the homemade to the 
vintage, from subtle to hardcore. To find out what is going on across Sydney in 
regards to arts events and queer culture, keep an ear out for the radio 
programmesCanvas <http://fbiradio.com/programs/canvas/> (on FBi), and Gay Panic 
and So Hot Right Now (both on2SER <http://www.2ser.com/>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff65f96d51be82d55ee293acdc037be94bf3b301d%2F0_0_8000_4500%2F8000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Sydney%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20cabaret%20and%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fgay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff65f96d51be82d55ee293acdc037be94bf3b301d%2F0_0_8000_4500%2F8000.jpg>
 A scene from Neurosex II, at November’s Perv Film Festival 
Nick Coyle
Care? E? Okay! <https://www.facebook.com/events/256663717861657/> is a 
debauched, late-night queer karaoke held every Thursday at Tokyo Sing Song and 
led by the statuesque firebrand Aaron Manhattan. Think 1970s performance art 
meets homoerotic audience interaction, with a sprinkling of straight frat boys 
who’ve stumbled downstairs from the pub above. I like to go here and destroy 
the party vibe by singing Jewel. I also have a scar on my shin from spinning a 
bar stool into my leg while singing Stronger by Britney Spears. No regrets.

Griffin Theatre Company <http://www.griffintheatre.com.au/> has a long history 
of queer Australian storytelling. It’s an intimate space with a weird 
pizza-slice-shaped stage that makes every performance an immersive experience. 
The venue champions diversity and new writers. I put on my first main-stage 
play here in 2009. Was I ready? Probably not, but it’s that kind of risky, 
chance-taking place.

Belvoir St Theatre <http://belvoir.com.au/> is a beloved venue with a main 
stage and a tiny downstairs space. The place has an amazing reputation, a loyal 
following, and increasingly bold programming that includes queer stories. The 
production of Angels in America in 2014 was heart-punchingly good, and I 
re-staged my turbo-gay one-man show, Blue Wizard, there during Mardi Gras this 
year – so it has definitely supported this queer.

Blue Wizard was part of the Mardi Gras Festival, which runs in the weeks 
leading up to the parade in March. During Mardi Gras, a lot of Sydney venues 
will programme queer performances to celebrate diversity – and to snaffle up 
that sweet pink dollar.
 