
Kable publishes GC (Government Computing magazine), which focuses on the 
technology and policy issues around information management in the public 
sector. Every month it includes a range of features looking at how information 
technology is applied in the public sector, best practice, investigations of 
the policy issues, news analysis, interviews, opinion and conference reports. 
Launched in 1986, it is the longest established title in its field, and has an 
ABC audited circulation of over 15,000 from all parts of the public sector (see 
PDF of ABC certificate <http://www.abc.org.uk/Certificates/15950000.pdf>). 

Features list

In the course of the year we cover a range of issues related to applications, 
back office operations, customer contact, data management, efficiency, funding, 
geographical information, green IT, hardware, identification, information 
security, mobile and remote working, networks, online services, open source, 
procurement, resilience and shared services.

The features list provides an indication of some of the subjects we plan to 
cover in GC in the approaching months. We do not provide any further detail. 
Anyone with information they believe may be relevant can send it to us at
gc@kable.co.uk <mailto:gc@kable.co.uk> and if it stirs our interest we will get 
back in touch.Material usually has to be with us at the beginning of the month 
prior to the cover date to have a chance of serious consideration.

Features 2011

March
Open data
How will the Open Government Licence and new platforms for making data more 
widely available affect the outlook for service delivery? We look at some of 
the initiatives in play.

Shared services
An increasing number of organisations are overcoming their reservations about 
shared services. We look at some of the initiatives in place and ask what makes 
an arrangement successful.

April
IT staffing
Spending cuts are placing making it difficult for IT departments to bring in 
extra skills when required. What approaches are local authorities taking to 
overcome the problem?

Sharing networks
The launch of the PSN is pushing the issue of shared networks for the public 
sector up the agenda. We look at the lessons learned by those organisations who 
have already begun to use regional or community networks.

For advertising and partnerships, please contact Roger Massey, 
roger.massey@kable.co.uk <mailto:roger.massey@kable.co.uk>, +44 (0)20 3353 2680.

For editorial queries, please contact gc@kable.co.uk <mailto:gc@kable.co.uk>.

Apply for a subscription - free to public servants. 
<http://reg.kable.managemyaccount.co.uk/GC/page0.php>

Download Kable's media pack. 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2009/12/21/media-pack-2010.pdf>

Download Kable's advertising production specifications. 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Society/documents/2010/03/16/kable-production-spec.pdf>
 