
First things first: don’t call it a trend. Gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> fluidity found its way into more 
headlines than ever in 2015. But regardless of the moment it’s having in both 
music and pop culture at large, to dismiss it as a passing fad or, worse, 
gimmickry is a mistake – one with echoes of that damaging and all too familiar 
phrase that queerness is “just a phase”.

Proclamations that “gender fluidity is the new black” 
<http://www.sheramag.com/culture/gender-without-limitations-5-gender-fluid-icons-of-today/>
 may be well intentioned, but are unhelpful. Instead, the cultural landscape of 
the last year has afforded a new openness for artists who don’t identify with 
gender binaries.Miley Cyrus 
<http://www.papermag.com/free-to-be-miley-1427581961.html> has been the most 
visible, declaring in June: “I don’t relate to being boy or girl, and I don’t 
have to have my partner relate to boy or girl.” She set up theHappy Hippie 
foundation <http://www.happyhippies.org/> in aid of homeless and vulnerable 
LGBTQ young people. In 2014, the indie singer-songwriterSt Vincent told Rolling 
Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/the-dream-world-of-st-vincent-20140623?page=2>
: “I believe in gender fluidity and sexual fluidity. I don’t really identify as 
anything.” Las Vegas-born rapper and singer Shamir echoed that statementin March
 <https://twitter.com/shamirbailey/status/580175617192169473>, tweeting: “I 
have no gender, no sexuality and no fucks to give.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fgender-fluidity-went-pop-in-2015-miley-cyrus-angel-haze-young-thug%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51558a47dab8d8b2d9706e3ea71f86e0711bc354%2F0_39_3000_1961%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gender%20fluidity%20went%20pop%20in%202015%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20it's%20not%20just%20a%20phase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fgender-fluidity-went-pop-in-2015-miley-cyrus-angel-haze-young-thug%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gender%20fluidity%20went%20pop%20in%202015%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20it%27s%20not%20just%20a%20phase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fgender-fluidity-went-pop-in-2015-miley-cyrus-angel-haze-young-thug%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51558a47dab8d8b2d9706e3ea71f86e0711bc354%2F0_39_3000_1961%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘I don’t identify as anything’ … St Vincent performing in San Francisco. 
Photograph: Splash News/Corbis 
Around the same time, rapper Angel Haze also came out as agender, and spoke 
about the way in which theirgender identity has 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/shannonkeating/the-evolution-of-angel-haze#.mmzmzPBEm> 
evolved. It’s an outlook similar to singer-songwriter Ezra Furman, whoexplained 
in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/03/ezra-furman-gender-fluidity>: “I 
am still exploring what [gender fluidity] means. I’ve not quite decided on a 
gender identity. I may never decide, and that’s all right with me. I am proud 
to exist in an ambiguous, undecided state.”

Pretty punk rock: how Ezra Furman found freedom in gender fluidity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/03/ezra-furman-gender-fluidity> 
Don’t confuse these statements, however, with pop’s rich history of 
theatrical, performative gender-blurring. From David Bowie and Prince’s 
explorations of androgyny and fashion in the 1980s to the role-switching ofCiara
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_HKH7Emy1SY> and Beyoncé 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AWpsOqh8q0M> in the 00s, music has been an 
outlet to expand gender assumptions, to question the socially conditioned roles 
men and women play – often in brilliant ways. In 2015, artists such as Young 
Thug, the Atlanta rapper with a penchant for cross-dressing, continued that 
tradition.

For the current wave of gender-fluid artists, it’s not about dressing up, but 
about expressing their core identity. Furman muses about gender on the song 
Wobbly: “I’ve just been changing genders fluidly / Because they’ll never pin me 
/ Down in the pages / Like a bug or bumblebee / Never classify me, don’t try.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fgender-fluidity-went-pop-in-2015-miley-cyrus-angel-haze-young-thug%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca781ca5839c9af5236d840cd8d5b464ee2911a2%2F0_18_3000_1803%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gender%20fluidity%20went%20pop%20in%202015%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20it's%20not%20just%20a%20phase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fgender-fluidity-went-pop-in-2015-miley-cyrus-angel-haze-young-thug%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gender%20fluidity%20went%20pop%20in%202015%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20it%27s%20not%20just%20a%20phase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fgender-fluidity-went-pop-in-2015-miley-cyrus-angel-haze-young-thug%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca781ca5839c9af5236d840cd8d5b464ee2911a2%2F0_18_3000_1803%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘They’ll never pin me down’ … Ezra Furman Photograph: Andy Sheppard/Redferns 
via Getty Images 
For many others, however, gender identity is not necessarily central to their 
music: it’s innate to their being, but largely incidental to their art. Their 
lyrical focus is on other subjects.Angel Haze’s Back to the Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/20/angel-haze-back-to-the-woods-review>
 is a devastating study of a break-up and subsequent breakdown.Shamir’s album 
Ratchet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/17/shamir-ratchet-album-review-on-the-regular-bailey-las-vegas>
 is shit-talking party rap straight out of MySpace circa 2005. Amid the lengthy 
stoned burblings on Cyrus’s surpriseDead Petz release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/31/miley-cyrus-her-dead-petz-first-listen-review>
, the most focused and affecting songs are those where she turns her attention 
to the environment – in particular on1 Sun 
<https://soundcloud.com/mileycyrus/1-sun>, a passionate lament for a dying 
Earth. That song works well alongside the similarly urgent 4 Degrees 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fi0q0O4V5Qs>, the new propulsive single and 
scorched-earth vision by transgender musician Anohni – formerly known as Antony 
Hegarty, an artist who seems to have been casually misgendered by the media for 
the bulk of her career. Then there’s the transgender deep house producer Terre 
Thaemlitz, AKA DJ Sprinkles, who has long made gender politics integral to her 
work. On this year’s brilliant Fresh Insights EP, withMark Fell 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y9rA6V59_DM>, she turned her attention to 
British class politics and power structures with an extensive sample of a Tony 
Benn speech. These works may be informed by their creators’ identities – but 
are not defined by them.

The battle against male/female binaries gained scientific traction last week 
with the publication ofa study by researchers at Tel Aviv University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/30/brain-sex-men-from-mars-women-venus-not-so-says-new-study>
 showing that there is no “male” or “female” brain, but instead “multiple ways 
to be male and female”. These findings, along with the success of artists who 
identify as gender fluid or anywhere else on the queerness spectrum, are just a 
small step towards progress in a society so reliant on gender stereotypes that 
it can seem like propaganda at times. Witness theknee-jerk reaction of the 
Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3342104/How-male-female-brain-Men-women-s-brains-NOT-different-says-new-research-Oh-yes-Try-tests-sex-grey-cells-are.html>
 – one of the worst propagators of “men are like this, women are like that” 
narratives – to the study: “Back in the real world, this simply can’t be true.”

The music world is hardly immune, either: the Lithuanian producer Ten Walls 
caused outrage witha homophobic rant last June 
<http://www.factmag.com/2015/06/08/ten-walls-goes-on-homophobic-rant/>. His 
comments reflected underlyingissues in dance clubs 
<http://thoughtcatalog.com/madison-moore/2015/06/we-need-to-talk-about-homophobia-in-electronic-dance-music/>
. And in November, the London singer-producer Kindness revealed that homophobic 
and transphobic abuse from figures feted by the industry made himquit music for 
several years 
<https://i-d.vice.com/en_gb/article/kindness-says-he-stopped-music-career-after-experiencing-homophobia-and-transphobia>
. Progress may have been made in 2015, but it’s more imperative than ever not 
to treat it as a fad or selling point.
 