
Interesting to see the predicted figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/oct/30/generation-rent-will-grow-by-2021>
 from campaign groupGeneration Rent <http://www.generationrent.org>, saying 
that renters could outnumber homeowners in 104 out of the 650 UK constituencies 
by the year 2021. Forty-nine of the predicted renter-heavy constituencies would 
be in London – northern cities are already more likely to be renter dominated. 
This trend is already established: the number of constituencies where those who 
rent are in the majority has grown from 38 in 2001 to 65 in 2011.

Through pure dumb luck, I have never consistently rented. In the years when I 
first moved to London, I went from a series of squats, to housing co-ops, to a 
mortgage. These days, I reserve the right to roll my eyes at younger people, 
who seem to expect to be homeowners, or at least living in salubrious abodes, 
basically achieving the lifestyles of their parents, by their early 20s.

Once again, nation’s yoof, be reasonable! “Generation rent” or not, most 
people have to rough it for a bit. When I squatted, it may have been free, but 
usually it was in rough areas, with vermin and frightening gas smells aplenty 
and, at one low point, only a couple of bin-liners taped over a gaping hole 
separated what I laughingly called “my bedroom” from the street. Is this what 
you mean by people like myself screwing your generation over?

However, transitory experiences in youth are a world away from getting stuck 
long term. My brief spells in the private rental market (in between homes) 
revealed what a foul, expensive and unsettling experience it can be. Not to 
mention self-revelatory. I suppose I’d always thought of myself as wonderfully 
bohemian, someone who’d be well suited to eschewing social mores, domain-wise, 
in favour of the funky Scandinavian model you hear about, where people actively 
prefer to rent.

So it was a shock to discover that I was the ultimate cliched Little Englander 
– whingeing about lack of cupboards, scowling at dripping showerheads no one 
did anything about and (deeper, much deeper) pathetically longing for the 
security and permanence of my own four walls. Oh dear. Goodbye Bohemian Babs, 
hello Terry and June.

This appears to be an attitude echoed by many people, not just the young, but 
also those who are older, or with children, forced to rent long term, who find 
themselves trapped in overpriced, badly maintained dumps, with vanishing 
landlords, few rights and the same cloying feeling of insecurity and 
impermanence that I felt, only in their case it’s all too permanent. What these 
ongoing excruciating levels of stress, instability and, above all, rage could 
do to a person’s head is one thing; how they could have an impact on voting 
patterns is another.

If it comes to pass, the projected dominance of Generation Rent could send a 
wrecking ball through some areas of long-established political lore. Older 
people have traditionally been heavily courted by political parties because 
they’re more likely to vote.

But if these older people aren’t homeowners, and don’t expect to be, if their 
small c conservative buttons can’t be pressed and manipulated in this way, what 
would they be wooed with? Similarly, there are occasional pushes to help people 
buy their first home, but if buying property remains an impossibility, for 
whatever reason, what else would the political parties have to offer long-term 
renters, whose growing numbers could no longer be ignored?

It’s little wonder that Generation Rent feels that its time has come and that 
the renter agenda needs addressing by all the major political parties. While 
some people are happy to rent, others plainly are not, and certainly not with 
in the current situation.

For the political parties, this raises the spectre of large groups of people 
feeling disenfranchised, ignored, insecure, hopeless, trapped, frustrated and 
extremely angry – and also outnumbering homeowners in 104 of the UK’s 
parliamentary constituencies.

Just wait until that little lot hit the polling booths.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fgeneration-rent-ignored-insecure-on-the-rise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F1%2F1414839537626%2F97428f56-a483-4275-9492-ee6369e79ac0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Generation%20Rent%3A%20ignored%2C%20insecure%20%E2%80%93%20and%20on%20the%20rise%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fgeneration-rent-ignored-insecure-on-the-rise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Generation%20Rent%3A%20ignored%2C%20insecure%20%E2%80%93%20and%20on%20the%20rise%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fgeneration-rent-ignored-insecure-on-the-rise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F1%2F1414839537626%2F97428f56-a483-4275-9492-ee6369e79ac0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Curiously little stops determined drinkers.’ Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/PA
Have I ever told you the Great Truth about alcohol?




Blimey, the Royal Society for Public Health says that there are loads of 
calories in alcohol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/31/put-calorie-labels-on-alcholic-drinks-to-curb-obesity-experts-urge>
. LOADS! They kept that quiet. I don’t know about you, but when people spoke of 
beer bellies, I thought this meant they were a convenient place to rest one’s 
pint glass, not that beer was the actual cause. Who else thought that cider 
counted as one of the five a day?

That’s quite enough sarcasm. In fairness, the point being made was about lack 
of awareness of the specific calorie counts of different drinks. Large glass of 
wine equals 170 calories, pint of beer equals 180 calories, that kind of thing.

It hardly matters, because labelling drinks with calorie stickers won’t stop 
people drinking if they’re determined to drink. Determined drinkers differ from 
alcoholics in that they could stop if they wanted to – they just don’t want to. 
In fact, during my experiments with alcohol (conducted over many years for the 
good of society as a whole, but with particular emphasis on the journalistic 
arts), I’ve concluded that curiously little stops determined drinkers. Weight? 
Nope. Health? Nah. Looming deadlines? A temporary inconvenience.

While conducting my experiment, I chanced upon a Great Truth that I’ve since 
felt obliged to share at every opportunity – which is that most people only 
stop drinking because of hangovers.

The older you are, the filthier they get, until finally you wake up in a cloud 
of pain and nausea so hideous, you’d rather plunge your head into boiling 
Guinness than ever go through it again.

At which point you start to crawl miserably away, whispering softly: “My one 
true love, I’ll never forget you.” Ultimately, it isn’t calorie-awareness, it’s 
pain (horrible, unendurable pain) that drives committed drinkers away from 
alcohol.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fgeneration-rent-ignored-insecure-on-the-rise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F1%2F1414839629736%2F24698fa4-9a3a-4d70-b52c-27c7ffb413eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Generation%20Rent%3A%20ignored%2C%20insecure%20%E2%80%93%20and%20on%20the%20rise%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fgeneration-rent-ignored-insecure-on-the-rise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Generation%20Rent%3A%20ignored%2C%20insecure%20%E2%80%93%20and%20on%20the%20rise%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fgeneration-rent-ignored-insecure-on-the-rise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F1%2F1414839629736%2F24698fa4-9a3a-4d70-b52c-27c7ffb413eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Annie Lennox: less of the preaching please. Photograph: Casey Curry/Casey 
Curry/Invision/AP 
Calm down Annie, and let the younger sisters do it for themselves




Annie Lennox <https://www.theguardian.com/music/annie-lennox> has spoken out 
about female over-sexualisation in the music industry, making graphic comments 
about how certain performers feel the need to “splay their legs”, which she 
feels will eventually lead to “full penetrative sex on stage”.

Sigh. No it won’t, Annie, just as it didn’t in your 1980s heyday, when Madonna 
was denounced as the Whore of Babylon for gyrating in her coned bra.

Lennox has said this sort of thing before and she really needs to address how 
vulgar and superior she sounds. Sure, the music industry is over-sexualised –
Miley Cyrus 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/10/31/miley-cyrus-aids-research_n_6082620.html>
 recently wore an outfit that appeared to have been fashioned by a roadie 
hurriedly biting off strips of gaffer tape backstage at the last minute. (By 
the way, I don’t object to Miley’s outfits. I object to the fact that sometimes 
she looks so vacant when she’s wearing them.)

What definitely doesn’t help is an older female artist pontificating from on 
high about how much more dignified she managed to be.

As Lennox admits, the music industry has changed beyond all recognition. 
Perhaps she was more dignified, but didn’t she also benefit from proper record 
advances, time to develop as an artist and the confidence that presumably comes 
from starting off in a pop duo (as one half of Eurythmics)?

It might be an idea for Lennox to focus her ire, instead, at the music 
industry’s pervading climate of coercion towards female artists – pushing them 
towards sexual display, sometimes overtly, at other times in a way that makes 
them think it’s all their own idea, and (woo-woo!) they are “owning it”.

As it is, it’s unedifying to witness Lennox trilling over Emma Watson’s UN 
feminist speech one minute and the next trashing younger women in her own 
industry, who are probably under greater pressure than she ever experienced.
 