
As an American, the imminent UK publication of my first two comic novels fills 
me with pride, excitement, and a cultural insecurity comparable to that of a 
Dubliner opening a taco stand inGuadalajara 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guadalajara>. 

My inspiration: Dave Lowe on Roald Dahl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/apr/29/my-inspiration-roald-dahl-dave-lowe>
Comedy is one of those things – like classic rock, tennis tournaments, and 
novels involving wizards – that the British are just plain better at than 
anyone else. I have no theories as to why, which is probably a good thing, 
since nothing kills humor dead like the attempt to analyze it. But I can offer 
plenty of examples:

Growing up in the midwest of the United States, where the cornfields stretch 
on forever (both literally and culturally-metaphorically), I loved British 
comedy even before I knew it was British. From AA Milne to Roald Dahl, all my 
favourite children’s books were written by British authors whose characters 
were both deeply weird and thoroughly believable, a trick I can’t recall any 
American children’s author ever pulling off.
 Geoff Rodkey: you’re just better at this than we are. Photograph: Ash Fox 
(For the purposes of this article I’m going to go right ahead and ignore Dr 
Seuss, except to note that he studied at Oxford for a while, which I can only 
assume was the formative experience of his creative life.)


Jim Smith's top 10 funny books for kids
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2013/dec/12/jim-smith-top-10-funny-books>
 Somewhere around the time I hit puberty, MTV <http://www.mtv.co.uk/> started 
showing imports of the 1980s cult comedy show The Young Ones 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Young_Ones_(TV_series)>. At a point when the 
pinnacle of American sitcoms wasThe Cosby Show 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Cosby_Show> (no, I’m not going to make a 
joke about that, but please feel free to supply your own), encountering The 
Young Ones on US television was like putting on anABBA 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ABBA> album and discovering a Sex Pistols 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sex_Pistols> track embedded in it. I recorded 
every single episode, and I watched them obsessively for a year.

 Then I discovered Monty Python and the Holy Grail 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monty_Python_and_the_Holy_Grail>. 

 I loved that movie with such a fervor that by the time I got to college, I 
could recite the whole thing from memory (a talent which, incidentally, was the 
catalyst for an important life lesson: just because you CAN do something 
doesn’t mean you SHOULD). Monty Python is exactly the sort of thing only 
British comedians could create, and only a British audience could appreciate. 
Take the “Summarise Proust” sketch. There are 320,000,000 Americans, and not 
one of us has ever read Proust. To this day, when I laugh at that sketch, I’m 
not sure I’m laughing for the right reasons.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIScaIp2fVIw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIScaIp2fVIw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIScaIp2fVIw&media=>
 And here is the summarise Proust sketch by Monty Python! 
 This is true of an unsettling number of Python sketches. “Blancmanges Playing 
Tennis”? Hilarious! Also utterly mystifying. “Communist Quiz Show”? Loved it! 
Just please don’t ask me to explain who all those people are.

 Honestly, even “The Cheese Shop” is a bit of a reach for an American 
audience. We’re with you up through “mozzarella,” and then it gets dicey.

 After Python and a college-era affair with Blackadder 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006xxw3> reruns, I became an adult, started 
writing comedy professionally for film and TV, and managed to go several years 
without simultaneously experiencing awe and crushing inadequacy at the hands of 
another British comedy practitioner… until I picked up aPG Wodehouse  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P._G._Wodehouse>novel. 

 I have no idea how Wodehouse does it. Some of his books (the most famous of 
which are the Jeeves books) are a century old, and they’re still as funny as if 
they were written yesterday. He can make a comedic tour de force out of Bertie 
Wooster putting on his socks. In less than 50 words. It’s really something.

 I suppose it’s possible that all this is just a matter of taste, and that 
there’s an Englishman somewhere who can’t understand why his country is 
incapable of producing a comic genius like Adam Sandler. If so, I would very 
much like to meet this person.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgeoff-rodkey-us-comedy-versus-uk-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442330032658%2F6621d01d-be48-420c-b56f-9e0e6bef58f8-663x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Geoff%20Rodkey%3A%20why%20UK%20comedy%20is%20better%20than%20US%20comedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgeoff-rodkey-us-comedy-versus-uk-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Geoff%20Rodkey%3A%20why%20UK%20comedy%20is%20better%20than%20US%20comedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgeoff-rodkey-us-comedy-versus-uk-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442330032658%2F6621d01d-be48-420c-b56f-9e0e6bef58f8-663x1020.jpeg>
 On second thought, no I wouldn’t. 

 Either way, with the UK publication of the first two volumes in the Tapper 
Twins series upon me, I’m feeling more than a little self-conscious. This isn’t 
due to a lack confidence in the books themselves. I thinkThe Tapper Twins Go To 
War (With Each Other) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/333431/>, is an 
enormously fun portrait of modern life that should be instantly recognisable, 
on either side of the Atlantic, to Minecraft-obsessed children , overworked 
parents, and anyone who’s ever posted something on a social network that they 
later regretted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgeoff-rodkey-us-comedy-versus-uk-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442330064832%2Faeafc94c-d983-4834-8307-b618e71f85c6-660x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Geoff%20Rodkey%3A%20why%20UK%20comedy%20is%20better%20than%20US%20comedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgeoff-rodkey-us-comedy-versus-uk-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Geoff%20Rodkey%3A%20why%20UK%20comedy%20is%20better%20than%20US%20comedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgeoff-rodkey-us-comedy-versus-uk-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442330064832%2Faeafc94c-d983-4834-8307-b618e71f85c6-660x1020.jpeg>
 And The Tapper Twins Tear Up New York 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/325580/> , about a 
scavenger hunt that goes horribly awry, is even funnier. 

 At least, it is in America. But will it play in Britain? You’ll have to tell 
me!

 * The Tapper Twins Go To War (With Each Other) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/333431/> and The 
Tapper Twins Tear Up New York 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/325580/> are 
available to order at the Guardian bookshop.
 