
I had been nursing a stubborn cold for weeks when I woke up yesterday with a 
painful shoulder. By the time I left Westminster after George Osborne's
gloom-laden autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/29/public-sector-george-osborne-growth>
 I had also acquired a painful knee. Five more years of austerity and, to cap 
it all,Iranian rioters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/30/britain-withdraws-diplomats-iran>
, whose government is so much more venal and incompetent than ours, were again 
attacking the British embassy.

A zeitgeist moment then. Yes, though the knee and shoulder feel better this 
morning, no thanks to the chancellor or the rioters. Overnight analysis of the 
autumn statement focuses on the coalition'srenewed squeeze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/29/public-sector-george-osborne-growth>
 on public sector jobs, pay and pensions – as well as the impact of lower tax 
credits on the lives and children of the working poor. The outlook looks bleak, 
uncertain or both for most people.

"Even the rich don't know where to put their money so it will be safe," 
explained a friend I met on a wet and windy street. Out and about unusually 
early on Wednesday morning I noticed a cluster of big 4x4 cars – those "Chelsea 
tractors" we like to laugh at – delivering pupils to the little private school 
at 8 o'clock so mummy and daddy can go straight to the office. Even the rich 
are having to work ever harder to maintain their high living standards. AsLarry 
Elliott reminds us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/nov/29/george-osborne-autumn-statement>, 
we've been here before, but this is systemic – more like the 1930s than the 
1970s.

The autumn statement was a little more complicated than mere class warfare (I 
don't agree withPolly Toynbee  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/29/osborne-class-war-autumn-statement>
about that) and the chancellor's room for manoeuvre shrinks with every passing 
day that leaves the euroon the brink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/nov/29/eurozone-finance-ministers-imf-bailout-fund>
.

Despite his dramatic borrowing overshoot – an extra £100bn over the parliament 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/nov/29/budget-osborne-fiscal-watchdog-austerity>
– Osborne did switch some money into capital spending projects, credit easing 
and pro-growth business incentives; he did pay out the full 5.2% 
inflation-proofing owed on pensions and benefits after all.

In doing so he earned the anger of rightwing commentators who think he sounded 
far too like Gordon Brown – tinkering with subsidies instead of cutting back 
taxes and the state – than they'd like. Plan A-minus, growled one disapproving 
thinktank. If the eurozone goes belly up and takes a chunk of the globalised 
economy's growth prospects with it he will be accused of failing to take 
sufficiently drastic action while he had the chance. At least Osborne will have 
the Lib Dems to blame for alleged soft-heartedness.

Savage austerity all round – the sort of policy still being urged on its 
eurozone neighbours by Germany – is the kind of pilot error that stalls 
aircraft and sends them plunging to the ground. In economics and politics, as 
in aviation, the trick is to maintain height, balance and velocity. Don't panic 
the markets, but don't push the real economy over the cliff either.

In a nuanced article Keynes's biographer, (Lord) Robert Skidelsky, elegantly 
reminds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/29/cutting-fantasy-over> 
Guardian readers today what the great man would have said ("look after 
unemployment and the budget will look after itself") and concludes that the 
chancellor is slowly rewriting his narrative to reflect the new realities and 
increase job-creating capital spending. Events may force the pace.

This is not necessarily good news for the teachers, health workers, local and 
central government officials on strike since increasedcapital spending – 
infrastructure projects from roads to high-speed broadband – will have to come 
in part from the ongoing squeeze on current spending, which means salaries and 
pensions.

But we now know for certain that the government is not going to meet its 
deficit reduction targets on time, so the question becomes: "On what do we best 
spend the unavoidable extra borrowing?" Jobs are always best.

Having slept on it I am still minded to give the chancellor credit for making a
good political fist out of a very poor hand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/blog/2011/nov/29/autumn-statement-george-osborne>
, mostly not of his own making – 60% to 70% not so, I would say off the top of 
my head. Labour's legacy and external factors – Europe and inflation-boosting 
world commodity prices – are still the dominant ingredients. Voters are still 
not listening to Labour's remedies, which strike an uncertain note reflected in 
Wednesday's Guardian coverage of the autumn statement.

But Wednesday's strikers – protesters is surely a better word ? – are both 
anxious about their own individual futures (everyone's case is different in 
different ways) but also concerned about fairness. After all, we are all in 
this together. Thus the coalition has yet to do enough to persuade voters that 
the better-off – not just the top 1% above £150,000, whose internal wealth gap 
is pretty steep – are pulling their weight in the collective sacrifice.

As Barack Obama's problems have demonstrated, it's difficult to get the tone 
right in ways that impress suspicious Middle America without arousing 
ridiculous charges of class warfare from the high end. Remember, Warren Buffet, 
the investment guru from Omaha, says the only class warfare being waged in the 
US is by his class – the super-rich – and that they are winning.

Society is not as polarised here, not as polarised in most of Europe, I think. 
But when respectable headteachers and members of Whitehall's FDA union for 
senior officials feel moved to join a symbolic strike action, ministers should 
take notice.

But the fairness agenda is not confined to squeezing the rich harder than 
society's poorest, whose in-work tax credits took a mauling on Tuesday.

There's a gender component – more complicated than often presented, but real – 
which bears down on low-paid women. There'll be an ethnic dimension and a 
north-south divide. Osborne tried to address that in his regional spread of 
capital spending programmes, though when I suggested on Twitter that it might 
guarantee him some positive headlines in the regional media, someone tweeted 
"there's not much left".

Regionalism cuts both ways. Osborne also hinted that he'd like to introduce 
regional pay bargaining in the public sector to trim the anomaly whereby a 
nationally agreed pay structure is perceived to be much more valuable in 
regions where travel, housing and living costs are cheaper than in London and 
the south-east.

Is that even true? And would a change weaken fragile regional economies even 
more if the public sector's purchasing power was further diminished? We need to 
discuss it, but the unions hate such divide and rule tactics, a political 
objection as much as an economic one.

Finally, fairness may require us to look again at inter-generational issues. 
It has long been assumed that the post-war boomers (I am an early example) have 
had too good a time at everyone else's expense. That narrative may be running 
out of steam as the re-rise of Asia and the end of the Atlantic world's 
post-war splurge looks like levelling out – or worse.

But ministers must surely look at non-pension perks of the over-60s, given on 
a non-means-tested basis to elderly duke and retired dustman alike – those free 
TV licences and bus passes, the winter fuel allowance that helps heat ducal 
palaces, even free prescriptions. David Cameron was boxed into a pre-election 
corner on such pledges – Gordon Brown wrong-footed him in a TV debate – but the 
deepening crisis must mean more bets are off.
 