
The attorney general, George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, has claimed he had 
no knowledge that finance department officials had warned the Abbott government 
against allowing former Family First senator Bob Day to move his office to a 
building he had owned.

The relocation is at the heart of a pecuniary interest controversy surrounding 
Day, who resigned earlier this week over the collapse of his building company, 
and then was hit with agovernment challenge in the high court regarding his 
validity as a senator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/bob-day-senate-election-family-first-labor-coalition-high-court>
.

The Day court outcome will determine whether another member from his party can 
take his position or whether it is determined on a recount, possibly going to 
the Labor party.

Government challenges election of One Nation senator Rod Culleton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/02/challenge-election-one-nation-senator-rod-culleton>
Also on Wednesday, Brandis announced he would also seek a high court ruling on 
the eligibility of the election of One Nation senator Rod Culleton over a 
larceny charged which was later annulled.

Following the government’s announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/02/challenge-election-one-nation-senator-rod-culleton>
 Culleton questioned the jurisdiction of the high court but then vowed to 
represent himself.

“If I do [participate in the high court] I will simply go down and shear a 
sheep and take the belly fleece and stick it over my head and I’ll represent 
myself because I am a true Australian standing up for the Australian people,” 
Culleton said.

The referrals of Day and Culleton, on top of the breakdown of Brandis’ 
relationship with the solicitor general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/24/solicitor-general-justin-gleeson-quits-over-broken-relationship--george-brandis>
, place the attorney general in the middle of the Coalition’s political storm 
ahead of the resumption of parliament next week.

Asked whether he had familiarised himself with the details of the leasing 
conditions, Brandis said he had not.


“I have no knowledge at all of what the finance department may have done in 
2014,” Brandis said.
factbox 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=ee4329aa-709a-4a06-8c44-272944ef9c38>
“The matter came to my notice as the attorney general when the special 
minister of state, Senator [Scott] Ryan, came to me, discussed the matter and 
we decided to get advice initially from the Australian government’s solicitor 
[Justin Gleeson] and then Mr Jackson, that came in late on Thursday.”


“I’m saying to you is that whatever happened in 2014 involving the special 
minister of state is not something about which I can speak.”

But when pressed, Brandis said he could assure people the Abbott government 
ministers acted at all times “in good faith”.

According to documents obtained by Fairfax 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/government-approved-bob-days-office-deal-despite-departmental-advice-not-to-20161102-gsg8rf.html>
, officials from the finance department warned the then special minister of 
state, Michael Ronaldson, against the relocation of Day’s electorate office 
from the central business district of Adelaide to a building he had owned.


The finance department’s entitlements manager wrote to Ronaldson in February 
2014, advising: “I recommend that you agree to not approve the establishment of 
a new electorate office for Senator-elect Day.”

Day wanted to move from an office at 19 Gilles Street, Adelaide – which was 
already leased by the Senate for the outgoing Labor senator Don Farrell – to 
Day’s 77 Fullarton Road building in Kent Town.

What is section 44? Why it matters if Bob Day is declared ineligible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/explainer-section-44-and-why-it-matters-if-bob-day-is-declared-ineligible>
Under the rules Day could not remain owner so subsequently sold the Fullarton 
Road building but provided finance for the new owner, Fullarton Investments.

After further negotiations between Ronaldson and Day, the government agreed 
but imposed conditions on the move, including that no rent was paid on the 
Fullarton Road building until August this year. Day has said he received no 
rent from the building.

But Farrell, who returned to the Senate in this year’s election, said the 
advice also pointed out that the senators and members’ handbook made it clear 
that “it is expected that an incoming senator or member will occupy the office 
vacated by his or her predecessor”.

Day has said he had advice he was eligible for the Senate, based on a high 
court decision that a family company having a contract with the commonwealth 
did not represent a pecuniary interest.

“In my case, I had no contract or agreement with the commonwealth. I had an 
agreement with someone else who had an agreement with the commonwealth.”

It is the latest development on the Senate crossbench, which was increased 
after Malcolm Turnbull called thedouble-dissolution election on 2 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jul/02/australian-federal-election-2016-results-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-politics-live>
.

As a result of the week’s extraordinary events, parliament will return next 
week one senator down and another under a cloud.

On Wednesday morning, the government insisted it would press ahead with its 
agenda, which has included the Australian Building and Construction Commission 
(ABCC) bill and the marriage plebiscite.

The high court referrals will occur on the first day of sitting on 7 November. 
As Day has already resigned, the Senate numbers will sit at 75 but Culleton has 
raised the prospect of not voting in the senate until the matter is resolved.

In the Culleton case, at issue is his earlier conviction in his absence 
earlier this year for stealing a tow truck key from a driver who was trying to 
repossess one of his company cars in 2014.


The conviction was later annulled in August, after the July election and 
declaration of the polls.Culleton’s election has been challenged by a former 
associate 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/court-fight-for-one-nation-senator-rodney-culleton/news-story/8a46b8b4afebed67e0b92740ffc98aad>
.


Culleton said Brandis contacted him last Saturday regarding the matter. He 
said he had not had time to read and “digest” the legal opinion of the outgoing 
solicitor general, Justin Gleeson.

He said taking a $7.50 key was “no different to taking a scone off someone’s 
plate” but said everyone had the right to challenge his election, according to 
the constitution.


Culleton again claimed he was innocent but did not deny he had taken the 
single key, after which, “a good old punch-up occurred”.

“I have never denied I didn’t take a key to defend my assets,” Culleton said.

Culleton also he was not sure whether he would vote in parliament but would 
take advice from the clerk of the Senate.


“I want a stamped document to say in a sense that what I am doing is not 
prejudicing myself and the Australian people, I don’t want to do that,” 
Culleton said.

A number of constitutional experts said the previous legislative votes 
supported by Day in this parliamentary term would likely remain valid.


Constitutional legal expert George Williams, professor of law at the 
University of New South Wales, said the high court did not tend to examine the 
internal affairs of parliament.

Hold on to your hats as the Bob Day and Rod Culleton show shakes up the Senate 
| Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/02/hold-on-to-your-hats-as-the-bob-day-and-rod-culleton-show-shakes-up-the-senate->
“There are many precedents that demonstrate this,” Williams said. “It suggests 
that the high court will look at the eligibility of the senator, but will not 
be prepared to revisit any prior votes by that chamber.”

Professor of law at the University of Sydney Anne Twomey said the courts would 
not usually go behind the passage of a law to look at who voted and whether or 
not they were qualified at the time.

“There is not a lot of authority on this point, but the best we have suggests 
that there would be no consequences from him having voted in the Senate while 
[possibly] disqualified,” Twomey said. “Such votes would continue to stand.”
 