
The historian Eric Hobsbawm once wrote 
<http://thenewpress.com/index.php?option=com_title&task=view_title&metaproductid=1176>
 that people only understand that a period in history has ended when it has 
been over for quite a long time. This is surely right. Bloodied soldiers didn't 
stand around on the battlefield at Bosworth and immediately reflect that, 
though it had been a hard-fought day, at least the later Middle Ages had now 
ended.

Obviously there are exceptions. The British foreign secretary who announced, 
on the eve of the first world war, that the lamps were going out all over 
Europe and would not be lit again in his lifetime made an on-the-spot epochal 
judgment that was vindicated by history. ButSir Edward Grey 
<http://www.firstworldwar.com/bio/grey.htm>'s remark was not as obviously true 
or widely understood at the time as it now seems in retrospect.

In general, though, history is what Coleridge said it is: a lantern on the 
stern of a vessel on the nocturnal ocean, partially illuminating the waters 
through which we have sailed, but saying little about what awaits us ahead in 
the dark. For this reason we should be cautious about assuming too readily that 
our politics reached a tipping point this week with the chancellor's humbling
autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/29/cutting-fantasy-over> 
and the largestpublic sector industrial action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/blog/2011/nov/30/public-sector-strikes-live-coverage>
 in decades.

There are long-, medium- and short-term reasons for such caution. The 
long-term reason is embodied in Hobsbawm's overarching observation. If,as Zhou 
Enlai said 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/spl/hi/asia_pac/02/china_party_congress/china_ruling_party/key_people_events/html/zhou_enlai.stm>
, it is too soon to have a view of the French Revolution, then it is probably 
too soon to say if the coalition is a failed government. The medium-term reason 
is that there is already very little agreement about how to characterise the 
times we are living through. Some believe that we are witnessing the failure of 
neoliberalism. Others that we are witnessing the historic failure of the nation 
state. They can't both be right.

But the proper province of a newspaper columnist is the short term. And while 
the temptation is to talk in terms of days of reckoning, turning points, 
watershed moments, lost decades and the rest of it, the events of this week 
already point in a less exciting direction: in economics towards more of the 
same in one austere form or another; and in politics, towards another hung 
parliament and another coalition government after the 2015 general election.

That's not to pretend that nothing has changed this week, because it certainly 
has. The claim that Britain could come safely through the global economic storm 
merely by sticking to the coalition's 2010 deficit reduction plan has been 
destroyed – in a mere 18 months. That means, economically, tougher times for 
all of us for longer; and, politically, that the coalition parties now cannot 
go to the country in 2015 claiming to have balanced the books. That wish was 
central to the entire Osborne strategy of 2010-11. Now it's not possible. By 
any standards that is a big coalition setback.

Nor is it to pretend that nothing new may happen in the coming months that 
could, after all, break the economic strategy or political mould. To write such 
a thing would be foolhardy for any number of reasons, mainly to do with the 
eurozone – not least in the aftermath of theBank of England governor's warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/dec/01/mervyn-king-warns-uk-banks> 
on Thursday about systemic crisis and the inability of any UK national 
authority to resolve the current turmoil.

But it is to say that the initial response to Osborne's autumn statement is 
strikingly in line with the public's pre-existing view about the state of the 
country. AYouGov poll 
<http://labs.yougov.co.uk/news/2011/12/01/osbornes-autumn-statement/>, taken 
after Osborne's speech, found that people are pessimistic about the economy, 
negative about the coalition's handling of it and negative about Osborne 
generally. But these same voters do not blame the coalition for the economic 
problems, think that things would be worse under Labour, and rate Ed Balls 
unfavourably when compared with Osborne.

These findings are extremely consistent with what voters have been saying for 
several months. As YouGov's Peter Kellnerput it 
<http://labs.yougov.co.uk/news/2011/11/28/economy-tories-unscathed/> before the 
autumn statement, the Conservatives are continuing to win the argument that 
they are cleaning up a mess left by Gordon Brown, while Labour is failing to 
make an impact. What is more, even though Labour leads the Conservatives in 
most voting intention polls, when voters are asked a "forced choice" question 
as to whether they would prefer a David Cameron-led Tory government after the 
next election or an Ed Miliband-led Labour one, they opt for Cameron and the 
Tories by a steady five-point margin.

All of this may change. Deepening stagnation, rising unemployment and the 
continuing programme of cuts may mean that public opinion will eventually reach 
the critical mass of revulsion against the coalition that some anticipate and 
others crave. But there is precious little sign of it. And it may not come at 
all. The autumn statement was shocking. Yet it did not come as a shock. People 
have increasingly been braced for worse times. Osborne speaks to that mood more 
effectively than Labour does. And he may go on doing so, unlessLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> can win a wider credibility. 
Perhaps, over three grim years, that will happen. But it is not happening now.

Do not overlook, either, that this has been a surprisingly successful autumn 
not just for the Tories, but the Liberal Democrats too. The Lib Dems have put 
their distinctive stamp on several progressive announcements in the autumn 
statement, not least the commitment to uprate benefits in line with inflation, 
on which Osborne vacillated. But theextra spending on work placements for young 
people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/nov/25/clegg-youth-jobs-generational-fairness>
, the targetedextra money for toddler care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/oct/06/government-announces-boost-childcare-pot>
 and the spending on infrastructure projects all bear the mark of Lib Dem 
pressure inside the coalition.

Yes, these are changing times. But the dominant mood is not currently for 
radical change, let alone radical change as defined by the unions. It is to 
hang on to what we've got, ride out hard times and submit to perceived 
necessary austerity as best we can. Eurozone tumult would play into that 
hunkering-down mood, not against it. Meanwhile, as the Office for National 
Statistics reports,this is in general a happy country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/dec/01/britons-happy-despite-financial-woes>
.

Politically, all this is proving unexpectedly kind for the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> and comparatively tough 
for Labour, while the Lib Dems show justified signs of renewed confidence. 
Another hung parliament in 2015, again overshadowed by deficit politics, looks 
a growing possibility. If so, then this week, far from a turning point, could 
be just another bump in a surprisingly straight road towards more of the same.
 