
George Brandis has appointed constitutional lawyer Stephen Donaghue as 
solicitor general, seven weeks after the former solicitor generalJustin Gleeson 
resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/24/solicitor-general-justin-gleeson-quits-over-broken-relationship--george-brandis>
 citing an irretrievably broken relationship with the attorney general.

A constitutional lawyer <https://www.vicbar.com.au/profile?3437> with 
specialties including migration and extradition, Donaghue acted as counsel 
assisting theroyal commission into the building and construction industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-trade-union-governance-and-corruption>
 and counsel for Asio in theClarke inquiry 
<http://www.lawcouncil.asn.au/lawcouncil/index.php/10-divisions/145-mohamed-haneef-case>
 into the case ofDr Mohammad Haneef 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/national/inside-story-of-the-bungled-haneef-case/2008/10/24/1224351544028.html>
, an Indian-born doctor falsely accused of helping terrorists.

Solicitor general Justin Gleeson resigns over 'broken' relationship with 
George Brandis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/24/solicitor-general-justin-gleeson-quits-over-broken-relationship--george-brandis>
“Dr Donaghue is a distinguished constitutional lawyer and has frequently 
appeared as senior counsel before the high court of Australia in constitutional 
and other public law cases,” Brandis said. “His practice has involved complex 
and high-profile matters across a broad range of legal areas.”

Donaghue was admitted to the Victorian Bar in 2001 and holds a doctorate of 
philosophy from Oxford University, and a bachelor of laws (first class honours) 
and bachelor of arts from the University of Melbourne. His appointment will 
begin on 16 January for a period of five years.

The professional relationship breakdown between Brandis and Gleeson first came 
to light over a legal direction by Brandis which stated that Gleeson must seek 
permission from the attorney general before giving legal advice to a government 
department.

Gleeson objected to the legal direction because as the government’s key legal 
adviser, second only to the attorney, it prevented him from giving urgent legal 
advice. Brandis asserted that he had consulted Gleeson over the direction – a 
claim Gleeson denied.

The tension was further inflamed after the Senate established an inquiry to 
examine the matter and when Gleeson gave evidence, he refused to back down in 
the face of aggressive questioning fromCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> senators.


The opposition-dominated Senate inquiry report found Brandis lacked the 
competence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/george-brandis-is-unfit-to-be-attorney-general-parliamentary-committee-finds>
 to be attorney general.


After Gleeson’s resignation, reports in the West Australian alleged the 
attorney general instructed Gleeson not to run a particular argument in the 
high court over creditors for the collapsed Bell Group.Brandis denied the claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/george-brandis-to-face-inquiry-into-actions-over-bell-group-scandal>
 in a statement to the Senate.

Mark Dreyfus (@markdreyfusQCMP) 
Labor welcomes appointment of new Solocitor-General Stephen Donaghue QC. Let's 
hope he is treated far better than his predecessor.
 <https://twitter.com/markdreyfusQCMP/status/808945631821590528> December 14, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/markdreyfusQCMP/status/808945631821590528> 
Stuart Clark, president of the Law Council of Australia welcomed Donaghue’s 
appointment, saying he was renowned in the legal profession.

“The Office of the Solicitor General plays a vital role in assisting ministers 
and agencies to comply with the rule of law and to discharge their functions in 
accordance with the constraints of the law,” Clark said. “Frank, fearless and 
independent advice is critical to the proper operation of government.

“The Law Council has every confidence in the ability of Stephen Donaghue QC to 
provide the impartial advice that the position demands.”

Anne Twomey, professor of law at the University of Sydney, described Donaghue 
as a highly qualified and experienced lawyer.

“He has appeared in most of the recent important high court cases in the area 
of constitutional law, including Plaintiff M68 (re Nauru detention centre), 
Williams No 2 (re the school chaplains), CPCF (re the turn-back of a boat to 
India) and AEC v Johnson (re the validity of the 2013 WA Senate election after 
the ballots were lost),” Twomey said in a statement. “The Commonwealth is very 
fortunate to have him.”

George Williams, the Anthony Mason Professor of Law at the University of NSW, 
said Donaghue was a “very fine choice and cannot be faulted”.

“He is rightly regarded as a leading constitutional lawyer in Australia, and 
has been sought after for many years as an adviser and advocate,” Williams 
said. “This is a strong, apolitical appointment that should be applauded.”
 