
If George Miller’s bat-out-of-hell explode-a-palooza Mad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road> hadn’t smoked the 
competition at Wednesday night’s Aacta awards there ought to have been riots on 
the streets.

Aactas 2015: Cate Blanchett honoured at fifth annual awards – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2015/dec/10/aactas-2015-cate-blanchett-honoured-at-fifth-annual-awards-in-pictures>
In a ceremony at which most of the interest lay in the film categories – the 
audience was reminded several times that 2015 has been the highest local box 
office since 2001 – Miller’s fuel-guzzling phenomenon took both best film and 
best direction.

Mad Max won six additional prizes last week (including gongs for editing and 
cinematography) during the so-called industry Aactas. “Industry” being code for 
“not as many celebrities so the winners don’t need to be on the telecast”.

The original Road Warrior himself, Mel Gibson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/melgibson>, announced Miller as best director 
(“oh hey, it’s George”) but the academy decided against assigning Miller the 
Baz Luhrmann treatment dished out in its 2013 ceremony, when a huge music and 
montage segment recapped all the director’s films (capped off with a standing 
ovation led by Luhrmann himself).

But why? Miller is an infinitely superior film-maker, with the possible caveat 
that he is less experienced in the acquisition and distribution of 
industrial-sized quantities of glitter. Imagine the weird kinky fun we could 
have been had with dancers frocked up in Mad Max’s BDSM outfits.

Aacta awards 2015: Mad Max and The Dressmaker win big – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2015/dec/09/aactas-2015-australias-biggest-television-and-film-awards-live>
In that segment’s place was a more distinguished tribute to Cate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett> (receiving the Longford Lyell 
award for contribution to culture) which featured congratulatory messages from 
the likes of Martin Scorsese, Ridley Scott and Ron Howard. Ever distinguished 
and sensible, Blanchett used her acceptance speech to make the pertinent point 
that while healthy box office is great for business it is not the only measure 
of cinematic success.

The 2015 ceremony was a strange, flashy and at times tacky couple of hours 
that felt like as though it was directed, particularly the dancing boy band at 
the start, by a sober and thus artistically strugglingRuben Guthrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/04/ruben-guthrie-first-look-review> 
type (a film that left empty-handed). But proceedings were kicked off by 
Guthrie himself: the charismatic and funny actor Patrick Brammall, who’d make a 
perfect choice for MC.

The event included (like Ruben Guthrie) advertisements inside the show itself. 
Presenters talked up Presto’s “major new Home and Away event”, the conspicuous 
product placement the offspring of an unusual network ménage à trois. The 
ceremony was broadcast on Channel Seven, presented by Presto and sponsored by 
Foxtel Movies.

Kate Winslet deservedly took best lead actress for The Dressmaker; few 
foreigners have mastered the Australian accent as well as her. Her co-star Judy 
Davis made an equally deserving choice for best supporting actress. As the 
protagonist’s mother – an acid-tongued cat lady-like old bag – the two-time 
Oscar-nominated veteran stole the show.

So did Michael Caton in Last Cab to Darwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/07/last-cab-to-darwin-first-look-review->
 (for which he won best lead actor). Director Jeremy Sims’ cancer-infused road 
movie may not be a great film but Caton, who looked irresistibly droopy and 
weather-worn through-out, gave a great performance.

This year Aacta introduced a new category: the people’s choice award, which 
also went toThe Dressmaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/17/the-dressmaker-review-jocelyn-moorhouse-blows-small-town-drama-sky-high>
. This was presumably a way of eliminating the chance of any 2014-style 
controversies – when the low-budget, critically acclaimed horror pic The 
Babadook tied for best film with The Water Diviner. It waslater revealed 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/movies/behind-the-baffling-best-film-tie-between-the-water-diviner-and-the-babadook-at-the-aacta-awards-20150731-gim7gy.html>
 that The Babadook had won the initial count but the numbers had been run again 
using a different methodology, returning a win for Russell Crowe’s 
globetrotting multiplex hit.

Australian cinema's lost wave: the renaissance nobody's noticed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/20/australias-lost-wave-of-film-or-the-renaissance-nobodys-noticed>
Every year since its inception in 2011 (before which the ceremony was known as 
the more dignified-sounding AFI awards), the highest performing title at the 
box office has never failed to secure best film. According to Aacta, Red Dog is 
a superior work of art to Snowtown, and The Great Gatsby (now certified rotten 
on Rotten Tomatoes <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_great_gatsby_2013/>), 
with its record-equalling haul of 13 awards, is one of the finest feature films 
made in Australia.

But this year you couldn’t fault the winner of the main prize. The 
International Federation of Film Critics, after all, was so certain Miller’s 
dystopian action blockbuster was the best film of 2015 thatit handed out its 
award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/02/mad-max-fury-road-voted-years-best-by-international-film-critics>
 in September – well before members could even view all the competition.
 