
What sort of a world would George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> like to live in? I imagine 
him fantasising about the Republic of Gilead in Margaret Atwood's novel The 
Handmaid's Tale. Unprotected workers, assigned their places in a fixed social 
system, crawl over toxic waste dumps, while the upper castes, though rendered 
sterile by unregulated pollution, live without fear of democracy, trade unions 
or the minimum wage.

The Republic of Gideon <> began to take shape on Tuesday, when the chancellor 
launched a full-spectrum assault on both workers and the environment. In his
autumn statement <http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/as2011_index.htm>, he curtailed 
public sector pay and, once again,hammered the tax credits and benefits upon 
which the poorest people depend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/29/osborne-class-war-autumn-statement>
. At the same time he gave away £250m in yet another bailout for big business: 
in this case the UK's most polluting industries. ReadDamian Carrington's 
withering exposure of this exercise in crony capitalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2011/nov/28/george-osborne-green-energy-economy-budget-report-industry>
, and you will rage and gnash your teeth.

He also snuffed out the government's attempts to limit the amount of transport 
fuel the UK consumes, announced the construction of new roads, airports and 
power stations and reneged on the promise the energy secretary made just a 
month ago, that there would be "absolutely no backsliding" on carbon capture 
and storage at the UK's power stations. Now the £1bn set aside for CCS will be 
given (in the Treasury secretary's words) to "different sorts of projects". 
Another corporate tax break perhaps?

But perhaps the worst of Osborne's environmentally destructive proposals was 
his attack on the laws protecting England's wildlife and places of natural 
beauty. These were first introduced in 1994 by the previous Conservative 
government. He claimed that they are "gold-plating" European rules and "placing 
ridiculous costs on British businesses".

He is wrong on both counts. The Davidson report in 2006 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/files/file44583.pdf> found that the European rules had 
not been gold-plated. The laws defending our special areas of conservation and 
special protection areas impose costs on business only if business wants to 
trash the few corners of England which have been placed off-limits. That means 
spots such as Lyme Bay, the New Forest, Epping Forest, the Norfolk Broads and 
Flamborough Head.

Why should corporations be allowed to do to these treasured places what they 
can do anywhere else? Osborne might as well complain that the rules forbidding 
developers to knock down St Paul's cathedral and build a new bank there place 
"ridiculous costs on British business".

His intentions are spelled out in more detail in the Treasury's national 
infrastructure plan 2011 
<http://cdn.hm-treasury.gov.uk/national_infrastructure_plan291111.pdf>. To 
prevent the protection of our natural heritage from imposing "unnecessary costs 
and delays" on money-making projects, the Treasury will "give industry 
representation on a group chaired by ministers so it can raise concerns … at 
the top of government".

This, remember, is a government umbilically connected to big business, which 
has so thoroughly infiltrated Westminster and Whitehall that government and 
corporations are almost indistinguishable. Now the Treasury claims that 
business needs even more access?

Worse still, bodies such as Natural England and the Environment Agency, which 
are supposed to defend our treasured wild places, will now "have a remit to 
promote sustainable development." This is a complete inversion of their purpose 
– from restraint to promotion.

The Country Land and Business Association, representing the class of rentier 
capitalists whom Osborne appears to see as his natural constituency,professes 
itself "delighted" 
<http://www.cla.org.uk/News_and_Press/Latest_Releases/Politics/Budget/1008407.htm/>
 with these proposals. I bet it is. The big landowners it represents have been 
pressing for slash and burn capitalism for years, while simultaneously 
insisting that the taxpayer stocks their wine cellars and cleans out their 
moats through farm subsidies. Now they have a government which gives them 
everything they ask for.

These people will never be satisfied. No ancient woodland, no Bronze Age 
burial mound is safe: unless it is protected by the kind of rules Osborne now 
wants to dismantle.

As for stimulating the economy, it's hard to see how the UK can win the race 
to the bottom to which he appears to have committed us. If this country tries 
to compete by tearing up the rules protecting workers, the unemployed, the 
environment and our quality of life, it will be worsted by China and 100 other 
nations with cheaper labour and laxer regulation than ours.

This seems obvious to everyone except ministers and officials. UK Trade and 
Investment, the government body which promotes this country to foreign 
investors,boasts that <http:> "compensation costs [ie wages] in the UK are less 
than most of the western European countries."It has 
<http://www.ukti.gov.uk/investintheuk/whytheuk.html> "one of the lowest main 
corporate tax rates in the EU, generous tax allowances and … low social welfare 
contributions." And "the UK's labour market is one of the world's most 
flexible." Come to Britain, where you can treat your workers like dirt.

In the wake of this autumn statement, perhaps UK Trade and Investment will now 
seek to entice investors away from Guangdong with the promise that there are 
tax breaks for the biggest polluters, no planning laws worth their name, and 
special access to ministers if you want to trash England's beauty spots.

Even if foreign investors can be persuaded that the rules are slacker in the 
Republic of Gideon than in the grimmest export-processing zones of the 
developing world, what does "winning" look like in these circumstances? A bit 
like winning a nuclear war? "Yes, our nation has been reduced to a charred 
desert. But we've come out on top*. Rejoice, just rejoice!

"*Customers should be aware that when, in the previous clause, the government 
states that "we" have come out on top, it is in fact referring to a subset of 
the population: namely those possessed of sufficient means to have invested in 
underground bunkers. The government cannot be held liable if the rest of the 
population experiences alternative results. If you are not fully satisfied with 
this outcome, please contact your nearest mortuary assistant."

In reality, the autumn statement, like much else that Osborne has delivered, 
has little to do with stimulating economic growth. It's about transferring even 
greater powers and resources from the rest of us to an economic elite, the kind 
of people Osborne hangs out with on Nat Rothschild's yacht. They are the only 
winners of the Chancellor's pyrrhic victories.

www.monbiot.com <http://www.monbiot.com>
 