
George Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> has backed 
Germany’s open-door policy towards refugees fleeing the Syrian conflict after 
meeting Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin.

Clooney and his human-rights lawyer wife, Amal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amal-alamuddin>, enjoyed a one-hour meeting 
with Merkel on Friday morning to discuss the ongoing crisis in the Middle East 
and the political reaction to it in Europe and elsewhere. Merkel has led 
Germany’s approach to the greatest movement of refugees since the second world 
war, which has resulted in Europe’s most populous nation taking innearly one in 
two of all asylum applications made by Syrians in EU member states last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/06/germany-imposes-surprise-curbs-on-syrian-refugees>
.

The actor, director and humanitarian, who was also due to meet refugees in 
Berlin, earlier told reporters: “I absolutely agree with her”.


The Clooneys were accompanied by David Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/23/david-miliband-george-amal-clooney-la-hillary-clinton>
, the former UK foreign secretary who is now head of the New York-based 
International Rescue Committee.Miliband told the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-35560492> the meeting involved 
discussing solutions to the “global problem” and praised Merkel for “showing 
very strong leadership” during the crisis.

George Clooney: film industry has been slow to respond to refugee crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/11/george-clooney-film-industry-has-been-slow-to-respond-to-refugee-crisis>
Clooney told the BBC last year 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-32791065> that he intended to do 
more to help the people of Syria, without becoming directly involved with 
politics, after his marriage to Lebanese-born Amal, née Alamuddin, gave him a 
new perspective on the country. The actor, a United Nations Messenger of Peace 
since 2008, has urged the US to take in more refugees.

Speaking on Thursday at the Berlin film festival, where he is currently 
promoting his role in the new Coen brothers film Hail, Caesar!,the actor 
admitted the world’s film industry takes too long 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/11/george-clooney-film-industry-has-been-slow-to-respond-to-refugee-crisis>
 to respond to humanitarian crises in the wider world.

“I’ve struggled to find ways to make a film about Sudan, about Darfur, 
something very close to me, and which I spend a lot of time on – but I haven’t 
been able to find the proper script,” he said. “It’s hard enough to find a good 
script for anything, and you don’t want to do it badly – because if you do you 
only get one chance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fgeorge-clooney-meets-angela-merkel-germany-support-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a16e10532d0c5247ae381b26bcd98cabca6a38f%2F0_0_2410_1447%2F2410.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Clooney%20meets%20Angela%20Merkel%20and%20backs%20Germany's%20support%20for%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fgeorge-clooney-meets-angela-merkel-germany-support-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Clooney%20meets%20Angela%20Merkel%20and%20backs%20Germany%27s%20support%20for%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fgeorge-clooney-meets-angela-merkel-germany-support-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a16e10532d0c5247ae381b26bcd98cabca6a38f%2F0_0_2410_1447%2F2410.jpg>
 George and Amal Clooney leave the chancellery in Berlin after the meeting. 
Photograph: Kay Nietfeld/AFP/Getty Images 
But the actor also reacted angrily to a reporter questioning his commitment to 
Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. “I spend a lot of my time 
working on these things,” he said. “And it’s an odd thing to have someone stand 
up and ask, ‘What are you doing about it?’”

Germany tightens refugee policy as Finland joins Sweden in deportations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/germany-tightens-borders-as-finland-joins-sweden-in-deporting-refugees>
The refugee crisis has been a major talking point in Berlin, with the city’s 
mayor, Michael Müller, telling audiences at the film festival that Germany 
should look to its past as it takes a stand on the issue. “Building new walls 
and barbed wire, shooting at refugees — these are messages that must never be 
transmitted from Germany ever, ever again,” he said.

Germany took in 1.1 million refugees in 2015, many of them fleeing the 
conflict in Syria. But the country’s attitude towards migrants appears to have 
hardened recently, with Merkel’s open-door policy under fire from opponents 
within her own conservative camp and outside. Last month Sigmar Gabriel, the 
German vice chancellor,announced the country was moving to place Algeria, 
Morocco and Tunisia on a list of “safe countries of origin” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/germany-tightens-borders-as-finland-joins-sweden-in-deporting-refugees>
 – meaning that migrants from those countries would have little chance of 
winning asylum. He also said some migrants would be blocked from bringing their 
families to join them in Germany for two years.
 