
A funny thing happened on the afternoon of the autumn statement. Barely had 
George Osborne sat down last week after announcing cuts in tax credit for 
children, and agiveaway to motorists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/29/george-osborne-child-tax-credit>
, than Treasury civil servants began claiming that the richest 10% of Britons 
would in fact be hit hardest. Ministers were still at it at the weekend 
claiming the budget was "fair". Their proof? Why, none other than an official 
budget appendix called Impact on households: Distributional analysis to 
accompany the Autumn Statement 2011 
<http://cdn.hm-treasury.gov.uk/as2011_distributional_analysis.pdf>. Except this 
wasn't solely an account of winners and losers from the mini-budget – but also 
counted some measures passed by Gordon Brown. Focus on Mr Osborne's own 
initiatives, as theInstitute for Fiscal Studies <http://www.ifs.org.uk/> did 
the next day, and you ended up with a package that hit the poorest hardest and 
put money in thepockets of the richest <http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/5930 
4>.

When it comes to measuring fairness, the coalition likes pulling that 
here's-something-Labour-prepared-earlier trick. Last summer the chancellor 
claimed his so-called emergency budget hit the rich hardest. That time, too, 
the IFS had to point out that that was only because of policies created by 
Alistair Darling, which the new government had accepted. On new measures, that 
budget was judged as regressive (as was the autumn spending review: one does 
not need to be a fashion editor to spot a trend here). Later, Nick Clegg wrote a
plaintive column 
<http://cachef.ft.com/cms/s/0/88da38b0-b090-11df-8c04-00144feabdc0.html#axzz1fOytgy9z>
 for the FT about the definitions of the word fairness.

Fine, but the terms regressive and progressive are not so slippery: they are 
about whether poor people are left financially worse or better off. And he and 
David Cameron have made plenty of claims to being progressives. Besides, does 
Mr Cameron really want to take credit for not reversing decisions made by 
previous governments? Follow that logic and you end up in the land of the 
absurd, with prime ministers taking credit for not abolishing the NHS.

This may look like an issue to do with tables and charts, but at heart it is 
about the trust voters place in politicians. The chancellor claims to "fit the 
budget to fit the figures, instead of fixing the figures to fit the budget". To 
help him achieve that laudable goal, let us propose a small but significant 
tweak: the independentOffice for Budget Responsibility 
<http://budgetresponsibility.independent.gov.uk/> should calculate who gains 
and who loses from each package of measures, and publish it on the same day. 
That should avoid political tricksiness and give voters an honest reading of 
the fairness of each budget. Not so long ago, Mr Osborne declared 
<http://www.demos.co.uk/press_releases/george-osborne-progressive-reform-in-an-age-of-austerity>
, "My politics are unapologetically progressive." Let's have an equally 
unapologetic gauge of that claim. It's only fair.
 