
The attorney general, George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, will face his 
second major parliamentary probe in a matter of months – this time, an inquiry 
into his actions in relation to the Bell Group controversy.


The Greens and Labor on Tuesday afternoon secured the requisite crossbench 
numbers to force an inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/29/australia-coalition-labor-turnbull-shorten-politics-live>
by the Senate’s legal and constitutional affairs references committee – a move 
following days of political controversy.


The new inquiry will also call the finance minister, Mathias Cormann, to give 
evidence.

Turnbull won't rule out ministerial reshuffle as Brandis comes under fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/turnbull-wont-rule-out-ministerial-reshuffle-as-brandis-comes-under-fire>
The investigation will examine conflicting accounts over whether or not there 
was a deal between the federal and West Australian governments in 2015 which 
would have cost the Australian Taxation Office $300m.

Brandis has faced political pressure this week after a report in the West 
Australian last Friday 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/wa/a/33318001/1-billion-bell-group-bombshell/#page1>
 alleged that the attorney general instructed the then solicitor general, 
Justin Gleeson, not to run a particular argument in the high court when a 
creditor of the collapsed Bell Group, which is associated with the 
controversial businessman Alan Bond, and its liquidator, challenged the 
constitutionality of a Western Australian law to take control of the group’s 
$1.8bn.

That report forced the attorney general to make a 30-minute statement to the 
Senate on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/george-brandis-joe-hockey-collapsed-bell-group-western-australia>
 outlining his actions in relation to the controversy.

Brandis told the Senate he did not believe there was a deal between the 
commonwealth and the Western Australian government over litigation surrounding 
the collapsed Bell Group – and if there was any such agreement, he had no 
knowledge of it.

The conversations with the WA government had been undertaken by the former 
treasurer,Joe Hockey <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joe-hockey>, 
now Australia’s ambassador in Washington, Brandis said.

Hockey, thus far, has declined to comment.

Brandis has 'thrown Hockey under a bus' over collapsed Bell Group, says Labor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/george-brandis-joe-hockey-collapsed-bell-group-western-australia>
The attorney general has refused to divulge the detail of his conversations 
with Gleeson over the related high court proceedings, citing legal professional 
privilege, but he told journalists on Monday he had not instructed Gleeson to 
run dead in the high court action.

As well as examining “the nature and scope of any agreement reached by the 
commonwealth and Western Australian governments in relation to the distribution 
of proceeds” of the Bell Group liquidation, the new inquiry will also examine 
the attorney general’s actions in relation to the solicitor general.

The terms of the motion passed by the Senate require the committee to examine 
“any direction or instruction given by the attorney general to the solicitor 
general, either directly or through his office or department, in relation to 
the conduct of litigation concerning the proceeds”.

The committee will also explore whether there is any connection between the 
Bell case and a controversial direction to the solicitor general issued by 
Brandis subsequently.

The legal services direction curtailed Gleeson’s capacity to provide 
independent advice, prompting a spectacular public blow-up between Australia’s 
first and second law officers,which culminated in Gleeson quitting his post. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/24/solicitor-general-justin-gleeson-quits-over-broken-relationship--george-brandis>

The new inquiry will project the Bell Group controversy into the new political 
year, because the inquiry has a reporting date of 21 March 2017.

Reshuffle speculation has been doing the rounds in Canberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/turnbull-wont-rule-out-ministerial-reshuffle-as-brandis-comes-under-fire>
 over this final parliamentary sitting week for 2016.

In question time on Tuesday, the prime minister was reminded by the ALP that 
exactly this time last year, Turnbull stood at the dispatch box and expressed 
full confidence in then ministers Jamie Briggs, Mal Brough and junior 
frontbencher Stuart Robert.

All of those MPs subsequently lost their frontbench spots.

The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, asked Malcolm Turnbull on Tuesday: “One year 
on, in the last week of this parliament for this year, will the prime minister 
express the same full confidence in the attorney general?”

The prime minister smiled before answering: “Of course I do.”

Labor and the Greens secured the support of One Nation’s Rod Culleton – who 
split with his fellow senators during the vote – the NXT bloc of three 
Senators, the Tasmanian independent Jacqui Lambie and the Justice party 
senator, Derryn Hinch, for the new inquiry.

The inquiry was opposed by the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition>, the remaining three One 
Nation senators and the Liberal Democratic party senator David Leyonhjelm.
 