
George Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> has said he 
believes it is up to society to elect politicians who it believes can give us 
all a brighter future.

The Hollywood heartthrob signed autographs and posed for selfies in Leicester 
Square on Sunday at the premiere of his new film,Tomorrowland: A World Beyond 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1k59gXTWf-A>.

The 54-year-old actor was joined on the red carpet by Hugh Laurie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/hugh-laurie>, who plays the villain 
in the Disney movie, and their young co-stars Britt Robertson and Raffey 
Cassidy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fgeorge-clooney-society-must-elect-politicians-who-can-make-things-better%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F17%2F1431889283663%2F117c6bae-5749-48a9-9566-4075082d430c-1401x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Clooney%3A%20society%20must%20elect%20politicians%20who%20can%20make%20things%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fgeorge-clooney-society-must-elect-politicians-who-can-make-things-better%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Clooney%3A%20society%20must%20elect%20politicians%20who%20can%20make%20things%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fgeorge-clooney-society-must-elect-politicians-who-can-make-things-better%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F17%2F1431889283663%2F117c6bae-5749-48a9-9566-4075082d430c-1401x2040.jpeg>
 Clooney with Tomorrowland co-stars Hugh Laurie and Britt Robertson. 
Photograph: Dave J Hogan/Getty Images 
The sci-fi adventure, directed by Brad Bird 
<http://screenrant.com/incredibles-2-brad-bird-story-challenges-superheroes/>, 
was inspired by the futuristic Tomorrowland attractions at the Disney theme 
parks and Walt Disney’svision of a utopian future 
<http://nypost.com/2015/05/16/how-walt-disneys-obsession-with-futurism-inspired-tomorrowland/>
.

Clooney plays Frank Walker, a former boy-genius inventor who has become 
pessimistic about the future of the world, until he teams up with a teenage 
girl who is determined to save it.

Clooney, who is rumoured to be planning a move into US politics, said: “I do 
believe that’s how we work it out – politicians are elected by us, so we as a 
collective can always make things better, and we always have.

“I really do believe that every time things seem very bleak – and I believe 
that they look very bleak right now – we figure it out. We have to, that’s how 
society moves forwards.”

Clooney, who married human rights lawyer Amal Alamuddin 
<http://www.legal500.com/firms/9303-/offices/9303-london/lawyers/96127> last 
year, said he feels happier about life since tying the knot. “I’m a happily 
married man,” he said. “I’m very happy.” But he dodged any questions about 
starting a family of his own.

Actor, comedian and blues singer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0rHKdaLfIew> 
Laurie, 55, plays scientist David Nix, the villainous scientist who has given 
up on the world. But Laurie revealed he has become a more optimistic person as 
he grows older.

He said: “For me, it was the other way round. I was a rather gloomy sort of 
kid and I think I’ve got more optimistic as the years have gone by. It’s partly 
an effort of will. I think, to a degree, we all have the power to change it: 
what we think about the future and what we think about the world. I’m trying as 
hard as I can to be a sunnier person than I was.”

 * Tomorrowland: A World Beyond is released in UK cinemas on 22 May.
 