
Geraint Thomas cracked in the final ascent of Paris-Nice but pulled himself 
together in the descent to hold offAlberto Contador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador> by four seconds and secure 
his biggest road racing victory.

The Team Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> rider, who was 
dropped in the ascent of the Col d’Èze, managed to reduce the gap during the 
nail-biting descent to the Promenade des Anglais at the end of the final stage, 
a 134km hilly ride around Nice won by the Belgian Tim Wellens.

Paris-Nice cyclists call it a day on Beaujolais stage because of snow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/09/paris-nice-cyclists-beaujolais-snow-abandoned>
Spain’s Contador took second place on the day ahead of the Australian Richie 
Porte, third overall and 12 seconds behind, with Thomas finishing in the second 
group five seconds off the pace.

The Welshman had started the day with a 15-second advantage over Contador, who 
earned a six-second bonus with his second place.

“I felt good, I felt strong, in control [when Contador first attacked],” 
Thomas said. “But when he went halfway up Col d’Èze, my legs went away. I 
thought: ‘It’s going to be all over’ but Sergio Henao stayed with me. I had a 
54-chain ring on in the descent and I needed that; I went just full gas to 
finally catch up in the last few kilometres.”

Thomas’s win means Sky have won the prestigious Paris-Nice race for a fourth 
time in five yearsafter Bradley Wiggins prevailed in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/mar/12/paris-nice-tour-de-france-bradley-wiggins>
 and Porte, now at BMC Racing, triumphedin 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/10/richie-porte-chris-froome-team-sky>
 andlast year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/15/richie-porte-paris-nice-geraint-thomas>
.

“It’s incredible to beat Contador. Man, he is one of the best stage racers 
ever. Richie won last year. It’s hard to believe I beat those two. It’s the 
biggest win for sure of my whole career,” said Thomas, who joins Wiggins and 
Tom Simpson as the only British winners of the race.

Contador, a seven-times grand tour champion aiming for a third Tour de France 
title in his final season, is a bold rider and he proved it once again. While 
most would wait for the last climb to try their luck, the Tinkoff rider 
attacked with 50km left. He made his move in the category-one Côte de Peille, 
opening a one-minute gap before being helped by his team-mates Robert 
Kiserlovski and Yuri Trofimov, who let themselves drop out of the early 
breakaway group. Sky chased them hard, however, and they were reined in just 
before the foot of the Col d’Èze.

Contador attacked four times without managing to shake off Thomas, who stayed 
in his team-mate Henao’s wheel. However, the Spaniard’s fifth attack, in the 
last steep part of the ascent, was too much to handle for the Welshman, who 
cracked and reached the top more than 20 seconds behind.

Only Porte could follow Contador and the pair caught the last survivor of the 
morning’s breakaway, Wellens, who won the stage in a three-man sprint.

Thomas rode himself into the ground, though, to preserve his yellow jersey 
while being helped throughout by Henao. 
 