
I read with interest the letters published on 2 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/01/peace-symbol-sketches-reveal-gerald-holtom-thinking>
 about Gerald Holtom (Peace symbol sketches reveal artist’s thinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/01/peace-symbol-sketches-reveal-gerald-holtom-thinking>
). Gerald was my great-uncle, and our family (now spread out over the country 
and further afield) very much agree with Ian Jack (The peace sign made it from 
Finsbury Park to Paris. Its creator should be honoured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/28/shouldnt-british-designer-gerard-holtom-of-peace-symbol-be-commemorated-paris-attacks>
, 28 November) and the other contributors on the idea of creating some sort of 
a memorial for him.

I found out from Ian’s article that the offices where Gerald first showed the 
design are around the corner from my flat in Finsbury Park. I have been in 
touch with some local residents who have already started to make a case for 
a memorial plaque to the council.

Eiffel Tower meets peace sign in show of solidarity after attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/eiffel-tower-peace-sign-solidarity-paris-artwork>
I don’t remember Gerald because I was only two or three when he died, but 
there are many stories; he was quite a character. I remember his daughters Anna 
and Rebecca (my dad’s cousins) at various times explaining the thought process 
behind the symbol’s design. As mentioned in one letter, Gerald was always 
adamant that the upside-down cross and any anti-religious sentiment read into 
the symbol was accidental. It was simply based on man, arms outstretched 
downwards, in deep despair.

Having recently become more active in the anti-war movement, I understand that 
despair at humanity and longing for a conflict-free world more than ever now. 
I’m proud that the symbol has become such a universal sign of hope and peace. 
Remembering its designer seems timely and right.
Rosie Holtom
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 