
Gerhard Richter and Arvo Pärt, two of the world’s most influential and 
important living artists, have made work inspired by and dedicated to the 
other, which will be shown and performed together for the first time at this 
year’sManchester international festival <http://www.mif.co.uk/>.


The project, announced on Thursday in Manchester, brings together the 
83-year-old German Richter, whose work hasrepeatedly set record auction prices 
for a living artist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/11/gerhard-richters-abstraktes-bild-sells-for-a-record-breaking-30m-in-london>
, with the 79-year-old Estonian Pärt, the world’s most performed living 
composer.

Five new works by Richter will be shown at the Whitworth Gallery during the 
July festival. At the same time visitors will hear a new composition by Pärt 
called Drei Hirtenkinder aus Fátima.


The Richter/Pärt project was announced as part of the 2015 programme that will 
also feature musicians FKA twigs and Björk; actorsMaxine Peake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/maxine-peake> and Charlotte Rampling; and 
artists Douglas Gordon and Ed Atkins.

The biennial festival is having its fifth edition in July, the final one for 
its founding director Alex Poots.

Poots said he and colleague Hans-Ulrich Obrist brought Richter and Pärt 
together in the autumn of 2013 and waited to see what might happen. Thankfully, 
they got on although it was not until four months ago that they heard news that 
the project was going to work.

“It took nearly nine months to get them to meet because who goes to visit who 
when you are that kind of artist, at that age and of that giant status?”

Poots called it, “possibly the most ambitious pairing of artists that MIF has 
yet presented. These giants of their artforms have between them experienced and 
reflected some of the key moments of the 20th century, and we are profoundly 
grateful to them for the opportunity to see and hear the results of their 
creative friendship.”

The Richter works will be in the newly renovated landscape gallery of the 
Whitworth <http://www.whitworth.manchester.ac.uk/> and the Pärt work will be 
sang byVox Clamantis <http://www.voxclamantis.ee/>, an Estonian choir, between 
9 and 11 July and local choirs from 12 to 19 July.

The festival, 18 days of new commissions and often surprising collaborations, 
will feature work by artists MIF has worked with before.

That includes the actor Maxine Peake, returning to the festival after her 
sensational performance in The Masque of Anarchy in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jul/14/the-machine-masque-of-anarchy-review>
. This time it was Peake and director Sarah Frankcom who pitched pitched direct 
to Poots the idea of staging Caryl Churchill’s play The Skriker, which 
premiered at the National Theatre in 1994 with Kathryn Hunter as an ancient 
fairy and modern shape-shifting evil spirit.

The new Skriker will feature specially commissioned music by Nico Muhly and 
Antony, best known as lead singer of Antony and the Johnsons.

Frankcom said it was a play that felt it was for now. “It feels very propehtic 
about climate change and a lot of things Caryl describes are part and parcel of 
the world we live in. Extreme weather, problems with food supply, deforestation.

“They were ideas that fuelled the writing, now they are what we are living 
with.

“It is one of Churchill’s most startling adventures in pushing the form of 
theatre itself, in redefining what a play can be.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fgerhard-richter-and-arvo-part-combine-for-manchester-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F658c6bc80515359a4ef3cc6481bf228cca5b1fa0%2F0_138_3406_2042%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gerhard%20Richter%20and%20Arvo%20P%C3%A4rt%20combine%20for%20Manchester%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fgerhard-richter-and-arvo-part-combine-for-manchester-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gerhard%20Richter%20and%20Arvo%20P%C3%A4rt%20combine%20for%20Manchester%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fgerhard-richter-and-arvo-part-combine-for-manchester-international-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F658c6bc80515359a4ef3cc6481bf228cca5b1fa0%2F0_138_3406_2042%2F2000.jpg>
 Björk will perform tracks from her album Vulnicura. Photograph: Dominique 
Faget/AFP/Getty Images 
Another returnee will be Björk <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bjork>, with 
a one-off gig at the city’s Castlefield Arena featuring music from Vulnicura, 
her latest album.

FKA twigs <https://www.theguardian.com/music/fka-twigs> will be resident for 
seven days in Manchester’s Old Granada studios with small audiences invited in 
to watch her make seven short films which Poots likened to art videos.

It will be as much about seeing the artistic process, said Poots, a big fan of 
the 27-year-old singer who was nominated last year in the BBC’s Sound of 2014 
poll. “It is incredibly rare to find an artist who is as talented and 
innovative in music making and performance as film making and creative 
direction.”


Collaborations will include one between the Turner prize-winning artist 
Douglas Gordon and the pianist and ardent wolf conservationist Hélène Grimaud. 
The production, Neck of the Woods, will be a fusion of visual art, theatre and 
music presenting a portrait of the wolf, withCharlotte Rampling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlotte-rampling> appearing as the show’s 
“raconteur”.

A new work called The Immortal by Mark Simpson, one of the UK’s brightest 
young composers, will be performed by the BBC Philharmonic at the Bridgewater 
Hall.

The festival, for which the Guardian is media partner, has already announced a 
new Damon Albarn musical called Wonderland. Written by Moira Buffini and 
directed by Rufus Norris, the production is a digital age work inspired by 
Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland, and it will later go on to be the National 
Theatre’s Christmas show.

There will also be the festival’s first ballet, Tree of Codes, a collaboration 
between Wayne McGregor, Olafur Eliasson and Jamie xx. And for children, Mr 
Tumble, the Cbeebies superstar, will be live on stage.

A particularly eyecatching production called Age of Starlight, which had been 
the festival’s most technologically advanced and highest-risk commission, will 
not be ready in time for this year, said Poots.

Manchester International Festival runs 2-19 July.
 