
Germany’s best-selling newspaper has removed all pictures from its print 
edition and website in response to complaints about its decision to publish 
images of the three-year-old Syrian refugee who drowned trying to reach Greece.

A statement from Bild says the photo of Alan Kurdi, who died last week along 
with his mother and five year old brother, “caused dismay and compassion” and 
“rattled a million people awake”.

It likened the images of the boy, who was initially named by Turkish officials 
as Aylan, to the famous photo of a Vietnamese girl running from a napalm strike 
during the Vietnam war, adding: “The world must see the truth in order to 
change.”

Will the image of a lifeless boy on a beach change the refugee debate?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/sep/03/will-the-image-of-a-lifeless-boy-on-a-beach-change-the-refugee-debate>
Kai Diekmann (@KaiDiekmann) 
Warum @BILD <https://twitter.com/BILD> heute keine Bilder zeigt! 
http://t.co/qWQ9Z1OkbR <http://t.co/qWQ9Z1OkbR> pic.twitter.com/SXY9DoXgj2 
<http://t.co/SXY9DoXgj2>
 <https://twitter.com/KaiDiekmann/status/641113334629183488> September 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/KaiDiekmann/status/641113334629183488> 
The decision to remove pictures in print and online comes less than a week 
after the newspaper dedicated its whole back page to the distressing image of 
Alan lying face down on the beach in Bodrum, surrounded by a black background 
and a plea for action fromEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>
.
Nick Sutton (@suttonnick) 
This is what the text under the photo says in English #tomorrowspaperstoday 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tomorrowspaperstoday?src=hash> #bbcpapers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/bbcpapers?src=hash> via @tanit 
<https://twitter.com/tanit> pic.twitter.com/sLk4ePEiB0 <http://t.co/sLk4ePEiB0>
 <https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/639212383173484544> September 2, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/639212383173484544> 
The images of Alan have helped shift debate across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/sep/03/will-the-image-of-a-lifeless-boy-on-a-beach-change-the-refugee-debate>
 and contributed to a public outcry over the plight of refugees trying to reach 
the continent.


However, they have also caused controversy, with numerous papers including the 
Guardian choosing to print a picture of a policeman cradling the dead child on 
their front pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/sep/03/will-the-image-of-a-lifeless-boy-on-a-beach-change-the-refugee-debate>
 rather than the image him lying face down on the beach.

The Independent was the only UK paper to choose the more distressing image of 
Alan for its front page.

Independent editor Amol Rajan defended the use of the picture on Saturday, 
writing: “Ultimately, we felt – and still do – that the power to shock is a 
vital instrument of journalism, and therefore democracy. Our motivation wasn’t 
avaricious; it was to shock the world into action.”

 * This article was amended on 7 September 2015 to correct the boy’s name to 
the Kurdish spelling of Alan, not Aylan as initially given by Turkish officials.
 