
Ivan Rogers has a reputation in Brussels not only as a knowledgable, 
accomplished diplomat with decades of EU expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
, but as a decent man. It is no secret that he opposed Brexit, and seems to 
have doubted the government’s ability to deliver it smoothly. It perhaps did 
not help that the UK permanent representation to the EU had been transferred 
from the auspices of theForeign Office to the Department for Exiting the EU 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-36985175>; or that after Brexit, the UK 
ambassador to the EU, having formerly taken a leading role at the EU table, 
would no longer be invited into the room.

UK ambassador's exit is 'wilful destruction of EU expertise'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
Following his abrupt departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/brexit-ivan-rogers>, and 
despite what many claim, the government’s immediate problem is not how to find 
a successor with Rogers’ skills or expertise. (Despite the shock and dismay in 
many EU capitals at the lack of preparedness for Brexit within Whitehall, 
Britain’s diplomatic corps is still regarded by other countries as a 
Rolls-Royce outfit, and boasts numerous qualified candidates.) Rather, it will 
be to square the circle of recruiting an EU insider with the stomach to face 
off against peers and friends at the Brexit negotiating table, in the service 
of a task he or she is unlikely to support.

Worrying implications of EU ambassador exit | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/worrying-implications-of-eu-ambassador-exit>
The alternative would be to appoint an expert official sympathetic to Brexit, 
but who can command the necessary trust and respect among fellow EU negotiators 
to deliver a workable deal within the limited time frame. Whoever is appointed 
should still be a known quantity with an intimate knowledge of the labyrinthine 
Brussels corridors: now is no time for the initiation of an enthusiastic 
beginner.

Unlike many Brexiteers, who still assume and assert that the negotiations will 
be based on trade and economics alone, the new ambassador must understand the 
deeply political and emotional underpinnings of the EU as it is experienced in 
so many of the other member states. While attempting to explain what Britain 
wants, and why it wants it – two things still far from understood in Brussels 
and national capitals – the representative also needs to emphasise Britain’s 
willingness to listen to its partners, and make compromises for their benefit 
as well as its own. If these requirements are not carefully fulfilled, and 
Britain arrogantly demands a solely mercantilist approach to the negotiations, 
then acrimony – and potentially economic disaster – could follow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fivan-rogers-wrong-successor-eu-ambassador-brexit-disaster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fa0df309d1c8cf051ce9ac138f225830384aad9%2F18_0_5083_3050%2F5083.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ivan%20Rogers%E2%80%99%20successor%2C%20and%20Brexit%20disaster%20could%20follow%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Lis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fivan-rogers-wrong-successor-eu-ambassador-brexit-disaster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ivan%20Rogers%E2%80%99%20successor%2C%20and%20Brexit%20disaster%20could%20follow%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Lis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fivan-rogers-wrong-successor-eu-ambassador-brexit-disaster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fa0df309d1c8cf051ce9ac138f225830384aad9%2F18_0_5083_3050%2F5083.jpg>
 Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator. ‘We can rest assured that on 
the other side, Barnier will be up to the task.’ Photograph: Thierry Monasse/AP 
The resignation of Rogers comes at a particularly precarious time in UK/EU 
relations. Britain is painfully short of allies. Even our best friends in the 
EU are saying behind closed doors that they like Britain and want us to 
succeed, but that ultimately the survival of the EU – the guarantor, as they 
see it, of prosperity, freedom and identity – must take priority.

Sir Ivan Rogers’ sudden departure is a hit to Theresa May’s Brexit plans | 
Matthew d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/brexit-ivan-rogers> 
Rogers was useful in soothing fears, but even longstanding colleagues 
suspected the British strategy was to play allies off against one another in 
order to break the EU27’s apparently united front. His successor will face the 
same suspicions, but potentially not the same benefit of the doubt. If things 
get off to a bad start, the isolation could be more awkward – and more damaging 
– than anything experienced by Theresa May in thatexcruciating appearance at 
the European council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/21/theresa-may-awkward-eu-meeting-sees-little-progress-on-brexit>
.

The greatest risk, both to the government and the negotiations, is that Rogers 
is replaced by a yes-man (or woman), afraid to speak truthfully or plainly for 
fear of upsetting the bosses. Brexit can be achieved, but only if the 
challenges are explicitly exposed, analysed and interrogated at every turn. We 
can rest assured that on the other side, thecommission’s negotiator, Michel 
Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/eus-chief-divorce-negotiator-michel-barnier-to-make-first-brexit-statement>
, will be up to the task.

As the old saying goes, Britain needs friends in order to wield influence. 
Ivan Rogers had both. We must hope that his successor brings similar incisive 
knowledge, and affability.

• Catch up on our discussion about this article in the Your Opinions thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/your-opinions-ivan-rogers-brexit-successor-southern-trains-crisis>
.
 