
My first memory is of music. I’m two-and-a-half, standing on a stool in my 
grandmother’s kitchen; she has let me help her wash the dishes, which is quite 
the grown-up honour. I am spinning records in the sink – essentially circling 
the water with a cleaning brush – because the music on the radio has moved me 
so much. “Trou-per-per! Trou-per-per!” the song goes, brightly. I am shining 
like the sun, feeling like a number one.

On that dull autumn afternoon, in a small Swansea scullery, began a little 
girl’s 35-year (to date) love affair with ABBA, and a connection withSuper 
Trouper <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BshxCIjNEjY> that would grow through 
her life (Teens: wow, it’s about touring! Twenties: it’s about the essential 
melancholy of fame! Thirties: God, how did they all cope doing songs like this 
while they were divorcing?).

Yes, that was me, but what do today’s kids think of pop? Are they more jaded 
and cynical because they have unlimited access to music? Or do their hearts 
still burst at the sound of a kick-drum, a synthesiser, a song?

The sharing of pop between the generations these days is a much bigger deal

I’ve just written a book for young kids called Pop! 
<http://fishertonpress.co.uk/pop/>, about the capacities this music can have, 
and the things it can do. I did it because I had a baby a few years ago, and 
felt my relationship to music go through a seismic shift. I wasn’t having much 
fun: I was often sleep-deprived, and covered with Calpol or dribble, so I’d 
listen constantly to nostalgia radio stations, seeking out old favourite songs, 
and singing their lyrics directly, soppily, to my son. An old primary school 
disco favourite took on a new, rosy glow (thanks Yazz:“The only way is up, 
baby, for you and me now” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UtKADQnjQmc>). A 
song I’d first loved on the soundtrack ofDirty Dancing now meant something 
quite different (bless the Ronettes’Be My Baby 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jrVbawRPO7I>). I wanted to play these songs to 
my son (now 21 months) because they gave me comfort, of course, but I also 
wanted to enjoy his primal reactions to them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fgetting-down-with-the-kids-children-review-pop-music-next-big-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67061ff840994e88fb868393eb8a02f5289fc894%2F0_133_2736_1642%2F2736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Getting%20down%20with%20the%20kids%3A%20children%20review%20music%E2%80%99s%20top%20tips%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fgetting-down-with-the-kids-children-review-pop-music-next-big-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Getting%20down%20with%20the%20kids%3A%20children%20review%20music%E2%80%99s%20top%20tips%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fgetting-down-with-the-kids-children-review-pop-music-next-big-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67061ff840994e88fb868393eb8a02f5289fc894%2F0_133_2736_1642%2F2736.jpg>
 Abba in concert, 1979: (l-r) Björn Ulvaeus, Agnetha Faltskog, Anni-Frid 
Lyngstad and Benny Andersson. Photograph: Sipa Press / Rex Features 
They took a while, but they came. His first proper, joyful wriggle? To 
something that I loved in my teens: Future Sound of London’sPapua New Guinea 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wfWMv8Y1V5E> (he’s clearly a raver). One of 
his first standing-up dances? To the Archies’ bubblegum pop hitSugar, Sugar 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h9nE2spOw_o> (he loves something with a 
handclap). His first vocal response? To the Beatles’She Loves You 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QoF-7VMMihA>. “Yeah, yeah, yeah, Mammy!”, he 
said, just the other week. “Yeah, yeah, yeah!” It may sound pretentious, but 
one of the ideas behind my book was to give pop the credit it deserves as an 
art form that moves us. As I write in the book, people can use pop “to express 
their feelings about all the things happening in their lives”.

This also went for the way I was feeling. My listening habits in my son’s 
early months transported me to the easier days of my childhood, but also to pop 
stars who opened my mind, widened my eyes, pumped my heart – larger-than-life 
creatures such as Adam Ant, Boy George, and, yes, David Bowie, who took me by 
the hand, and showed me a wider, bolder world. More than anything, I wanted to 
let children know that pop, at its best, is about self-expression, and that it 
“lets you be whomever you want to be”.

So what would children make of the crop of 2016’s most-likely-tos, the artists 
filling all those one-to-watch lists? On a Saturday morning atObserver HQ, I 
get six- and seven-year-olds Bert, Juno, Xavier, Pearl and Jack to talk to me 
about pop and rate tracks by five rising stars (results on the panel over the 
page). Be warned: they’re a discerning bunch of critics. OK, they’re not great 
at spotting instruments or accents, and things can get a little chaotic (the 
idea that Jack Garratt was a carrot was a difficult concept to shake from 
them), but for stinging responses and irreverent comment, they’re your gang. 
Their tastes are often split on gender lines (dispiritingly common at this age, 
according to their parents), something also reflected in their favourite songs. 
The boys all loveEverything Is Awesome 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=StTqXEQ2l-Y> from The Lego Movie (“BECAUSE 
IT’S AWE-SUMMMMM!”, they explain, jumping off their chairs, screaming). The 
girls adore Katy Perry’sRoar <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CevxZvSJLk8> 
(Juno: “because it’s bouncy” ) and theFrozen soundtrack’s Let It Go 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CevxZvSJLk8> (Pearl: “my mum said to me the 
other day, ‘Can we turn this off now?’”).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DStTqXEQ2l-Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DStTqXEQ2l-Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DStTqXEQ2l-Y&media=>
 Everything Is Awesome by Tegan and Sara featuring The Lonely Island, a popular 
track among the boys. 
The girls take the reviewing task seriously, and whisper their ideas to each 
other. The boys try to impress each other, and affect suspicion of “quiet, 
pretty music” (although I spot their heads nodding when I’m not looking). 
Everyone also seems to like music their parents like, which wasn’t always the 
way for my generation (I liked my mum’s Beatles tapes, but thought David Essex 
was awful). This panel’s parents had a much broader musical education, though, 
mainly because of their age. They grew up with acid house and Britpop, hip-hop 
and heavy metal, and most likely spent their teenage years reading music 
magazines that taught them, lengthily, about the past.

Favourites of the panel today include Björk, the Bangles and Arctic Monkeys. 
Juno even comes along listening to a Spotify playlist, featuring Steve Miller 
Band’sThe Joker <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PmVusVh4TRQ> and Cliff 
Richard’sDevil Woman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7tuAkdlLhTE>. But when 
the children are asked why they like things, they’re not always sure. I was 
like this at their age: I remember falling in love with Wham!’sFreedom 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BFwOs-jy53A> when I was six, without 
understanding it, only knowing that the bit that went “you know that I’ll 
forgive you/just this once, twice, forever” put butterflies in my tummy. Years 
later, I know how that song references Motown, how descending basslines push 
emotional buttons, and how hugely yearning those lyrics are. But most 
importantly: those butterflies are still there.

While I fondly remember enjoying 60s cassettes in the car with my mum, the 
sharing of pop between the generations these days is a much bigger deal. My 
bum-wiggling toddler and I have attended countless classes led by 
long-suffering musicians with a keen eye on extra income (although watching a 
room full of babies shake rattles to La Bamba and We Will Rock You is quite fun 
for parents, admittedly). I’ve also DJed several times forBig Fish Little Fish 
<http://www.bigfishlittlefishevents.co.uk/>, the national music and events crew 
who put on unpretentious “family raves” on Sunday afternoons (their brilliant 
slogan: “2-4 hour party people”). It is run by ex-senior civil servant, Hannah 
Saunders, who gave up a 20-year career to set it up, a career change which 
reminds us that we’ve entered a new age for parenting: one in which mums and 
dads are allowed to have as much fun as their offspring.

Pop is also about dancing, of course, and vivid, physical reactions. This is 
what I will remember most warmly from our perky pop panel: the arms flailing, 
the kids windmilling so unguardedly, so joyfully. But I’ll also remember their 
little reactions about melancholy, and the elaborate, silly stories they 
concocted, as small songs set off their imaginations in a million directions. 
By the end of our hour, Pearl and Juno had even decided to form a band and held 
their first meeting behind an executive chair (“Go away, Dad!”, Juno’s father 
was told when he tried to take her home). Who knows? In 35 years’ time, they 
may still have a special memory to relate, and a shared love of certain songs 
that have changed and grown with them. Either way, they’re super troupers, 
every one.

Pop! by Jude Rogers and Alex Farebrother-Naylor is out now (Fisherton Press 
£6.99) <http://fishertonpress.co.uk/pop/>

Jack Garratt – Worry

(Island Records)

Post Ed-Sheeran, eElectronica-drizzled, beardy singer-songwriter of the 
moment. BBC Sound Of 2016 winner
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhFP3qh1x1Zo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhFP3qh1x1Zo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhFP3qh1x1Zo&media=>
[Uproarious laughter from all the children as soon as song starts]

Jack: Jack Garratt? He’s a carrot!

Xavier: And he sounds like a carrot! Carrots are boring.

Pearl: [sensibly]: He sounds like he’s sleeping.

It’s not working for me because I worry about everything
Bert 
Juno: [thoughtfully]: It doesn’t sound happy or sad. It sounds in the middle 
between happy and sad. And his voice is a bit funny. He’s all up and down. I 
think he’s singing to the audience because he’s worried and he wants help.

Bert: It’s too peaceful.

Jack: He sounds weird. Like a drunk carrot.

Pearl: It sounds a bit like rap at the end. I like rap. Rap is really fast.

Xavier: He’s crazy like a carrot.

Bert: [talking about the title] It’s not working for me because I worry about 
lots of things.

Pearl: I’d like some more rap.

Juno: [thoughtfully]: He sounds more like broccoli to me.

Bert: 0, Jack: 0, Juno: 3, Pearl: 4, Xavier: 0

TOTAL: 7/25

Rat Boy – Sign On

(Parlophone)

Jamie T-style tearaway indie-punk, with; lyrics about Wetherspoons and the 
lottery
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaBEELDNwa-4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaBEELDNwa-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaBEELDNwa-4&media=>
Jack: Is his first name Rat?

Bert: It sounds like he’s driving fast to work, driving in his car.

Xavier: The song goes like this [jumps up, mimes steering wheel manoeuvres of 
Formula 1 winner].

Maybe he’s driving fast because he was late to steal from the bank
Jack 
Bert: I think he sounds like he’s going to the beach.

Jack: Or going to the bank.

Juno: Maybe there’s a fire at his home ‘cos it’s really, really fast. It’s 
bouncy.

[They are asked where he sounds like he’s from]

Bert: America?

Pearl: South America.

Jack: Norway.

Juno: [sensibly] Scotland.

Pearl: It’s got big, big drums and electric guitars. He sounds old, like he’s 
from the 70s. Like ABBA, but different. I like ABBA.

Juno: It’s too noisy for me.

Jack: I like it because it sounds violent.

Xavier: [hears lyric] Maybe he’s stealing from the bank?

Jack: Maybe he’s driving fast because he was late to steal from the bank, 
because he was sleeping in the pub, because he was so drunk.

Bert: 4, Jack: 4, Juno: 2, Pearl: 5, Xavier: 4

TOTAL: 19/25




Billie Marten – As Long As 

(Sony/Chess Club)

Sensitively intelligent acoustic ballad by 16-year-old singer-songwriter
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUeGJ23hXwuA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUeGJ23hXwuA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUeGJ23hXwuA&media=>
Juno: It reminds me of It’s Oh So Quiet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=htobTBlCvUU>. I like that song. I like the bit 
where she shouts “Zing-boom”.

Xavier: [grumpy] It’s a zero.

She’s a kid! A baby goat. She sounds a bit like a goat
Xavier 
Bert: Minus zero.

Jack: Zero, zero, zero. It’s too peaceful. It sounds like a rabbit. A really 
peaceful rabbit.

Juno: I think it sounded like a flower.

Jack: A rabbit at night, jumping around quietly, trying to find its food 
without the foxes eating it.

Xavier: It sounds like someone I met with a very weird voice. Or a violin 
singing.

Pearl: Or a butterfly. It reminds me of Silent Night, like a song to help you 
go to sleep. It has a nice guitar, like a lullaby. I think she sounds pretty.

Juno: I think she’s an old lady.

[They are told her age]

Xavier: She’s a kid! A baby goat. She sounds a bit like a goat [quietly makes 
goat noise].

Bert: 0, Jack: 0, Juno: 5, Pearl: 5, Xavier: 0

TOTAL: 10/25

Blossoms – At Most a Kiss

 (Virgin EMI)

Synthy guitar-rock from five young overcoat-endorsing northerners
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5VXvOJ6b12k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5VXvOJ6b12k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5VXvOJ6b12k&media=>
[The kids are told the title]

All the boys: URRGGGGGGH!!!

Jack: I hate kissing!

Bert: YUCK! [sticks fingers in his ears. Juno and Pearl are dancing around 
smiling]

Pearl: This would be good at a roller disco. It’s fast and loud. It needs some 
more rap.

I think he sounds stinky
Juno 
Juno: It’s a bit crazy.

Xavier: [listens grudgingly] It’s an electric piano, I think. [copies sci-fi 
riff] Dun-dun-dun-dun-DUN!

Jack: I’d like to listen to this if there was a future world war.

Juno: It’s jazz. It’s very noisy and a bit bouncy. 

Pearl: I reckon the person who makes it is a bit ugly.

Bert: And wears grey glasses.

Juno: I think he sounds a bit stinky.

Xavier: I think he’s got a funny moustache.

Bert: 1, Jack: 3, Juno: 5, Pearl: 5, Xavier: 2

TOTAL: 16/25

Lizzo – BGSW

(BGSW Records)

Riot grrrl-influenced, Prince-endorsed rapper, with a bark as loud as her bite

[Song begins slow and soulful, then explodes into a fast, starkly accompanied 
rap]

Bert: The start is weird. I felt there was nothing inside me.

Juno: I like the slow bit, middle bit, and the fast!

Jack: I hated the start when it was quiet. The loud bit, I liked.

She sounds like she’s in a space rocket and she can’t talk properly
Pearl 
Bert: It’s like a snail that goes really slow, then really fast and crashes 
into a car.

Jack: Maybe it’s a snail that’s had fast potion poured on it.

Pearl: I like that it stopped for a second, then started again. 

Jack: She’s angry because she’s shouty.

Pearl: She thinks she’s like a boy, because she’s doing lots of shouting. But 
I like it.

Bert: Maybe she’s a girl snail that’s so angry that she jumps into the middle 
of the Earth and explodes.

Pearl: She sounds like she’s in a space rocket and she can’t talk properly, 
then she’s shouting in space. It’s a bit of a joke, because she was only 
pretending she can’t speak, so that’s why she shouts. Like this bit! [entire 
room breaks out in dancing]

Bert: 5, Jack: 5, Juno: 5, Pearl: 5, Xavier: 5

TOTAL: 25 (WINNER!)
 