
I bet I'm not the only horror fan who is fed up with watching people tied to 
chairs and tortured, or couples terrorised by home invaders, or characters 
dying in grisly ways you can't see properly because their camcorder got dropped 
on its side.Horror <https://www.theguardian.com/film/horror> films, which don't 
require stars or lavish spectacle, remain one of the cheapest and easiest 
routes for first-timers to break into movie-making, but I wish more of them 
would realise there are creatures even cheaper and easier than zombies. Ghosts!

Perhaps it's wishful thinking on my part, but there seem to have been a few 
more things going bump in the night lately. For a while, it was Hispanic 
film-makers carrying the torch with films such as The Others, The Devil's 
Backbone and The Orphanage. But Nick Murphy'sThe Awakening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143146/awakening>, co-written with 
Stephen Volk, brings the haunted house back to Britain. It's set after the 
Great War; professional debunker Rebecca Hall is summoned to a boys' school to 
disprove the existence of a restless spirit, leading to (give or take the odd 
bit of CGI) a full complement of minimalist movie haunting – strange noises, 
barely glimpsed figures, and the "Lewton bus", the sort of fake scare named 
after a moment in the Val Lewton-produced Cat People (1942) in which an already 
nervous heroine is startled by a bus suddenly drawing up in front of her.

The problem with ghosts is that cinema is often thought of (understandably but 
erroneously) as a purely visual medium, leading to film-makers assuming they 
have no choice but to pile on the special effects. But ghosts, unlike other 
movie monsters, are arguably more frightening when they're unseen or, at most, 
only glanced at. Exhibits One and Two in this thesis are the contrasting 
adaptations of Shirley Jackson's The Haunting of Hill House. Robert Wise's 1963
The Haunting <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/99697/haunting> is an 
exemplary study in the deployment of noise, shadow and camera angle to reduce 
even the most sceptical spectator (that would be me) to a state of whimpering 
terror. Jan de Bont's 1999 "remake", on the other hand, piles on revolving 
rooms, collapsing staircases, possessed bedlinen, haunted hair-dos and doughy 
CGI apparitions to tiresome and ultimately somniferous effect. There's a time 
and place for the carnival funhouse, and I'm sorry, but Jackson's story isn't 
it.

Jim Sheridan's Dream House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142927/dream-house> promises to be 
another haunted-house story but screws the pooch with the reveal (it's inthe 
trailer <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XFxIYqcmRxc>!) that the phantoms are 
all in Daniel Craig's mind. I prefer the unapologetically supernatural 
shenanigans ofInsidious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141338/insidious>, which (like Dead 
Silence) suggests James Wan and Leigh Whannell might be more at home with 
spooky noises, faces at the window and ghostly tableaux vivants than with the 
explicit tortures of the Saw franchise they created seven years ago.

Perhaps the most interesting tendency in 21st-century hauntings is the FFFF 
(Faux Found Footage Film), assumed to have been launched with The Blair Witch 
Project, though I would contend the real kicking-off point came seven years 
earlier, with Ghostwatch. Penned by The Awakening's Volk, the BBC's 
controversial 1992 Halloween offering was aired prior to the camcorder boom, 
but its then-innovative format, chatshow-cum-documentary rather than obvious 
fiction, convinced some viewers the ghostly events were actually happening. One 
wonders if they'd fall for it now, when a surfeit of reality TV has left 
everyone sceptical as to how much of what they see is staged.

But Ghostwatch's lo-tech but effective scares are still regularly recycled in 
today's FFFF. A few weeks ago I was lamenting the dearth of long takes in 
today's commercial cinema, yet only the other day found myself watching
Paranormal Activity 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144125/paranormal-activity-3>, directed 
by Henry Joost and Ariel Schulman (co-directors of the faux-or-not docCatfish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/138629/catfish>) and marvelling at how 
a packed cinemaful of rowdy popcorn munchers were somehow tricked into staring 
for long minutes at CCTV footage of nothing happening in someone's living-room. 
They'd never tolerate this sort of thing in a Béla Tarr movie. But – 
film-makers please take note – they'll do it for a ghost story.
 