
The portrait of the hacker as an antisocial, lonesome deviant is pervasive and 
seemingly indelible. This week, for example, the British tabloids rounded ona 
child who has been arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/26/talktalk-cyber-attack-boy-15-arrested-in-northern-ireland>
 in connection with the hacking of telecommunications provider TalkTalk’s 
porous servers in order to access customers’ personal data. The Daily Mail’s 
front page referred to him as “a baby-faced loner who rarely leaves his 
bedroom”. The Sun described the boy, who lives on a council estate with his 
single mother in Ballymena, Northern Ireland, and who suffers from learning 
disabilities and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, as “reclusive”. He 
is, they continued, an avid player of video games, as if such a detail 
distinguishes this particular teenager from any other. The Mirror quoted a 
neighbour who described the boy as “quiet and shy”. He was often seen, she 
added, with a skateboard, although there was no mention whether or not his 
baseball cap was worn in the style of Bart Simpson: anarchically askew.

TalkTalk hack: boy arrested over alleged cyber-attack is bailed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/27/talktalk-boy-arrested-alleged-cyber-attack-bailed-northern-ireland>
There are two common stereotypes of the young, usually male, hacker. They are 
seen either as a shadowy criminal mastermind, able to sift hidden information 
for gold or, in the case of the teenagers who manage to take the websites of 
multinational corporations offline for a few hours, little more than digital 
vandals. As portrayed in the media, the alleged hacker from Ballymena straddles 
both stereotypes, with added ghost notes to do with class and poverty. He is an 
undesirable but, unlike the hooligans who throw stones at windows, also 
possesses arcane skill (at least in the eyes of those without a basic computer 
science education). The detail of his alleged crime is illegible to all but the 
cognoscenti. As such, he is presented as a deviant wunderkind, simultaneously 
astute and base, accomplished yet also somehow pitiful.A second teenager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/30/second-teenager-arrested-over-talktalk-data-breach>
 has now been arrested in west London; it will be interesting to see how his 
character is represented in the days to come.

These cliches have been strengthened and propagated by fictional 
representations of hackers.Jurassic Park’s Dennis T Nedry 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6bauZwl9AP0> is the overweight, sweat-prone, 
moral-free computer scientist who disables security systems in order to smuggle 
dinosaur embryos out of the titular park in a hollowed can of shaving foam. His 
surname is a barely scrambled anagram of “nerdy”.Boris Grishenko 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mIq9jFdEfZo>, the bespectacled Russian hacker 
from GoldenEye, is a misogynistic narcissist who is both cowardly and conceited 
(he dies, pleasingly, in a shower of liquid nitrogen, which hits moments after 
he declares: “I am invincible!”).Lisbeth Salander 
<http://www.imdb.com/video/imdb/vi180946457>, protagonist of Stieg Larsson’s 
The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo, may be a more contemporary class of elite 
hacker – lithe, attractive, leather-clad – but the get-up merely disguises a 
more familiar stereotype: she is highly introverted and struggles to make 
friends. Another character in the book describes Salander, variously, as 
“paranoid”, “obsessive” and “psychotic”. She subsists on pizza and fizzy pop. 
NowMr Robot <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot>, a wildly 
successful new US drama, followsElliot Alderson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2CPiLoWwNPg>, a brilliant young hacker drawn 
into an anarchist movement. Elliot is lovable, but he’s also delusional, 
depressed, addicted to drugs, and beset with social anxiety disorder.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg6gG-6Co_v4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg6gG-6Co_v4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg6gG-6Co_v4&media=>
According to Ian Reynolds, a hacker turned security consultant who now works 
fortifying corporations and governments against the threat of cyber attack, 
these stereotypes are antiquated and unhelpful. “The common misconception that 
computer hackers are just spotty-faced teenagers working out of their bedrooms 
over their parents’ broadband connection is largely inaccurate,” he says. “In 
reality there is a far wider variety of people and personality types that are 
attracted to computer hacking. There is no blueprint. With ‘social engineering’ 
hacks, for example, the ideal personality is an outgoing, impressionable 
individual who is able to trick people into performing a task or divulging 
usernames or passwords. Introverts are much less likely to succeed in these 
styles of attack as they lack the confidence or social skills required.” Corey 
Nachreiner, chief technology officer at WatchGuard Technologies, which helps 
combat malicious online attacks, agrees. “Regardless of whether you’re talking 
about hackers in the positive sense – many non-criminal security researchers 
may identify with the term – or you’re talking about criminals, the stereotype 
is totally outdated and misleading,” he says.

Mr Robot: 'Edward Snowden is a huge fan of our show'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/17/mr-robot-christian-slater-rami-malek>
The data supports the claim. According to research 
<http://venturebeat.com/2013/02/22/profile-of-a-cyber-criminal-infographic> 
carried out by the online payments company Jumio in 2013, 43% of criminal 
hackers are aged between 35 and 50 years old. Only 8% of criminal hackers are 
under 18. Almost a quarter of criminal hackers are women, and almost half of 
all criminal hacking traffic originates from Asian-Pacific countries, the 
majority from Indonesia (14% of all cybercrime, compared to 19% from the US, a 
country many times its size). Criminal hackers usually do not work alone but 
are, in Jumio’s term, “fully fledged businesses”, with executives, middle 
managers and workers. “Even though there are some criminals who fit the 
stereotypical profile of a hacker, it underestimates the extent and 
organisation of the wider fraud and cybercriminal syndicates,” says Jumio’s 
Marc Barach. “Cybercrime is big business, populated by highly intelligent and 
hardworking people who often times excel at their jobs. If they applied their 
skills to legal pursuits, they’d probably be amazingly successful.”

Both Reynolds and Nachreiner are eager to distinguish between so-called 
“script kiddies” – mischief-making teenagers who download distributed denial of 
service (DDoS) tools and use them to send a vast amount of fake traffic to a 
particular website in order to cause its servers to fail and go offline – and 
skilled computer hackers. “Fifteen years ago, it may have been true that many 
of the internet hacking ‘pranks’ or nuisance malware was created by egotistical 
script kiddies,” says Nachreiner. “Many of them may have fit the profile of 
awkward, socially inept loners with strong technical skills. Today, however, 
the hacker profiles are much more diverse.” Nacheiner says that you need only 
spend a few minutes roaming the halls ofDef Con, the world’s largest hacker 
convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/10/skateboards-drones-brain-hackers-defcon-las-vegas>
, which is held annually in Las Vegas, to witness the diversity of people who 
adopt the label. “You’ll find everyone from guys in trench coats with blue 
hair, to old greybeards in their 60s, to polished, dynamic professionals.”

The term “hacker” was not coined to describe one particular type of person. 
Its first documented use in relation to computers was in 1955, when it was 
recorded in the minutes of a meeting of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT)’s seminal computing group, theTech Model Railroad Club 
<https://medium.com/backchannel/the-tech-model-railroad-club-3b06a3163563#.5hgt9n50v>
. They used it to mean “messing about with machines”. Its definition was 
formalised four years later by club member Peter R Samson, who, inhis TMRC 
dictionary <http://tmrc.mit.edu/dictionary.html>, defined the word as 
“something done without constructive end” or, deliciously, “an entropy booster”.

Writing in 2005, Samson claimed that, in those early years, the word “hacking” 
was neutral, with no suggestion of malice or benevolence. He cites, as one of 
the earliest examples of a hack, a group project to find a way to play music on 
one of the university’s room-sized computers. By 1975 the word “hacker”, which 
was now in widespread usage, was defined in theJargon File 
<http://www.catb.org/jargon/html/>, a glossary for computer programmers, as “a 
person who enjoys exploring the details of programmable systems and how to 
stretch their capabilities”. This was, the definition stated, distinguishable 
from most computer users, who “prefer to learn only the minimum necessary”.

OPM hack: China blamed for massive breach at US federal agency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/04/us-government-massive-data-breach-employee-records-security-clearances>
Jargon File’s definition is, according to Timo Gnambs <http://timo.gnambs.at/>
, a researcher for the Leibniz Institute for Educational Trajectories, a more 
accurate description of the hacker mentality than the contemporary stereotype. 
Gnambs recentlypublished a study 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092656615300052> in the 
Journal of Research in Personality, in which he trawled data from 19 previous 
studies, involving nearly 1,700 people, in order to examine correlations 
between programming talent and personality type. While he found a strong 
association between introversion and programming skill, he also saw firm links 
between intelligence, conscientiousness and, in stark contrast to the cliches, 
“openness” – a person’s degree of creativity and intellectual curiosity. There 
was, he found, no link between a person’s agreeableness or neuroticism and 
their skill as a hacker.

“According to prevalent stereotypes, computer programmers are supposed to lack 
interpersonal skills, and are frequently characterised as socially inhibited 
individuals that are single-mindedly focused on computers,” Gnambs says. “My 
study showed that personality traits that, according to the stereotypes, are 
typical for programmers, do not differentiate able from less-able programmers. 
In other words, particularly disagreeable programmers do not create better 
code.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Freal-hackers-hiding-behind-the-cliches-of-talktalk-and-mr-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3311657b5e4c458096d118d67a6e446e8f3112db%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ghosts%20in%20the%20machine%3A%20the%20real%20hackers%20hiding%20behind%20the%20cliches%20of%20TalkTalk%20and%20Mr%20Robot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Freal-hackers-hiding-behind-the-cliches-of-talktalk-and-mr-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ghosts%20in%20the%20machine%3A%20the%20real%20hackers%20hiding%20behind%20the%20cliches%20of%20TalkTalk%20and%20Mr%20Robot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Freal-hackers-hiding-behind-the-cliches-of-talktalk-and-mr-robot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3311657b5e4c458096d118d67a6e446e8f3112db%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Delusional, paranoid, narcissistic, moral-free … screen hackers (from left) 
Elliot Anderson in Mr Robot, Lisbeth Salander in The Girl With the Dragon 
Tattoo, Boris Grishenko in Goldeneye and Dennis Nedry in Jurassic Park 
While there may not be a blueprint for a typical hacker, according to 
Reynolds, the common denominator is that computer hacking in its purest form 
attracts highly technical, creative people. “They must get a kick out of taking 
a non-standard approach to gaining access to a website or environment – 
circumventing the layer of security that is designed to keep people out,” he 
says. It’s this puzzle element to hacking – the need for lateral thinking, 
problem solving, even outsmarting an adversary – that inspired Pete Herzog to 
co-foundHacker Highschool <http://www.hackerhighschool.org> in 2002, an 
educational programme that seeks to “capture the fun and magic of hacking”.

Herzog worked with La Salle University in Barcelona to design 12 lessons for 
teenagers, designed to teach security skills, and ran the course as summer 
classes, teaching children a foundation in network security, alongside values 
of respect and empathy. In 2010 Herzog and his team rewrote the lessons, 
removing the teacher from the equation so, as he puts it, the students “could 
teach themselves, like real hackers”. The course has proved hugely popular. On 
average, lessons are downloaded a quarter of a million times every month, in 10 
languages.

Inside the secret world of hackers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/aug/24/inside-secret-world-of-hackers>
There is a big difference between teenagers who experiment with, say, breaking 
into a telecommunication company network, and organised criminal hackers, says 
Herzog. “Long-term criminal hackers do it for a living,” he adds. “But most 
teens who commit illegal criminal acts do it as part of a power struggle, 
something we all go through. They’re lashing out. Some teens punch, some 
scream, some have sex and some shoplift. In most cases we assign the behaviour 
as teenage angst and get them help. With hacking, however, they’re tried as 
criminals and often go to jail.” Herzog likens his course to boxing clubs, 
which aim to turn teenage frustration and anger into discipline and passion 
through sport. “We need to stop punishing teens for carrying out cyber attacks 
because they got angry at someone. Right now, if a teen hacks into a web server 
and deletes data, they will likely serve a longer, tougher sentence then if 
they broke into the server room, knocked out a few employees and set the web 
server on fire. What does that tell you? That doesn’t create fewer hackers. It 
just turns more hackers into criminals.”

Many criminal hackers, especially the kind who, in their younger years, staged 
attacks against corporations out of frustration, have been able to turn their 
expertise into gainful employment in the way that Herzog hopes his course will 
encourage.Kevin Mitnick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2002/dec/13/g2.usnews>, who calls 
himself “the world’s most famous hacker”, was certainly one of the most 
notorious. Prior to his arrest in North Carolina in 1995, he was the FBI’s 
most-wanted outlaw, after hacking into computers belonging to companies such as 
Motorola, Nokia and Sun Microsystems. He spent five years in prison, including 
eight months in solitary confinement, because a federal judge believed, 
preposterously, that he could “whistle tones into a phone and launch a nuclear 
missile”.

Now 51, Mitnick, runs a successful and profitable company where he and his 
team attempt to break into corporations by any means necessary, in order to 
expose security flaws (work that’s known, alluringly, as “penetration testing” 
in the business) – much the same things he did as a criminal hacker. GCHQ 
reportedly hires many ex-criminal hackers, and the idea of the programming 
wunderkind who is caught by the authorities then cajoled into working for them 
has become a recurrent motif in drama. The more notorious the hacker, the more 
likely they are to be hired. In 2011, the 21-year-old hacker George Hotz, who 
“unlocked” Apple’s iPhone andSony’s PlayStation 3 console 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2011/jan/07/playstation-3-hack-ps3>
 to run pirated software, was hired by Facebook weeks after he settled a 
lawsuit with Sony. “Knowledge is power, and a reformed criminal knows the 
industry far better than someone who has never been there and done it,” says 
Barach. Herzog goes further. “You wouldn’t hire a policeman who’s never thrown 
a punch or a fireman who’s never set a fire either. So why would you want to 
hire a security professional who’s never hacked?”

Anonymous plans to reveal names of about 1,000 Ku Klux Klan members
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/29/anonymous-ku-klux-klan-members-reveal-names>
Some blame for the way hackers are routinely viewed as a monolithic group can 
be ascribed to the hackers themselves, who often labour, not only under a mask 
of anonymity, but also one of uniformity. Members of Anonymous, one of the 
largest collectives of hackers in the world, are known for wearing identicalGuy 
Fawkes masks 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2014/11/economist-explains-3>
, the design taken from the graphic novelV for Vendetta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/21/v-for-vendetta-film>. But behind 
the masks, there’s diversity. “Many of the larger, more well-known hacking 
groups have people from all backgrounds and walks of life, says Reynolds. 
“Usually it’s a variety of people united over a common cause.” That cause can 
be politically motivated, vigilantism, crime or, in the case of state-sponsored 
hackers, even patriotism. “We should spend much more time profiling the motive 
of different threat actors rather than the psychologies,” says Nachreiner. 
“You’ll often find multiple members of the same threat-actor group to all have 
slightly different psychologies, but a shared motive.”

The stereotype will, however, endure as long as people need a bogeyman they 
can visualise trying to steal their data. The image of a rotund, washed-up 
journalist hacking celebrity’s phones for News International doesn’t have the 
same potency as the hooded, indoorsy miscreant, neither for headline- nor 
Hollywood writers. “Hacking is the closest thing the general public knows to be 
an unknown, unexplained power that some people possess, like modern magic,” 
says Herzog. “So, of course, there will be witch-hunts for those who wield that 
power. We can’t fight that. But we can teach young hackers humility and 
empathy.”
 