
The National Portrait Gallery <http://www.npg.org.uk/> in London is to stage 
the first portrait show for an artist whose work ranks as some of the most 
recognisable of the 20th century.

Alberto Giacometti <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/giacometti> is 
well known for his tall and spindly sculptural figures. But he is far less well 
known as a portrait artist – a situation which the gallery hopes to redress 
with an exhibition opening in October.

According to Paul Moorhouse, curator of 20th century portraits at the NPG, the 
show has been five years in the planning. “Giacometti is one of the giants of 
20th century art, one of the giants of modernism, but there is a great deal to 
be discovered about Giacometti,” he said on Tuesday.

The announcement of the show came the morning after a Giacometti work, L’Homme 
au Doigt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/12/179m-picasso-could-hold-world-record-for-a-decade>
 (Pointing Man) sold for in New York for $141.3m (£90m), a world record for a 
sculpture sold at auction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fgiacometti-portrait-exhibition-record-breaking-sale-national-portrait-gallery-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431449988171%2Fcbadb013-1595-458e-b172-94aa3bf3a1dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giacometti%20portrait%20exhibition%20announced%20after%20record-breaking%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fgiacometti-portrait-exhibition-record-breaking-sale-national-portrait-gallery-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giacometti%20portrait%20exhibition%20announced%20after%20record-breaking%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fgiacometti-portrait-exhibition-record-breaking-sale-national-portrait-gallery-sculpture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431449988171%2Fcbadb013-1595-458e-b172-94aa3bf3a1dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alberto Giacometti’s sculpture Pointing Man sold for more than $141m at 
Christie’s in New York on Monday. Photograph: Kathy Willens/AP 
The NPG exhibition will focus on what was a life-long preoccupation with 
portraiture and feature more than 60 works, including paintings, drawings and 
sculptures.

On display will be portraits of Giacometti’s main models, including his wife, 
Annette, his wayward brother Diego and his mother. Other sitters range from 
friends such as Jean Genet to the retailer and philanthropist Lord Sainsbury.

The NPG show comes after a long gap in British exhibitions devoted to the 
Swiss artist. There was a definitive Tate show in 1965, curated by David 
Sylvester, and a Royal Academy show in 1996. After the NPG there will be a 
major retrospective at Tate Modern in 2017.

There will be many eye catching loans from private and public collections; not 
least a 1950 work,The Artist’s Mother, from the Museum of Modern Art in New York
 <http://www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=78448>, and Diego Seated 
from the Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts in Norwich 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/arts/yourpaintings/paintings/diego-seated-1887>. 
Moorhouse said the latter work in his view ranks among the “greatest portraits 
of the 20th century … just extraordinary”.

• Giacometti: Pure Presence is at the National Portrait Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/national-portrait-gallery> in London 
from 15 October to 10 January.
 