
The Australian Human Rights Commission president, Gillian Triggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gillian-triggs>, has criticised 
reporting of the commission’s work by the Australian newspaper, including the 
claim it is “failing older white men”.

Triggs said the headline was a “journalistic flourish that has no substance in 
law or in our practices” and criticised “misinformation” by some media outlets 
about reporting of section 18C Racial Discrimination Act complaints.

On Monday, Triggs appeared before the Senate legal and constitutional affairs 
committee to clarify her earlier evidence that incorrectly claimed her comments 
in an interview with the Saturday Paper were taken out of context.

Gillian Triggs is still holding on, and her reward is continuing torment | 
Mark Dreyfus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/gillian-triggs-is-still-holding-on-and-her-reward-is-continuing-torment>
Triggs also confirmed, as Guardian Australia reported in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/gillian-triggs-to-go-as-human-rights-chief-turnbull-confirms>
, that she had advised the government on several occasions she did not intend 
to seek an extension of her term beyond mid 2017.

Triggs refused to answer questions about the section 18C case against three 
Queensland University of Technology students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/04/qut-computer-lab-racial-discrimination-lawsuit-thrown-out>
, noting her obligations of confidentiality and that the matter was still 
before the court because of an appeal.

“Were I able to discuss it, I would be pleased to do so because of the high 
level of misinformation in some sections of the media,” she said, and suggested 
revisiting the case in public debate after it had concluded.

Triggs said section 18C complaints were just 3.8% of the 2,300 formal 
discrimination complaints the commission handled.

Triggs said only a “very small aspect” of the QUT case had been presented by 
interested media outlets. Selective release of documents by the parties in the 
case and those discovered under freedom of information had resulted in an 
“extremely imbalanced view of the case”, she said.

In November, the Australian published a story titled AHRC head Gillian Triggs 
‘failing older white men’ 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/ahrc-head-gillian-triggs-failing-older-white-men/news-story/46d053f7e6939ca33c385847789d3660>
 for not taking up the cause of white male complainants who objected to the 
claim by MP Linda Burney that opponents of 18C tended to be “basically white 
men of a certain age that have never experienced racial discrimination in their 
life”. Triggs rejected the claim outright.

In October, Triggs was grilled in a Senate estimates committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/oct/18/malcolm-turnbull-rejects-amnesty-claim-that-detention-akin-to-torture-politics-live?page=with:block-580586e7e4b005f21833a81a#block-580586e7e4b005f21833a81a>
 aboutan interview she gave the Saturday Paper 
<https://www.thesaturdaypaper.com.au/news/politics/2016/04/23/human-rights-commission-president-gillian-triggs-speaks-out/14613336003160>
 in April in which she reportedly said politicians were “usually seriously 
ill-informed” and had “lost any sense of the rule of law”.

Triggs had told the committee her comments were “taken out of context” and 
some quotes were inaccurate. She laterrevised her evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/coalition-mps-attack-gillian-triggs-over-allegations-she-misled-senate-committee>
, saying on reflection the article was accurate, prompting severe criticism 
from Coalition MPs including Ian Macdonald, the committee chairman.

In her opening statement on Monday, Triggs explained that in “one answer to 
one question after six hours of questioning might have been misconstrued”. She 
said there had been confusion because her answers related to the hard copy 
edition not the electronic version.

Triggs said she had been assured by the editor of the Saturday Paper the 
extracts were accurate, and she accepted that.

Triggs explained that her comments she could have “destroyed” politicians 
questioning her role were made out of frustration with questions that indicated 
committee members had not read laws governing the commission and its reports.

Gillian Triggs to go as human rights chief, Turnbull confirms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/gillian-triggs-to-go-as-human-rights-chief-turnbull-confirms>
“I regret any offence that the article or my comments might have caused,” she 
said.

In previous hearings, Macdonald boasted that he hadn’t read the commission’s 
Forgotten Children report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/15/ian-macdonald-could-do-with-a-lesson-on-the-art-of-respectful-questioning>
 because he did not want to “waste my time on a report which was clearly 
partisan”.

Triggs said that about 18 months ago she told the attorney general, George 
Brandis, that she did not intend to seek a new term as AHRC president when her 
term expired in mid 2017. She said she confirmed that intention about six 
months ago.

In November Malcolm Turnbull said Triggs would not continue as Human Rights 
Commission president beyond 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/gillian-triggs-to-go-as-human-rights-chief-turnbull-confirms>
 in comments that were misinterpreted to mean the government was refusing to 
reappoint her to the position.
 