
The Human Rights Commission president, Gillian Triggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gillian-triggs>, has said any 
weakening of section 18C and 18D of the Racial Discrimination Act would be a 
seriously retrograde step and has criticised coverage of recent cases as 
distorted and one-sided.

Triggs called for perspective in the Queensland University of Technology case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/04/qut-computer-lab-racial-discrimination-lawsuit-thrown-out>
 brought under the act.


Triggs told the parliamentary inquiry into freedom of speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/government-to-launch-free-speech-inquiry-into-section-18c-of-the-racial-discrimination-act?cmp=wp-plugin>
 – established to consider whether to amend the act – that the public and 
politicians were seeing only one side of the QUT case.

Gillian Triggs criticises News Corp claim Human Rights Commission 'failing 
older white men'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/12/gillian-triggs-criticises-news-corp-claim-human-rights-commission-failing-older-white-men>
The case, which was thrown out last month, was brought by an Indigenous 
employee, Cindy Prior, against university students over Facebook comments after 
she asked them to leave a computer lab designated for Indigenous students.

“I suggest that to weaken section 18C in any way would be a seriously 
retrograde step,” Triggs said. “If anything this section should be strengthened 
and clarified.”

Triggs said in cases like the QUT matter and the complaint against the 
Australian’s cartoonist Bill Leak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/12/no-investigation-into-bill-leak-cartoon-after-complaint-dropped>
, it would be difficult to get conciliation because the parties were “fighting 
it out in the media”.

The Australian newspaper has been campaigning to change section 18C.

Triggs said as a result the two matters had sparked “justifiable” public 
concern because only some of the facts had been leaked to the media.

“Because the information that the public has is so distorted and so one-sided 
that it is very difficult for the public or parliamentarians to get a fair 
assessment,” Triggs said.

“Everyone views the [Human Rights Commission] process through the prism of the 
QUT case.”

Triggs has previously indicated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/gillian-triggs-says-replacing-insult-and-offend-could-strengthen-18c>
 she is open to overhauling the Racial Discrimination Act, including replacing 
the terms “offend” and “insult” with “vilify”.

But on Monday she refused to restate that position and said it was a matter 
for the government to draft proposed changes and the HRC and other parties to 
respond.

She told the committee – chaired by Liberal MP Ian Goodenough – that she would 
not go into details on the QUT case.

Gillian Triggs is still holding on, and her reward is continuing torment | 
Mark Dreyfus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/gillian-triggs-is-still-holding-on-and-her-reward-is-continuing-torment>
A supporter of amending 18C, Liberal senator James Paterson asked why Triggs 
gave the ABC’s 7.30 program details of the case if she could not canvass the 
issues.

In that interview <http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2016/s4570705.htm>, 
Triggs explained why the case had taken longer than most: “Some students had 
gone away on holidays, were difficult to connect and so on. So that was why it 
took much longer than usual.

“It was not my intention to do so,” Triggs told Paterson on Monday.


She said she appeared on the program because of the unremitting criticism 
about the work of the commission.


“A reasonable person would understand the criticism has been so misleading and 
so unremitting for weeks on end that I as president of course wanted to stand 
up for the reputation of the work of the highly trained staff of the 
commission,” Triggs said.


Gillian Triggs: I won’t be cowed by political attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/gillian-triggs-i-wont-be-cowered-by-political-attacks>
“So I was prompted to assure the interviewer that the work of the commission 
has been done in good faith according to our statute.”

Triggs said even though the commission had managed the Racial Discrimination 
Act for 30 years, the recent debate had become politicised after the coverage 
of the QUT and Bill Leak cases.


“I would suggest that sections 18C and D do send a message to us all that 
abusive race hate speech is not consistent with Australian values,” she said.

 