
 The author:  Thomas Hardy (1840-1928) was born and brought up in Dorset, 
where he trained as an architect. After a spell working in London in the 1860s, 
he returned to Dorset and began writing seriously. His first novel, The Poor 
Man and the Lady (now lost), was accepted by a publisher in 1868, but Hardy did 
not go ahead with it. Desperate Remedies became his publishing debut in 1871, 
with his fourth novel, Far From the Madding Crowd (1874) his first significant 
success. Increasing acclaim brought financial reward and status. Hardy's 
prolific output reached a high point in the late 1880s and early 1890s: The 
Mayor of Casterbridge, Tess of the d'Urbervilles and Jude the Obscure.

 The story:  Rejected by magazines for its controversial content, the book 
initially had a number of passages removed by Hardy to ensure serial 
publication; he later restored them for a definitive 1912 edition. Tess 
Durbeyfield is sent by her parents to "claim kin" with the wealthy d'Urberville 
family. Tess is seduced by her "cousin" Alec d'Urberville and is left with a 
baby that soon dies. Ashamed, she finds work in another part of the country 
where she meets and marries the free-thinking but sternly moralistic Angel 
Clare. Clare, however, abandons her when he finds out about her past. She 
becomes involved once again with d'Urberville (who has become a preacher after 
a religious conversion), and agrees to become his mistress. Tess later murders 
d'Urberville, is hunted down and executed.

 The film-maker:  Born in France in 1933, Roman Polanski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/romanpolanski> grew up in Poland during the 
second world war (including a period confined to the Warsaw Ghetto). After film 
school, he made his directorial debut with Knife in the Water (1962) before 
heading to the west. A string of increasingly successful films followed, but 
the murder of his wife Sharon Tate cast a blight over his career. After the 
release of Chinatown (1974), Polanski was convicted of unlawful sex with a 
minor and fled the US before sentencing. Polanski found backing for Tess from 
French actor-director-producer Claude Berri, and the film was shot in northern 
France. Polanski cast Nastassia Kinski (actor Klaus Kinski's daughter, whom he 
had met when she was 15) in a role Tate had once planned to play.

 How book and film compare:  Apart from the inevitable telescoping of events 
and scenes, the film remained largely faithful to Hardy's narrative. 
(Significantly, perhaps, Polanski considerably defangs the character of sexual 
predator Alec d'Urberville, and omits his religious conversion.) The script was 
written in French, with Polanski's regular collaborator GÃ©rard Brach, then 
returned to English by John Brownjohn. Brownjohn also had to supply dialogue 
for scenes that Hardy had glossed over, such as Tess's emotional revelations to 
Clare.

 Inspirations and influences:  Polanski said he wanted to recreate the peasant 
life he had known in the "medieval" Polish countryside as a wartime escapee, 
and attempts a similar recreation of period agricultural life as Terrence 
Malick's Days of Heaven (1978), though his stylistic references are more 
French-influenced (notably the genre painting of Courbet and De la Tour) than 
American. Tess marked the end of Polanski's major phase: Pirates (1986), was a 
flop. It was only with The Pianist (2002) that he has regained anything like 
his former reputation.
 