
There is a scene filled with terrifying suspense in the 1995 French film La 
Haine 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/film/2015/may/03/la-haine-film-sequel-20-years-on-france>
. Police have detained two young men, having found them to be in possession of 
a small piece of hashish.

They sit handcuffed to their chairs, side by side, as two cops beat and harass 
them. A third policeman, who is new to the job, sits and observes. This is a 
sort of training for him, a demonstration of how to effectively use violence.

Giulio Regeni: funeral in Italy for student found dead in Cairo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/giulio-regeni-funeral-in-italy-for-student-found-dead-in-cairo>
“They could be free in two hours, we gotta use our time wisely,” one of the 
policemen says to his new colleague. “You stay in control the whole time... the 
hard part is stopping in time, you can’t go too far.”

It has been over a week since Italian student Giulio Regeni’s body was 
discovered 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/2016/feb/04/italian-student-found-dead-egypt-giulio-regeni-torture>
, tortured and broken, off a highway outside Cairo. Reports from Egypt and 
Italy indicate that he was taken in by police on the night he disappeared, 
although the Ministry of Interior hasdenied this 
<http://www.madamasr.com/news/interior-ministry-denies-arrest-italian-student-giulio-regeni-death>
.

At a memorial for Regeni in front of the Italian embassy in Cairo, an Egyptian 
man held up a sign written in Arabic which read “Giulio was one of us, and he 
died like one of us.” A message of solidarity, but also, an attempt to remind 
the world that Regeni’s death belies a wider crisis.

For months, Egyptian human rights groups and activists have been speaking out 
about a marked increase in police brutality in the country.

The Al Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence reported 
more than 600 cases 
<http://www.madamasr.com/news/nadeem-center-egypt%E2%80%99s-security-forces-killed-474-people-2015>
 of torture in 2015. The Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights documented14 
deaths of detainees <http://eipr.org/en/pressrelease/2016/02/03/2531> in a 
single police station over a two year period.

Enforced disappearances – when individuals are arrested by security forces and 
then cannot be found for days, weeks or in some cases, years – have also 
increased.

The victims have included other expatriates. In 2013, a Frenchman and 
long-time resident of Cairowas also killed in police custody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/18/egypt-frenchman-dies-syria-morsi>
.

Amid so many stories of brutality, Regeni’s death strikes a nerve because he 
was a foreign visitor toEgypt <http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/egypt>. 
Protection from police violence comes not from the law, but from a calculus of 
privileges tied up with class, race and geography that should have made Regeni 
– a white European in downtown Cairo – immune to the violence inflicted on 
Egyptians.This was not supposed to happen to him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fgiulio-regeni-death-egypts-brutal-police-spare-no-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2e111040b98b36e60c412c6e0a33d6905583b47%2F0_39_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giulio%20Regeni%E2%80%99s%20death%20reminds%20us%20no%20one%20is%20safe%20from%20Egypt's%20brutal%20police&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fgiulio-regeni-death-egypts-brutal-police-spare-no-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giulio%20Regeni%E2%80%99s%20death%20reminds%20us%20no%20one%20is%20safe%20from%20Egypt%27s%20brutal%20police&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fgiulio-regeni-death-egypts-brutal-police-spare-no-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2e111040b98b36e60c412c6e0a33d6905583b47%2F0_39_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Giulio Regeni went missing in Cairo in 25 January. Photograph: Twitter 
That it did happen, to him and so many others, is a result of years of 
impunity for a security apparatus trained to break people, with no consequence 
or accountability to the public.

These are the same security forces allegedly contracted to torture people in 
Egyptian prisons and barracks as part of anextraordinary rendition 
<https://www.aclu.org/fact-sheet-extraordinary-rendition> program. 

Unlike the French policemen in La Haine, these cops can go as far as they want 
to

Former CIA agent Robert Baer is quoted as saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/31/extraordinary-rendition-backstory>
: “If you want a serious interrogation, you send a prisoner to Jordan. If you 
want them to be tortured, you send them to Syria. If you want someone to 
disappear – never to see them again – you send them to Egypt.” These are the 
same security forces that killednearly a thousand people in a single day 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/2014/aug/16/rabaa-massacre-egypt-human-rights-watch>
 on 14 August 2013 – and then arrested anybody who dared speak out about it.

The government maintains that cases of torture and police brutality are 
“exceptions”. Cases against police officers that do make it to court often end 
in a dismissal of charges or reduced sentences.

Unlike the French policemen in La Haine, these cops can go as far as they want 
to.

Regeni went missing on 25 January, the fifth anniversary of the 2011 revolution
 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/commentisfree/2016/jan/25/the-guardian-view-on-the-egyptian-revolution-five-years-on-its-too-early-to-say>
 that removed President Hosni Mubarak from office. The trigger of the 
revolution was police brutality. Protesters burnt nearly 100 police stations to 
the ground, and rallied around the figure ofKhaled Said 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/2011/oct/26/khaled-said-police-sentenced>, a 
young man who had been beaten to death in custody.

In a grotesque intersection of past and present, the officer in charge of the 
preliminary investigations into Regeni’s death has a previous conviction: for 
complicity in the abduction and torture – to death – ofan Egyptian man 
<http://www.madamasr.com/news/officer-investigating-giulio-regeni-death-previously-convicted-torture-murder>
 in 2003.

The police force that inspired such rage has gone unreformed, unchanged. No 
one is safe.
 