
On 24 February, a jury in Missouri awarded $72m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/johnson-johnson-72-millon-babuy-talcum-powder-ovarian-cancer>
 to the family of Jacqueline Fox, a woman who died of ovarian cancer at age 62. 
Lawyers for the Fox family brought a civil suit against personal care product 
giant Johnson & Johnson, stating that Fox used their baby powder as a feminine 
hygiene product for years. Her lawyers alleged that these products were the 
cause of her cancer and the jury agreed, holding Johnson & Johnson liable for 
counts of fraud, negligence and conspiracy.

Is it safe to use talcum powder?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/29/is-it-safe-to-use-talcum-baby-powder-ovarian-cancer-johnson-johnson>
One of the most troubling pieces of evidence presented to the court was an 
internal memo from a Johnson & Johnson medical consultant whichstated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/johnson-johnson-72-millon-babuy-talcum-powder-ovarian-cancer>
, “anybody who denies [the] risks” between “hygienic” talc use and ovarian 
cancer would be publicly perceived in the same light as those who denied a link 
between smoking cigarettes and cancer: “Denying the obvious in the face of all 
evidence to the contrary.”

It’s a stark reminder to consumers of just how disconnected we are from what 
we’re putting in, and on, our bodies. Think of the dozens of shampoos, lotions, 
serums and scrubs that you use on a daily basis – and add makeup to the list. 
Do you know what makes your body wash foam, or what gives your lipstick that 
deep red hue?

Reading the product label will give a breakdown of individual ingredients, but 
even this information is pretty useless unless you know offhand what penthenol 
or dimethalymine are (I certainly don’t). Companies don’t make it any easier by 
cramming 84 ingredients into one tiny 8pt paragraph, slapping words like 
“natural” on their products when they are anything but.

So – let’s say you’ve been suitably horrified by this story and desperately 
want to give your bathroom a makeover to avoid death by beauty product. Where 
do you begin?

First, trim the fat. Stop buying useless crap – the stuff flashy 
multimillion-dollar marketing campaigns convince you to buy. Perfumed body 
wash, razors with strange aloe strips surrounding the blades, toners, 
astringents and a different soap for your hands, body and face – you don’t need 
most of it. Reducing the amount of beauty products you use means less shopping, 
less cost, less packaging waste, fewer thrown-out plastic bottles, and fewer 
questionable chemical compounds being absorbed into your skin.

Next, for the stuff you do need, try to make as much of it as you can. In 
previous columns, I’ve provided recipes forbody lotion, toothpaste, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/23/make-your-own-toothpaste-lotion-ingredients-environment>
shampoo and conditioner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/22/problem-sanctimonious-environmentalists-baking-soda>
 and even some sweet, simplescrubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/23/make-your-own-toothpaste-lotion-ingredients-environment>
. Maybe now’s the time to give them a shot. Creating your own products ensures 
you have almost complete control over the ingredient and the manufacturing and 
packaging process.
For the stuff you can’t make (or for those of you well-intentioned folks who 
just know there’s no way you’ll ever be found whipping up a batch of homemade 
body cream) there’s a wonderful gold mine of a site calledCosmetics Database 
<http://www.cosmeticsdatabase.org/>. This non-profit site, run by the 
Environmental Working Group (EWG) is an absolute warehouse of information. 

EWG staff scientists take the ingredients found in more than 75,000 popular 
health and beauty products and cross-reference them with information found in 
more than 60 toxicity and regulatory databases. EWG then comes up with a 0-10 
safety rating for each product and provides links between individual 
ingredients and studies which have proven possible organ toxicity, reproductive 
issues or carcinogenic effects.

To use the site, simply type in the name of your product and you’ll be 
redirected to a product page which lists each ingredient, along with any 
potential health concerns and a score between 0-10. A score of 0 indicates a 
pretty innocuous product with little to no proven health concerns, while a 
score of 10 indicates something you most likely do not want to be slathering 
all over your skin anytime soon. It’s one way to educate yourself about the 
products you’re using, and also a great way to demystify the process of buying 
“safe” products.

As for Johnson & Johnson, many are saying that the $72m verdict is unlikely to 
stand in appeals court, and cancer experts state that the link between talc use 
and ovarian cancer is tenuous at best. Regardless of the outcome, Johnson & 
Johnson may have already begun moving toward creating healthier products. In 
2012, the company bowed to consumer demand andpromised 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/16/business/johnson-johnson-to-remove-formaldehyde-from-products.html?_r=0>
 to remove potentially toxic and carcinogenic components from its product line, 
including removing formaldehyde-releasing ingredients, limiting parabens, and 
completely eliminating triclosan from their product line.
It’s never too late to do better.
 