
There was a time, before smartphones and broadband, when you could happily 
spend the Glastonbury weekend cut off from the outside world. News of what was 
going on beyond the festival’s boundaries tended to arrive in the form of 
profoundly unreliable rumours: for some reason, on annual basis in the mid-90s, 
these included one about the sudden death of Cliff Richard. Now, you can’t get 
away from current events. Early arrivers on Thursday take part in agathering in 
memory of MP Jo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/23/billy-bragg-jo-cox-mp-tributes-glastonbury-festival>
; a tribute video, featuring Portishead’s sombre version of Abba’s SOS, is 
shown before proceedings begin on the Pyramid stage on Friday morning. Over in 
the NYC Downlow, DJ Roger Sanchez interrupts his set to read out the names of 
the victims of the Orlando massacre.

While you would have a hard time arguing that Friday morning’s news about 
Brexit plunges the festival’s mood into shellshocked reflection or anger – 
indeed, if it affects it at all, you get the feeling that people who have paid 
a lot of money to be here might have been even more determined than usual to 
enjoy themselves before returning home to face an uncertain future – it would 
have taken an almost superhuman effort to avoid it altogether.

People keep talking about it from the stage. Sometimes their comments are 
downcast: “I have a very heavy heart today,” saysDamon Albarn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/damon-albarn>. “Democracy has failed us 
because it was ill-informed.” Sometimes they are angry – “Fuck David Cameron,” 
yells grime MC Novelist – and sometimes they’re self-deprecating. “I’m a rock 
star, what the fuck do I know?” muses the 1975’s frontman Matty Healy, before 
suggesting: “There’s a sentiment of anti-compassion that’s spread across the 
older generation, and they’ve voted us a future that we don’t want.”

And sometimes they urge us to look hopefully at the bigger picture. “I know 
this is a disappointing day for some,” offers Yannis Philippakis of alt-rocker 
Foals, “but the sun is out and it’s a big day for us.” Alas, the cheer that 
greets this feels a little half-hearted, as if even their most vociferous fans 
are beset by the sneaking suspicion that Friday 24 June might not go down in 
history as A Big Day For Foals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fd5bb582d377f691ed67bfcb09c606043c5fd2e%2F0_109_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fd5bb582d377f691ed67bfcb09c606043c5fd2e%2F0_109_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Damon Albarn with and Bassekou Kouyate and the Orchestra of Syrian Musicians. 
Photograph: Ian Gavan/Getty Images 
Albarn’s comments come at the start of a performance by the Orchestra of 
Syrian Musicians, the latest world music project to arrive in Britain under the 
auspices of his Africa Express organisation. It feels like a brave move, not 
just because of the logistical difficulties in assembling the musicians, 
scattered around the globe by Syria’s civil war, but because it was an 
expectedly lengthy musical interlude featuring some of the musicians performing 
today that sent Gorillaz’s famously underwhelming 2010 Glastonbury headlining 
set off-piste: strangers to the concept of leaving them wanting more, the 
Syrians ended up leaving them leaving to see what was happening on the Other 
stage.

This performance, however, really works. The strings weave dramatically around 
the kora of Seckou Keita and the ngoni of Bassekou Kouyate, the latter played 
through a wah pedal to distinctly psychedelic effect. Albarn comes out for a 
version of Blur’s Out of Time, set to an eerie, off-kilter backing. It sounds 
haunting and strange, although the increasingly frantic looks being passed 
between the singer and the musicians suggest its eerie off-kilterness might not 
be entirely intentional.

Over on the Other stage, Héloïse Letissier of Christine and the Queens has 
come up with a novel approach to worsening weather conditions: standing at the 
lip of the stage, throwing punches at the sky, she appears to be offering the 
rain out for a fight. Then again, Letissier seems to have come up with a novel 
approach to virtually everything she does. Her set is one of Glastonbury’s 
unequivocal highlights, slipping between the coolly stylised and choreographed 
– flanked by male dancers, she’s a slick, captivating performer – and the 
impassioned and eccentric.

She throws roses at the crowd “because it’s a first date”, muses on the 
resemblance of various other flowers to a selection of R&B divas (“This one is 
like Rihanna,” she says, brandishing a lily, “So beautiful. I’d like to eat 
Rihanna”), interpolates her own songs with covers of Technotronic’s Pump Up the 
Jam and Stardust’s Music Sounds Better With You, and smacks herself in the 
chest with her fist as she sings. She couldn’t be more French if she came on 
stage in a beret with a string of onions round her neck, but watching the crowd 
sing along with Tilted – her addition to a fairly slender pantheon of anthemic 
pop songs about pansexuality – the idea of her achieving the same mainstream 
fame here as she has across the Channel seems far from inconceivable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0355cb531bdbe840c530603ea23726fe64595a48%2F104_0_2829_1698%2F2829.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0355cb531bdbe840c530603ea23726fe64595a48%2F104_0_2829_1698%2F2829.jpg>
 French royalty: Christine and the Queens (AKA Héloïse Letissier) performing on 
the Other stage. Photograph: Shirlaine Forrest/WireImage 
Indeed, for all the Radio 2-friendliness of some of this year’s big names – 
Bastille, whose brand of synth-pop sounds as if it was thoroughly scrubbed with 
Dettol before being allowed out in public, the cheery one-woman M Peoplede nos 
jours that is Jess Glynne – more complex and idiosyncratic approaches to pop 
music are cheeringly easy to find.

Up on the Park stage on Friday afternoon, Unknown Mortal Orchestra draw a big 
crowd for their off-message blend of 80s funk, psychedelia and lyrics about the 
emotional convolutions of a polyamorous relationship. The crowd hang around for
Ezra Furman, having clearly decided that if you only listen to one 
cross-dressing, gender-fluid, observant Jewish singer-songwriter performing 
ramshackle 50s rock’n’roll-influenced songs heavy on the honking sax, it should 
be him. They are rewarded with a set that opens with Furman, for reasons best 
known to himself, eschewing the traditional “Hello Glastonbury, it’s so good be 
here” greeting in favour of shouting, “Tentative stab wound!”, and gets 
progressively less predictable from thereon in: the whole thing teeters, rather 
thrillingly, on the verge of a collapse into total chaos.

Anyone who likes their music more reliable is presumably over at the Pyramid, 
watchingZZ Top, who are exactly as you would expect ZZ Top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/zz-top> to be: beards, hats, furry guitars, 
the mid-80s MTV hits floating around in a sea of amiably chugging blues-boogie 
with lyrics about things that unreconstructed real men from Texas write lyrics 
about: going to barbecues, cars, female buttocks etc.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8ebda88f121cbfb311ce60e36bfc43acfd6c994%2F0_113_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8ebda88f121cbfb311ce60e36bfc43acfd6c994%2F0_113_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Pomp and circumstance: Matt Bellamy of Muse. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA 
You couldn’t wish for a bigger contrast with headliners Muse, a band who are 
not likely to write a song about having a barbecue or, indeed, goin’ downtown 
to look for some “tush” any time soon. Their set opens with a Big Brother-like 
figure mercilessly haranguing the audience from the screens on either side of 
the stage, but it’s not all as subtle as that. For years now,Muse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/muse> have sounded like the winners of a 
competition to see who can cram the greatest number and variety of bombastic 
flourishes into every song: riffs that sound as if they are based on Bach’s 
Toccata and Fugue in D minor; widdly-woo guitar solos involving much tapping of 
fingers on the fretboard; bovver-booted glam drums; pounding Giorgio 
Moroder-ish synth lines; ostentatious Rachmaninov-inspired piano 
embellishments; a combination of quasi-operatic vocals and conspiracy-theory 
lyrics that occasionally leave them sounding like Queen if Freddie Mercury had 
digested the complete works of David Icke en route to the studio.

At its worst, when you’re assailed by the terrible creeping fear that all the 
New World Order and survivalist cobblers in their lyrics might not be meant 
ironically, it can feel a bit exhausting – it’s hard not to wish they would 
occasionally dial it down a bit: perhaps a couple of numbers about barbecues or 
bums might not be such a bad idea after all. But at its best, when the songs 
pack choruses as big as the band’s desire for grandiosity – Plug In Baby or 
Starlight – it’s both preposterous and preposterously entertaining.

Saturday morning brings with it more rain, which seems to dampen people’s 
enthusiasm forShura’s take on synth-pop – a shame, because it sounds noticeably 
richer and smarter than the kind of thing Radio 1 usually clasps to its heart.
Squeeze, on the other hand, go down a storm with an audience that is, 
admittedly, largely of an age to remember the band from the first time around. 
Their set is peppered with impermeable hits – Up the Junction, Tempted, Is That 
Love? – while Chris Difford and Glenn Tillbrook’s evident delight at the 
rejuvenated Squeeze’s success is a pretty infectious thing. Labelled With Love, 
the saga of an ageing, lonely alcoholic, seems a strong candidate for the most 
depressing song ever to provoke a mass festival singalong.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe70379d49527dadceed1e359748712ede62d769d%2F0_6_2432_1459%2F2432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe70379d49527dadceed1e359748712ede62d769d%2F0_6_2432_1459%2F2432.jpg>
 Skepta performing on the Pyramid stage. Photograph: exEX/Shutterstock 
Anyone surveying the swaying crowd and wondering where all the young people 
went could do worse than head up to the Park stage, where Lady Leshurr is doing 
her second set of the weekend. There is a lot of grime on offer at Glastonbury 
this year. If you are looking for confirmation of the genre’s ascendancy to 
huge commercial, as well as artistic importance, thenSkepta’s Friday-afternoon 
set on the Pyramid stage seems strong evidence. He is not the first grime MC to 
appear there: Dizzee Rascal beat him to it by several years. But Dizzee 
Rascal’s sets were heavy on concessions to pop-rap, and Skepta’s is anything 
but. It’s raw and wilfully menacing, the appearance of fellow MC Frisco on 
stage astride a BMX notwithstanding: it provokes a mosh pit.

Lady Leshurr, meanwhile, wins over the crowd with self-deprecating Brummie 
wit: “Go crazy,” she tells the crowd. “Just pretend you’re watchingAdele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> or Jay Z.” She’s an incredibly 
engaging performer, dedicating Crispy Bacon to a particularly sunburnt reveller 
in the crowd, and enquiring after the audience’s hygiene: “How did you brush 
your teeth today? Toothpaste and no water? Ugh.” Behind the pulverising bass 
and the gunshot sound effects, there lurks a very British and very funny kind 
of lyrical bathos. In Queen’s Speech 5, one adversary is dismissed as a “pick 
your nose and eat it gyal”; elsewhere, her lyrics are changed to reflect her 
surroundings: “I can’t stand girls who take their wellies off in the rave, I’ll 
step on your big toe to teach you how to behave.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1960091d89b7ae247c57e61a10f06ec1e14fe32b%2F0_192_4449_2670%2F4449.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1960091d89b7ae247c57e61a10f06ec1e14fe32b%2F0_192_4449_2670%2F4449.jpg>
 Wigging out: Suggs with Madness. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Curiously, it doesn’t feel jarring at all to leave her performance and go and 
seeMadness, who draw an immense crowd to the Pyramid stage. “I’d like to 
apologise to anyone who’s camping near my family – some of them seemed to move 
away this morning,” says Suggs, who does have the air of a man who has recently 
been enjoying himself in time-honoured Glastonbury style. The success of their 
performance is about as close to a foregone conclusion as you can get – the sun 
comes out during Our House, It Must Be Love retains its nonpareil ability to 
make everything seem temporarily all right with the world, the crowd let out a 
collective “aw” when the stage is flooded with the band’s children and 
grandchildren. But it’s not without its surprises: quite aside from Suggs’s 
increasingly wayward between-song pronouncements, there’s both a beautiful 
cover of David Bowie’s Kooks and a baffling interlude where proceedings are 
halted in order for guitarist Chris Foreman to sing a karaoke version of 
AC/DC’s Highway to Hell.

In the John Peel tent, John Grant seems to be having one of those fabled 
Glastonbury moments where festival mood and music combine into something that 
feels genuinely magical. He has flu, he complains, and he’s losing his voice. 
But when it gives out, on Glacier, a tumultuous version of Queen of Denmark and 
GMF, the audience take up the slack, to hugely moving effect: you realise how 
much the lyrics of these songs – at turns coruscatingly bitchy and tender and 
warm – mean to people. Grant looks authentically overawed: later he takes to 
Facebook and calls it one of the greatest experiences he has ever had on stage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe426ad93168b5843944453af7aa79d48012fb118%2F275_0_2667_3333%2F2667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe426ad93168b5843944453af7aa79d48012fb118%2F275_0_2667_3333%2F2667.jpg>
 Every inch the rock star: Matty Healy of the 1975. Photograph: David Levene 
for the Guardian 
Elsewhere, the 1975’s Matty Healy has helpfully turned up on stage dressed as 
a rock star – white flared suit, sunglasses, cigarette dangling from lip – but, 
like Héloïse Letissier, his onstage persona is an intriguing, engaging 
combination of the knowingly mannered and the heartfelt. He moves like a man 
who took that motivational poem about dancing as if no one is watching very 
much to heart; his band’s clever repurposing of 80s AOR – replete with a 
saxophone played by a man dressed as a mid-80s saxophonist, his flowing locks 
tousled by the breeze – sounds flatly fantastic here.

By contrast, Tame Impala, parachuted into the pre-Adele slot, struggle a 
little to connect. There’s nothing wrong with their music, which sounds every 
bit as dense and spectacular as it does on record – a polished, individual 
21st-century reboot of psychedelia – but, with the best will in their world, 
they are not a band overflowing with charisma on stage.

The announcement of Adele as Saturday-night headliner met with considerable 
controversy: you don’t have to be implacably opposed to her brand of 
multi-platinum heartbroken balladry to see why. Indeed, she can see it herself: 
“I don’t have a lot of upbeat happy songs, which is why I think people were 
annoyed,” she says from the stage. “But fuck them, eh?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b303c914a307791b239c1563a0257f589cbe8f7%2F0_186_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b303c914a307791b239c1563a0257f589cbe8f7%2F0_186_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Charm offensive: swearing and perfect delivery from Adele won over the 
Saturday-night crowd. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
She needn’t have worried: the crowd she draws is absolutely vast, even by the 
standards of Saturday-night Pyramid stage headliners, underlining the fact that 
she is currently the biggest pop star in the world. In the middle of it, a boy 
sits on a camping chair, doggedly ignoring everything around him in favour of 
playing Minecraft on his iPad, but everyone else seems almost as delighted to 
see her as she is to see them: initially, she keeps squawking the words, 
“Fuckin’ ’ell”, in the middle of songs, as if she can’t believe what’s 
happening, later showing a video of her first Glastonbury performance – to a 
tiny audience in a Guardian-sponsored acoustic tent nine years ago – as 
evidence of why she might be feeling flabbergasted. Indeed, there’s something 
pretty winning about the dramatic contrast between Adele the singer – a 
composed, effortless, unshowy vocalist, still capable of injecting real emotion 
into songs she now must have sung thousands of times – and Adele the person who 
takes to the microphone between songs and asks if anyone in the audience has 
shit themselves over the course of the weekend. “Is there piss in that cup?” 
she enquires of someone in the front row. “Don’t throw it at me.”

Unperturbed by the lack of almost anything you can dance to in her set – there 
are potent versions of Rumour Has It and Rolling in the Deep, but otherwise 
it’s ballads all the way – the audience lap up her charm offensive, which 
extends to diving into the crowd and re-emerging wearing a fez, and bringing a 
10-year-old girl on stage, asking her what her favourite colour is and taking a 
selfie with her. You could argue it’s got a whiff of the end-of-the-pier about 
it, but, equally, there’s something pretty bracing about her absolute refusal 
to conform to the standard notions of festival headlining cool: perhaps one of 
the side-effects of selling 50m albums is that you develop a keenly defined 
sense of self.

She ends with Someone Like You, which is both her biggest hit and an oddly 
downbeat conclusion. She leaves the stage before it ends: there is no encore. 
No one seems to mind: they drift off into the night, still singing its chorus 
en masse.

By Sunday, it’s hard to avoid the sense that the conditions on site are 
starting to wear on people a little: even Michael Eavis, a man who you suspect 
would still find a way of declaring it the best Glastonbury ever if the site 
were subjected to an outbreak of plague, is paying sombre tribute to the 
fortitude of anyone who has stuck it out.ELO roll out the hits to an audience 
whose enthusiasm is impressively undimmed, but there is no mistaking the ripple 
of hollow laughter that greets the line in Mr Blue Sky about there not being a 
cloud in sight: the skies are a blanket of slate grey and constant drizzle. It 
feels bizarrely like being at a festival on overcast afternoon in November.

Elsewhere, PJ Harvey reads out John Donne’s Meditation XVII in protest at the 
Brexit vote in the middle of a really powerful set. It is heavy on both the 
twisted, doomy blues that powers her most recent album The Hope Six Demolition 
Project, and the singer’s knowingly arch, stylised, regal posturing. Meanwhile, 
it’s hard not to be impressed by the sheer size of the crowd thatKamasi 
Washington draws to the West Holts stage. Modern jazz artists who transcend the 
limited audience for modern jazz tend to do so by popping up their sound, much 
to the disgust of purists – “You want to do crossover? Crossover my black ass,” 
as Miles Davis once rasped – but Washington seems to have done it without 
compromising his music at all. His sound is tough and funky, sometimes 
beautiful, sometimes confrontational, about as far removed from the world of 
Michael Parkinson-approved jazz-lite as it’s possible to get.

On the main stage, Beck looks a little bewildered, as a gentleman born, raised 
and still resident in the sun-kissed loveliness of California is perhaps wont 
to be when confronted with the sight of what is officially muddiest Glastonbury 
ever. Nevertheless, his performance cuts a crowd-pleasing, populist swathe 
through his eclectic back catalogue – E-Pro, Loser, a lot of stuff from Odelay. 
He joins the ranks of artists keen to pay homage to the late David Bowie, 
encouraging his guitarist to perform China Girl. It might have made for a more 
heartfelt tribute if he had actually known the words, but the audience seem to 
decide that it’s the thought that counts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa90f827f030b94ba7dd065dccc7d02b4cdd540a1%2F0_80_5000_2999%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glastonbury%202016%20verdict%3A%20Muse%2C%20Adele%2C%20Coldplay%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fglastonbury-2016-verdict-muse-adele-coldplay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa90f827f030b94ba7dd065dccc7d02b4cdd540a1%2F0_80_5000_2999%2F5000.jpg>
 Shamelessly corny and hugely effective: Chris Martin of Coldplay. Photograph: 
Ian Gavan/Getty Images 
What is needed on the Pyramid stage as Glastonbury draws to a close is not a 
head-spinningly original and challenging exploration of rock’s bleeding edge, 
but something comforting and familiar – the musical equivalent of a baked 
potato. EnterColdplay, stadium rock’s answer to Spudulike, to an accompaniment 
of fireworks and a tape of a voice saying: “You the people have the power.” It 
is tempting to go: yeah, and look where exercising it has got us. But a 
suitable degree of cynicism is genuinely hard to maintain in light of what 
follows. “It’s our favourite place in the world,” says Chris Martin as he walks 
on stage: by the conclusion of Yellow, he’s thanking the audience for 
“restoring our faith in the world”.

The audience, for their part, start bellowing along and don’t really stop for 
the next hour and a half: through Every Teardrop is a Waterfall, a version of 
Paradise that now comes with a pounding house coda attached, Viva La Vida and 
Fix You, the latter a song that always sounds substantially less mawkish when 
thousands of people are singing along. The trick of distributing thousands of 
flashing wristbands to the crowd and getting them to wave their arms in time to 
the music is both shamelessly corny and hugely effective as the night draws in.

They eschew a cover of David Bowie’s Heroes in favour of paying tribute to 
Viola Beach, the young band who were killed in car accident earlier this year: 
showing a video of them playing their debut single, then joining in the song 
themselves, “creating an alternative future for them”. They also seem to have 
noticed that the other Pyramid stage headliners haven’t done anything 
particularly out of the ordinary, and that it’s down to them to, as Martin puts 
it, “pull out all the stops to make it special”.

For an encore, they bring out first Barry Gibb to sing To Love Somebody and 
Staying Alive, then Michael Eavis to sing My Way. People, understandably, go 
nuts: you can, if you’re so minded, mock Coldplay’s innate musical 
conservatism, their shameless emotional button-pushing, but you’d have a hard 
time arguing that they don’t make perfect sense in a setting such as this. 
“What is the point of Coldplay?” is an oft-asked question among more waspish 
music fans and critics. Tonight, the fairly obvious answer seems to be: well, 
this.
 