
I've never understood why many of my fellow Scots insist on wearing kilts to 
social gatherings. It seems few weddings and even fewer formal get-togethers 
occur these days where a majority of the males are not trussed up in the tartan 
menace, having been sold the lie that it makes them look more manly. It doesn't 
â€“ it simply makes them look like big liquorice allsorts.

The modern kilt is a fey and ridiculous representation of the robust Highland 
dress in which the Jacobites went into battle against the Hanoverians and which 
was banned under the terms of the Dress Act in 1746. Sadly, when that law was 
repealed a few decades later, tartan was adopted as Scotland's national dress 
and any sense of quality control, taste or discrimination disappeared.

Any and all types of unnatural and gaudy colourings, dyes and pigmentations 
were now permitted in the making of the cloth and spurious connections to the 
ancient clans were invented. This scurrilous practice has been allowed to 
continue and now no public occasion or event inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is deemed to be complete without its 
own official tartan. Those who manufacture these garments cash in and charge 
outrageous prices just so that you can look like the male version of the sugar 
plum fairy. Tartan does have one good thing going for it, I'll admit: you can 
be sick all over it and no one would notice. It is scrote couture.

It's puzzling then that there has been such a negative reaction to Jilli 
Blackwood's creations forScotland's Commonwealth Games athletes 
<http://www.goscotland.org/parade-uniform.aspx> when they're parading in the 
opening and closing ceremonies. MsBlackwood  <http://www.jilliblackwood.com/>is 
one of Scotland's most gifted and iconoclastic artists whose work with fabric 
and texture results in the most splendid tapestries, several of which reside 
happily in our national collections. Unfortunately, Ms Blackwood opted for the 
tartan route when asked to design our athletes' parade uniforms, thus ensuring 
from the outset that any sense of decorum careers right out the window.

I wouldn't be surprised if it emerged that the estimable Ms Blackwood had been 
told to remain within strict parameters when designing the Commonwealth 
habiliment: we don't care what you concoct as long as it's tartan. What has 
emerged is a brave attempt to make tartan work as an ensemble. Instead of 
simply opting for one of those dreadful ghillie shirts that rugby chaps and 
private school types are fond of wearing with their kilts, Ms Blackwood has 
tried to bring something different to the party. Thus the shirts have a wee 
motif kind of thing running through them that seeks to have a relationship with 
the tartan in the kilts. And the tartan itself is a mercifully understated 
number that won't glow in the dark.

When Glasgow's Commonwealth Games <http://www.glasgow2014.com/> finally begin 
on 23 July, the event will become the property of the people and the athletes 
and not a moment too soon. Until now, the event has belonged to the officials 
and organisers and what a mess they have made of it so far. Events such as this 
seem to attract a specific strain of humanity: that which is happiest in a 
uniform, a name badge and making life as difficult as possible for those they 
are paid to serve. The controversy over the parade uniform is the least of it.

These people seriously thought it desirable to blow up some of the city's 
unlovely but iconic high-rise flats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/03/glasgow-2014-red-road-flats-demolished-opening-ceremony-commonwealth-games>
as the centrepiece of the opening ceremony. That's right: showcase to the world 
the expertise of Glasgow local government in keeping its least affluent 
citizens in permanent drudgery. Then, despite having had years to prepare for 
the day, their bizarre ticket-issuing policy led to anonline meltdown 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/sport/commonwealth-games/cwg-news/computer-expert-condemns-games-ticketing-meltdown.24235924>
.

Driving through one of Glasgow's edgier neighbourhoods the other day, I 
encountered evidence of perhaps the most crass and ill-judged action of the 
Games organisers: the decision to accept Atos as one of the main partners for
Glasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> 2014.

Atos is the outsourcing conglomeration whose fit-for-work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/17/atos-fit-for-work-tests-contract>
 tests on behalf of the Tory-led Westminster administration would have been 
deemed to be unrealistic by the Spartans. But when a private firm has been 
entrusted with cutting benefits costs as part of the government's 
blame-the-poor austerity drive nothing, it seems, is deemed too harsh. Reports 
in Glasgow's East End of sclerotic, one-legged pensioners being asked to prove 
their disability by running round an athletics track are not uncommon. To 
witness Glasgow 2014 banners bearing the hated Atos logo hanging from lampposts 
in these streets is simply an insult to residents who have been treated so 
inhumanely by this shower of government-appointed bovver boys.

Perhaps when the true extent of the emergency funding of Glasgow 2014 is 
revealed afterwards we will also get the chance to ask the organisers to 
justify this decision. In the meantime, many residents of Glasgow's East End 
have already begun to experience the dubious legacy of theCommonwealth Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/commonwealth-games>. Some of them the other 
week were ordered, with an hour's notice, to remove their cars from their own 
streets. Those failing to comply with this intrusion would risk having their 
cars impounded until September, they were told.

Parking restrictions in other parts of the city close to Games venues have 
also been imposed in a similar high-handed and authoritarian manner. And of 
course any local traders seeking financial recompense for lost custom during 
the Games by using the Glasgow 2014 logo in any promotional ventures risk being 
apprehended and roughed up by the Commonwealth Games Stasi.

Ever since London won the right to host the Olympics in 2012, the word legacy 
has been deployed to justify excessive cost or corporate gerrymandering of the 
best seats. At Glasgow 2014, "legacy" is placed in every whispered conversation 
about the Games. The suggestion is that the magic of the event will have the 
city's most under-privileged neighbourhoods teeming with Alf Tuppers all eating 
their five a week and tipping their cloth caps to the foreman for letting them 
off early from their shift at the foundry so that they can compete for the 
local Harriers. And that the nice smart homes in the athletes' village will be 
turned into affordable housing for the poor and the low-paid.

Aye right.
 