
The winner

Universal is banking on Dracula Untold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dracula-untold> to disinter its 1930s 
supernatural stable of monsters 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Monsters> and kick off a new franchise, 
according to reports. But the studio, in partnership with Legendary Pictures, 
has opted for an approach that is both risky and timid. Unproven Hobbit/Fast & 
Furious franchise playerLuke Evans <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1812656/> has 
been cast in the lead role – lightening the ballast on a big budget rumoured to 
be as much as $130m (£80m). And, with a muddy story concept and artworkheavily 
reminiscent of a certain dark knight <http://www.draculauntold.co.uk/>, the 
producers have failed to stake out fresh territory for the first big film 
featuring the count for a decade. That been-there feeling could explain a 
$23.5m US opening that is firm but hardly ecstatic, and lags behind most other 
recent vampire works (Van Helsing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/100479/van.helsing>, 2004: $51.7m; 
Underworld: Awakening <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/145511/underworld>
, 2012: $25.3m).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_2aWqecTTuE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_2aWqecTTuE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_2aWqecTTuE&media=>
There’s been a rush of interest, however, in the long-hibernating character 
overseas, as Dracula Untold scored nine more No 1s in the 17 markets it 
expanded into this weekend – including the best 2D opening of the year in 
Russia ($9.6m). With $86.6m in the bank after three frames, and several big 
territories to come, it should pass the global takes forUnderworld: Rise of the 
Lycans <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/128158/underworld> ($91.1m) and 
Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147852/abraham-lincoln> ($116m); those 
for similarly fanboyish Blade ($131.1m) andsequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/91611/blade.ii> ($155m) should also be 
within reach. Depending on its true outgoings, Dracula Untold might have to 
gross considerably more to hit profit. The heights touched more than 20 years 
ago by the starrier, more literary-styled likes ofBram Stoker’s Dracula  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/85831/bram-stoker-s-dracula>
($215.8m/$365.8m corrected) andInterview With a Vampire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/55210/interview-with-the-vampire> 
($223.6m/$358.9m corrected) might be too much to ask for Universal’s putative 
franchise-starter. Don’t expect to see Frankenstein just yet.

The runner-up
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F03%2Fgone-girl-you-night-draft-day-life-after-beth-video-reviews&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412269710341%2FBen-Affleck-in-Gone-Girl-021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gone%20Girl%2C%20You%20and%20the%20Night%2C%20Draft%20Day%20and%20Life%20After%20Beth%3A%20the%20Guardian%20film%20show%20%E2%80%93%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F03%2Fgone-girl-you-night-draft-day-life-after-beth-video-reviews>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gone%20Girl%2C%20You%20and%20the%20Night%2C%20Draft%20Day%20and%20Life%20After%20Beth%3A%20the%20Guardian%20film%20show%20%E2%80%93%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F03%2Fgone-girl-you-night-draft-day-life-after-beth-video-reviews&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412269710341%2FBen-Affleck-in-Gone-Girl-021.jpg>
I cast aspersions in last week’s box-office report about Gone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl>’s ability to go the distance. Bad 
call: it’s held well (-29% drop) in the States, the UK (-15%), Australia 
(-12%), Germany (-19%), Hong Kong (-3%) and elsewhere, in addition to opening 
in 14 new markets. (By way of comparison, horror filmAnnabelle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annabelle>, which opened neck-and-neck with 
David Fincher’s film in the US, fell 57%.) Its watercooler topicality (some 
people commented that it seemed to be every journalist’s duty last week to 
write a Gone Girl thinkpiece) seems to have given it powers of endurance in the 
developed world, about which it makes its psychosatirical inquest. It is doing 
well next to the October-timed speciality releases Fox has been using as a 
yardstick:Captain Phillips <https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-phillips> 
(-36.2%) andThe Departed <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-departed> 
(-29.2%) saw similar second-weekend audience loyalty, whileGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity> (-22.6%) and Argo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/argo> (-15.5%, albeit on a much smaller 
opening) held better. Gone Girl has comfortably earnt more at this point in its 
global rollout ($63m overseas) than all the above apart from Gravity, which had 
full-blown blockbuster credentials. It has, though, transcended its 
airport-thriller origins to touch on the upper realms of the zeitgeist.


Groot in China
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fguardians-of-the-galaxy-trailer-marvel-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405596660458%2FStill-from-Guardians-of-t-024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardians%20of%20the%20Galaxy%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Marvel's%20weirdest%20superhero%20proposition%20yet%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fguardians-of-the-galaxy-trailer-marvel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardians%20of%20the%20Galaxy%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Marvel%27s%20weirdest%20superhero%20proposition%20yet%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fguardians-of-the-galaxy-trailer-marvel-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405596660458%2FStill-from-Guardians-of-t-024.jpg>
Marvel is making play of a $29.8m debut for Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy> in China, an October 
opening-weekend record there. (Though that claim requires some cheeky 
hair-splitting with regard to local comedy-steamrollerBreakup Buddies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IYhS9FDboPg>, whose $38m the previous weekend 
was not technically – as it was released midweek – for an opening one.) It 
looks less emphatic when you consider it’s only the seventh biggest Hollywood 
debut of the year in China, which may not give it enough of a lift, three 
months after US release, to raise it above X-Men: Days of Future Past and 
Maleficent into 2014’s global top three. The next few weeks could be difficult 
in China for Peter Quill and co. Hollywood fodder has been packed into October 
(21: Hercules; 28: The Maze Runner; 31: Teenager Mutant Ninja Turtles) to clear 
the path for big year-end Chinese releases. But, spun another way, Guardians 
has done OK. Even more unfamiliar to eastern film-goers than to us, it beatThe 
Avengers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-avengers>’ opening ($19m), which 
faced the same issue; it had stiff competition from Breakup Buddies; it’s not 
dropped the ball on Marvel’s recent strong openings (Iron Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146938/iron-man-3>: $64.5m; Captain 
America: The Winter Soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-the-winter-soldier>: $38.8m) 
that are slowly building the presence and pull of the studio’s carefully 
interconnected universe in a country with no superhero tradition.


The African-American dollar
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4LErjzY_wKI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4LErjzY_wKI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4LErjzY_wKI&media=>
Surprise package of the week is hovering just outside the top 10 in the shape 
of erotic dramaAddicted <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZdZ0lUxunbA>, which 
took $7.5m in the US. Produced by Lionsgate’s African-American imprintCodeBlack 
<http://codeblack.com/>, it’s an example of the ethnically driven micro-genres 
the vast North American market can support. Pantelion, also backed by 
Lionsgate, havetargeted Hispanics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/mar/13/hollywood-hispanic-audiences-cinema>
, including those back in that diverse demographic’s various mother countries. 
CodeBlack isn’t as internationally focused, but shares the savvy for tightly 
focused marketing via social media. For instance, Addicted, directed by R&B and 
hip-hop video specialistBillie Woodruff <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0937306/>, 
benefited from source author Zane’s patronage onher Facebook account 
<https://www.facebook.com/AuthorZane> – cheap publicity that, set against a $5m 
budget, means the film should join the likes ofDiary of a Mad Black Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/108074/diary-of-a-mad-black-woman> 
(2005) in the seriously profitable bracket. Lionsgate, which also produced that 
film, knows that, despite film tastes that are sometimes sneered at, the 
African-American audience are taste-makers, too: Mad Black Woman starTyler Perry
 <http://www.tylerperry.com/> has become the latest in a long line to join the 
mainstream talent pool after his turn as lost-cause defence lawyer Tanner Bolt 
in Gone Girl.


The rest of the world
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT8tiwBIl8ZQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT8tiwBIl8ZQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT8tiwBIl8ZQ&media=>
Two new additions were swimming around in the lower echelons of the global 
chart, to add to Breakup Buddies,Bang Bang! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LRARHtMzZQE> and the flotilla of overseas hits 
that flooded in last frame. One Direction concert filmWhere We Are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/12/one-direction-where-we-are-the-concert-film-review-harry-styles>
, distributed by the UK-based Arts Alliance, took $5m from 26 territories 
(including £1m at the UK box office, where it came in fourth), to put it in 
12th globally; its predecessor, the Morgan Spurlock-directedThis Is Us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/one-direction-this-is-us>, took $68m 
worldwide. In 13th place was Korean filmMy Love, My Bride 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UhvY4UBv6D0>, a remake of the 1990 film of the 
same name, the first romcom to top the local chart this year.

The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F25%2Ffury-brad-pitt-world-war-ii-tank-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F6%2F25%2F1403709964857%2FBrad-Pitt-in-Fury-010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fury%3A%20watch%20Brad%20Pitt%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20World%20War%20II%20tank%20thriller%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F25%2Ffury-brad-pitt-world-war-ii-tank-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fury%3A%20watch%20Brad%20Pitt%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20World%20War%20II%20tank%20thriller%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F25%2Ffury-brad-pitt-world-war-ii-tank-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F6%2F25%2F1403709964857%2FBrad-Pitt-in-Fury-010.jpg>
Fury <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fury>, Brad Pitt’s much-publicised 
second world war Sherman-tank actioner, fires off its first salvos in North 
America and the Caribbean next frame. Questions about Robert Downey Jr’s appeal 
outside of the Iron Man suit will be put to the test inThe Judge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-judge>, which debuted weakly in the US 
this weekend and rolls out in 30 more markets. Latin-flavoured animationThe 
Book of Life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vs5b3LYWZmA&list=PL9TmbeeEvfFr1RH7nDAaZKeuob--MQPPb>
 – creeping into isolated locales since the beginning of the month – breaks 
proper in 25 territories. And French directorial team Olivier Nakache and Eric 
Toledano are using Hollywood rinse-and-repeat tactics to try to match the 
beyond-their-wildest-dreams success of their 2011 comedyIntouchables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149158/untouchable> ($426m worldwide – 
the 11th most successful comedy of all time).Samba 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-tqzwbjy0WQ>, opening this week in France, 
featurescomedian Omar Sy <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1082477/> again, trying to 
leap the immigrant gap again – only with romance now on the cards as Charlotte 
Gainsbourg’s stressed-out case officer replaces François Cluzet as Sy’s uptight 
white-middle-class foil.


Top 10 global box office, 10-12 October


1. Dracula Untold <https://www.theguardian.com/film/dracula-untold>, $58m from 
43 territories. $86.8m cumulative – 72.7% international; 27.3% US
2. Gone Girl <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl>, $53.8m from 53 
territories. $141.3m cum – 44.6% int; 55.4% US
3. Annabelle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annabelle>, $43.5m from 45 
territories. $122.5m cum – 49.2% int; 50.8% US
4. Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy>, $33.1m from 23 
territories. $687.1m cum – 52.5% int; 47.5% US
5. (New) Alexander and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-and-the-terrible-horrible-no-good-very-bad-day>
, $21.9m from 15 territories – 12.8% int; 87.2% US
6. The Equalizer <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-equalizer>, $21.2m from 
87 territories. $137m cum – 41.7% int; 58.3% US
7. The Maze Runner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-maze-runner>, $21.2m 
from 63 territories. $223.8m cum – 62.5% int; 37.5% US
8. (New) The Judge <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-judge>, $14.9m from 7 
territories – 10.7% int; 89.3% US
9. Breakup Buddies, $13.2m from 4 territories. $141.5m cum – 99.6% int; 0.4% US
10. The Boxtrolls <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-boxtrolls>, $10.3m 
from 27 territories. $72.8m cum – 43.6% int; 56.4% US


• Thanks to Rentrak. Some of this week’s figures are based on estimates; all 
historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.


• What should we be covering in our new global box office column? Let us know 
in the comments below.
 