
I interviewed the American climate activist and writer Bill McKibben 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/dec/06/bill-mckibben-interview> five 
years ago. I liked the essays he wrote in the New York Review of Books, and 
persuaded an editor that his books about environmental science and politics 
merited a profile. I had been a candidate for the Green party in local 
elections in London earlier that year, and with hindsight I think I was 
wondering, what next? McKibben knew far more about green issues than I did (his 
first book about climate change,The End of Nature 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/199359.The_End_of_Nature>, came out in 
1989). So I asked him: if a person is really worried about global warming, what 
should they do?

I may also have mentioned lightbulbs. As in: should this worried person change 
all the lightbulbs in their home to energy-saving ones first, or give up 
flying? I left the question out of the published article, though I admitted 
feeling inspired by McKibben in a paragraph that now makes me cringe. I’ll come 
back to that cringe, but what he said, very clearly, is that a mass movement of 
people is the only way to beat “the raw power of the fossil fuel industry”.

Cameron must make a climate U-turn immediately if he isn’t to betray Paris | 
Craig Bennett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/14/david-cameron-u-turn-paris-climate-change-summit>
I believed him then. I still do, and the Guardian agrees: Keep it in the ground
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/mar/16/keep-it-in-the-ground-guardian-climate-change-campaign>
, the campaign launched this year by outgoing editor Alan Rusbridger and 
continued by Katharine Viner, is all about trying to mobilise our readership 
against coal, oil and gas – and in favour of renewable energy. But just how 
mobilised, or politically active, should one aim to be?

I feel chastened writing this, even a bit low, because the truth is that 
although I understand catastrophic climate change to be a certainty, I haven’t 
been doing a great deal. I went on last month’sclimate march in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2015/nov/29/global-climate-march-2015-in-pictures>
, and discussed going to Paris for a weekend of street protests during the UN 
summit. I’ve written some more interviews with environmentalists, such asNew 
Zealand actor and activist Lucy Lawless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/jun/30/lucy-lawless-xena-ecowarrior-protest>
, aka Xena the Warrior Princess, because I thought they deserved the attention. 
I marvelled at the heroism of theArctic 30 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/arctic-30-protesters>, imprisoned 
after they attempted to board an oil rig in 2013, and donated to Greenpeace.

But I’m not an environment reporter and I write about other things as well. 
Meanwhile, in my own time (of which I have more than many people because I 
don’t work full time), I helped a Green party councillor get elected in 2014, 
which was brilliant, not least because the result was so close that every 
hour’s canvassing felt worth it. But since then, much of the time when I’m not 
working or with my family has been taken up bythe non-party-political community 
council I helped set up in my area 
<http://www.queensparkcommunitycouncil.gov.uk/council>.

I said I would come back to that cringe – I’ll call it the climate cringe. The 
truth is it’s impossible not to cringe from thecoming disasters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/10/scientists-predict-huge-sea-level-rise-even-if-we-limit-climate-change>
 – by which I mean floods, droughts and heatwaves, melting ice caps, sea-level 
rises that will drown parts of our world and turns millions of people into 
refugees. This will happen. It is happening. But the embarrassment I feel when 
I reread myself vowing to be greener is something else. You pious twit, says a 
voice in my head. This is another form of climate cringe – the cringe that 
inhibits us even from trying, and shames us for efforts that are bound to be 
inadequate and riddled with contradictions (call yourself an environmentalist, 
and you drive a car/eat meat/have four children!).

The Guardian view on UK energy policy after Paris: Amber Rudd must flick the 
trip switch | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/14/the-guardian-view-on-uk-energy-policy-after-paris-amber-rudd-must-flick-the-trip-switch>
The problem is that we are all – in the rich west – addicted to carbon and, 
like all addicts, we are ambivalent about anyone else giving up. Hydrocarbons 
(coal, oil, gas) formed from rotting vegetation and laid down over millions of 
years, have made us richer than our cave-dwelling ancestors could have 
imagined. Now carbon dioxide pollution threatens to cause irreparable harm, and 
may kill many of us off – the poorest people, who haven’t even benefited from 
the hydrocarbon boom. Such planetary-level injustice is hard to comprehend. But 
in our own daily lives, our addiction gives us so much pleasure (cheap flights! 
fast cars! plastic toys!) that we can’t bear to imagine life without it – and 
when others try to cut down, we are torn between support and irritation.

If I were 25, or didn’t have young children, I hope I’d be up for some direct 
action. At 44, I’m looking forward to next year’s London elections. Our city 
needs a green mayor. To anyone else – anyone, that is, who feels they are in a 
position to do anything – what can I say? It’s helpful to shrink your carbon 
footprint, but political engagement (which means pressure groups and local 
initiatives as well as Westminster) matters more. Read up, decide: do you 
believe the science or not? Then panic, but don’t cringe or despair. We have 
too much to lose, and still some time.
 