
The first thing I do as I prepare to go for holiday is panic. “How will I ever 
get it all done?” I ask myself. “What will happen if this or that doesn’t get 
follow-up while I’m away?”

Then, I try to breathe and remember the advice a mentor once shared: taking 
care of me <http://www.how-matters.org/2016/02/26/my-struggles-with-self-care/> 
is the work.

Taking time off is not a luxury. It is a necessity in becoming inspired and 
effective contributors to social change. Our work relationships require us to 
recommit every day to making them work, with deep listening, patience, 
humility, and an embrace of paradox. These qualities are hard to come by when 
I’m stressed and overcome by the tyranny of the to-do list.

So I’m sharing five steps I take when it’s time to switch off and revitalise:

Every day I’m away, I commit to doing something that gives me a clear sense of 
taking care of myself

1 Make comprehensive handover notes

I start by taking everything that’s in my head and on my to-do list and make a 
summary for my co-workers. This “status update” helps me identify what really 
needs to get done while I’m away and what can wait for my return. Making 
handover notes also helps me determine what can be delegated and if, when, and 
how I can be contacted if questions or emergencies arise. They are also a great 
way to remind the boss of the responsibilities and projects I’m holding. 
Ultimately, the handover notes are for me, so that I go on holiday feeling all 
the loose ends are tied up.

2 Cut off email from your phone

I have a hard and fast no-email rule while on leave. Given that I’m tethered 
to my phone for social media and the camera, it is just too tempting for me to 
see what emails have come in. So I make sure those emails are simply not 
delivered to my phone. How many of them are truly urgent anyway? I’ve learned 
the hard way to not let the fear of returning to hundreds of emails be stronger 
than my resolve not to be disturbed by work.

3 Commit to a daily practice

It could be a walk every afternoon, 20 minutes of meditation, reading a 
beloved book, making breakfast every morning, or calling my grandmother. Every 
day I’m away, I commit to doing something that gives me a clear sense of taking 
care of myself or my family. Too many times, during busy work days, I just 
don’t have the time, or make excuses for why this has to be put off. These 
things become my first priorities while I am away, and become easier to 
integrate into my daily life on my return.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fgoing-on-holiday-how-to-switch-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49c1da8c138cc26391157b167d427c7f1114476%2F0_79_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20on%20holiday%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20switch%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fgoing-on-holiday-how-to-switch-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20on%20holiday%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20switch%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fgoing-on-holiday-how-to-switch-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49c1da8c138cc26391157b167d427c7f1114476%2F0_79_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 Does Theresa May know how to reap the full benefits of her holiday? If not her 
work could suffer Photograph: WPA Pool/Getty Images 
4 Engage in creativity

I try to allow my mind some freedom on leave. Artistic endeavours of any sort 
are a great way for me to do this. I am apoet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/dec/24/development-disruptors-poem-jennifer-lentfer>
 all the time, but exploring new music, making a collage, or taking a 
storytelling or cooking class reconnects me to my creativity and my passion. I 
use different parts of my brain from those used to plan and budget and 
evaluate. Every time, it’s amazing what unexpected “a-ha” moments occur as a 
result.

5 Take time to reflect on your goals

 Thomas Merton wrote: “It is true that we are called to create a better world. 
But we are first of all called to a more immediate and exalted task: that of 
creating our own lives.” Time to take acareful accounting 
<http://www.how-matters.org/2015/12/31/did-i-2015-reflections/> of what I have 
experienced in my life, what has shaped it, is often hard to come by on 
holiday, especially if surrounded by family or friends. But it’s crucial. Our 
professional goals and achievements are only part of our lives. What should I 
celebrate? What do I have yet to attain? Am I creating the life I truly want? 
Am I resisting change, or embracing it?

Development work is an emotional and spiritual endeavour, requiring us to not 
only to use our intellects, but our whole selves. The world needs many more 
people resolved and fearless enough to work and fight for a better future for 
us all.

So take your days off, and “fill up the well”. Return from leave as your most 
hopeful, courageous self.

Jennifer Lentfer is the creator of how-matters.org <http://www.how-matters.org>
 and director of communications atIDEX - International Development Exchange 
<http://www.idex.org>. Follow @IDEX <https://twitter.com/idex> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 