
Todd Haynes’s Carol led the pack with five Golden Globes nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/10/golden-globes-nominations-2016-full-list-of-film-tv>
 while Mad Max: Fury Road got unexpected nods for best picture and best 
director as Golden Globes voters produced their usual mix of shocks and snubs.

Golden Globes nominations 2016: the full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/10/golden-globes-nominations-2016-full-list-of-film-tv>
Mad Max is joined by Carol, The Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant>, Room and Spotlight in the 73rd 
Golden Globes’s best picture (drama) category, while Amy Schumer’s Trainwreck 
was another big winner with nods for Schumer in best actress (comedy), and the 
film will go up against The Big Short, Joy, The Martian and Spy in best motion 
picture, musical or comedy.

The Revenant and The Big Short are both up for four awards each, while Idris 
Elba <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> received nods in 
television (Luther) and film (Beasts of No Nation). Alicia Vikander was 
nominated for best supporting actress (Ex Machina) and as a lead for her 
performance in The Danish Girl, which is up for three awards.

Quentin Tarantino was nominated for best screenplay for The Hateful Eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hateful-eight>, where he’ll be up against 
Aaron Sorkin (Steve Jobs) as well as Tom McCarthy (Spotlight), with Room and 
The Big Short finishing off the category.

In television, Lady Gaga received a nomination for her role in American Horror 
Story: Hotel, while Empire,Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, Narcos, Outlander 
and Mr Robot also did well. Mr Robot had a successful morning with three nods, 
the same number as Wolf Hall and Transparent.

Best television series (comedy) was dominated by the original content of 
streaming sites. Casual (Hulu), Mozart in the Jungle (Amazon Prime), Orange Is 
the New Black (Netflix) and Transparent (Amazon Prime), are all up for the 
award, with HBO’s pair of Veep and Silicon Valley, the only cable competition.
 