
It was the resignation letter read around the world.

Greg Smith, a Goldman Sachs director in London, resigned after publishing a 
devastating open letter in the New York Times accusing senior staff of being "
morally bankrupt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/mar/14/goldman-sachs-director-quits-morally-bankrupt>
".

Of course, Smith was not the first – nor will he be the last – to pull a Jerry 
Maguire <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSi4HHNOnd0>. Here are a few other 
relatively recent letters of note – some resignations, some manifestos and some 
a combination of the two:

Google executive James Whitaker: Why I Left Google 
<http://blogs.msdn.com/b/jw_on_tech/archive/2012/03/13/why-i-left-google.aspx>. 
March 13, 2012

"The Google I was passionate about was a technology company that empowered its 
employees to innovate. TheGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>
 I left was an advertising company with a single corporate-mandated focus."

Technology columnist Paul Carr: I'm Leaving TechCruch, Here's Why 
<http://techcrunch.com/2011/09/16/last-post/>. September 16, 2011

"A little over a week ago I wrote that, unless Mike Arrington was allowed to 
choose his own successor as editor ofTechCrunch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/techcrunch>, I would no longer write for the 
site. Sure enough, this past Monday, a statement from AOL announced Erick 
Schonfeld as the new editor."

Daily Star reporter Richard Peppiatt: I quit 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/mar/04/daily-star-reporter-letter-full>. 
March 4, 2011

"Undeterred by the nuisance of truth, we omitted a few facts, plucked a couple 
of quotes, and suddenly anyone would think a Rochdale shopping centre had hired 
Osama Bin Laden to stand by the taps, handing out paper towels."

Jake DeSantis, an executive vice-president of AIG: March 24, 2009 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/25/opinion/25desantis.html?pagewanted=all>

"We in the financial products unit have been betrayed by AIG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig>. and are being unfairly persecuted 
by elected officials."

Steve Jobs: To the Apple Board of Directors and the Apple Community 
<http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2011/08/24Letter-from-Steve-Jobs.html>. August 
24, 2011


"I have always said if there ever came a day when I could no longer meet my 
duties and expectations as Apple's CEO, I would be the first to let you know. 
Unfortunately, that day has come."

Karen Handel, Susan G Komen executive. Feb 7, 2012 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2012/02/07/karen-handel-s-resignation-letter-from-susan-g-komen.html>

"I am deeply disappointed by the gross mischaracterizations of the strategy, 
its rationale, and my involvement in it."

'A Rim Employee': Open letter to RIM executives 
<http://www.bgr.com/2011/06/30/open-letter-to-blackberry-bosses-senior-rim-exec-tells-all-as-company-crumbles-around-him/>
. June 30, 2011


"While I hide it at work, my passion has been sapped. I know I am not alone — 
the sentiment is widespread and it includes people within your own teams."

Yahoo senior vice-president Brad Garlinghouse: the 'Peanut Butter Manifesto' 
<http://online.wsj.com/public/article/SB116379821933826657-0mbjXoHnQwDMFH_PVeb_jqe3Chk_20061125.html>
. November 18, 2006

"I've heard our strategy described as spreading peanut butter across the 
myriad opportunities that continue to evolve in the online world. The result: a 
thin layer of investment spread across everything we do and thus we focus on 
nothing in particular."
 