
For the past few weeks Australia's Ashes tour has seemed to serve a purpose 
other than mere domination on the cricket field. The campaign to promote Shane 
Warne's new book has looked like a marketing man's dream.

My Autobiography has been propped regularly on the Australian players' 
balcony. Warne's team-mates have been observed reading it. Even Skimpy the 
kangaroo, the team's marsupial mascot, has been seen with his stuffed nose 
buried in its pages - perhaps to attest its broad appeal.

Nothing could be quite so effective in shifting a few units, however, as 
shifting a few Englishmen. And that mission was accomplished on Saturday in a 
spell which, almost by the way, made Warne the first slow bowler in history to 
claim 400 Test wickets.

It was not only exciting to watch but also fun. Warne dramatises slow bowling 
as Dennis Lillee did fast. An over from him involves an elaborate dumb show, of 
anticipation, agony, glee and gloating. He paws his chin, ruffles his hair, 
rubs the ground. The lips purse and pucker, smile and smirk. Archie MacLaren 
once wrote of the great Australian fast bowler Jack Gregory that "he employs 
his face also to add to the dismay his approach is calculated to inspire". The 
same could be said of Warne.

Warne also brings to mind Sir Donald Bradman's famous remark about Bill 
O'Reilly: "He seemed to attack from all directions." And this is more than 
rhetoric: Warne has bowled a greater proportion of his overs from round the 
wicket than perhaps any of the game's outstanding wrist spinners. When Richie 
Benaud won a Test match at Old Trafford with this tactic 40 years ago, he was 
said to have thought the unthinkable. In Warne's hands the approach has become 
more familiar, even routine.

At times in recent years, in fact, Warne seems to have developed an id√©e fixe 
about bowling into footmarks. A veteran of more special operations than George 
Smiley, he may even have needed it as a psychological prop - with the ball 
rebounding from the rough even when the mode of attack appeared predictable and 
nugatory.

The challenge of bowling on pitches two and three days old in England this 
season has been good for Warne. Without the enticements of footmarks, he has 
reverted to more orthodox methods: his leg-break has reacquired that voluptuous 
shape of old, veering toward leg stump before darting away. Apart from the last 
day at Headingley he has been consistently threatening.

What can one say, meanwhile, about the record itself? The mere figures are 
rather meaningless; numbers devoid of interpretation are as helpful as a map 
without place names. But, with a little tweak or two, Warne's statistics speak 
quite eloquently.

One of the simplest and best measures of a bowler's stature is how he 
assimilates different conditions. A great many cricketers have been lions at 
home and lambs away; only the best do the business in all climes.

Warne's record in Australia is 188 wickets at 24.6. This performance alone 
justifies his claim to greatness; coincidentally, his wickets on Australian 
pitches have cost precisely the same as Bill O'Reilly's.

During Warne's home Test career, moreover, it is hard to remember him ever 
having been outbowled. The world spin elite has come calling - Kumble, 
Muralitharan, Saqlain Mushtaq, Mushtaq Ahmed - but none has outshone him.

Spinners obtained five 10-wicket Test bags on Australian soil during the 
1990s; four were Warne's.

Warne's haul in the other Test-playing nations, meanwhile, is a little less 
instantly impressive: he is currently in his 50th away Test, for 215 wickets at 
27.4. But the figures are distorted. Warne has endured two truly wretched 
series, both in India after incapacitating finger injuries; in hindsight these 
were Tests too far and too soon.

Discount Warne's overseas record for these matches and a clearer underlying 
trend emerges: 195 wickets at 24.8. Such near-perfect symmetry is exceedingly 
rare. Even Lillee is hard to rank in the same light.

Saturday at the Oval was as good for cricket as it was for Warne's publishers.
 