
ITV breakfast show Good Morning Britain is closing its New York office 
following areview of the programme’s operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/oct/30/good-morning-britain-itv>
.

It comes as executives try to figure out how to boost ratings for Good Morning 
Britain as it approaches its nine-month anniversary in January.

Last month, ITV director of television Peter Fincham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/peter-fincham> said he would like to see an 
improvement in the breakfast programme’s audience figures and, in May, he said 
that the time to discuss the show’s ratings was early next year
Over the last week, Good Morning Britain has been averaging around 600,000 
viewers – the same as its predecessor Daybreak did during the same time period 
last year.

Good Morning Britain launched in April with four presenters – including BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Breakfast’s former presenter Susanna 
Reid – after the producers spent time in the US studying the success of such 
shows as a Good Morning America.

However, it has reviewed its US operations and decided to close its New York 
bureau as part of an efficiency drive.

Two staff were employed there and the producer is being transferred to the 
show’s Los Angeles office, leaving the programme to rely on an independent 
company to broadcast the latest news from America.

An ITV spokesperson said: “USA news coverage will remain an integral part of 
the ITV Breakfast output. ITV is proud of the new show, and we are pleased by 
the recent audience increases.”

After Good Morning Britain launched, ratings dipped below 400,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/06/good-morning-britain-ratings-drop-itv-bbc-breakfast>
, but they have since stabilised and, according to ITV figures in November, it 
averaged 592,000 viewers – up 50,000 on October.

Despite heavy promotion on-air, the programme is still regularly beaten by its 
BBC1 rival. BBC Breakfast attracts around 1.4 million viewers on weekdays.

It is understood that the show makes good money from competitions and adverts, 
but when it comes to audience figures, it has not yet broken through to the 
extent that ITV hoped it would, so changes to the show may be on the horizon.
Speaking last month at the Salford Media Festival, Fincham said Good Morning 
Britain had the broadcaster’s support and that ITV was taking a long view – as 
outlined by chief executiveAdam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier> in June when he said the 
broadcaster was backing the programme for a one- to two-year period.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
on Twitter and Facebook.
 