
What is it? The patch you strap on if your Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> withdrawal shakes 
won’t quit.

Why you’ll love it: (Or not) You won’t find a single review of Good Girls 
Revolt that doesn’t mention Mad Men and this one will be no different. I have 
never seen a show so desperate to be Mad Men, with everything from the office 
set to the selection of character types to the slightly cringe whig-out scenes 
and hippy happenings bearing a remarkable resemblance to AMC’s biggest hit. 
This show feels like a determined but naive girl, trying to wear her big 
sister’s heels but walking ever so slightly like a duck in them.

Mad Men bowed out at the end of the 60s and this show also chooses to use the 
transition from the 1969–70 as the background to the zeitgeisty lives of the 
employees at a busy New York media office. This time it’s fictional magazine 
News of the Week, but the office politics, booze consumption and clacking 
typewriters have been shipped wholesale.

It’s based on Lynn Povich’s well-documented real experience 
<http://www.lynnpovich.com/_i_the_good_girls_revolt_how_the_women_of_newsweek_sued_their_bosses_and_changed_111485.htm>
 of helping to lead a female staff mutiny at Newsweek in the 1970s, one which 
resulted in 46 workers suing their employer for discrimination. But back at 
News of the Week, it’s the 70s, guys, and there’s a whole lot of news happening 
out there, goddammit. While the all-male editorial team of said journal are 
busy taking the credit, they fail to notice that their female researchers are 
secretly banding together to demand a crack at the reporting jobs.

A big story needs big characters and this is told from the viewpoint of three 
main fictional researchers (althoughNora Ephron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/27/nora-ephron> is thrown in there 
too for authenticity) on a publication that doesn’t appreciate them. There’s 
feisty shit-stirrer Patti (Genevieve Angelson 
<https://twitter.com/GenevieveAngel?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
) who gets dumped by her boyfriend for being too much of a feminist blow-hard. 
Then we meet Cindy (Erin Darke <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3520615/>), forever 
pushing her oval glasses on to her nose demurely and pretending to be less 
clever than she is. They are joined by Jane (Anna Camp 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2319871/>), who starts the show fixated on marriage 
and how big she can backcomb her hair, but finds there is more to life than a 
Tiffany ring. You get the picture.

Lording it over them is Finn (Chris Diamantopoulos 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0224565/>), the Don Draper of News of the Week, 
married to his job, an irascible husband who goes all adorable when playing 
with kids and then hurls a typewriter through a glass partition because he’s so 
complicated. And Cindy is Peggy Olson. And Jane is Betty Draper. It’s The
Bootleg Beatles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/shortcuts/2013/jun/30/rolling-stones-bootleg-beatles-glastonbury>
, genuinely, but I still can’t bring myself to hate it. Either I’m missing Mad 
Men so much I’ll take a lookalike and just squint to enjoy it, or it actually 
isn’t bad and I need to try to see past the many similarities between the two.

Cindy is the hook that keeps me watching as she transforms from trapped, 
subservient housewife into someone with a growing curiosity for what she might 
actually like if given a free choice. And the answer is autonomy and unlimited 
clitoral orgasms.

Good Girls Revolt tells an important story and it reminds us, implicitly, that 
this war isn’t over. We are not watching the past, yet.

Length: eight one-hour episodes, all available now on Amazon Prime.

Stand-out episode: episode five, in which my favourite character, Cindy, 
begins her own personal revolt against her dull marriage. So much polo neck sex.

If you liked Good Girls Revolt, watch: I’m trying not to type Mad Men (Amazon 
Prime) but I’m going to have to say Mad Men. Also Masters of Sex (Amazon Prime).
 