
This autumn yet another new edition of EH Gombrich’s classic 1950 book The 
Story of Art – the “Luxury” edition 
<http://uk.phaidon.com/store/art/the-story-of-art-9780714872155> – will be out 
in time for Christmas. Meanwhile the BBC is hard at work on Civilisations, an 
epic attempt to regain the factual television heights ofKenneth Clark’s 1969 
series Civilisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/18/kenneth-clark-civilised-man-art-historian-civilisation>
.

Last art history A-level axed after Michael Gove cull of 'soft' subjects
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/12/last-art-history-a-level-axed-after-michael-gove-cull-of-soft-subjects>
Gombrich and Clark were outstanding scholars and thinkers in the academic 
discipline of art history, which means the historical study of the styles and 
meanings of art. They were also great public intellectuals who could share the 
subtleties of their knowledge in lucid prose with millions of people.

Today it would be very hard to find an academic historian in their league. The 
closest is probably the eloquent Marxist thinkerTJ Clark, but even his 
brilliant ruminations on Picasso 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v38/n11/tj-clark/picasso-and-the-fall-of-europe> and the 
age of Auschwitz are far from mainstream fare. When I want a clear (and 
beautiful) explanation of what the Romanesque is and why it matters, I dig out 
my DVDs of Clark’s Civilisation for the hundredth time.

What killed art history? It is worth asking this as the last exam board to 
offer art history as an A-levelgives up the ghost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/12/last-art-history-a-level-axed-after-michael-gove-cull-of-soft-subjects>
. The AQA board will dropAS-levels in history of art 
<http://www.aqa.org.uk/subjects/art-and-design/as-and-a-level/history-of-art-2250>
 after 2018.

Is that a tragedy? The historian and art critic Simon Schama tweeted that 
<https://twitter.com/simon_schama/status/786315776244539392> the destruction of 
this A-level is “a big dull axe wielded by cultural pigmies”. Yes, but before 
getting on too high a horse, it is worth knowing that, asMaev Kennedy reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/12/last-art-history-a-level-axed-after-michael-gove-cull-of-soft-subjects>
, only a “handful” of state schools offered art history A-level. Behind that 
handful is the embarrassing fact that most students sitting it were at public 
schools. In 2014, art historywas offered by just 17 state schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/mar/04/art-history-not-posh-visual-toolkit>
 – and 90 fee-paying ones. A campaign called the Maintained Sector History of 
Art Project, launched with a lunch atSotheby’s <http://www.sothebys.com/en.html>
 (where else?), sought to correct the situation by inviting comprehensive 
pupils to join classes at public schools, like Victorian urchins being given 
charity.

I have met students who did history of art A-level – at their fee-paying 
schools. Very confident it made them too. Far from a savage attack on the 
people’s art history, this is the end of one privilege of the public-school 
elite.

Far from a savage attack on the people’s art history, this is the end of one 
privilege of the public-school elite

But then, art history at university level is itself a bit of a posh subject. I 
never knew of its existence while I was at school and it would have been 
unimaginable for a Welsh comprehensive pupil to apply for such an apparently 
decorative discipline. At Cambridge – where I read proper history instead – I 
sometimes ventured into the art history faculty library. It was gorgeous, like 
a gentleman’s club, with students kitted out likeSebastian Flyte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/sep/27/evelynwaugh.fiction> (this was 
the 1980s, when everyone was intoxicated by the TV adaptation of Brideshead 
Revisited) seated in comfy armchairs, languidly leafing through books on the 
baroque.

More recently, the most famous graduate in art history from a British 
university has been the Duchess of Cambridge. This week she wasphotographed 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/11/duchess-of-cambridge-meets-dutch-king-on-day-of-soft-diplomacy-o/>
 at theMauritshuis <https://www.mauritshuis.nl/en/> in Holland looking at 
Vermeer’s Girl With a Pearl Earring – while wearing a pearl earring! It’s good 
that her degree from St Andrews gave her that insight into the Dutch Golden Age.

Kenneth Clark: a civilised man?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/18/kenneth-clark-civilised-man-art-historian-civilisation>
Other art history graduates, whether they went to private or state schools, 
gravitate to Britain’s booming art market to work at Sotheby’s or London’s 
legion of commercial galleries. Some will become curators at museums, or teach 
and research art history themselves. What none seem able to do is to share 
their knowledge with the general public in the way Gombrich or Clark once did.

Art history has become an obscurantist, elitist subject. It is remarkable that 
while theoretical physicists are constantly communicating their latest whacky 
ideas in popular books or on TV, none of the readable popular books on art 
history you will find in shops are by academic art historians. They are more 
likely to be written by art critics such asMartin Gayford 
<http://martingayford.co.uk/> or Andrew Graham-Dixon 
<http://www.andrewgrahamdixon.com/index.html>. Why is this?

It is a perverse spasm that results from the (not entirely unjustified) 
perception of art history as a posh person’s leisure activity. In the 1980s, a 
generation of art historians styled themselves “new” and “radical” – just like 
literary critics at the time they embraced “French theory”. Ever since, art 
history at the research level has abandoned any idea of elucidating the story 
of art in a humane and cogent way. In other words, the drive to prove art 
history is neither posh nor soft has resulted in a dry Byzantine academicism 
that can’t communicate outside a secluded seminar.

On the one hand, art history produces the well-groomed salespeople who make 
Frieze Masters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/05/frieze-masters-2016-review-regents-park>
 go with a swing. On the other it creates tedious discourses of no interest to 
anyone, or deconstructs its own intellectual purpose.

Meanwhile, the hole in our culture that was once filled by the great art 
historians gets ever larger. Abolish the A-level? This entire subject needs a 
shake-up.
 