
Online shopping is not the most glamorous aspect of the digital revolution, 
but it has just become the latest Silicon Valley battleground, with droids 
racing drones to become the courier of the future.

First Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> promised to 
eliminate the drudgery of the post office queue with parcels delivered by 
drone. Now Google has revealed that it is developing humanoid robots that could 
one day carry groceries to your door.

Andy Rubin <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/andy-rubin>, the Google 
executive who brought smartphones to the masses by developing Google's free 
Android software, has revealed he is working on a secret project for the search 
engine company to create a new generation of robots.

Rubin resigned unexpectedly from running Android in March, and over the past 
six months has quietly overseen Google's acquisition of seven small companies 
whose combined technology could be used to create a robot with animal 
characteristics such as a form of vision and moving limbs.

"With robotics it's a green field," Rubin told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/04/technology/google-puts-money-on-robots-using-the-man-behind-android.html?ref=technology&_r=0>
. "We're building hardware, we're building software, We're building systems, so 
one team will be able to understand the whole stack."

Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> robotics will be based 
in Palo Alto, California, and in Japan. The companies acquired include 
Industrial Perception, an American start-up that has developed digital eyes and 
robot arms for use in loading lorries, Holomni, which produces caster wheels 
that can rapidly swivel in any direction, and Japan's Schaft, whose robots 
generate as much power as a human and have mastered stable biped walking to 
cope with uneven ground (they can even retain their balance against the force 
of a human kick).

Sources say plans are to develop machines that can be used for a range of 
activities, from manufacturing small electronics like smartphones – still 
mostly assembled by hand – to packing goods in warehouses and ultimately making 
home deliveries.

If Amazon and Google's plans materialise, the unsuspecting online shopper 
could find a dazzling array of remote controlled technology arriving by air and 
road at their doorstep.

On Sunday, Amazon's founder, Jeff Bezos, kicked off his company's Christmas 
publicity push by revealing a project to use drones to deliver purchases to the 
doorstep within half an hour of an order being placed.

Meanwhile, Google is approaching a breakthrough with self-driving cars that 
will use sensors and onboard computers to steer through traffic, raising the 
prospect that purchases could be delivered by robots in driverless vehicles.

The recently launched Google shopping service, a pilot project, is already 
delivering goods in San Francisco from Walgreens pharmacies, Target discount 
stores and American Eagle Outfitters.

Noel Sharkey, emeritus professor of artificial intelligence at the University 
of Sheffield, said: "This is a very exciting development at Google. The 
robotics community is waiting with bated breath to find out what is being 
planned. Clearly, given the companies that have been acquired this is going to 
be research on the development of humanoid robots.

"People should not be worried that [the robots] will be super intelligent. It 
is more likely they are going to develop these for domestic purposes such as 
assistance in elder care or perhaps for bar work or as receptionists. We can 
only speculate. But with the kind of money that Google can throw into a project 
like this, it is likely to be astonishing."

Rubin worked for the German manufacturing firm Carl Zeiss, as a robotics 
engineer, before joiningApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> 
and then Google.

He said that much of the technology needed for humanoid machines was already 
in place. There was room for improvement in areas including software and 
sensors, but mobility and moving hands were already well advanced.

He described the robotics project as a "moonshot", but unlike other Google 
research labs Rubin's division intends to produce machines that will eventually 
come to market.

"Like any moonshot, you have to think of time as a factor," Rubin said. "We 
need enough runway and a 10-year vision."

While Amazon's drones may prove little more than a publicity stunt, Rubin has 
a proven commercial track record. Android, launched not long after Apple's 
first iPhone, was slow to catch on, but its model of providing free software 
for use in any manufacturer's smartphone has helped Samsung surge ahead of 
Apple. Today, 80% of all smartphones sold run Android software.
 