


Time for Rupert Murdoch to mobilise the lobbyists? Search engines would be 
exempted in UK law from any liability for copyright infringement, under a 
remarkable amendment (292) proposed to theDigital Economy Bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2009-10/digitaleconomy.html>.

Conservative Lord Lucas is proposing a specific new clause so that…

"Every provider of a publicly accessible website shall be presumed to give a 
standing and non-exclusive license to providers of search engine services to 
make a copy of some or all of the content of that website, for the purpose only 
of providing said search engine services ...

"A provider of search engine services who acts in accordance with this section 
shall not be liable for any breach of copyright..."

Lucas' amendment, Protection of search engines from liability for copyright 
infringement", would rewrite the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

This could throw the cat amongst the pigeons on practices like aggregating MP3 
deep links (for whichYahoo has been penalised even in China 
<http://paidcontent.org/article/419-china-upholds-ruling-yahoo-music-site-breaches-copyright/>
) - but would have the mostprofound impact on the ongoing issue of search 
engines' ability to crawl news publishers articles...

Indeed, it would, for example, give Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> legal immunity with which to 
index News Corp content, settling that thorny topic once and for all. But all 
would not be lost for publishers who want to retain control. Lucas's amendment 
does make provision…

The presumption (of having an automatic license) may be rebutted by explicit 
evidence that such a licence was not granted. Such explicit evidence shall be 
found only in the form of statements in a machine-readable file to be placed on 
the website and accessible to providers of search engine services.

In other words, Google would be free to copy everything - but a publisher 
blocking search spiders with a robots.txt file would be taken as withholding 
that right. An explicit "fair use" provision, which Google often cites against 
copyright-abuse claims,does not exist in UK law 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyright_law_of_the_United_Kingdom#Fair_dealing_and_other_exceptions>
.

The wide-ranging Digital Economy Bill, whose glitziest clauses ask ISPs to 
warn subscribers accused of illegal downloading before throttling their 
bandwidth or kicking them offline, is currently going through House Of Lords 
committee stage.

During its passage, individual representatives are trying to pin their 
specific interests on to the bill. Butthere are opportunities for Lucas' 
amendment to fail. If it fails to win peers' backing, Lucas may yet withdraw it 
before the Lords decide on a version to pass to House Of Commons MPs, who may 
themselves remove it if Lucas does not.

It's one of 299 proposed amendments which are being heard in the Lords, with 
the next such session on Tuesday.
 