
The future of US online news could be stifled by proposals put forward by the 
Federal Trade Commission to protect journalism,Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has warned.

In its 20-page response to the FTC's discussion draft, the search giant argues 
that the proposals, far from working towards a sustainable future for the 
future of news and online journalism, "not only hurt free expression, but also 
the very profession of journalism".

"Innovating to create products and services that consumers want to pay for is 
the only way to guarantee long-term subscription revenue growth, and none of 
the policy proposals are designed to foster that kind of innovation," itsays 
<http://googlepublicpolicy.blogspot.com/2010/07/business-problems-need-business.html>
.

The FTC <http://www.ftc.gov/ftc/offices.shtm> began examining the impact of 
the internet on journalism 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/24/business/media/24ftc.html> in May 2009, 
hostingdiscussions 
<http://daggle.com/ftcs-journalism-internet-age-workshop-feature-murdoch-huffington-1495>
 with publishing executives, professors and internet companies. It issued its
47-page draft report for discussion 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/32171948/New-FTC-Staff-Discussion> a year later. 
Final recommendations are likely to follow.

Among the  suggestions 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/32171948/New-FTC-Staff-Discussion> the FTC puts 
forward is the idea of exemptions to competition laws that would enable news 
organisations to collectively limit the ability of websites to aggregate their 
content. These exemptions would also make it easier for multiple publishers to 
move behind a unified paywall. Google said adopting either notion would be a 
"significant mistake, as a matter of public policy and as a matter of fairness".

The FTC also suggests that copyright law could also be expanded to limit the 
right of aggregators to republish reported facts within a specific time period, 
a change known as a "hot news" exemption.

The response from Mountain view is: "Facts, hot or cold, cannot be protected 
by copyright since there is no author of them."

Google goes on to quote John Temple, former editor, president and publisher of 
theRocky Mountain News <http://www.rockymountainnews.com>, the US newspaper that
fell victim to the challenges of the digital age 
<http://www.rockymountainnews.com/news/2009/feb/27/goodbye-colorado/> in 
February last year, as saying:

"Being a great newspaper isn't enough in the Internet era. You have to know 
what business you're in. We thought we were in the newspaper business. Working 
on the web, you need to think of now and forever. At a newspaper, people 
largely think about tomorrow. Thinking about tomorrow isn't enough any more.
"If newspapers would spend more time trying to understand their customers 
instead of focused on their own internal issues [...] they're more likely to be 
successful. That's a hard switch for traditional manufacturing operations like 
newspapers to make."

A hard switch, maybe, but Google is sanguine as ever, concluding:

"Through all of the initiatives we describe above, and more to come, Google 
continues to work with publishers to find ways to ensure that journalism 
survives and thrives on the web. We remain optimistic about the future of 
journalism: the fourth estate is too crucial a part of a functioning democracy, 
and the Internet too powerful a medium, for journalism to die in transition to 
a web-first approach. News organisations have more readers than ever, more 
sources of information than ever, more ways to report and tell stories than 
ever, and more potential ways to generate revenue than ever. Journalism will 
change, but the free market and free society will ensure that it won't die."

Here is Google's full document:
 