
Twenty-five years ago, Goran Bregovic <http://www.goranbregovic.rs/> was a 
philosophy graduate. The slim 62-year-old still looks the part, even though – 
he says – he was "rescued from the sad destiny of teaching Marxism" by 
rocketing to fame "literally, in one week", as leader of the former 
Yugoslavia's biggest ever rock group,Bijelo Dugme 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W0TyuQa02tE> (White Button). Though not of 
Gypsy parentage himself, Bregovic was already a devotee of Balkan Gypsy brass 
music – "we used to have Gypsy bands play in our dressing room to get us in a 
good mood for stadium gigs" – and was approached by fledgling film directorEmir 
Kusturica <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/mar/04/2> to write a 
soundtrack for his 1988 movieTime of the Gypsies 
<http://www.imdb.co.uk/title/tt0097223/>.

Neither Kusturica nor Bregovic have ever looked back. The figure in front of 
me, his hair appropriately grizzled but luxuriant, produced two more 
award-winning soundtracks for the director, plus a series of highly successful 
Gypsy-rock albums, pop operas, including a Gypsy Carmen, oratoria, song poems 
and at one point even advertising jingles. He also embarked on what seems like 
an intermittent but endless world tour of "the best festivals and concert halls 
in the world, and also shitty places like Novosibirsk".

We first meet in a Marseilles hotel room, then catch up at a chalet in a 
mountain resort near Sarajevo, from where he will drive to his house in 
Belgrade, before taking a flight to Australia and the Sydney Opera House. "This 
is how I work," he says. "I'm an old-fashioned live musician, not a TV guy."

The current tour is theoretically linked to the launch of Bregovic's new album 
Champagne for Gypsies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/24/goran-bregovic-champagne-gypsies-review>
, a goodtime record replete with the trademark Gypsy brass of hisWeddings and 
Funerals Orchestra <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kq4Z0RNlTUI>, touches of 
newermanele <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manele> urban Gypsy pop, galloping 
rhythms, and a rich cast of vocalists, including four members of the venerable 
French rumba gitane combo theGypsy Kings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mifnMC_Kn1Q>. "The destiny of these songs, at 
least in the Balkans, is to have the women dancing on the tables and the 
musicians getting lots of tips," Bregovic says.

Nonetheless, if the album is, as he reiterates, "fun music – joyful actually", 
it comes with a serious subtext. The album sleeve contains throwaway references 
to society's debt to a curious selection of Gypsies: Django Reinhardt, Mother 
Teresa, Elvis Presley, Ronnie Wood, Adam Ant, all of whom, according to 
Bregovic's research, have Gypsy ancestry. "All over Europe, Gypsies are being 
persecuted again," he says, referring to the shanty towns of Romany economic 
refugees sprouting on the periphery of Paris, where he has another home. "I 
remember the huge encampment of Kosovan Gypsies under a bridge in Belgrade 
during the Balkan war ... I just wanted to remind people of what Gypsy culture 
has given the world. Just send out a little signal."

Bregovic has his own debt to Gypsydom, and vice versa, and thereby hangs a 
certain amount of controversy. He has built a career on the use of Gypsy 
culture, and his success has contributed greatly to the new appetite for Balkan 
Gypsy music around the world. As a result of its international vogue, its 
popularity has grown back home, where it was unfashionable for years due to its 
former status as government-promoted folklore, or "communist shit" in 
Bregovic's pithier terminology. But Bregovic has also been accused of 
registering traditional melodies, or even specific Gypsy musicians' melodies, 
as his own: the great standardEderlezi 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OU--Ox25DCo> is a case in point, or the track 
Mesecina <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AKRCo3347fw> from Bregovic's hit album 
Underground, which the late singerSaban Bajramovic 
<http://www.sabanbajramovic.com/> once claimed was a version of one of his 
songs, though Bajramovic did seem to remember signing some paper with Bregovic 
about it.

Bregovic deflects these complaints with a mixture of frankness – "everyone 
starts from existing melodies ... composing is kleptomaniac work" – and 
dismissal – "this is just gossip". Whatever, the complexities of Balkan 
copyright enforcement, and the lure of working on his prestigious projects, 
deter most jobbing musicians from rocking the boat too vigorously.

For his new world tour, a couple of dozen musicians are involved, half the 
maximum Bregovic sometimes marshals. "There will be six male singers, a string 
quartet, I'll do some liturgical pieces, some stuff from movies, some of 
Champagne for Gypsies." None of the star guests from the album will be coming, 
though all the agents are asking for them. Can he still reproduce the Gypsy 
Kings numbers live without them? "Oh, sure," says Bregovic laconically, "I've 
got very good singers." In fact, Bregovic has very good everything. The 
Weddings and Funerals Orchestra I saw in Marseille was a crack outfit, drilled 
to perfection, a mixture of authentic Gypsy players –the Kosovan refugee goc 
drummer Muharem Redzepi – and conservatory pros such as saxophonist Stojan 
Dimov.

Further new plans encompass another opera, "a drinking and dancing version of 
Orfeo", commissioned by an Italian festival, although because of that country's 
political chaos "now nobody knows if there's still funding ... "

Bregovic doesn't sound nervous. If anyone's going to emerge from the economic 
shipwreck that is Europe with a full engagement book, it's him.

Goran Bregovic's world tour begins on Friday 8 March, including appearances at 
Womadelaide on Mon 11 March, theAdelaide festival 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/> on Tues 12 March and the Royal Festival 
Hall in London on 18 May. The Guardian is the Adelaide festival's partner, 
supported byEmirates <http://www.emirates.com/uk/english/>, and the media 
partner ofWomad <http://womad.co.uk/> at Charlton Park in the UK in July.
 