
The murder of Alexander Litvinenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko> was “ordered from the 
top”, Gordon Brown writes in a new book, adding that his government was aware 
of another assassination attempt planned by the Kremlin on British soil.


Recalling his time as prime minister, Brown says his “immediate problem” with 
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> arose from 
the Litvinenko case. “We were clear that the assassination had been ordered 
from the top … and what was clear was that further assassinations on British 
soil were possible,” he writes. “Indeed, we believed that one new assassination 
was being planned. This led to the diplomatic standoff that has characterised 
our relations with Russia ever since.”

Gordon Brown could knock out Boris Johnson in a Brexit bout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/15/battle-brexit-gordon-brown-boris-johnson>
Litvinenko was poisoned in November 2006 with a cup of radioactive tea in a 
Mayfair hotel. Days after becoming prime minister in June 2007,Brown faced his 
first diplomatic crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/jul/12/uk.world> when Moscow refused 
to extradite one of Litvinenko’s killers, Andrei Lugovoi.

Brown expelled four diplomats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/jul/17/uk.topstories3> from the 
Russian embassy in protest. Moscow responded with tit-for-tat expulsions. Brown 
writes that he agreed with a public inquiry held last year by Sir Robert Owen 
which concluded that Putin and hisFSB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/06/fsb-putins-modern-day-kgb> spy 
chief had“probably approved” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-was-probably-murdered-on-personal-orders-of-putin>
 Litvinenko’s murder with polonium.

In July 2007, Scotland Yard arrested a Chechen allegedly sent to London to 
kill Boris Berezovsky. It is unclear if Berezovsky was the target of the second 
assassination plot Brown refers to. Berezovsky – a bitter critic of Putin’s – 
was found dead in 2013 at his ex-wife’s Berkshire mansion. A coroner recorded an
open verdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/27/boris-berezovsky-inquest-open-verdict-death>
 on his death.

 Brown makes the comments in his new book Britain: Leading Not Leaving 
<http://gordonandsarahbrown.com/2016/05/britain-leading-not-leaving/>, written 
to coincide with the EU referendum campaign and which explores Britain’s 
post-war relationship with the EU, as well as making a strong case for 
Britain’s continuing membership.

Part of the book covers his period as prime minister. Putin was prime minister 
during most of Brown’s period in office with Dmitry Medvedev Russia’s titular 
president. Brown writes: “Putin left it in no doubt that he was in charge. I 
particularly remember the G8 meeting [in Japan] in 2008. After we thought we 
had secured a common G8 position on Zimbabwe, Russian president Medvedev’s 
acquiescence was immediately overruled by prime minister Putin.”

The book also includes a vivid description of the moment when he was 
chancellor and toldTony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> 
the Treasury’s assessment had concluded Britain should not join the euro.


Brown writes: “‘We can’t join the euro? Is that what you said?’ Tony Blair 
said to me in 2003.


“‘We can’t join the euro,’ I said. 


“‘We can’t join the euro? Is that what you said?’ Tony repeated. 

“‘Yes, I said we can’t join the euro,’ I told him. 

“‘You can’t say that,’ he replied. ‘But the evidence is clear,’ I argued, ‘it 
just won’t work for us.’”

Alexander Litvinenko: the man who solved his own murder | Luke Harding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/alexander-litvinenko-the-man-who-solved-his-own-murder>
Brown says the press claimed his opposition to joining the euro was influenced 
by personal ambition, but that in fact his motivation was simple: “I saw 
detailed – what I believed irrefutable – evidence which confirmed our economy 
was out of sync with that of the rest ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and was likely to stay out of 
sync for some time.”

In his book Brown also reveals that relatively recently he took a DNA test to 
learn more about his family history and discovered that his ancestors 
originally came from Sweden. “Almost certainly [the DNA test showed] my 
ancestors had travelled by sea from Sweden to England in search of prosperity 
and the evidence suggests they left Sweden around the 9th or 10th centuries.”

Brown also says that, according to a story passed down the generations in his 
family, some of his ancestors used to live on the Borders but fled to Scotland 
and changed their name at a time when cattle raiders were being driven out of 
the area.


Brown says the discovery of his “migrant roots” and “European roots” made him 
appreciate how “almost all our families, at some stage, have been migrants”.

 