
Gordon Lord Byron rolled back the years at The Curragh on Sunday as he put up 
his best performance in almost two seasons when tenaciously denying David 
Nicholls’ British raider Sovereign Debt by half a length to record back-to-back 
successes in the Group Two Minstrel Stakes.

The son of Byron passed the post second in this race 12 months ago but was 
awarded the win following the disqualification of Home Of The Brave.

Aidan O’Brien lands a fifth Irish Oaks after Seventh Heaven springs surprise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/aidan-obrien-irish-oaks-seventh-heaven-even-song-ryan-moore>
Tom Hogan, who has trained the eight-year-old to his 15 career victories, was 
delighted but not surprised, despite his charge being returned at odds of 16-1. 
He said: “I thought if he was right he was well capable of beating those. I 
didn’t think there was a Group One horse in against him and on his day he’s 
still a Group One horse. In his work he showed he was as good as ever.

“He’s had lifelong problems with allergies and in the spring we thought we 
were losing the battle. He’ll probably come back for a Group Three [Phoenix 
Sprint Stakes] here in August and he’ll go back to Haydock for the Sprint Cup.”

Bocca Baciata was given a well-judged ride by Colm O’Donoghue to get up and 
deny Aidan O’Brien’s challenger, Earring, to win the second Group Two race on 
the card, the Kilboy Estate Stakes, for the trainer Jessie Harrington.

The daughter of Big Bad Bob had previously run second to the brilliant filly 
Minding in the Pretty Polly Stakes and, with nothing of her calibre in the 
field on Sunday she landed her first race at this elevated level.

Mecca’s Angel bounces back with impressive win in Sapphire Stakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/meccas-angel-sapphire-stakes-michael-dods-the-tin-man-newbury>
Bocca Baciata is likely to pick up plenty of air miles now as connections go 
in search of that first Group One. Harrington said: “They didn’t give her an 
easy lead. She took a while to get going and another 100 yards would suit her.

“Races like the Beverly D at Arlington [Park], the EP Taylor [at Woodbine] and 
the Prix de l’Opera [at Chantilly] are all possible targets.”

O’Brien, who had won the Irish Oaks 24 hours earlier with Seventh Heaven, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/aidan-obrien-irish-oaks-seventh-heaven-even-song-ryan-moore>
 is planning another big-race challenge this Saturday as he confirmed that 
Highland Reel was likely to be his sole runner in the King George VI and Queen 
Elizabeth Stakes at Ascot.

Highland Reel has been a real standard bearer overseas for Ballydoyle with 
successes in the Arlington Million [at Arlington Park, Chicago] and the Hong 
Kong Vase [at Sha Tin]. O’Brien, who has won Ascot’s midsummer championship 
three times, said: “Sir Isaac Newton is in there [the King George] but Highland 
Reel may be our only runner.”

Postponed, looking to become only the third horse to win the King George  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/roger-varian-postponed-king-george-ascot>
in successive seasons, is now 4-7 for the Ascot showpiece while Highland Reel 
is generally an 8-1 shot, but 10s in a place.
 