
Hundreds of schoolchildren are to get free and behind-the-scenes access to 
theatres, museums and heritage sites under three pilot schemes announced by the 
culture secretary, Karen Bradley.

The schemes are part of the “cultural citizens programme”, which is a key 
element of theculture white paper published in March 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/culture-white-paper>. They hope to 
address the problem of low participation in the arts among young people from 
disadvantaged backgrounds.

The aim is to get children hooked on art and culture at an early age, and to 
address the fact that UK arts audiences are overwhelmingly white and middle 
class.

The schemes will begin in September in Liverpool, Blackpool, Birmingham and 
Barking and Dagenham, and will offer 600 young people access to cultural 
activities such as free visits to plays and behind-the-scenes access to museums 
and galleries.

Bradley said culture was an integral part of British society that “boosts 
tourism, improves our wellbeing and provides a source of local pride and 
identity”. “We want to ensure that it is available to everyone, no matter what 
their background,” she added.

The white paper proposed a lottery-funded programme that would operate in 70 
areas and reach 14,000 young people a year, of which these schemes are the 
pilots.

Bradley said the programme would “open doors for hundreds of young people 
across the country, so they can enjoy our fantastic arts and culture scene and 
gain the skills to build careers in this thriving sector”.

A report published by the Warwick commission last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/arts-and-culture-systematically-removed-from-uk-education-system>
 revealed that the wealthiest, best educated and least ethnically diverse 8% of 
society make up nearly half of live music audiences and one-third of 
theatregoers and gallery visitors.

Providing art and culture for all was the main thrust of the white paper 
published by the former arts minister Ed Vaizey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/23/arts-organisations-must-reach-out-to-everyone-minister-ed-vaizey>
, the first sinceJennie Lee’s groundbreaking report in 1965 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/feb/23/jennie-lee-policy-arts-white-paper-funding>
. Vaizey, the UK’s longest-serving arts minister, was sacked from his post in 
Theresa May’s reshuffle – to the dismay of many arts leaders.

Details of the pilot schemes include children in Birmingham becoming “cultural 
champions” for 20 organisations – for example, acting as tour guides, running 
social media and designing an events programme.

In Liverpool, children will help plan extracurricular visits to organisations 
such as Fact, Liverpool Everyman, Tate Liverpool and the Museum of Liverpool.


The programme will be led by Arts Council England 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/>. Its chief executive, Darren Henley, said: 
“Our investment ... will help to ensure that more children and young people 
will have the opportunity to engage with art and culture, regardless of their 
background.

“We hope the scheme will complement our existing programmes for children and 
young people and help to nurture the cultural citizens of the future.”

Bradley made the announcement in Liverpool, where she was giving her first 
major speech sincereplacing John Whittingdale in the May reshuffle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/14/xxxx-john-whittingdale-culture-secretary-bbc>
.

She was due to say that culture and sport mattered beyond their economic 
importance to the UK.

“Watercolour painting, playing a sport, visiting ancient and beautiful places, 
drawing, writing poetry, mastering a musical instrument – all of these lead to 
a life well lived. They raise the human condition and cheer our spirits. Simply 
put, they make us happy.”

Culture, she told her audience, “must be available to everyone, not the 
preserve of a privileged few”.
 