
Atos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/18/after-hated-atos-quits-will-maximus-make-work-assessments-less-arduous>
, the controversial outsourcing company, is facing a government review of all 
of its major Whitehall contracts, which amount to more than £500m, following 
another serious IT failure.

The Cabinet Office told the Guardian it would undertake a full re-examination 
of every contract worth more than £10m operated by the French-based firm.


Such a review of a single contractor is a rarity in Whitehall and is a 
reflection of the levels of exasperation both from civil servants and the 
public accounts committee at the programmes overseen byAtos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos>.


It will come as a blow to Atos, which has faced many public sector IT 
disasters. Criticisms include its role in implementing the employment and 
support allowance (ESA), the replacement for incapacity benefits and delays in 
assessingdisabled people for personal independence payments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/23/disability-fitness-tests-flawed>
 (PIPs).

The decision to launch the review follows severe criticism by the National 
Audit Office ofAtos’s role in the development of an IT system 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/general-practice-extraction-service-investigation/>
 designed to allow the extraction of data from GP practice systems.


Maximus miss fitness-to-work test targets despite spiralling costs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/08/maximus-miss-fitness-to-work-test-targets-despite-spiralling-costs>
MPs on the public accounts committee examined the auditors’ report and found 
that Atos, the supplier contracted for a key part of the system, “did not show 
an appropriate duty of care to the taxpayer” and “appears to have acted solely 
with its own short-term best interests in mind”.


They suggested that although Atos may have complied with the letter of its 
contractual obligations, it took advantage of a weak client by taking the 
client’s money while knowing that the system had not been properly tested.


The expected cost of the system rose from £14m to £40m during the planning and 
procurement phase, and has since risen further.


In its recommendations, the committee urged the Cabinet Office to review 
Atos’s relationships as a crown supplier and also to ensure that the reasons 
for the project’s failure “are disseminated widely to reinforce the steps that 
need to be taken to avoid such mistakes being repeated again”.


Atos was one of seven firms working on the GP extraction service and told MPs 
that they were not able to see the entire programme that they are now being 
punished for. The firm has also defended itself from claims that it misled the 
PAC over PIPs, saying that senior civil servants defended the firm’s actions to 
parliament.

Atos is currently working within HM Revenue and Customs, the Home Office, 
Department of Health, NHS Scotland and the Ministry of Justice, according to 
its website. The firm first came to prominence in the UK after winning the 
£500m contract to implement the “fit for work tests”.


It became a lightning rod for anger over the health test, known as the work 
capability assessment. The assessment was criticised by MPs and campaigners as 
inhumane. Thousands of vulnerable people were found to have been wrongly judged 
to be fit for work and ineligible for government support.Atos eventually 
stepped down from the contract a year early. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/27/atos-quite-work-capability-assessment-contract-early>


In 2014, the firm was singled out again for criticism by the committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/20/watchdog-attacks-atos-disability-payouts-fiasco>
 for misleading the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) about its 
capabilities when bidding for the £1bn contracts connected to PIPs.


The Cabinet Office confirmed on Friday that it had accepted the PAC’s 
recommended review – a decision that observers of Whitehall believe may be part 
of a new attitude towards outsourcing firms.

Labour welcomes Tory 'climbdown' over Freedom of Information Act
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/01/labour-climbdown-freedom-information-act>
A spokesperson said: “In line with the PAC’s recommendation the Cabinet Office 
is undertaking a review of all current Atos contracts with central government 
with an annual spend over £10m.”


Reacting to the review, Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader, called on George 
Osborne, the chancellor, to take responsiblity for poor outsourced services and 
open them up to the Freedom of Information Act.

“Until private providers of taxpayer-funded services are subject to the same 
transparency and accountability rules as their public counterparts, whatever 
steps the Cabinet Office takes to improve services are bound to fail,” he said.


Daniel Thornton, programme director at the Institute for Government, said the 
review of a single supplier was unusual but may be seen as the start of a 
harder line taken against outsourcing firms by the government.


 “As part of its drive to save money, [the government] now relies on outside 
providers to deliver essential public services, despite repeated problems with 
managing outsourced services. So while it is unusual to recommend a review into 
all contracts with a single provider, it isn’t unheard of – and we might expect 
more of this in future.”


An Atos spokeswoman welcomed the Cabinet Office review. “We look forward to 
working with the Cabinet Office with whom we have a transparent and open 
relationship and we look forward to maintaining our green rating for delivery 
across Whitehall,” she said.
 