


When Stephanie de Giorgio, a Kent GP, sat down at a medical conference last 
year in Liverpool to hear the health secretary,Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, she expected to be annoyed. 
A partner in a busy practice by the sea in Deal, Kent, she had almost given up 
on medicine because of the stress of dealing with shrinking budgets while the 
pressure built up to do more.

However, her irritation soon became hostility as the Tory politician pitched 
for doctors’ votes by saying he had always supported GPs. In the 
question-and-answer session, she asked what Hunt 
<http://www.pulsetoday.co.uk/your-practice/practice-topics/education/health-secretary-announces-independent-review-to-assess-gaps-in-gp-workforce/20008103.article#.VP7vxmSsXPU>
 “was going to do (about) … the elephant in the room. The ever increasing 
inappropriate demand from patients. Instead of addressing this, you … make it 
worse by continually denigrating general practice and encouraging patients to 
be ever more demanding. We are exhausted, drowning and, quite frankly, furious 
with you.”

The applause was thunderous but fell flat when Hunt responded with a plea for 
GPs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> to realise that if “something 
goes wrong on a Saturday morning patients don’t want to wait until Monday 
morning. They want to get it sorted out straight away.”

Since then De Giorgio has become a leading light in Resilient GP 
<http://www.resilientgp.org/>, an association of about 1,000 doctors who regard 
the past few years as an assault on the medical profession. She said: “The 
[Health and Social Care Act 2012] is a big part of it. People being ditched in 
favour of targets. We are seeing our GP budgets cut. The competition from 
private interests. I am not against innovation but it has to be for the benefit 
of patients. This isn’t.”

Spending a day with De Giorgio involves a whirlwind of activity. In the 
morning there are a dozen patients, about 25 prescriptions and a blizzard of 
phone calls. Lunch is a sandwich between home visits and the afternoon involves 
another dozen calls with patients, 45 more prescription requests to go through, 
25 more lab results and 26 letters.

“Two home visits today. Both were unnecessary. One had a cough, the other a 
cold,” said De Giorgio “That means time taken away from people who did need to 
see me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnhs-gps-are-exhausted-ae-is-overrun-and-hospitals-are-broke-what-went-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426780615521%2F16d15ab9-2992-423e-9bff-bcf40f518154-2060x1544.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GPs%20are%20exhausted%2C%20A%26E%20is%20overrun%20and%20hospitals%20are%20broke.%20What%20went%20wrong%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnhs-gps-are-exhausted-ae-is-overrun-and-hospitals-are-broke-what-went-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GPs%20are%20exhausted%2C%20A%26E%20is%20overrun%20and%20hospitals%20are%20broke.%20What%20went%20wrong%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnhs-gps-are-exhausted-ae-is-overrun-and-hospitals-are-broke-what-went-wrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426780615521%2F16d15ab9-2992-423e-9bff-bcf40f518154-2060x1544.jpeg>
 A home visit. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
She believes the changes in recent years are undermining the spirit of general 
practice, with experiments such as 111, the non-emergency healthcare telephone 
helpline, doing “exactly what we are told not to. So here we had a case 
recently of a man who had cut his finger. Because there was blood and he rang 
111, what happened? They sent an ambulance. And what did they do? Put a plaster 
on him.”

The coalition’s health shakeup, spearheaded by the then health secretary, 
Andrew Lansley <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley>, was the 
biggest change since the founding of the NHS. For De Giorgio, and many others 
in the medical profession, they were, as she put it, a “big waste of time”.
Where the parties stand on health 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2015/04/2015-04-policy-panels/policy-health.html>
With the NHS among the three top concerns for voters in the lead-up to the 
general election, such sentiments are bad news for the governing parties. Since 
the beginning of the campaign, Labour has put the NHS at the centre of its 
election strategy – in essence offering to repeal much the coalition’s reforms 
with £2.5bn of extra funding for theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

In response David Cameron and Nick Clegg have backed the “Stevens plan” – 
named after the health service boss – which involves the government injecting 
£8bn cash into the NHS while recouping £22bn from efficiency savings. The extra 
cash has not translated into extra votes. A poll of 2,000 voters this week by 
Health Service Journal showed 
<http://www.hsj.co.uk/news/policy/exclusive-poll-tory-cash-pledge-fails-to-cut-through/5084556.article?blocktitle=News&contentID=15303#.VT95oWTF9c4>
 they believed by a margin of more than 11% that Labour is the party most 
likely to give the NHS the money it needs over the next five years, even though 
the Conservatives have promised more cash for the service in the next 
parliament.

Underlying the coalition parties’ difficulties is that the 2012 health act 
marked a leap into the unknown for the English NHS. The government’s changes 
increased competition, abolished tiers of management and forced local doctors 
to form groups to purchase healthcare on behalf of their patients.

Immigration: in Enoch Powell's former seat jobs and the economy matter more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/29/immigration-enoch-powell-wolverhampton-south-west-jobs-economy-more-important>
It was a market-based system: there were new regulators, watchdogs with an 
emphasis on financial rectitude, and the patient was viewed as a consumer of 
healthcare. The Tories’ defence is that the reforms “cleared out bureaucracy, 
generating savings which we have invested in care for patients. Instead of 
chasing managerial targets, we have focused on outcomes and performance.”

The changes were so big, joked the last head of the NHS, Sir David Nicholson, 
that they could be seen from space.


But size is not everything. While the act painted the NHS with a lick of 
Thatcherite free-market blue, critics say it failed to soup up the engine with 
the Cameronian zeal for redistributing power away from the government.

Consider what happened with hospitals. The government’s ambition was that all 
NHS trusts would become foundation trusts, to be completely free from Whitehall 
control once they had proved themselves able to manage their finances without 
impinging on patient care. They were supposed to experiment with new mutual 
models such as worker control and ownership.

Yet there are now just 149 foundation trusts – only 20 more since 2010. There 
are no examples of“employee-led” foundation trusts as envisaged in the 
coalition’s 2010 white paper. 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/213823/dh_117794.pdf>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnhs-gps-are-exhausted-ae-is-overrun-and-hospitals-are-broke-what-went-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430318690926%2F0ae530b4-28ba-4f80-9bbd-e84df5c19585-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GPs%20are%20exhausted%2C%20A%26E%20is%20overrun%20and%20hospitals%20are%20broke.%20What%20went%20wrong%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnhs-gps-are-exhausted-ae-is-overrun-and-hospitals-are-broke-what-went-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GPs%20are%20exhausted%2C%20A%26E%20is%20overrun%20and%20hospitals%20are%20broke.%20What%20went%20wrong%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnhs-gps-are-exhausted-ae-is-overrun-and-hospitals-are-broke-what-went-wrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430318690926%2F0ae530b4-28ba-4f80-9bbd-e84df5c19585-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Andrew Lansley during his time as health secretary. Photograph: David Jones/PA 
There is evidence that things are getting worse. NHS hospitals and other 
providers finished 2014-15 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/240676f4-e44f-11e4-a4de-00144feab7de.html?ftcamp=published_links%2Frss%2Fworld_uk_politics%2Ffeed%2F%2Fproduct#axzz3Yb459bW0>
 with hidden deficits approaching £1.6bn and face a further £2.3bn black hole 
this financial year.Just as the campaign began Nicholson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/election-2015-32325490> dryly pointed out that this 
was a “substantial financial problem” that might need “emergency action” after 
the election.

The failure to change the acute sector is perhaps symbolised best by the 
decision of the first private company to pull out of a contract to run an NHS 
hospital,amid rows with the regulator that patient care was inadequate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/09/hinchingbrooke-hospital-special-measures-cqc-report>
.

For Bill Morgan, a former aide to Lansley who now runs the consultancy firm 
IncisiveHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, the biggest 
failure was relaxing the target of forcing hospital trusts to become foundation 
trusts by 2014. “The idea was that the ones that didn’t make it would have been 
taken over by successful trusts. But by dropping that target we sent a signal 
out to hospitals that they would be bailed out year after year,” said Morgan.

The claim that GPs were in charge of patient budgets, providing a key link 
between hospital and local needs, also proved hollow. While the 211 new 
clinical commissioning groups were largely chaired by local doctors, research 
released this yearshowed that just a quarter of the “accountable officers” 
<http://m.hsj.co.uk/5075761.article> in the groups were GPs and hence local 
doctors were not shouldering responsibility for decisions made on local 
healthcare spending and rationing.

Experts say the failure of the changes was due to the medical profession 
rejecting Lansley’s central idea: to pit doctor against doctor in a competition 
to provide patient care. Ruth Thorlby, of the Nuffield Trust, a health 
thinktank, said medics did not want to be motivated by “self-interest” and to 
protect their budgets by arguing that the cash for other medics should be 
slashed.

“We’d interview doctors and you could see GPs at first getting very excited 
about the idea of reshaping, for example, dermatology services,” she said. 
“They would get very animated about what they might be able to fund instead. 
But then they would stop and ask: how would this affect other doctors in the 
local hospital?They don’t want to take decisions with potentially very high 
visible impact. It’s a very connected world, medicine.Doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/doctors> all know each other.”

That doctors did not want the responsibility thrust upon them seems logical 
when you consider that there was no money around.An analysis by the London 
School of Economics 
<http://sticerd.lse.ac.uk/case/_new/research/Social_Policy_in_a_Cold_Climate/Programme_Reports_and_event_information.asp>
 showed the average annual growth in English health expenditure per capita from 
2010 to 2014 was just 0.1%. For the UK as a whole there has been a small 
decline in public expenditure on health as a percentage of GDP – from 8.2% to 
7.9%.

So much was done so fast in an unprecedented squeeze

The financial squeeze is having real implications on patient care. As the 
election kicked off,NHS in England admitted one in nine patients 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-32202587> waited longer than four-hours in 
A&E – missing the government’s target and making it the service’s worst 
performance in a decade.

Chris Ham, chief executive of the King’s Fund health thinktank, said the 
combination of a huge upheaval in the NHS at a time of unprecedented financial 
restraint meant the success of the changes was always going to be difficult to 
guarantee.

“Lansley’s plans were always going to be tough because so much was done so 
fast in an unprecedented squeeze. On balance, I think there have been more 
negatives than positives. For me, the government has placed too much faith in 
regulation, which has grown over the parliament, especially with Jeremy Hunt 
placing faith in them to avoid patient-safety scandals. It’s a mistake, I 
think, because you need to consider leadership and culture in the NHS.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnhs-gps-are-exhausted-ae-is-overrun-and-hospitals-are-broke-what-went-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430318501088%2Fd4d11839-8316-4025-8396-16d363ba5d40-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GPs%20are%20exhausted%2C%20A%26E%20is%20overrun%20and%20hospitals%20are%20broke.%20What%20went%20wrong%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnhs-gps-are-exhausted-ae-is-overrun-and-hospitals-are-broke-what-went-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GPs%20are%20exhausted%2C%20A%26E%20is%20overrun%20and%20hospitals%20are%20broke.%20What%20went%20wrong%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnhs-gps-are-exhausted-ae-is-overrun-and-hospitals-are-broke-what-went-wrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430318501088%2Fd4d11839-8316-4025-8396-16d363ba5d40-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jeremy Hunt meets a patient, Monica Kneebone, at King’s College hospital in 
London. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA Archive/Press Association Images 
The parties’ policies on health 

Conservatives


A pledge to give the NHS the “at least an additional £8bn by 2020” demanded by 
theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England boss, Simon Stevens, 
is a key plank of Tory policy and, when it was announced, wrongfooted Labour, 
which has promised less cash. However, exactly how this will be paid for 
remains unanswered. There are ambitious targets to deliver seven-day-a-week 
access to a GP between 8am and 8pm and, especially, to make England the first 
country in the world to provide the “truly seven-day NHS”. However, experts 
point out that with the current shortages of doctors and nurses it is 
impossible to see how such promises would be kept.

Labour

The NHS is Ed Miliband’s hot topic – and the party devoted a week on the issue 
– hoping for a breakthrough with a poster reworking the Conservatives’ “Labour 
isn’t working” image of 1979 by depicting a huge queue outside a waiting room 
with the title: “The doctor can’t see you now.” The party says it will put in 
£2.5bn – and hire 8,000 new GPs and 20,000 more nurses. There’s also a new 
right to see a GP within 48 hours and to a test for cancer inside a week. The 
party’s rhetoric revolves around repealing theHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Social Care Act 2012 and 
integrating parts of the healthcare system. Perhaps most striking is that 
Labour has not backed Stevens’ five-year plan, signalling that the party will 
reassert control over the NHS.

Schools' hidden funding crisis: teachers take drastic action as cuts hit hard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/28/schools-hidden-funding-crisis-teachers-education>
Liberal Democrats


The party has matched the Tory pledge to give the NHS the minimum £8bn a year 
extra by 2020, with some details on funding but not enough to say how the whole 
amount would be paid for. Lib Dems have also sought to expand the health 
service’s focus, with theirproposals for mental health  
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2014/10/cleggs-plan-improve-mental-healthcare-shows-his-party-still-stands-young>
to be placed on par with physical health. Perhaps the most important call is 
for “a non-partisan fundamental review of NHS and social care funding” – a 
replay perhaps of past debates but also a recognition the coalition failed to 
solve this problem.

SNP


The NHS is perhaps the most vivid expression of the West Lothian question – 
the anomaly which allows Scottish, Northern Irish and Welsh MPs to vote on laws 
affecting England while English MPs have little power over Scotland, Northern 
Ireland and Wales. The SNP calls for an increase across the UK of £24bn by the 
end of the parliament, an eye-watering £9.4bn above-inflation rise and the 
largest spending promise yet. The move would deliver a £2bn rise to NHS 
Scotland. The money, it says, will come from scrapping Trident.

The Green party

The Greens would set aside £5bn to exit PFI deals and offering free social 
care at a cost of £8bn. The party says it would increase the total NHS budget 
by £12bn a year, with investment in mental health care and in providing free 
dentistry, chiropody and prescriptions in England. Thereafter, the Greens would 
increase the overall NHS budget annually in real terms by 1.2%. Taken together, 
this radical plan would raise NHS budgets by £20bn by 2020.

Ukip

Ukip says visitors to the UK – and migrants until they have paid national 
insurance for five years – will have to have NHS-approved private health 
insurance as a condition of entry. The party says this would save £2bn, which 
would help fund the additional £3bn it says it wants put into the NHS. Nigel 
Farage’s party also wants to train 8,000 more GPs, 20,000 more nurses and 3,000 
more midwives.
 