
I'm very careful to avoid the "F" word. They don't like it. And anyway, I've 
stepped away from the obvious "retelling of fairytale" candidates. Recasting 
fairytales has become a publishing sub-genre in itself, and has been done both 
well and to the point of entropy. More interesting are those works where the 
structures of fairytales are abandoned but the world of "fairy" is imported as 
a delicate spice. In these fictions, magical and impossible content tends to be 
offered in a more naturalistic mode of storytelling. The effect for the reader 
is that of riding a shuttle between natural scepticism and open credulity. If 
there were a film paradigm it would start with Pan's Labyrinth. All of these 
authors are rule-breakers. I'd call them "fantasists" except that it's a word 
with an unstable currency; but a sense of awe and dislocation is upheld here, 
and a new way of knowing is always the prize.

Here's my top 10 in no particular order.

1. The Djinn in the Nightingale's Eye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099521310/the-djinn-in-the-nightingales-eye-five-fairy-stories>
 by AS Byatt

Stuffed with marvels. Byatt doesn't re-tell fairytales, she creates her own 
and endows them with intelligent intention and original power. The heroine of 
the title story, Dr Gillian Perholt, is a scholar and a decoder of stories, and 
the narrative nests inside that detail. But it's not all cerebral fun. This 
story has a very large genie endowed with impressive and stinky genitals.

2. The Faery Handbag by Kelly Link

To be found in the collection Pretty Monsters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fantasy/9781847677846/pretty-monsters>
. Throw away everything you think you know about short stories and read Kelly 
Link: her stories get bigger each time you read them. You think you know what's 
in the bag, but you don't. The rhythms of Link's storytelling evoke some very 
old cadence patterns, but always operate in a modern idiom. I don't always know 
what her stories mean, but I always know that they are a delight.

3. The Stolen Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fantasy/9780099490593/the-stolen-child>
 by Keith Donohue

Inspired by Yeats's poem about the legend of the changelings 
<http://www.online-literature.com/yeats/816/>, The Stolen Child also owes a 
debt to JM Barrie'sPeter Pan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099511793/peter-pan>, 
another fairy story that was not about fairies at all but about the loss of 
imagination and about growing up. On the surface, a clever novel about some 
rather degenerate Fair Folk. But while our backs are turned the author performs 
a switch and delivers a luminous novel about our humanity.

4. Nights at the Circus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099388616/nights-at-the-circus>
 by Angela Carter

Her collection The Bloody Chamber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780099588115/the-bloody-chamber-and-other-stories>
 might be more obvious but some of those stories come under the re-telling 
category. Nights at the Circus is more anarchic and the chief protagonist is a 
peroxide blonde with wings called Fevvers, who was hatched from an egg laid by 
unknown parents. Yes, her wings are a metaphor but yes, her wings are real. 
Another landmark novel shunned by the Man Booker judges because it lacked, 
well, gravity. Many traditional fairytales are invoked and overturned 
throughout the novel.

5. Shod <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780956551412/shod>
 by Mark Goodwin

The wildly inventive Midlands landscape poet won prizes for this brilliant 
collection. Goodwin experiments with ambient sound or acoustic context for 
recording his poems, many of which reference fairytales, or furry tales as the 
poet calls them.

6. The Girl with Glass Feet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781843549208/the-girl-with-glass-feet>
 by Ali Shaw

This is a novel that draws on the great tradition of European fairytales but 
which offers us a shimmering romance for our modern world. A luminous work, 
about a girl's transformation into glass.

7. The Owl Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780007127894/the-owl-service>
 by Alan Garner

Garner is one of the very greatest fantasy writers in the English language, 
though I admit that the categorisations of his work as "Children's" or 
"Fantasy" are meaningless. The Owl Service is set in Wales, and uses as its 
basis a story from the mediaeval Welsh epic,the Mabinogion 
<http://www.mabinogion.info/>. Published in 1967, in 2007 The Owl Service was 
selected by judges of the Carnegie Medal for children's literature as one of 
the 10 most important children's novels of the past 70 years. Really, I could 
pick anything by this writer.

8. Briar Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780330334471/briar-rose>
 by Jane Yolen

This is a young adult novel, but nevertheless, the book won the annual 
Mythopoeic Society Award for Adult Literature in 1993 
<http://www.mythsoc.org/awards/winners/>. It combines the Sleeping Beauty story 
with the Holocaust and themes of homosexuality. That's right. Got it banned 
somewhere in the American Midwest. Constantly surprises as the standard images 
of the tale of Sleeping Beauty dissolve into the realities of life under the 
Nazis.

9. Winter Journey 
<http://trumpetville.wordpress.com/2011/05/31/winter-journey-by-joel-lane/> by 
Joel Lane

A clever reversal of the feral-child story, first published in Black Static 
magazine, a terrific venue for this kind of writing. Joel Lane is another gem 
of a short-storyist. The narrator pursues some kind of fox-being, a creature 
that possesses one person after another, always travelling.

10. Sweet Bride by Kate Rusby

Can we have a song? Yes, let's break the rules and finish on a song 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T3O1I1eqnF4>. The Barnsley Nightingale singing 
her own composition. This song is an extraordinary tale of dangerous seduction 
and it calls on a pan-European tradition of willing abduction into the world of 
the Other.
 