
Tuesday’s announcement of the nominations for the 59th annual Grammy awards, 
which will be handed out on 12 February, had some expected outcomes –Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> dominated, with Lemonade and its 
affiliated properties receiving nine nominations, while Adele’s 25 scored her 
five nominations. As with any attempt to winnow down pop music to some 
semi-arbitrary notion of “bests”, though, the real stories come from what might 
be missing.

Grammy awards 2017: Beyoncé leads nominations with Lemonade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/06/grammy-awards-2017-beyonce-drake-rihanna-kanye-west-adele>
Perhaps the most quixotic of the Big Four cross-genre categories was album of 
the year. Adele’smega-selling 25 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/nov/19/adele-what-shes-singing-about-on-25>
 andBeyoncé’s conversation-altering Lemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/24/beyonce-lemonade-review-a-woman-not-to-be-messed-with>
 were pretty much givens for this category; theNashville fringe-walker Sturgill 
Simpson’s epistolary A Sailor’s Guide To Earth, too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/17/sturgill-simpson-a-sailors-guide-to-earth-review-nirvana-in-bloom>
, was a somewhat expected honoree. But in an eligibility year when so many 
artists –Rihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/24/rihanna-review-wembley-stadium-anti>
, the lateDavid Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/11/was-david-bowie-saying-goodbye-on-blackstar>
, evenKanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/kanye-west-new-album-the-life-of-pablo-launch>
 – crafted albums that represented creative leaps, rounding out the category 
withJustin Bieber’s Purpose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/12/justin-bieber-purpose-review-fourth-album>
 andDrake’s Views 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/01/drake-views-album-review-more-sharp-introspection>
, two albums that were commercial smashes but decidedly uneven craft-wise, 
seemed almost like a defiant act.

In past years, the Grammys have been mocked for being out of step with the pop 
times – recall Herbie Hancock’s Joni Mitchell tribute beating out Amy 
Winehouse’s Back To Black in 2008, or Steely Dan’s Two Against Nature edging 
out Eminem in 2001, or even 2015, when Beck’s tranquil Morning Phase topped 
Beyoncé’s self-titled album. Nominating Purpose, Bieber’s redemptive plunge 
into pop-EDM, and Views, which smashed streaming records upon its release in 
April and just passed the quadruple-platinum mark, would seem like a rebuke to 
those observers who believe the Recording Academy to be populated exclusively 
by old-guard types whose favorite artists have remained etched in stone since 
the 70s. That both those albums were nominated, though, while Bowie’s 
omnivorous parting statement Blackstar was left out in the cold, seemed like 
the biggest snub;Rihanna’s Anti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/31/rihanna-anti-review-bid-for-freedom>
, a withering statement by a major star showing off newfound range, would have 
been a better pop choice. Perhaps the general bloat and navel-gazing of Views 
appealed to those voters who prefer albums by overly ponderous dudes who treat 
the women in their lives as mere inconveniences – or maybe they were just 
dazzled by its ability to dominate streaming charts for months.

Chart-dominating women and guitar-assisted men in pensive mode are all over 
the song of the year and record of the year nominations. Adele’s 
world-conquering Hello and Beyoncé’s potent Formation grabbed nominations in 
both categories, as did theDanish act Lukas Graham’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/31/lukas-graham-lukas-graham-forchhammer-cd-review-warner-music>
 nostalgia whinge 7 Years. Rounding out record of the year, which is given to 
the people behind a song’s recorded version, were Rihanna’s sinewy (and 
Drake-assisted) Work and the rock duo Twenty One Pilots’ sour Stressed Out;Mike 
Posner’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/12/mike-posner-interview-i-took-a-pill-in-ibiza-remix-seeb>
 lightly neurotic I Took A Pill In Ibiza, which received a new lease on pop 
life after being remixed by the EDM duo Seeb, and Bieber’s spiteful Love 
Yourself filled out song of the year, which goes to songwriters.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-OqrcUvrbRY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-OqrcUvrbRY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-OqrcUvrbRY&media=>
Best new artist, the final category of the Big Four, has a fairly strong 
field. Kelsea Ballerini, who specializes in twangy refashionings of mid-tempo 
pop, and the winking upstart Maren Morris, who brings power-pop and reggae 
influences into her sprightly songs, represent Nashville’s new guard of 
up-and-coming ladies. Anderson .Paak’s kitchen-sink music fuses funk, soul, 
hip-hop and anything else the omnivorous rapper-singer can get a handle on. The 
bro-EDM duo The Chainsmokers, whose laconic Closer had an iron grip on the top 
of the US pop charts this year (and who were nominated even though their 
crashing 2014 single #SELFIE soundtracked a slew of TV montages showcasing 
snap-happy millennials), and the Chicago MC Chance the Rapper, whose third 
mixtape Coloring Book fuses gospel, hip-hop and magical realism in a thrilling 
way, are the category’s two biggest names.

Latin Grammys: Jennifer Lopez steals the show at politically muted awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/18/latin-grammys-jennifer-lopez-marc-anthony>
The Grammys’ attempt to throw its arms around the musical world is borne out 
in its genre-specific categories, which can range from the satisfying to the 
perplexing. The R&B categories show how strong of a year the genre has had, 
honoring artists including Fantasia and Solange. The new-ish best urban 
contemporary album, which pits Lemonade and Anti against Anderson .Paak’s 
Malibu, the R&B trio KING’s sumptuous debut We Are KING, and the velvet-voiced 
crooner Gallant’s Ology. Best rap/sung performance also has Beyoncé (this time 
for the defiant Kendrick Lamar-assisted track Freedom) and Drake (for his 
meme-friendly Hotline Bling), as well as D.R.A.M.’s sparkling left-field hit 
Broccoli and two tracks from West’s sprawling The Life Of Pablo – the 
devotional Ultralight Beam (which features Chance the Rapper, Kelly Price and 
Kirk Franklin) and Famous, which featuresRihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna> as well as the Taylor Swift insult 
that inspired her snappish album of the year acceptance speech at 2016’s 
Grammys ceremony.

On the rock side of things, though, the nominations stumble over themselves. 
Is a previously unreleased White Stripes track (City Lights, from a compilation 
ofJack White <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jack-white> acoustic 
recordings) really one of the best American roots songs? Did Disturbed’s 
unplugged cover of Simon & Garfunkel’s 50-plus-year-old The Sound of Silence 
really stand head and shoulders above most of the other rock performances 
recorded between 1 October 2015 and 30 September 2016? (And did White’s 
appearance tip the scales for Beyoncé’s Don’t Hurt Yourself getting a nod in 
that category?) Meanwhile, best alternative music album this year feels like a 
lifetime achievement award surrogate, with Bowie’s Blackstar facing off against 
Iggy Pop’s Post Pop Depression, PJ Harvey’s The Hope Six Demolition Project, 
Radiohead’s A Moon Shaped Pool, and Bon Iver’s 22, A Million.

With 84 categories from record of the year to best music film (where the 
Beatles will square off against Beyoncé), theGrammys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/grammys> always have as much room to be off 
the mark as they are on target. The 59th ceremony will likely offer a sometimes 
frustrating mixture of both, no matter who wins the night’s top trophies.
 