
A reluctant camel, a “minor fire” and a fractured arm feature in the first 
full-length trailer forThe Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/11/jeremy-clarksons-amazon-show-grand-tour-top-gear>
.

Jeremy Clarkson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson>, James May 
and Richard Hammond are billed as three friends on an “adventure” in the promo 
for the new show.

It features the trio in exotic locations, with the ex-Top Gear presenters 
joking that they have only had a “minor fire” when a stunt goes wrong.

Top Gear cast change due to 'perfect storm', says former producer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/24/top-gear-cast-change-perfect-storm-former-producer>
The stars are seen speeding around race tracks, flying over the desert - and 
trying but failing to entice a camel up a ramp.

May wears a sling after fracturing his arm.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fclarkson-may-and-hammond-reunite-for-the-grand-tour-video-trailer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarkson%2C%20May%20and%20Hammond%20reunite%20for%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20%E2%80%93%20video%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fclarkson-may-and-hammond-reunite-for-the-grand-tour-video-trailer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarkson%2C%20May%20and%20Hammond%20reunite%20for%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20%E2%80%93%20video%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fclarkson-may-and-hammond-reunite-for-the-grand-tour-video-trailer&media=>
Clarkson, May and Hammond reunite for The Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/oct/07/clarkson-may-and-hammond-reunite-for-the-grand-tour-video-trailer>
As he sits helplessly in his car, Clarkson asks his co-presenter: “Has your 
door broken?” to which a grumpy May replies: “No, I’m broken. Can you hold the 
door for me?”

And May and Hammond both make fun of Clarkson when he turns up dressed in a 
cream suit, joking “Wow, Roger Moore”.

Clarkson, who is not known for his dress sense, replies: “Looking good is more 
important than looking where you are going” to which May adds cheekily: “When 
are you going to do that then?”

The banter continues when a crane drops a car into the ocean, and May shouts 
at his co-stars: “That’s to release it, you muppet.”

And the stars joke about a “minor fire” when a tank blows up a moving van.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcaezhWQc8Dw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcaezhWQc8Dw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcaezhWQc8Dw&media=>
 James Corden’s The Grand Tour Grand Racing Quiz 
The show is billed as “three friends” on “one incredible adventure” across 
“four continents”.

Clarkson was sacked by the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/10/top-gear-jeremy-clarkson-suspended-bbc-producer>
 for his “unprovoked physical and verbal attack” on a Top Gear producer in 
March.

New presenter Chris Evans left his “dream job” on Top Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/chris-evans-quits-bbc-top-gear-after-one-series>
 hours after the final episode was broadcast.

The first episode of The Grand Tour launches on 18 November, on Amazon Prime 
Video <https://www.theguardian.com/media/lovefilm>.
 