
“Stop saying things that are going to get us fired,” says Richard Hammond to 
Jeremy Clarkson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson>, less than 
five minutes into the first episode of The Grand Tour.

It is a loaded jibe and just one of the several pointed references, made 
throughout the show, to the freedoms enjoyed by the formerTop Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> trio now unshackled from 
BBC rules and restrictions.

 “We’re on the internet, which means I could pleasure a horse,” says Clarkson 
to his live audience.

 Indeed, the overwhelmingly positive response from audiences to the first of 
12 episodes of the motoring show when it finally arrived on Amazon Prime on 
Friday seemed to prove that Amazon’s risk in giving Clarkson, Hammond and May a 
budget of $160m (£130m) and an almost completely free rein to recreate the 
magic of Top Gear away from the BBC has paid off.

 The only muted review came from the BBC arts editor, Will Gompertz, who said 
that “the payoff never comes” and added that there appeared to be a rift 
between the presenters.

 Gompertz wrote: “The cheesy smiles are not a set-up to a joke, but a 
precursor to them taking to the stage in the manner of rock stars on tour. A 
huge crowd of cheering fans has amassed at their feet. There is no irony. It 
feels uncomfortably hubristic.”

 Away from the regulations of public service broadcasting, Clarkson did not 
hold back on the discriminatory comments that have made him such a polarising 
figure. Referring to the nomadic nature of the show, which takes place in a 
tent erected in a different country each week, Clarkson said they would be 
“like gypsies, only, the cars we drive are going to be insured”.

 Later on in the episode, when insulting a car, he describes it as “like being 
stuck in a Victorian women’s novel”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fgrand-tour-de-force-justifies-amazons-faith-in-unshackled-former-top-gear-trio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F961d0b24c9762bcb91fb80e183a9208f30ea1386%2F0_0_1462_877%2F1462.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Grand%20Tour%20de%20force%20justifies%20Amazon's%20faith%20in%20unshackled%20former%20Top%20Gear%20trio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fgrand-tour-de-force-justifies-amazons-faith-in-unshackled-former-top-gear-trio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Grand%20Tour%20de%20force%20justifies%20Amazon%27s%20faith%20in%20unshackled%20former%20Top%20Gear%20trio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fgrand-tour-de-force-justifies-amazons-faith-in-unshackled-former-top-gear-trio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F961d0b24c9762bcb91fb80e183a9208f30ea1386%2F0_0_1462_877%2F1462.jpg>
 Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Hammond and James May back on track. Photograph: 
Amazon Prime 
 The allusions to Clarkson’s tumultuous end to his relationship with the BBC 
and Top Gear were also a common feature of the show. While the presenters did 
not ever directly mention their old show, the opulent opening sequence begins 
with Clarkson standing glumly outside Broadcasting House, handing in his BBC 
pass and stepping into the London rain, media reports of his sacking playing in 
the background.

Fast forward and he arrives in LA airport, gleefully jumps into a shiny blue 
mustang and speeds off into the California desert, to be joined first by 
co-presenters Richard Hammond andJames May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/james-may>, and then a fleet of 150 
vehicles, worth a total of $150m, to arrive at “Burning Van” festival and 2,000 
screaming fans.

 Clarkson is then introduced by Hammond as “technically the only one of us 
never to be fired by anyone”.

 There were other reminders throughout The Grand Tour’s first episode that 
this was no longer a pre-watershed BBC family show. On describing the 
differences between a McLaren and a Porsche, Clarkson used the analogy of 
“crystal meth and iffy weed”, and the test track specially built for the show 
is named “Eboladrome” because its shape resembles the deadly virus.

 The trio also mocked, with thinly-veiled insults, segments that had been 
staples of Top Gear, which thanks to BBC copyright they have not been able to 
bring over to Amazon. “The Stig” has been replaced by “The American” and the 
concept of having a celebrity test drive a car – the so-called “star in a 
reasonably priced car” feature – was dismissed by Hammond, who said: “I don’t 
like it, I’m not sure it would work”. In another pointed twist for the show, 
all three celebrities supposed to appear on the show supposedly end up dying 
moments before.

 May said it had been a “relief” to be forced to dump the Top Gear format 
after so many years but admitted he had to have a “lie down” before watching it 
go out.

 He said:“It has forced a rethink and it has refreshed us, which is something 
we should probably have done but which we wouldn’t have done had we stayed 
where we were because there would have been no incentive to.”

 