
The author of a 1999 novel titled Gravity about a disaster in space is suing 
the makers of the Oscar-winning film which shares its name, reportsDeadline 
<http://www.deadline.com/2014/04/warner-bros-gravity-lawsuit-rizzoli-isles-author-tess-gerritson/>
.

Alfonso Cuarón's extraterrestrial drama won seven prizes at the Academy awards 
in March, including best director for its lead architect. Prolific American 
writer Tess Gerritsen, whose novel is also about a female astronaut trapped in 
space, now wants what she believes is her cut.

Deadline reports Gerritsen is asking for $10m plus damages from studio Warner 
Bros <https://www.theguardian.com/film/warner-bros>, which backed the $716m 
box-office smash. She also wants a "based on the book by Tess Gerritsen" credit.

The industry blog suggests Gerritsen previously distanced her novel from 
Cuarón's film, and someplot details 
<http://www.tessgerritsen.com/books/medical-thrillers/gravity/> do appear to 
differ. The central character, according to the author's own website, is a 
brilliant research physician sent to the international space station in order 
to study living beings in space.

"Once aboard the space station … things start to go terribly wrong," reads a 
synopsis. "A culture of single-celled organisms known as Archaeons, gathered 
from the deep sea, is to be monitored in the microgravity of space. The true 
and lethal nature of this experiment has not been revealed to Nasa. In space, 
the cells rapidly multiply and soon begin to infect the crew – with agonising 
and deadly results."

Warner offshoot New Line is said to have optioned Gerritsen's book in 1999, 
and the author says details she was asked to add during an earlier incarnation 
of the film adaptation made it into Cuarón's movie. "To assist in the 
development of the GerritsenGravity <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity> 
Project, Gerritsen wrote and delivered additional material that constituted a 
modified version of a portion of the Book," reads her lawsuit. "The additional 
material written by Gerritsen included scenes of satellite debris colliding 
with the International Space Station ("ISS"), the destruction of the ISS, and 
the surviving female medical doctor/astronaut left drifting in her space suit, 
alone and untethered, seeking the means to return to Earth."

Cuarón and Warner Bros have yet to make a public comment on Gerritsen's suit.
 