
When Gravity came out last year, I was pretty excited. All of our critics had 
liked it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/28/gravity-review-venice-film-festival>
. In fact, most critics had liked it (it still has 97% on Rotten Tomatoes 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/gravity_2013/> and a score of 96 on Metacritic 
<http://www.metacritic.com/movie/gravity>). Many of my friends had raved about 
it, and space is pretty cool, so I went. And it was terrible.

The plot can be boiled down to one sentence: “Unhappy woman has bad time in 
space but survives against the odds.” Sandra Bullock’s character, Ryan Stone, 
floats from one mishap to another, always escaping disaster at the last 
possible moment.

In order to provide breathing space between the disaster set pieces, Stone is 
provided with a saccharine, implausible backstory full of sledgehammer 
symbolism. Her daughter fell over, hit her head and died – because of gravity 
(wait, that’s the name of the film? No way!). So she goes into space, 
presumably to defy gravity. With no training as an astronaut, she manages to 
get a job as a “mission specialist” on a space station – and things soon go 
horribly wrong.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fsep%2F06%2Fgravity-trailer-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F9%2F6%2F1378479707064%2FGravity-trailer-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gravity%3A%20watch%20Sandra%20Bullock%20and%20George%20Clooney%20in%20the%20new%20full-length%20trailer%20of%20the%20space-walk%20thriller%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fsep%2F06%2Fgravity-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gravity%3A%20watch%20Sandra%20Bullock%20and%20George%20Clooney%20in%20the%20new%20full-length%20trailer%20of%20the%20space-walk%20thriller%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fsep%2F06%2Fgravity-trailer-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F9%2F6%2F1378479707064%2FGravity-trailer-001.jpg>
Many reviewers and commentators have praised it as a rare example of a strong 
female lead character in a Hollywood movie. But they must have been watching a 
different film, becauseGravity <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity> 
embraces all sorts of gender stereotypes. Often clueless, Stone is the very 
model of the damsel in distress. She is repeatedly rescued, but always by men 
or by chance – she never escape catastrophe thanks to her own ingenuity. Plus, 
there are more unnecessary lingering shots of Bullock in her underwear than 
you’d find of models in a Pirelli calendar.

Gravity is not designed as a comedy, but at times it is difficult not to 
laugh. The most notable of these is the utterly ludicrous deus ex machina scene 
in which Stone’s dead colleague, played byGeorge Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney>, appears in a hallucination 
and conveniently tells her exactly which buttons to press to escape, reminds 
her that life is worth living, and then disappears.

Even 1990s Steven Spielberg would be embarrassed by the level of 
sentimentality, and Steven Price’s this-is-where-you-cry score certainly 
doesn’t help in this regard.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df46GwvQHmOs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df46GwvQHmOs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df46GwvQHmOs&media=>
“Nobody ever taught me how to pray,” Stone tells us at one point. She also 
beseeches Clooney’s ghost to say hello to her dead daughter: “You tell her that 
I love her, Matt. You tell her that I love her so much. Can you do that for 
me?” After years of production and untold millions of dollars spent on special 
effects, couldn’tAlfonso Cuarón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfonso-cuaron> have given someone a few quid 
to spend half an hour casting their eyes over the script and removing a few of 
the cliches?

However technically impressive it might be, 3D technology is no substitute for 
a good story. Having a metal bolt appear to fall towards me is just showing off 
(not to mention inexplicable to those watching in 2D). If I want to be wowed 
just by 3D effects, I’ll go to a theme-park simulator game and watch monsters 
jump out at me and clowns fall off ladders. And if I want clumsy homages to 
2001: A Space Odyssey, I’ll head to a sixth-form college short-film night.

Still, a lot of these problems could be forgiven if Gravity didn’t commit the 
worst sin of all: being intensely boring. I’m not remotely invested in what 
happens to any of the astronauts. The most likable character is the Inuit 
fisherman,Aningaaq <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0zcYkuIzzy8>, who Stone 
contacts by radio. In fact, Gravity co-writer Jonás Cuarón’s short film about 
Aningaaq <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0zcYkuIzzy8> has more depth in seven 
minutes than the feature film manages in a tedious 90 minutes. The film finally 
became interesting in the final scene. I’d much rather watch a movie about what 
happens to Ryan Stone after –spoiler alert! – she returns to Earth.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0zcYkuIzzy8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0zcYkuIzzy8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0zcYkuIzzy8&media=>
Escape against the odds is an appealing story, but only when it contains 
nuance, surprise and ambiguity. For example, JC Chandor’s filmAll Is Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/all-is-lost>, released a month after Gravity, 
is essentially the same plot, but set on the sea. It deals with the same issues 
of solitude and the value of life in a far more interesting way because Chandor 
doesn’t spoon-feed emotion to his audience the way Cuarón does.

I couldn’t care less about scientific inaccuracies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/08/gravity-science-astrophysicist>, 
and I don’t begrudge Gravity its many awards. The technical wizardry is 
brilliant, and it’s great that the sound-mixing team have been recognised. Good 
job! It’s not your fault the film’s so dull. But Gravity is the cinematic 
equivalent of a drum solo. Technical prowess is nice, but it isn’t what counts 
when it comes to entertainment. Great films live or die on the strength of 
their stories, and Gravity barely even has one.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F08%2Fgravity-seduced-and-abandoned-how-to-survive-a-plague-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F11%2F7%2F1383844864019%2FComposite-of-stills-from--015.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20Gravity%2C%20Seduced%20and%20Abandoned%20and%20How%20to%20Survive%20a%20Plague%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F08%2Fgravity-seduced-and-abandoned-how-to-survive-a-plague-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20Gravity%2C%20Seduced%20and%20Abandoned%20and%20How%20to%20Survive%20a%20Plague%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F08%2Fgravity-seduced-and-abandoned-how-to-survive-a-plague-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F11%2F7%2F1383844864019%2FComposite-of-stills-from--015.jpg>
 The Guardian Film Show on: Gravity, Seduced and Abandoned and How to Survive a 
Plague 
• More most overrated films: Peter Bradshaw on Billy Liar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/10/billy-liar-my-most-over-rated-film>
• Read Peter Bradshaw’s five-star review of Gravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review>
• Gravity star Sandra Bullock: ‘What we do, it’s all sci-fi’ – video interview 
<http://theguardian.com/film/video/2013/nov/06/gravity-sandra-bullock-video-interview>
 