
Michael Gambon has talked openly about his enforced retirement from the stage, 
although not from television, because of difficulty retaining lines. But, when 
you meet Gambon he still has the aura of a great actor. It’s partly the result 
of his massive physical presence, his pouched, seamed, highly expressive face 
and a voice that can seemingly hit all registers from basso profundo to light 
tenor. If I had to choose one performance that was a testament to Gambon’s 
greatness, it would be his Eddie Carbone in a 1987 National Theatre revival of 
A View From the Bridge. People talk excitedly ofIvo van Hove’s recent Young Vic 
version 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/02/ultimate-production-ivo-van-hove-arthur-miller-theatre>
 withMark Strong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/23/mark-strong-interview-stark-bare-brutal-arthur-miller>
. But good as it was, I still preferAlan Ayckbourn 
<http://guardian.co.uk/stage/alanayckbourn>’s more naturalistic production, 
which reminded us that Arthur Miller’s play is a social, as well as a 
psychological, tragedy.

Michael Gambon: 'You just do it. That's what acting is'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/20/michael-gambon-interview> 
Gambon started with the advantage of looking like everyone’s idea of a 
Brooklyn longshoreman. He is big, barrel-chested and has muscular forearms 
which told you that this was a character who could work the docks and heave 
coffee-bales. Gambon also defined Eddie’s unhealthy obsession with his niece, 
Catherine, through precise physical actions. Learning she had got a job, he 
stabbed a tablecloth angrily with his fork. When he heard the immigrant 
Rodolpho call her beautiful, he turned on the boy with a blood-freezing stare 
(something he may well have picked up from watching Olivier). Seeing Catherine 
and Rodolpho quietly courting also drove Gambon’s Eddie to paroxysms of furtive 
jealousy as he sat in a chair glaring restlessly at an evening paper.

All great acting carries with it a sense of danger and unpredictability: 
something famously unleashed in this production when Gambon picked up a table 
and hurled it violently at a wall. I learned only recently that this 
electrifying moment stemmed from Ayckbourn needing to find a way of getting rid 
of the table in time for the next scene. But there was more to Gambon’s Eddie 
than inarticulate rage. As I wrote at the time, Gambon showed a Brando-like 
capacity to suggest the sensitivity lurking inside a muscular frame. When Eddie 
told his wife that his inexplicable passion was breaking his heart, it was with 
the beautiful melancholy of the uncomprehending. And, after Eddie’s final 
phonecall to the immigration authorities, Gambon’s knees sagged and buckled in 
awareness of his guilt at having betrayed the laws of his tribe.

Tragedy, we’re always told by the textbooks, involves a downfall from a great 
height. Gambon’s magnificent performance proved that the capacity for limitless 
suffering transcends class and status.
 