
A goodwill gesture to ease the plight of those hardest hit in Greece by tax 
increases and budget cuts has backfired spectacularly on the prime minister,
Alexis Tsipras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, with the 
country’s international creditors making clear he has acted out of step.

In the starkest case yet of how closely watched loan-reliant Athens is, 
lenders reacted with unusual alacrity on Friday after the leftist leader 
announced a one-off Christmas bonus for 1.6 million low-income pensioners.

“The programme includes clear commitments to discuss all measures related to 
programme objectives with the institutions in advance,” an EU spokeswoman said. 
“The commission was not made aware of all the details of the announcements 
before they were made. We will now need to study them.”

Retirees have been among those most affected by the gruelling regime of 
austerity the debt-stricken country has been forced to enact in exchange for 
over €300bn in emergency rescue funding.

Once unassailable, Tsipras’s own popularity has plummeted amid scenes of 
pensioners being teargassed and beaten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/greek-police-fire-teargas-at-pensioners-during-anti-austerity-protest-athens>
 as they took to the streets in protest. Under the scheme – announced in a 
televised address following a nationwide strike when anti-austerity 
demonstrations had swept the country – Tsipras said handouts of €617m (£518m) 
would be given to those living on €800 or less a month.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fpensioners-clash-with-riot-police-in-athens-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pensioners%20clash%20with%20riot%20police%20in%20Athens%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fpensioners-clash-with-riot-police-in-athens-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pensioners%20clash%20with%20riot%20police%20in%20Athens%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fpensioners-clash-with-riot-police-in-athens-video&media=>
Pensioners clash with riot police in Athens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/03/pensioners-clash-with-riot-police-in-athens-video>
The Syriza leader, who was first catapulted to power as a strident opponent of 
the neoliberal policies inflicted onGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, has long promised to make good on a 
pledge that he would seek to alleviate the lot of those most afflicted by the 
measures.

State minister Alekos Flambouraris, the 42-year-old politician’s closest 
mentor, said creditors had not been forewarned as the money came out of the 
surplus Greece hadmanaged to achieve through stringent belt-tightening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/greece-edges-out-of-recession-with-two-quarters-of-growth>
.

In a move indicative of the tensions between Athens and its creditors, Bild, 
the mass-selling German daily, poured scorn on the handout, saying: “Mr Tsipras 
has violated the agreements of thebailout programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/eurogroup-eurozone-ministers-greece-loans>
.”

In recent weeks Greek-German ties have become increasingly strained, with 
Berlin’s powerful finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, reminding Athens 
repeatedly that Grexit, or exit from the eurozone, would beckon if it did not 
stick to the rules, implement reforms and attain tough fiscal targets.

Germany’s insistence that thrice bailed-out Greece commits to a primary 
surplus of 3.5% for a 10-year period after its current bailout accord expires 
in 2018 has added to the pressure as it has become ever clearer that Athens 
will have to adopt more austerity.

The demand has become a major sticking point in the continuing row over the 
International Monetary Fund joining the latest rescue programme – participation 
Berlin deems crucial if it is to continue disbursing funds. The recession-hit 
country has lost over 25% of its GDP – the biggest downturn to be experienced 
by an advanced western economy in peacetime – since its financial collapse 
seven years ago.

But social tensions are also spiralling.

“Tsipras is worried and that is why he made this move,” Grigoris Kalomoiris, 
chief policy maker at the union of public sector employees Adedy, told the 
Guardian. “Come January there will be more cuts to salaries and pensions in 
very real terms. We are all being pushed to breaking point. This, believe me, 
is the calm before the storm.”

Ignoring creditor anger, Tsipras’s beleaguered administration dug in its heels 
late on Friday, saying the bonus did not threaten fiscal targets and would not 
be rescinded. “It is up to the Greek government to distribute expenditure in 
the way it sees most fit and socially correct, as long as agreed goals are 
reached,” the prime minister’s office said. “Greece is not a colony.”
 