
The Greek parliament has approved a fresh round of austerity incorporating 
€1.8bn (£1.3bn) in tax increases – widely regarded as the most punitive yet – 
amid hopes the move will lead to much-needed debt reliefwhen eurozone finance 
ministers meet this week. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/09/eurozone-ministers-to-examine-how-to-ease-greeces-debt-burden>

Alexis Tsipras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, the prime 
minister, mustered the support of 152 of his 153 deputies on Sunday to vote 
through policies that many have previously rejected.

Addressing the 300-seat house during the heated three-day debate that preceded 
the ballot, Giorgos Dimaras, an MP in Tsipras’s leftwing party, said he was 
appalled at being forced to support measures he had spent a lifetime opposing.

“I am in mourning,” he said. “This is what can only be called wretchedness.”

This time in the euro debt crisis, the IMF will come bearing gifts for the 
Greeks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/22/greece-euro-debt-crisis-imf-bearing-gifts>
As parliamentarians had prepared to vote, large crowds of protestors took to 
the streets with Panaghiotis Lafazanis, a former minister who broke ranks with
Syriza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syriza> to form the Popular Unity 
party, taking the demonstration to the foot of the building itself where he 
unfurled a giant banner proclaiming: “The memorandum will not pass.”

The belt-tightening legislation, outlined in a 7,500-page omnibus bill, 
includes measures that range from the taxation of coffee and luxury goods to 
the creation of a new privatisation fund in charge of real estate assets for 
the next 99 years. Under the stewardship of EU officials, the body will oversee 
the sale of about 71,500 pieces of prime public property in what will amount to 
collateral for the €250bn in bailout loansGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> has received since 2010.

“They are with the exception of the Acropolis selling everything under the 
sun,” said Anna Asimakopoulou, the shadow minister for development and 
competitiveness. “We are giving up everything.”

The multi-bill, which also foresees VAT being raised from 23% to 24%, is part 
of a package of increases in tax and excise duties expected to yield an extra 
€1.8bn in revenue. Earlier this month,Tsipras’s leftist-led coalition endorsed 
pension cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/08/rioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote>
 that were similarly part of an array reforms amounting to €5.4bn, or 3% of GDP.

At the behest of the EU and International Monetary Fund, the government has 
agreed to adopt tighter austerity in the form of an automatic fiscal brake – 
referred to as “the cutter” in the Greek media – if fiscal targets are missed.


Despite official claims that goals will be achieved, there is a high degree of 
scepticism as to whether this is feasible. The Greek economy has seen a 
depression-era contraction of more than 25% since the outbreak of the debt 
crisis in late 2009, and with high taxes likely to repulse investment, economic 
fundamentals are also unlikely to improve.

The choice for Europe: rescue Greece or create a failed state | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/09/the-choice-for-europe-rescue-greece-or-create-a-failed-state>
“We are talking about indirect taxes, property taxes and income taxes all 
going up,” Asimakopoulou said. “Nobody will be able to pay them, targets will 
be missed, more austerity will be imposed and of course public rage will have 
to be vented. People will not only feel angry, they will feel conned.”


The measures – the ultimate U-turn for a government that once pledged to 
eradicate austerity – are the latest in a set of “prior actions” Athens must 
take to complete an economic review that will unlock desperately needed bailout 
funds to avert default. The country has to meet €3.5bn in debt repayments this 
summer, starting with a €300m loan instalment to the IMF on 7 June – money the 
country simply does not have.

Eager to avoid more drama before next month’s in/out EU referendum in the UK, 
general elections in Spain and regional polls in Germany, lenders have 
indicated they will disburse the loans at Tuesday’s Eurogroup meeting. Berlin, 
which has provided the bulk of Greece’s emergency aid, signalled the instalment 
could be as much as €11bn – more than twice the original €5.4bn, according to 
the German financial daily Handelsblatt.

But creditors are still fiercely divided over the red-button issue of tackling 
Athens’ staggering €321bn mountain of debt. Although the EU and IMF now both 
concede the load is unsustainable, member states reject outright the prospect 
of a debt writedown for fear of losses on bailout loans. Euro finance ministers 
insist that if it is ever to recover, Greece has to achieve a primary budget 
surplus of 3.5%, excluding debt repayments. They have hinted that at most, they 
will agree to discuss debt relief when the country’s current - and third – 
bailout programme expires in 2018.

The quarrel deepened last week when the Washington-based IMF, which has openly 
questioned Athens’ ability to achieve such a high surplus, proposed that Greece 
defer all debt repayments until 2040 and extend its repayment period with 
maturities that would run through 2080 on a capped interest rate of 1.5%. The 
standoff is expected to intensify on Tuesday.

Addressing parliament on Sunday, Tsipras insisted it was a huge achievement 
that Greece had finally succeeded in putting the debt issue on the table. 
Previous governments had done little more than kowtow to creditors without ever 
dealing with the source of Athens’ financial woes, he said.

“No other party but the left could pass such measures,” said Nikos Athanasiou, 
who has watched the crisis unfold from the kiosks he runs facing parliament in 
Syntagma square. “If the right were in power Athens would be in flames.”
 