
Two Greens parliamentarians have publicly defied their federal leader, Richard 
Di Natale <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, on 
the existence of factions and whether the Left Renewal faction, which aims to 
replace capitalism, has a place in the party.

In an opinion piece for Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/left-renewal-since-when-has-taxing-the-rich-and-saving-the-planet-been-so-controversial>
, the federal senator Lee Rhiannon and the New South Wales upper house 
politician David Shoebridge argue that the Greens’ founding principles “don’t 
endorse or condemn capitalism” and therefore differences of opinion must be 
tolerated within the party.

In a reference to Di Natale’s class and former occupation the pair say the 
party has room for a range of people from “forest defenders to middle-class 
doctors and student activists” because it is “a broad and accepting social 
movement that has always celebrated its diversity”.

Left Renewal: since when has taxing the rich and saving the planet been so 
controversial?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/left-renewal-since-when-has-taxing-the-rich-and-saving-the-planet-been-so-controversial>
The piece responds to growing tension after the emergence in December of the 
Left Renewal faction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/richard-di-natale-says-greens-group-that-wants-end-to-capitalism-does-not-represent-party>
, whosemanifesto states 
<https://www.facebook.com/notes/left-renewal/statement-of-principles/101438823691099>
 it will “fight to bring about the end of capitalism” which it describes as “a 
violent and antagonistic relation between workers and those who exploit them”.

Di Natale hit back at the group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/richard-di-natale-says-greens-group-that-wants-end-to-capitalism-does-not-represent-party>
, telling them to consider finding a new political home. He said the Greens do 
not support the overthrow of capitalism, describing it as a ridiculous idea.

But Rhiannon, who is the federal democracy spokeswoman, and Shoebridge, who 
holds various portfolios including justice and industrial relations, suggest no 
such universality of opinion exists.

The pair said that, given the diversity of opinion in the Greens, “it is 
pretty hard to understand all the anger being expressed by some at the 
establishment of a small self-organising group within the Greens that calls 
itself Left Renewal”.

Shoebridge told Guardian Australia he didnt think this amounted to 
contradicting Di Natale because he was correct that “the overwhelming majority 
don’t support the overthrow of capitalism”, but added: “Our principles allow 
for members to have a different view”.

Rhiannon and Shoebridge say: “Left Renewal has every right to exist in the 
Greens along with less obvious, but no less real, rightwing groupings in the 
party.”

The statement is a further repudiation of Di Natale, who said he would never 
support a formal factional system and also said the Greens have “never had 
factions”.

The pair said it was “perfectly natural” for like-minded people in a party to 
coalesce into groups to achieve common goals and a “healthy political party” 
would combine these groupings with an ability to “build bridges internally”.

Richard Di Natale says Greens group that wants end to capitalism does not 
represent party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/richard-di-natale-says-greens-group-that-wants-end-to-capitalism-does-not-represent-party>
Shoebridge said groupings in the Greens “wouldn’t satisfy the definition of a 
faction in the Liberal or Labor party” but “being ignorant or wishing it wasn’t 
the case” that like-minded members coalesced around common goals “isn’t going 
to help build those bridges”.

He has publicly argued 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/hardleft-faction-forms-inside-greens-aiming-to-end-capitalism-20161222-gtghf9.html>
 the“No Nastiness” grouping 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/no-nastiness-nsw-greens-split-intensifies-over-secret-facebook-group-20160919-grjcka.html>
 set up by a staff member of his fellow NSW Greens parliamentarian Jeremy 
Buckingham, who is considered more rightwing than the so-called “Eastern bloc” 
MPs in the state, could be considered a faction.

Candidates backed by Buckingham have met with success in contests for NSW 
upper house vacancies, with his pick Justin Field being chosen as the successor 
for John Kaye, and Dawn Walker defeating Kelly Marks, the pick of the more 
leftwing grouping, for another position.

Shoebridge addressed calls from the former party leader Christine Milne 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/greens-tensions-boil-over-as-milne-challenges-nsw-mps-20170108-gtnszx.html>
 for him to repudiate an office-holder who suggested forming an 
anti-establishment left populist party. He said it was “not the role” of MPs to 
condemn members’ views but a person “can’t hold” an office-holder position and 
advocate competition.

People are more than customers and our natural world is more than a collection 
of exploitable resources
Lee Rhiannon and David Shoebridge 
In their piece, Rhiannon and Shoebridge reiterate that they are not members of 
Left Renewal because it “steps beyond what either of us believes both 
economically and politically”. “In their blanket opposition to capitalism and 
their denunciation of state power Left Renewal go much further than most Greens 
members are comfortable with.”

Rhiannon and Shoebridge adopt a more balanced view of capitalism, crediting it 
with “an extraordinary capacity to organise resources and innovate”. “Whether 
it is delivering the iPhone or Facebook, cornflakes or solar panels, there is 
an energy and creativity in capitalism that anyone can see and we support.

“However capitalism has also put our planet in danger, as the conditions for 
life are degraded by an economy in which fossil fuels, profit and the market 
reign supreme.”

They conclude by calling on the Greens to “challenge and change the status 
quo”, including by taxing the rich, retaining public ownership of the national 
broadband network and ending a range of subsidies to corporations.

“In short we need to come together as a society and say that people are more 
than customers and our natural world is more than a collection of exploitable 
resources. We need transformative change. Passing laws and changing government 
programs cannot alone deliver the level of change that is needed.”
 