
The Greek government has announced it will have reception centres with a 
capacity to host 50,000 people ready next week as figures showed the number of 
refugees and migrants in the country has passed 42,000.

The country’s leftist-led coalition, racing against the clock to deal with the 
massive influx, ruled out using force to relocate more than 12,000 men, women 
and children stranded in increasingly wretched conditions on the 
Greek-Macedonian border. Instead, it said it hoped the people who are trapped 
in a waterlogged camp where sanitation facilities have deteriorated and illness 
has become rife would understand that Europe’s Balkan corridor had been closed 
and choose to settle in organised shelters.

“We have to persuade them [to move] and we can’t do that using teargas,” said 
the deputy public order minister, Nikos Toskas. “Half the people there are 
women and children.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Frefugees-at-idomeni-camp-near-greece-macedonia-border-aerial-video-footage&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F11%2F1457706987751%2FKP_1834689_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugees%20at%20Idomeni%20camp%20near%20Greece-Macedonia%20border%20%E2%80%93%20aerial%20video%20footage&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Frefugees-at-idomeni-camp-near-greece-macedonia-border-aerial-video-footage>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugees%20at%20Idomeni%20camp%20near%20Greece-Macedonia%20border%20%E2%80%93%20aerial%20video%20footage&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Frefugees-at-idomeni-camp-near-greece-macedonia-border-aerial-video-footage&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F11%2F1457706987751%2FKP_1834689_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Refugees at Idomeni camp 
Authorities handed out fliers urging refugees to leave the sprawling tent city 
that has sprung up around Idomeni because there “is no hope” they can continue 
their journey north into Europe following the decision ofMacedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia> and other Balkan states to seal 
the route.

Earlier this week, more than 14,000 people – including a baby boy born in a 
mud-clad tent to a Syrian refugee on Sunday – were caught in limbo as a result 
of the border closures.

With debt-stricken Greece being tested to its limits by the crisis, the 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> pledged to expedite the 
delivery of humanitarian aid to the country. Seen as the easiest gateway into 
the 28-member bloc, Greece has been on the frontline of the emergency since 
hundreds of thousands of people began seeking refuge on the continent after 
fleeing conflict and poverty in Syria and elsewhere.

“We have a moral duty as Europeans to offer this help to refugees,” the EU’s 
leading humanitarian aid policy maker, Christos Stylianides, told reporters 
after holding talks in Athens with prime ministerAlexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>. “I want to be clear: Greece 
is not alone in these difficult times.”

Disaster relief of the sort normally distributed to developing nations has 
been earmarked for the myriad NGOs working out of the country under a €700m 
(£540m) EU aid programme announced last week. The package is due to be given 
the green light on Tuesday before being sent to the European parliament for 
further endorsement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fgreece-rules-out-using-force-against-migrants-and-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fc9c7f5f92f1d5f66bc17303960a0dd294059a4%2F163_0_3083_1852%2F3083.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greece%20rules%20out%20using%20force%20against%20migrants%20and%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fgreece-rules-out-using-force-against-migrants-and-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greece%20rules%20out%20using%20force%20against%20migrants%20and%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fgreece-rules-out-using-force-against-migrants-and-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fc9c7f5f92f1d5f66bc17303960a0dd294059a4%2F163_0_3083_1852%2F3083.jpg>
 Refugees walk along a beach in Izmir province, Turkey. Photograph: Umit 
Bektas/Reuters 
“The humanitarian crisis that we currently have in Idomeni is not a Greek 
matter, it is a European matter and we should all face it together,” Tsipras 
said after the meeting. He said the overstretched state apparatus, which is 
preparing holding facilities for 10,000 people every week, should receive 
financial support.

The EU-Turkey refugee deal is a far cry from postwar altruism | Patrick 
Kingsley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/09/the-eu-turkey-refugee-deal-is-a-far-cry-from-postwar-altruism>
Despite the contours of an agreement being reached with Turkey at an emergency 
EU summit to stem the flows on Monday, increasing numbers of migrants and 
refugees are continuing to make the often perilous journey to Greece’s Aegean 
isles.

By Friday, 42,253 were inside the country, according to Athens, including 864 
who landed on Greek shores on Thursday and about 1,600 who reached the Aegean 
island of Chios on Wednesday.

Announcing that the time had come to focus on the smuggling rings behind the 
illicit flows, the deputy defence minister Dimitris Vitsa, who is coordinating 
the Greek government’s response to the crisis, told Star TV: “We have to turn 
our eyes to traffickers [in Turkey] … because it is they who are selling false 
hope to people.”
 