
Last month, Anohni (formerly Antony and the Johnsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/antonyandthejohnsons>) became the first 
transgendered artist to be nominated for an Oscar - a benchmark moment 
organisers felt was important enough to warrant a mention on their trivia page, 
but not a live appearance: “I want to be clear — I know that I wasn’t excluded 
from the performance directly because I am transgendered,” saidAnonhi in an 
open letter 
<https://www.facebook.com/AntonyandtheJohnsons/posts/10154001331678552>, 
entitled ‘Why I am not attending the Academy Awards’. “I was not invited to 
perform because I am relatively unknown in the US, singinga song about ecocide 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f1JiJhWkM9M>, and that might not sell 
advertising space.”

It’s true: despite decades of warnings from top scientists, ecocide 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecocide> remains an unfashionable issue, thanks 
in no small part to intensive lobbying and spin from agribusiness, biotech 
corporations and carbon barons, who use art world patronage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/mar/19/liberate-tates-six-year-campaign-to-end-bps-art-gallery-sponsorship-in-pictures>
 to create an illusion of benevolence.

Musicians across genres and generations are calling time on this lie, from 
Neil Young’s furiousMonsanto Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/23/raging-in-the-free-world-neil-young-monsanto-years-starbucks-geffen>
 album and Greenpeace’s strikingRequiem for Arctic Ice 
<https://soundcloud.com/greenpeaceuk-1/sets/requiem-for-arctic-ice> to 
THEEsatisfaction’s lush, eco-conscious odyssey, EarthEE. “We want to start a 
conversation about climate change,” the Sub Pop duotold the Guardian last 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/02/theesatisfaction-declare-war-on-replica-rappers-and-the-haters-who-called-them-queerdos>
 year. “Because it’s a real issue, a problem many try to avoid.”

Hopelessness, Anohni’s forthcoming album, is a stunning response to this 
inaction, joiningjournalist Rebecca Solnit’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/07/climate-change-violence-occupy-earth>
 call to label climate change “extreme, horrific, long-term, widespread 
violence”. The songs are sublime in their movement, devastating in their 
truth-telling – war, surveillance, American imperialism, the slow murder of the 
Earth and its inhabitants not just by men with machines, but by all of us who 
are complicit in the planet’s devastation. It is, to quote Elizabeth Barrett 
Browning, a curse from the depths of womanhood: “salt, and bitter, and good” – 
a sonic extension of Anohni’s work inthe Future Feminists  
<http://theholenyc.com/2014/08/15/future-feminism-2/>collective. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFi0q0O4V5Qs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFi0q0O4V5Qs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFi0q0O4V5Qs&media=>
Fear and rage are powerful tools for change, but delight and pleasure are 
equally formidable. These things are in abundance on THEEsatisfaction’s limber, 
Afrofuturist poetry (on the aforementioned EarthEE, or their debut, AwE 
NaturalE, and their catalogue of mixtapes) – heady, rich, semi-mystical music 
that traces symbiotic lines between earth and body, music and mind, lineage and 
land.

Brooklyn-based rapper Junglepussy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/02/the-playlist-hip-hop-junglepussy-wiki-tink-ghostface-killah-action-bronson-asap-rocky>
 has a similar, pesticide-free MO on her excellent second album,Pregnant with 
Success <https://soundcloud.com/junglepussy/sets/pregnant-with-success>, a 
record ripe with carefree confidence, black love and green metaphors – witty, 
salacious and earthy in equal measure. In JP’s world, merch is a line of 
organic beverages (Junglepussy Juice), self-love is paramount (“I seen you 
eating Mickey D’s, knew you ain’t love yourself / I’m up in Trader Joes, 
shopping cart full of health”) and would-be lovers are advised to woo her not 
with popping bottles (“that’s not impressive”) but freshly picked fruit.

It makes sense that artists like Junglepussy, Anohni and THEEsatisfaction are 
at the forefront of green music, since it’s marginal communities – oppressed, 
poor, BAME, “other” – who are, and will continue to be, the first and worst 
affected by ecocide, while the 1% holiday in the sun. Ask the black, 
working-class people of Flint, Michigan, who are forced to drink and bathein 
lead-contaminated water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/jan/16/flint-tainted-water-timeline>
; the victims of developing countries devastated by the droughts and famines 
that follow extreme weather; the many indigenous peoples across the globe 
fighting oil spills and pipelines, land grabs anddeforestation 
<http://amazonwatch.org/about>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Feco-conscious-anohni-theesatisfaction-outsider-music-artists-challenge-ecocide-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe17612cff1ea62a8158799cf149a865b81d49fd6%2F113_164_2323_1394%2F2323.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Green%20days%3A%20why%20outsider%20musicians%20are%20putting%20eco-consciousness%20on%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Feco-conscious-anohni-theesatisfaction-outsider-music-artists-challenge-ecocide-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Green%20days%3A%20why%20outsider%20musicians%20are%20putting%20eco-consciousness%20on%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Feco-conscious-anohni-theesatisfaction-outsider-music-artists-challenge-ecocide-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe17612cff1ea62a8158799cf149a865b81d49fd6%2F113_164_2323_1394%2F2323.jpg>
 Junglepussy: organic rap. Photograph: Johnny Nunez/WireImage 
And yet, as Anohni points out, identity politics in this “tipping point” era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/13/greater-transgender-visibility-hasnt-helped-nonbinary-people-like-me>
 are increasingly used against us by big business as smokescreens to distract 
us from a culture of wealth extraction:

They are going to try to convince us that they have our best interests at 
heart by waving flags for identity politics and fake moral issues. But don’t 
forget that many of these [award show] celebrities are the trophies of 
billionaire corporations whose only intention it is to manipulate you into 
giving them your consent and the last of your money. They have been paid to do 
a little tap dance to occupy you while Rome burns.

Hopelessness works because it articulates the despair so many of us feel on 
our worst days – that we’re all doomed, that the world is past saving, that 
we’re all to blame. But it also speaks to defiance and refusal, joining a 
growing resistance that is starting to take root across the globe: inSudha 
Kheterpal’s SPARK technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/12/spark-eco-light-source-music-electricity-kenya>
, in Björk’stireless activist-art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/06/bjork-calls-action-destruction-iceland-highlands-petition>
, in the healing, pleasure-filled rhythms and melodies of THEEsatisfaction and 
Junglepussy.
 