
The arrival of tens of thousands of refugees has plunged Greece into an 
unprecedented crisis the likes of which no nation could manage alone, the 
country’s embattled prime minister,Alexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, has said.

Speaking as the European commission signalled it was putting together an 
urgent humanitarian aid package for the country after predictions that more 
than 200,000 men, women and children will be marooned there by summer, the 
leftwing leader said Brussels had promised “support and solidarity”.

“We are experiencing the biggest refugee crisis since the second world war,” 
he told Greek Star TV. “The problem surpasses the powers of the country, the 
strength of a government and the innate weaknesses of the European Union.”

Calais camp refugees stage sit-in protest as demolitions resume
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/01/french-riot-police-teargas-jungle-calais-camp-evictions>
Close to 30,000 migrants and refugees are now trapped in Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> following the decision of Balkan 
countries to close Europe’s migrant corridor. The vast majority are Syrians and 
Iraqis, many women and children, fleeing conflict in the Middle East. “What we 
are witnessing is the result of the absurd choices of the west,” Tsipras said, 
referring to western policy over Syria.

By Tuesday more than 8,500 migrants and refugees were said to be stuck at 
Idomeni at the frontier Greece shares with Macedonia, unable to continue their 
journey north. Greek armed forces were working around the clock to set up tent 
cities in fields at the border.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fgreeces-refugee-crisis-pm-says-country-is-overwhelmed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb1ad2082f8d89da2a25b1442af88bb855aeaeb%2F0_270_4626_2775%2F4626.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greece's%20refugee%20crisis%3A%20PM%20says%20country%20is%20overwhelmed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fgreeces-refugee-crisis-pm-says-country-is-overwhelmed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greece%27s%20refugee%20crisis%3A%20PM%20says%20country%20is%20overwhelmed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fgreeces-refugee-crisis-pm-says-country-is-overwhelmed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb1ad2082f8d89da2a25b1442af88bb855aeaeb%2F0_270_4626_2775%2F4626.jpg>
 Migrants rest in the passenger terminal after arriving from the islands at the 
port of Piraeus. Photograph: Milos Bicanski/Getty Images 
On Monday there was chaos and commotion in the no man’s land between the two 
states as Macedonian riot police fired teargas at refugees attempting to break 
through a border fence. Children, including toddlers, received emergency aid 
from Médecins Sans Frontières and other medical charities after suffering 
respiratory problems.

“It rained throughout the night and a lot of tents aren’t waterproof but the 
situation this morning is calm,” said Caroline Haga, a delegate with the 
International Federation of Red Cross, at the scene. “The military has been 
distributing food and registering refugees and pitching tents in new camps in 
the area.”

The rapid build-up of migrants at Greece’s northern borders risks creating a 
humanitarian disaster, the United Nations high commissioner for refugees said 
on Tuesday.

The UNHCR called for better planning and accommodation for those stuck in 
Greece, including the 8,500 at Idomeni. “Europe is on the cusp of a largely 
self-induced humanitarian crisis,” the UN refugee agency’s spokesman, Adrian 
Edwards, said.

“The crowded conditions are leading to shortages of food, shelter, water and 
sanitation. As we all saw yesterday, tensions have been building, fuelling 
violence and playing into the hands of people smugglers,” he said.


The UNHCR also urged all EU member states to reinforce their capacity to 
register and process asylum seekers through their national procedures as well 
as through the European relocation scheme. “Greece cannot manage this situation 
alone,” Edwards said.

Calais 'Jungle' camp clearance – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/feb/29/calais-jungle-camp-clearance-in-pictures>
The crisis is playing out across Greece from Athens’s port of Piraeus in the 
south to the port of Kavala in the north and cities in between, where 
panic-stricken authorities have reportedly been working through the night to 
establish housing facilities for the new arrivals. Men, women and children were 
being housed in army barracks, sports arenas, parks and public buildings.

Government officials said the plan was to accommodate 50,000 as soon as 
possible. But with the rate of migration showing no signs of abating soon, 
Tsipras’s two-party coalition is clearly struggling to keep up with events. 
Authorities on outlying Aegean islands that have borne the brunt of the 
arrivals from the Turkish coast are seeing as many as 3,000 people arrive every 
day. Passenger ferries, normally the preserve of tourists, were expected to 
land at Piraeus with another 2,500 migrants and refugees from the islands of 
Lesbos and Chios on Tuesday. At least another 500 were sleeping out in the open 
in conditions that have become increasingly squalid in Victoria Square in 
downtown Athens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fgreeces-refugee-crisis-pm-says-country-is-overwhelmed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d2df71e9baddee11edffa6f64f163b97604c957%2F0_97_3274_1964%2F3274.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greece's%20refugee%20crisis%3A%20PM%20says%20country%20is%20overwhelmed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fgreeces-refugee-crisis-pm-says-country-is-overwhelmed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greece%27s%20refugee%20crisis%3A%20PM%20says%20country%20is%20overwhelmed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fgreeces-refugee-crisis-pm-says-country-is-overwhelmed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d2df71e9baddee11edffa6f64f163b97604c957%2F0_97_3274_1964%2F3274.jpg>
 Migrants carry belongings in Athens’ Victoria Square. Photograph: Vadim 
Ghirda/AP 
With Greece’s public services hard hit by the country’s debt crisis, NGOs have 
rushed to fill the gap. By 10am on Tuesday, a group of volunteers with the 
Hellenic Red Cross had begun distributing packages of dry food and water to 
hundreds of Syrians, Afghans, Iranians and Iraqis in Piraeus. “There is a huge 
problem with children being sick,” Panaghiotis Bouras, a social worker with the 
group, told the Guardian.

“A lot of them arrive exhausted from the journey. The only thing they want to 
know is when the border [with Macedonia] is going to open again. The truth is, 
we have no idea what to tell them.”

Macedonian officials insisted that borders would remain sealed “until further 
notice”.

“The entry procedure for migrants is to remain suspended,” said Marijan-Pop 
Angelov at the Macedonian embassy in Athens. Earlier the government in Skopje 
had announced: “It will resume upon restoration of order on the other side of 
the border and of adequate conditions for controlled entry.”

Greek officials admitted Athens was also preparing an emergency health plan to 
“protect the Greek public” in the event of an outbreak of disease. The Greek 
daily Ta Nea, citing European commission sources in Brussels, reported that an 
aid package of as much as €700m (£545m) could be given to Greece for relief 
purposes in the coming days.
 