
The Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, has reshuffled his government to 
boostbailout reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/11/alexis-tsipras-greece-criticises-creditors-thessaloniki>
 in the hope of getting the EU to agree to critical debt relief by the end of 
the year.

Heralding a new political era for his country, the embattled leader said on 
Sunday the time had come to expedite measures demanded by international 
creditors and “turn the page”. Hardline ministers who had criticised policies 
including privatisations were dumped for moderate technocrats in what was 
interpreted as a further shift to the centre by the man who once personified 
the hope of Europe’s radical left.

“We are very near the end of a long period of very difficult decisions,” he 
told his newly assembled cabinet. Tsipras said reform negotiations had to be 
concluded by 5 December so that eurozone finance ministers, holding their last 
meeting this year, could begin debating how best to cut the country’s debt.

At over €320bn (£285bn), Greece’s debt pile is regarded as its biggest 
impediment to economic recovery.


Eurogroup ministers back further bailout loans for Greece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/eurogroup-eurozone-ministers-greece-loans>
In a move aimed at placating the lenders who have bailed out Greece three 
times since its economic near-collapse six years ago, the respected US-based 
economics professor Dimitri Papadimitriou was appointed economy minister. The 
70-year-old head of the LevyEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> Institute, a thinktank, will 
have oversight of investment policies and EU structural funds.

Signalling he would push ahead with the often unpopular policies demanded by 
Greece’s lenders –the European Union and the International Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/eu-and-imf-auditors-to-visit-athens-as-greeces-agony-continues>
 – Tsipras also retained the finance minister, Euclid Tsakalotos. The 
Oxford-educated economics professor has won plaudits for his low-key efficacy, 
in sharp contrast to his forerunner, Yanis Varoufakis.


Stergios Pitsiorlas, a veteran leftist who helped found the ruling Syriza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syriza> party, was elevated to the position 
of deputy economy minister. In his previous role as chairman of Greece’s 
privatisation agency, Pitsiorlas had been praised for his no-nonsense approach 
to disposing of cash-draining state assets. The shipping minister, Theodoros 
Dritsas, who was against further investment in Piraeus port by the Chinese 
conglomerate Cosco was among those dropped, while Panos Skourletis, the energy 
and environment minister, who had vehemently opposed the partial privatisation 
of the Public Power Corporation, was moved to the interior ministry.

Skourletis, an established Syriza figure, was described by insiders as too 
powerful to be removed altogether. He was replaced by George Stathakis who had 
held the economy ministry portfolio.

The septuagenarian leftist ideologue Aristides Baltas, who had been culture 
minister, was similarly replaced by Lydia Koniordou, Greece’s foremost female 
classical actor.

A new migration ministry was also established, reflecting the country’s 
frontline role in the refugee crisis and allowing the deputy migration 
minister, Ioannis Mouzalas, to tap into resources and administrative backup in 
his promoted role as minister.


The popularity of Tsipras’s two-party coalition has been in free-fall. A 
Public Issue poll last week put the government 24 percentage points behind the 
centre right New Democracy, the main opposition party. Tax increases and 
sustained cuts to wages and benefits have corroded its support withthousands of 
pensioners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/greek-police-fire-teargas-at-pensioners-during-anti-austerity-protest-athens>
 recently taking to the streets in protest in Athens.

With many of the measures beginning to bite this winter, the challenges remain 
immense for the country still seen as Europe’s weakest link. Tsipras told his 
48-member cabinet that by completing reformsGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> could “follow the roadmap” of being 
included in the European Central Bank’s quantitative easing programme early 
next year, which would see the bank acquire Greek government debt. The 
government is also aiming to regain access to debt markets by the time its 
latest bailout expires in 2018.
 