
Greyhound races scheduled to take place across New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> on Friday have 
been cancelled as the industry comes to terms with news its sport has no future 
in the state.

Greyhound Racing NSW has temporarily suspended all competition after the Baird 
government sounded the industry’s death knell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/new-south-wales-to-ban-greyhound-racing-from-next-year-after-cruelty-investigation>
 on Thursday by announcing a full ban from July next year.

Greyhound Racing NSW said the temporary halt was appropriate until it “better 
understood the immediate implications of the government decision” and “any 
potential staff, industry and animal welfare concerns”.

New South Wales to ban greyhound racing from next year after live-baiting 
scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/new-south-wales-to-ban-greyhound-racing-from-next-year-after-cruelty-investigation>
“Right now, our primary focus is on supporting staff and industry participants 
in the aftermath of this announcement, understanding how this decision will 
play out in practical terms and ensuring ongoing greyhound welfare,” Greyhound 
Racing NSW said.

The suspension will remain until the greyhound racing body “is satisfied there 
is no impediment to its proper control and administration of the industry”.

“Whilst we are disappointed at the government’s announcement, we are proud of 
the leadership GRNSW has shown driving substantial industry reform in the past 
16 months,” Greyhound Racing NSW said.

Thursday’s announcement by the NSW government followed a special commission of 
inquiry report that revealed – among other damning findings – that up to 68,000 
greyhounds were killed in the past 12 years because they were deemed 
uncompetitive.

The former high court judge Michael McHugh’s 800-page report also found that 
up to 20% of trainers used live animal baits and 180 greyhounds a year suffered 
catastrophic injuries such as skull fractures and broken necks.

The government has vowed to support industry members through the difficult 
phase but full details of its industry shutdown plan won’t be revealed until 
later in the year.

The decision to ban greyhound racing in NSW next year was backed by the 
Australian Capital Territory but other states say the sport is here to stay.

“It is untenable for the ACT government to continue allowing and financially 
supporting the practice of greyhound racing,” the ACT’s chief minister, Andrew 
Barr, posted on social media.

Victoria, Queensland, South Australia and the Northern Territory all said they 
would not be banning the sport, Tasmania is waiting on its own inquiry and 
Western Australia said it would consider the NSW report before acting.

An estimated 10,000 people participate in greyhound racing in NSW, whether 
full-time or as a hobby.

Queensland greyhounds: 550 injured and 14 dead in first two months of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/14/queensland-greyhounds-550-injured-and-14-dead-in-first-two-months-of-2016>
Now raced at 36 tracks across the state, the ban will hit the 1200 people 
directly involved in training and racing the dogs, while questions will be 
asked about the future of the premier track at Wentworth Park, prime real 
estate on the edge of the Sydney CBD.

The financial implications are not just going to hit those directly involved 
in racing, with the government receiving between $48m to $90m in revenue from 
the industry.

GRNSW also contributes to the overall return to the three racing codes which 
receive most of their funding from the racing distribution agreement from TAB 
wagering.

Greyhound racing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/greyhound-racing> had been 
lobbying for a larger share, saying it contributed 22% of the wagering market 
while receiving 13% of the revenue.

Over the past 16 months, Greyhound Racing NSW says it has made significant 
reforms following thelive-baiting scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/18/rspca-raised-live-baiting-concerns-with-greyhound-racing-official-six-years-ago>
 and reports of dogs being put down for being non-competitive.
 