
 Author:  Russell Banks (b1940) grew up in New Hampshire and, after a 
childhood and adolescence marked by family strife and low-paid work, he moved 
to Boston and experienced the burgeoning counterculture first hand. After 
attending college in his mid-20s, Banks found academic work, and started 
publishing stories in the late 1960s. In 1974 his first novel, Family Life, 
came out. A spell living in the West Indies in the mid-70s resulted in The Book 
of Jamaica (1980), but it was Continental Drift (1985) that proved a 
breakthrough. Banks was subsequently hired by Jonathan Demme to work on a 
screen adaptation that never materialised. Affliction (1989) and The Sweet 
Hereafter (1991) cemented his reputation, as did the film versions of both that 
followed in the mid-90s. Banks currently teaches at Princeton and his most 
recent novel, The Darling (2005), is set against the civil turmoil in Liberia.

 Story:  Banks was inspired by a school bus crash in Alton, Texas in 1989 that 
killed 21 children. He relocated the story to a characteristically icebound New 
England landscape (the fictional town of Sam Dent, New York). The crash and its 
aftermath is presented in four sections, each told as a first-person narrative 
by a different character: the bus driver, the principal witness, the lawyer who 
leads an attempt to gain compensation, and a survivor. Banks uses the changing 
perspective to throw light on the moral and emotional subtleties surrounding 
the trauma - most disturbingly in the final section, when the survivor 
deliberately wrecks the legal action as revenge against her abusive father.

 Film-maker:  Born in Egypt in 1960 to Armenian parents, Atom Egoyan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atom-egoyan> was raised in Canada after his 
family emigrated. His early features, including Family Viewing (1987) and The 
Adjuster (1991), were studies of emotional dependency and addiction. In 
Calendar (1993), Egoyan himself played a photographer returning to Armenia in 
an autobiographical cultural essay. He subsequently explored the Armenian 
genocide in Ararat (2002). For The Sweet Hereafter, Egoyan cast veteran British 
character actor Ian Holm alongside his regular collaborators, which include his 
Lebanese-Armenian wife Arsin√©e Khanjian.

 How book and film compare:  Egoyan dispenses with the novel's four-voice 
structure, reconfiguring events so that the lawyer, Mitchell Stephens, becomes 
the central figure. Stephens' difficulties with his own daughter, Zoe, 
therefore become more significant to the narrative, paralleling the town's 
plight over losing so many children. Egoyan also removes the sexual abuse 
element from the final act, making the motivation of the wheelchair-bound 
victim, Nicole, considerably more ambiguous. Egoyan considered the story a 
"grim fairytale", and introduced a Pied Piper motif (along with a medieval 
music score) to underline its fabular nature.

 Inspirations and influences:  Part of a Canadian film-making generation that 
included David Cronenberg, Egoyan has cut out an individual path, but shares 
with Cronenberg a fascination with fetishistic and addictive behaviour, though 
to less gruesome effect. As a poet of dislocation and isolation, Egoyan's 
closest equivalent is arguably American writer-director Paul Schrader, who made 
an adaptation of another Banks novel, Affliction , in the same year as The 
Sweet Hereafter .
 