
I am holding for David O Russell, the Oscar-nominated director of Silver 
Linings Playbook 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148764/silver-linings-playbook> and The 
Fighter <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140166/fighter>, who has agreed 
to talk about one of his all-time favourite films: the comic masterpiece
Groundhog Day <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/79383/groundhog-day>, 
released in the US 20 years ago this month. (It reached the UK in May 1993.) 
But the person on the other end of the line doesn't sound like Russell: it's 
more of a shrill whine, the vocal equivalent of nails on a blackboard. Then the 
penny drops.

"Ryan? It's Ned! Ned Ryerson! Bing!" After a prolonged chuckle, Russell drops 
his impersonation of Groundhog Day's irksome insurance salesman, a minor but 
intensely memorable character, and explains excitedly that he recently met 
Andie MacDowell, one of the film's stars. "She came to a screening of Silver 
Linings Playbook and I was, like: 'Oh my God, you were in one of the greatest 
motion pictures of all time.' She goes: 'Four Weddings and a Funeral 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/54602/four.weddings.and.a.funeral>?' I 
said, 'No, Groundhog Day!' I would give my left arm to have written that 
fucking script. It's the only movie I think of from that period other than the 
ones by Quentin [Tarantino]. It makes me mad because I would so like to make a 
film like that. Oh man, I could go on for ever about that movie …"
 Andie MacDowell in Groundhog Day. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext /Allstar 
Collection/COLUMBIA 
We don't have for ever – isn't that one of the lessons of Groundhog Day? – but 
Russell happily slips in and out of voices and lines from the movie, his 
recollections punctuated by wistful sighs. This is what tends to happen when 
fans of Groundhog Day get together. On its release, the picture, directed by 
Harold Ramis, instantly took its place alongside long-cherished favourites such 
asIt's a Wonderful Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36171/it-s-a-wonderful-life> and Some 
Like It Hot <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36223/some.like.it.hot>. It 
was a hit, if not a record-breaking one –Free Willy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/49589/free-willy> made more money that 
year. It wasn't even the biggest comedy of 1993: that honour went to the Robin 
Williams cross-dressing farceMrs Doubtfire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/78380/mrs-doubtfire>, which grossed more 
than three times as much in the US. But if one of the marks of a great film is 
that we can barely remember a time when it wasn't in our lives, then Groundhog 
Day passes that test with ease. It seems to have been with us for ever.

So, too, does its title, which has entered our language as shorthand for any 
period of intolerable monotony comparable to the one experienced by the 
misanthropic TV weatherman Phil Connors (Bill Murray). Phil is dispatched to 
the folksy town of Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania, to cover the annual 2 February 
celebrations, which revolve around a groundhog supposedly foreseeing the exact 
date of the arrival of spring. "This is one occasion where television really 
fails to capture the true excitement of a large squirrel predicting the 
weather," Phil sneers to camera. But when he wakes the following morning, it is 
2 February again. And 2 February it will remain indefinitely, rebooted each day 
at 6am, until Phil can figure out how to arrest the cycle. The secret, it 
transpires, lies within him.
 Bill Murray interviews the groundhog. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext /Allstar 
Collection/COLUMBIA 
The film's timelessness can be attributed partly to its classical redemptive 
narrative, which has echoes of A Christmas Carol. "The redemption plot is one 
of the oldest story shapes," says Peter Baynham, the Day Today and Brass Eye 
writer whose script credits includeBorat 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/114557/borat>, Arthur Christmas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144411/arthur-christmas> and the 
forthcoming Alan Partridge: The Movie. "With so many movies, especially 
comedies, you can see the bones sticking out – you can see what they're trying 
to do. But Groundhog Day is such a clever, wonderful ride that you don't notice 
the joins. It's rare for a comedy to be funny and profound but also popular. 
Films such as Groundhog Day andBack to the Future 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/78042/back-to-the-future> sold a lot of 
popcorn, but they were insanely smart too. That's very inspiring when you're 
sitting there trying to write a comedy screenplay. Groundhog Day is living 
proof that it's possible to create intelligent comedy that still has a broad 
appeal."

Also remarkable is the film's refusal to reveal how Phil came to be stuck in 
his time-loop: there is no magical fairground machine (Big 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0094737/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1>), no mantra (Shallow Hal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/89786/shallow.hal>), no curse (What Women 
Want <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/87419/what.women.want>). Nor does it 
specify the amount of times he repeats the same day. It could be 10 years or a 
thousand, however long it takes him to memorise the personal histories of 
Punxsutawney's townsfolk, and to become, among other things, a pianist, an 
ice-sculptor and a doctor ("It's kind of an honorary title," he shrugs). That 
radical withholding of information makes it something of an art film in 
mainstream clothing.

The artist and film-maker Gillian Wearing included Groundhog Day in her 
all-time top 10 whenpolled last year 
<http://explore.bfi.org.uk/sightandsoundpolls/2012/voter/956> by Sight & Sound 
magazine. Her list included other enigmatic, if less multiplex-friendly, films 
– L'avventura, The Exterminating Angel, Last Year at Marienbad. "All those 
films reinvent structure and create a new conceptual framework that makes you 
understand them," says Wearing. "They share an almost surrealistic vision, and 
they pose philosophical questions. Groundhog Day is there primarily to 
entertain, but there are lots of really intelligent ideas in it. It makes me 
think of [the French philosopher Gilles] Deleuze and his thoughts on how change 
can arise from repetition. The film follows that to the letter."

Not that the studio pushed the screenwriter Danny Rubin to go big on Deleuze 
or to make the third act more Marienbad-ish. On the contrary, Rubin was urged 
to write a Gypsy-curse scene explaining the loop, which Ramis wisely never 
shot. The mystery has only fortified the film's magic. Its chances of longevity 
were helped too by a purge on period references. Rubin urged Ramis, with whom 
he shares a writing credit, to expunge any nods to the 1990s: "You've gotta 
take all this out," he said, "because this movie is really going to go on for 
years and years." Compare this with Judd Apatow's films, which are peppered 
with gags about early-21st century celebrity culture. Parts ofFunny People 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/128103/funny.people> and This Is 40 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150230/this-is-40> will be 
incomprehensible in 50 years' time, whereas our descendants in 2063 will have 
no trouble understanding Groundhog Day when they download it on to their 
frontal lobes.
 Stephen Tobolowsky (left) with Bill Murray in Groundhog Day. Photograph: 
Allstar/COLUMBIA/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
Speak to any of the film's admirers and one word comes up repeatedly: perfect. 
"I thought straight away that it was a classic," says Wearing. "It's like a 
Billy Wilder film: other generations will understand immediately what's so good 
about it. To me, it's a perfect film."

Russell agrees: "It's perfect in its structure, and its ideas are so profound. 
Very much like Silver Linings Playbook, it's about someone fighting their 
demons using all that humble, difficult, baby-steps hard work that it takes, 
but doing it in such a hilarious way. It shows that until you wake up and get 
things right, you're gonna live that stuff until you die: the same emotional 
prison every day. Phil has to go through every incarnation of what he thinks 
love is until he really gets it."

Like Russell and Wearing, the former Monty Python member Terry Jones also 
includedGroundhog Day <https://www.theguardian.com/film/groundhog-day> in his 
top 10. "What's so remarkable about it," Jones observes over a pint in a north 
London pub, "is that normally when you're writing a screenplay you try to avoid 
repetition. And that's the whole thing here, it's built on repetition. That's 
so bold. The way they get through it is to short-circuit everything, so just 
when you think something is going to happen that you've seen before, the film 
gets to it before you and changes or abbreviates it in some way. I saw it when 
it came out and it just took my breath away."
 Bill Murray in Groundhog Day. Photograph: Alamy 
It still does. I watched the film again at a London cinema last weekend (on 
Groundhog Day itself 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/feb/02/groundhog-day-punxsutawney-phil-weather>
, in fact), where it played to a rapturous sold-out crowd who hung on Murray's 
every poisonous putdown. ("Probably the best work that I've done 
<http://www.theamericanconservative.com/dreher/happy-groundhog-day-bill-murray/>
," Murray once said of the movie.) His performances since then, from his 
collaborations with Wes Anderson (including last year'sMoonrise Kingdom 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145667/moonrise-kingdom>) to his 
Oscar-nominated turn in Sofia Coppola'sLost in Translation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/96936/lost.in.translation>, each have as 
their springboard Groundhog Day. Before that, Murray was seen largely as a 
clown. After it, he was a complex actor with range. "It's the movie he was born 
to make," enthuses Russell. "It's his greatest role. His cynicism and 
eventually his sincerity feel so real because he comes by them so honestly. He 
proves that if you feel it from the feet up, there are no cliches."

If the impact of Groundhog Day is still felt on Murray's career, its influence 
on cinema in general is ever more prevalent. It legitimised fantasy aspects in 
mainstream comedy so effectively that stars such as Jim Carrey (in The Truman 
Show, Liar Liar and Bruce Almighty) and Adam Sandler (in Click and 50 First 
Dates) spent years trying to replicate its formula. Its imprint can be detected 
on films as diverse as Sliding Doors, The Family Man, Run Lola Run and the 
recent Safety Not Guaranteed. In 2004, there was an Italian remake, though the 
best thing about that was the title:È già ieri 
<http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%88_gi%C3%A0_ieri>, or It's Already Yesterday. 
And Charlie Kaufman has also occupied the same philosophical terrain with films 
such as Being John Malkovich and Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (with 
Carrey again). "Look at everything Kaufman's done," says Russell, "and you'll 
see that Harold and Danny got there first." Later this year, Richard Curtis 
will try for the Groundhog Day effect withAbout Time 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2194499/reference>, featuring a hero who can zip 
back and forth through episodes in his own life. In one sequence, he refines 
repeatedly his first night with a new girlfriend until he perfects his 
technique. Connors, never shy of using supernatural subterfuge for sex, would 
have approved.

"There have been a lot of messing-with-time movies where you can't help but 
see the influence of Groundhog Day," Rubin tells me. "There wasSource Code 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140826/source-code>, which was like 
Groundhog Day but with a bomb on a train. I quite liked that. Every time it 
happens, my friends say: 'You just got ripped off. I hope they paid you.' I'm, 
like: 'No, it's an homage.' It's not like I'm being erased. It's an honour. I 
always thought the premise could be explored a million different ways. I 
welcome all of these explorations; it's fun for me because I like to see how 
other people play with the idea. Basically it shows how ubiquitous it's become 
in the culture. It's getting harder and harder now to find anyone who hasn't 
seen it."

• Groundhog Day by Ryan Gilbey is published by BFI Publishing, price £10.99. 
To order a copy for £8.79 with free UK p&p, go toguardian.co.uk/bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844570324>
, or call 0330 333 6846.
 