
It was on an Edinburgh nightclub dancefloor in 1987 that a girl sidled up and 
shouted in my ear: "Aren't you the bloke who played Adrian Mole on the telly?" 
Anyone I have ever mentioned this to assumes it must have been one of the most 
humiliating experiences of my life. Why, exactly, I ask? Because, they say, 
Adrian Mole is the ultimate loser. But I don't agree. And I should know: Adrian 
and I have grown up together, ever since I read the then newly published Secret 
Diary ofAdrian Mole <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adrian-mole> Aged 13 
3/4, back in 1983, when I was 13 3/4.

We didn't hit it off immediately. For a start, I had a problem with the title: 
at that age, boys have dropped the precious practice of adding fractions to 
their age. It seemed patronising. And I never lost the sense that I was reading 
something written by a woman who hadn't quite got into a boy's head (most of us 
at that age are not obsessed by the size of their "things").

He may not have been entirely convincing as an individual but then Adrian and 
his family were created specifically to sit on the fault line between the 
disfranchised working classes and those destined to be sucked into Thatcher's 
social revolution. That is why it was an inspired move by Sue Townsend to set 
her kitchen-sink drama during the great upheaval.

But the stroke of genius was to turn it into a slapstick comedy. In truth, the 
first time I read the books, they didn't seem that funny. But returning to them 
20 years later, I can see how wrong I was. They are hilarious. Perhaps at the 
time I was just a little too close to the material.

And perhaps they have actually improved with age, sitting very comfortably as 
period pieces. (It is astonishing how little has changed from Adrian's world: 
in the first book, Ken Livingstone is running London, the railways are a mess 
and the Guardian even drops the odd clanger.)

Despite all this, Adrian and I understood each other as only two 13-year-old 
schoolboys could have done. And we were bonded by our shared horror of the 
comprehensive school system - the teaching methods had changed little since the 
war. His account of the rock-hard rugby pitch on January mornings still makes 
me wince.

I have no idea how Townsend managed to capture that time but it rang utterly 
true. Like all of us, Adrian's true place in the world was defined by how he 
first conducted himself at school. Both of us found that world alienating. And 
although I swam and he sank, we were both formed by the experience, although 
one of my old schoolfriends admits that I reminded him of Adrian Mole at the 
time "in some of the nerdy aspects".

But it went horribly wrong for Adrian after he left school: Townsend made a 
mistake by keeping him out of university. The higher education system was 
expanding at an explosive rate at the time and you could nearly always find 
somewhere that would take you. I have no idea why Townsend decided to keep 
Adrian out of that. Maybe she didn't relish the challenge of entering a world 
already so expertly portrayed by Malcolm Bradbury and David Lodge.

But Adrian Mole: The Redbrick Years would have been a triumph. Imagine: the 
missing grant cheques, the deranged tutors, the tales of Pandora's string of 
Oxbridge successes. I feel I could sit down and write it myself.

The real tragedy of Adrian's failure to grapple with higher education, though, 
is that it marked the point when he and I parted company. After that moment, if 
we were to meet in the pub there would always be something separating us: that 
system I went through that he never did and now never could. Perhaps that was 
why Townsend did not send him to university: Adrian's comedy always came out of 
tragedy. There was more to be gained from contemplating the implication of what 
might have been, rather than what was.

But that failure to go on to university marked the moment that the books lost 
their edge. The Wilderness Years, which saw Adrian at 23 and working in a local 
government office in Oxford, were not what they should have been - they were 
the juvenile jottings of an insecure adolescent rather than the diaries of a 
young man trying to make his way in the world.

Part of me wishes the books had left Adrian in childhood. At the end of The 
Growing Pains it would have been so easy to imagine that it all could have 
turned out so well. How painful to discover that in fact, when we reconvened, 
it had all gone horribly wrong. By time of the time of The Wilderness Years, 
Adrian had stopped being confused and naive. He was stupid.

The fine line between the brilliance of the early Mole books and mere 
eccentricity was clearly demonstrated in Townsend's 1987 Rebuilding Coventry, 
which followed a 40-year-old woman's midlife crisis: without the filter of 
Adrian's naivety, it came across as an oddly surreal affair.

I suspect that, on some level, Townsend already knew Adrian was running into 
trouble. In 1986, when asked by the Times whether she would take Adrian into 
adulthood, she admitted: "There's something almost distasteful about it because 
I know it would sell and I would feel I was cashing in on it. It's an easy 
thing for me to do now and I just want to do something different." The 
Cappuccino Years - the latest book, adapted for the new television series - 
reveals most brutally the problems of sticking with Adrian. It covers the 
period when New Labour has just come to power. Adrian is living in London with 
an estranged wife and two estranged children, and forced to watch Pandora's 
ascent as a Blair babe. The satirical jokes hit the mark, but Adrian himself 
seems somehow incidental to the business of landing as many blows on New Labour 
as possible. The fact is that he is inextricably linked to Margaret Thatcher 
and her era. When she went so, to some extent, did he.

But there is a delicious irony in the fact that Adrian has ended up here in 
the pages of the Guardian, after having viewed it with awe for so many years. 
And it has given him a new lease of life. I only hope Townsend has a happy 
ending planned for Adrian. He has had his ups and downs (mostly downs) but he 
deserves his shot at happiness. I have a horror that one day she will kill him 
off. And if that happens something inside me will die as well.

Â• Adrian Mole: The Cappuccino Years, tonight on BBC1 at 9.30pm, except 
Scotland where it begins on Monday at 10.35pm. Private lives returns next week.
 