
A number of additional acts have been announced for the Great Escape festival 
<http://escapegreat.com/> in Brighton, as well as three Guardian New band of 
the day <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/series/newbandoftheday> gigs.

The Temper Trap 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/bb6eaced-69dd-4636-829f-9f987acc4fc3>, 
S.C.U.M 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/a1a66475-37d3-4994-89af-b610be783b45> 
andGaz Coombes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/c05a93d1-c9c4-41f4-8493-f55858c8212d> 
join the previously announcedLianne La Havas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/lianne-la-havas>, Mystery Jets 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/mystery-jets> and Alabama Shakes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/40419b33-18e9-4d5a-a674-30b4bb14bac2> 
and 300 other acts for the three-day festival.

Taking place at 30 venues throughout Brighton from 10 to 12 May, the Great 
Escape <http://escapegreat.com/> is traditionally seen as a showcase for new 
bands and a scene-setter for the rest of the summer.

For the first time, the Guardian will be staging three New band of the day 
gigs, curated with the assistance ofPaul Lester 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/paullester>, author of the daily column 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/series/newbandoftheday>.

The first NBOTD show, at the Warren on Thursday 10 May, features art-rockers 
the Darcys 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/9615516e-7e8e-4a6b-b4ab-87b9c2072804>, 
duoBoy Friend 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/abe64e4c-be05-496e-8776-7c994b890805>, 
Japanese performance group Trippple Nippples and singer-songwriter Gabriel 
Bruce.

The lineup on Friday 11 May includes Swedish indiepop star Dante, 2 Tone 
devoteesRazika 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/53e1dadd-5b09-4fff-b9d8-d25ecf6ee7fa>, 
singer-songwriterRae Morris 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/6f332bdc-b91f-4907-89b4-7be6fc9339e3> 
and enigmatic duo Keep Shelly in Athens 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/322855bb-f33b-4208-9205-defe72a20a97>.

The final show on Saturday 12 May features Norwegian singer-songwriter and 
guitarist Bernhoft, DIY Camden duoBIGkids 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/feb/13/new-band-bigkids>, Philco Fiction 
and singer-songwriterKing Charles 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/fed809c7-6615-4d9f-8295-48ecec946e72>.

Africa Express Sound System, Maxïmo Park 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/maximopark> and the Temper Trap will play 
headlining shows at the Brighton Dome. Other acts on the festival lineup 
include Shabazz Palaces, Errors, Toy,Dry the River 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/dry-the-river>, Jamie N Commons, Django Django 
andPerfume Genius <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/perfume-genius>.

Previous acts to play the Great Escape, which was first staged in 2006, include
Bon Iver <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/boniver>, Adele 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/adele>, Tinie Tempah 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tinie-tempah>, Mumford & Sons 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/mumford-and-sons> and Ed Sheeran 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/ed-sheeran>.

Early-bird three-day tickets <> are available until 11 April and cost £45. As 
in previous years, a Great Escape convention programme comprising industry 
talks and panel debates will run alongside the music festival.

The Guardian is a media partner for the event, whose lead international 
partner, Catalan Sounds, will bring a host of bands from Catalonia and the 
Balearic islands. For more information on the lineup visit
escapegreat.com/festival-line-up <http://escapegreat.com/festival-line-up>.

A further New Band of the Day gig 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/mar/23/angel-guardian-new-band-day-gig> 
takes place at the Barfly in London on 11 April.
 