
Established ways of releasing that data have evolved. APIs in standard 
formats, Linked Data using RDF and Domain Modelling are examples that are fast 
becoming the orthodoxy.

But the practice of visualising data is a little less well understood, perhaps 
because it's one of those disciplines that mixes art and science. There are 
plenty of blogs that list good examples of creative data visualisation (
infosthetics.com <http://infosthetics.com>, flowingdata.com 
<http://flowingdata.com>, informationisbeautiful.net 
<http://www.informationisbeautiful.net> etc) but not many sites that aim to 
teach the skills needed to interpret and present data in an engaging way.

The Data Art project <http://backstage.bbc.co.uk/data_art/> aims to do this. 
It's a collaboration betweenBBC Learning <http://www.bbc.co.uk/learning/> and 
theUniversity of Westminster <http://www.westminster.ac.uk/schools/media/cream> 
and is funded by theAHRC <http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/Pages/default.aspx>. We are 
especially interested in how data visualisation can be used in teaching.

Our latest project is called News Traces 
<http://backstage.bbc.co.uk/data_art/guardian_newstraces/> and it uses the 
Guardian's Open Platform. Users can search for words and phrases and see the 
instances of those words in Guardian articles from 2000 until the present day. 
In doing so it turns the Guardian website into a visual history lesson of the 
first decade of this century. We aimed to create something that could be used 
in the classroom to augment current affairs and recent history teaching but 
we've ended up with something that is pretty interesting for a general audience 
and certainly useful for data journalists.

The design

We arrived at this way of presenting the data on the back of several other 
prototypes. These included a flash visualisation plugged into an internal BBC 
API that exposed subtitles information for recent TV programmes. We 
subsequently developed this idea further withMicrosoft Pivot 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_Live_Labs_Pivot> to navigate to iPlayer 
using the same data. What we learnt was that in displaying individual instances 
of words as blocks we had a useful way of navigating back to the original 
content. In addition, putting these instances on a timeline highlighted trends 
and events that added value to the original data set.

How we built it

It seemed a natural progression to try this visualisation technique on a large 
structured data set that went back over some considerable time. The Guardian's 
Open Platform was an ideal candidate as it's the only UK paper to expose its 
content in this way. It's well documented and easy to use.

As we only needed access to headlines and metadata we opted for keyless 
access. This also meant other developers could reuse our code without the need 
to register with the Guardian.

We chose to build the thing in Flash as we had the skills in our team and it's 
very fast to prototype in AS3.

Rather than painstakingly taking you through the minutiae of our actionscript 
code, we've created a paired down version for you todownload 
<http://jungle.bbc.westminster.ac.uk/newstraces/news_traces_01_guardian.zip> 
and play around with. I'll talk you through the basics of the how to get it 
working and show you some interesting queries in the video below.

News Traces Tutorial <http://vimeo.com/17076467> 

The visualisation sequentially loads data from Open Platform in JSON format. 
The best way to get yourself familiar with the various queries you can perform 
and the data returned is to play around withthis explorer 
<http://explorer.content.guardianapis.com> that the Guardian have kindly 
created.

We probably aren't going to develop this any further as we are focused on 
making experimental prototypes rather than products, but if you want to do 
something with it feel free to take our code (as long as you stick within the 
Open Platform rules!).

You can see some of our other prototypes on our website 
<http://backstage.bbc.co.uk/data_art/>.

One of the things that is increasingly apparent in a world where data is all 
around us is the importance of individual skills of interpretation. Which 
hospital should I choose for my operation? Which school should I send my child 
to? Which MP should I vote for? These are all decisions that can be informed 
with data that is already in the public domain. The ability to interpret this 
data can be seen as a new literacy that soon could be as important as grammar 
and spelling. Introducing data visualisation into the classroom seems like a 
good thing to be doing.
 