
A worryingly high proportion of aid workers have experienced mental health 
issues, exclusive findings from the Guardian can reveal.

79% of the 754 respondents to the mental health and wellbeing survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/23/share-your-stories-mental-health-and-wellbeing-in-the-aid-industry>
 on the Global Development Professional Network stated that they had 
experienced mental health issues. The overwhelming majority, 93%, believe these 
to have been related to their work in the aid industry.

Over three quarters of those that took the survey were female and the majority 
of participants identified as international staff working at an international 
NGO.


The findings raise fresh concerns over the wellbeing of staff in the 
profession, and lends further weight to the arguments of a small but growing 
number of figuresquestioning the quality of support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/31/aid-workers-casualties-mental-health>
 and protection provided by humanitarian organisations. “This is a huge, hidden 
and important issue,” said one anonymous contributor to the survey.


Over half of contributors said they had experienced or been diagnosed with 
anxiety, and 44% with depression. Panic attacks and post traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) were also cited among over a fifth. While there was little 
gender differentiation for these results, men were almost twice as likely to 
cite alcoholism than women.

While the conclusions of the survey must be weighted against the fact they are 
drawn from a relatively small sample size and participants who had experienced 
mental health issues may have been more likely to complete the survey, they 
suggest the problem may be more prevalent than previous studies have indicated. 
Research by the Antares Foundation found that30% of field workers report 
symptoms of PTSD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/mar/03/post-traumantic-stress-disorder-aid-workers>
 after field assignments.Around a quarter 
<http://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/help-information/mental-health-statistics/> of 
the UK population will experience some kind of mental health problem within the 
course of a year, according to the Mental Health Foundation.


Secret aid worker: sometimes I go to supermarkets to escape the loneliness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/01/secret-aid-worker-humanitarian-loneliness>
“These results are higher than those consistently reported by others,” said 
Jim Guy, from the Headington Institute, an organisation providing psychological 
support to aid workers. “Nonetheless, we know that the culture of an 
organisation – whether employees feel supported by supervisors and colleagues – 
can have a huge impact on whether stress becomes tolerable or toxic.”


The survey paints a stark picture of both suffering and resilience among aid 
workers. 63% of those that say they have experienced mental health problems 
believe them to have impacted on their ability to do their job, and 79% say 
they have led to them considering leaving the industry. Despite this, a large 
majority, 84%, say they have continued working with untreated mental health 
issues that they felt affected their work.

What’s behind the issue?

Stress and danger in the field


Exposure to security threats and witnessing human tragedy came up frequently 
in the section of the survey where contributors were given the opportunity to 
share more detail on their experiences.

60% of respondents cited specific incidents witnessed at work as having an 
impact on their mental health, and half said that they were permanently 
deployed to a country affected by disasters or conflict.

“Aid workers are likely to witness events that would classify as a traumatic 
events and therefore we know that a proportion of them will be vulnerable to a 
chronic traumatic reaction,” said Richard Stott, clinical psychologist and 
specialist in anxiety disorders and trauma. Last year was one of themost 
dangerous recorded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/19/deaths-aid-workers-world-humanitarian-day>
 for aid workers, with 155 killed, 171 seriously wounded and 134 kidnapped.

Lack of support


While there were individual reports of praise for the support received from 
employers, participants overall cited a lack of support (66%) at work as the 
principal factor impacting on their mental health, followed by specific 
incidents witnessed at work, heavy workloads and isolation.


“Humanitarians often face similar traumatic experiences to those working in 
the military, and yet there are established mental health support services to 
those in the military, whilst there are none to aid workers,” said Idit Albert, 
clinical psychologist at the Maudsley Centre in London.A recent study 
<http://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/help-information/mental-health-a-z/a/armed-forces/>
 of armed forces in the UK found 4% reported probable PTSD, and 19.7% other 
common mental health problems.

One aid worker, commenting anonymously in the survey, stated that where 
support was available it wasn’t sufficient:

During a traumatic experience for my colleagues and I last year (several 
colleagues had been abducted and executed), I felt a massive lack of mental 
health support. What can be best defined as tokenistic support was made 
available to staff. But it was brief, late and hugely insufficient.

The findings suggest a distinction between what is available in theory and in 
practice. 68% of respondents said it was not clear who was responsible for 
their wellbeing and mental health while on the job, and the majority do not 
agree that their organisation is supportive of staff experiencing mental health 
problems.

Culture of silence


The survey also hinted at a culture of silence surrounding, and potentially 
perpetuating, mental health issues in the industry.

Anonymous contributors to the survey stated: 

There is a culture where asking for conditions that benefit your own personal 
well-being (and mental health!) means you are not a “true” humanitarian.

There is such a culture of martyrdom amongst aid workers. This culture both 
allows for abuse and gives no room to complain or seek help. I ultimately had 
to leave the sector before I felt it too late. I am so glad I did. I have been 
away for almost four years and only now feeling I can re-enter in a healthier 
place.

These attitudes may account for why so many appear to have continued working 
despite untreated problems, and why the most popular change that people wanted 
to see on staff welfare in the industry was “a more open culture of talking 
about mental health”. The great majority of those that did seek support chose 
private therapy over that provided by their organisation.


What more needs to be done?

Improved counselling services, and a clearer sense of who is responsible for 
staff wellbeing were also highlighted as key changes organisations could make 
to better support staff with mental health problems.

Sexual violence in the aid sector: what should NGOs be doing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/19/sexual-violence-aid-sector-ngo-action>
 “The question of mental health and well-being of humanitarian staff is so far 
under-addressed,” said Marine Menier, security manager at humanitarian training 
organisation RedR. National staff, that face similar or greater challenges than 
their international colleagues, are particularly overlooked, she added.

“We need more consistency and commitment across organisations,” said 
Emmanuelle Lacroix, people capacity and development manager at CHS Alliance. 
“It should not be left to luck for aid workers to have a manager who take staff 
care seriously or an agency that somehow has worked out a way to allocate and 
integrate relevant support provisions to both mitigate and manage the mental 
health risks associated with aid work.”

We will be continuing to explore the issue of mental health and well being in 
the aid sector this week on Global Development Professionals Network. You can 
follow the coveragehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/aid-worker-wellbeing>
.Get in touch on globaldevpros@theguardian.com if you would like to comment on 
the topic.


 * If you have been affected by the stories in this article, the Samaritans can
be contacted on 116 123 in the UK 
<http://www.samaritans.org/how-we-can-help-you/contact-us>. If you live outside 
the UK, a list of organisations providing support internationallycan be found 
here 
<http://in2mentalhealth.com/2011/06/23/50-mental-health-ngosuser-organizations-around-the-world/>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 