
Have you ever thought about where your super’s being invested? The money you 
pay your electricity company? The money in your bank? If you’re like most 
Australians, you’re probably heavily invested in fossil fuels, without even 
knowing it. If you’re feeling powerless in the face of political inaction, 
there is something you can do, shift your money away from fossil fuels.


Guardian Masterclasses and Festival of Dangerous Ideas present a practical 
divestment workshop hosted by investigative reporterJess Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jessica-hill>, guests to include Dr John 
Hewson <http://www.abc.net.au/news/john-hewson/29768>, Phil Vernon 
<https://www.australianethical.com.au/people/senior-management/> from 
Australian Ethical <https://www.australianethical.com.au/>, Blair Palese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/blair-palese> from 350 org 
<http://350.org.au/>, Ben Burge 
<http://www.theage.com.au/it-pro/business-it/ben-burge-the-man-hoping-to-reignite-the-electricity-market-20141230-12fojw.html>
 fromPowershop <http://www.powershop.com.au/>, and Julien Vincent 
<https://twitter.com/julesallover> from Market Forces 
<http://www.marketforces.org.au/>. In this introductory course, Australia’s 
leading experts on divestment will show you why your money matters and what to 
do with it. They’ll also reveal why divestment is not just an ethical choice, 
but a savvy financial decision.

If, as Naomi Klein <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/naomiwolf> says, 
capitalism is at war with the climate, it’s up to us as consumers to fight back.

This course is for you if...

 * You want to divest your personal wealth from fossil fuels 
 * You want to understand which companies invest in fossil fuels 
Course description

This Masterclass will explore where personal wealth is invested and how you 
can divest yours into a more sustainable market.

Tutor profile

Jess Hill is a freelance investigative reporter for the The Monthly 
<https://www.themonthly.com.au/author/jess-hill> and Background Briefing, based 
in Sydney. In 2011, while she was a producer at ABC Radio Current Affairs, she 
represented Australia on the Edward R Murrow Fellowship in the United States, 
and a few months later, moved to Cairo as Middle East correspondent forThe 
Global Mail. In 2012, Foreign Policy listed her as one of the top 100 women to 
follow on Twitter, and in 2013, she was listed as one of the 30 most 
influential women under 30 byCosmopolitan.

Book now

Tickets are to be booked via the Festival of Dangerous Ideas website 
<http://fodi.sydneyoperahouse.com/program/dirty-money/>.

Details

Date: Saturday 5 September
Times: 1pm
Location: Sydney Opera House, Utzon Room
Price: $30
Dress code: There is no dress code for Masterclasses. Please wear whatever you 
feel comfortable in

To contact us, click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/about-guardian-masterclasses-australia>
. Terms and conditions can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/terms-and-conditions>
.

Returns policy
Tickets are non-refundable.
 