
The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has signed a deal 
with AOL On, the YouTube-style portal for premium partners, to globally 
distribute original video content.


Under the agreement the Guardian will provide videos, including documentaries, 
toAOL <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> On’s network of publisher 
partners which combined draw more than 1bn views a month.

AOL On has channels spanning news and entertainment to health and channel and 
claims 1bn video views a month of content from partners including Channel 4 
News, ITN, and the Telegraph.

Content from partners such as the Guardian will be distributed across AOL On’s 
international network which includes its own sites, such as Huffington Post and 
TechCrunch, as well as third parties including Daily Mirror publisher Trinity 
Mirror, TalkTalk and Videojug.

“AOL is committed to producing premium content that captures the imagination 
of consumers,” said Graham Moysey, head of international at AOL. “Curation and 
distribution go hand in hand with great content and we are delighted the 
Guardian has chosen AOL On as a partner to drive even greater audiences to 
their content.”

The flip side of the deal for content partners such as the Guardian is that 
they also have the option to access AOL On’s pool of videos, of which there are 
more than 1m, to use on their own websites globally.

AOL has also invested heavily in original programming with more than 50 series 
commissioned to date – with shows from high-profile stars including James 
Franco, Boardwalk Empire’s Steve Buscemi and Sex and the City star Sarah 
Jessica Parker – which also appear within AOL On.

There have also been two UK series commissioned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/16/tess-daly-richard-bacon-rochelle-humes-aol-web>
, one starring Richard Bacon and the other Tess Daly and The Saturdays singer 
Rochelle Humes.
 