
Guitar Hero, the multimillion-selling music game series that brought air 
guitar into the digital age, is back – and this time it’s aiming for the 
Spotify-listening Coachella crowd.

Guitar Hero Live, announced on Tuesday, is the first big revamp in five years 
of the phenomenally popular game. Publisher Activision said the new game took 
account of the rise of digital music and growth of music festivals that has 
taken place in the interim.

“Guitar Hero created this whole music game phenomenon; it’s one of the first 
titles to really transcend video games as a category,” said Tyler Michaud, 
senior director of product management at Activision. “However, our last release 
was in 2010 – just think about all that’s changed in that time. We’ve had a new 
console cycle and people are much more connected now.

“Music has changed a lot too. In 2010, I was walking around with an MP3 player 
in my pocket, which held a lot of music, but it was still a contained 
selection. Now if you want a particular track you just get it – from the cloud, 
from digital services, form wherever. The festival scene has blown up too, the 
sheer numbers of people who are going out and experiencing music – the breadth 
of the bands playing at big events. It has really widened now and we’re 
reflecting that. This is the reinvention of Guitar Hero.”

Guitar Hero Live will use a brand new controller with a refreshed interface, 
designed to more closely resemble real guitar playing. The game will ship with 
a wide array of licensed tracks, and will also allow players to access extra 
songs – and to indulge in online multiplayer competitions – through a new 
Guitar Hero TV service, billed by publisher Activision as “the world’s first 
playable live music video network”.

Developed by UK-based studio Freestyle Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>, previously responsible for the 
DJ Hero series, the game will also abandon the visuals of previous titles, 
which showed cartoon-like performers on stage. The new game instead adopts a 
first-person view from a guitarist’s onstage perspective, and players will see 
real-life video footage of the other band members and the crowd. Freestyle has 
used an innovative digital video technology, previously employed by film-makers 
like James Cameron, to allow crowd members to display apparently real-time 
reactions to the players’ performance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fguitar-hero-live-the-music-game-returns-with-new-guitar-and-fresh-look%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429012301719%2Fdde07077-30a8-4a90-8e0b-559970f824d2-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guitar%20Hero%20Live%20%E2%80%93%20music%20game%20returns%20with%20new%20guitar%20and%20fresh%20look&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fguitar-hero-live-the-music-game-returns-with-new-guitar-and-fresh-look%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guitar%20Hero%20Live%20%E2%80%93%20music%20game%20returns%20with%20new%20guitar%20and%20fresh%20look&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fguitar-hero-live-the-music-game-returns-with-new-guitar-and-fresh-look%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429012301719%2Fdde07077-30a8-4a90-8e0b-559970f824d2-1020x612.jpeg>
 Developer Freestyle Games has used a twin-camera system to allow dynamic 
changes to audience reactions. Fluff a few notes and they start getting 
restless Photograph: Activision 
Instead of a series of five-coloured buttons on the fret board of the guitar 
controller, which previous titles used, the new version has six buttons 
arranged into two rows of three. “The new configuration came from the desire to 
give the fret hand something to do that’s closer to what a real guitarist 
does,” said Freestyle founder and creative director Jamie Jackson. “With two 
rows of buttons, the player’s fingers are now making chord shapes. The 
challenge is to get your fingers into the correct position rather than just 
running them up and down the neck as fast as you can.”


The controller does, however, retain the familiar strum bar to play notes and 
a whammy bar to add effects.


Midway through the presentation at Times Square’s Best Buy Theater, Pete Wentz 
from Fall Out Boy took the stage next to Freestyle’s Jackson to play My Songs 
Know What You Did in the Dark, a song Wentz wrote.

Jackson showed him the ropes: “If you screw it up, the drummer gets really 
pissed,” said Jackson.

“Just like in real life,” Wentz replied.

Wentz played a 90-odd-note streak and then missed a button. “My own song!” he 
moaned.

For the multiplayer component, Jackson brought up Gerard Way to play Na Na Na, 
by Way’s band My Chemical Romance. “People who are good at playing guitar 
generally suck at Guitar Hero,” Activision CEO Eric Hirshberg warned. (Way, who 
said he’d been practicing, won.)

Activision has not specified how many tracks will be available from launch, 
although the press release says “hundreds”. Freestyle is aiming for a diverse 
selection of genres, moving away from rock staples to encompass indie, punk and 
even EDM. The Black Keys, Fall Out Boy, Green Day, Ed Sheeran, The War on 
Drugs, The Killers and Skrillex are among the first artists to be supported.

With the Guitar Hero TV mode, players will have access to a range of 
constantly updated digital channels each dedicated to a different genre of 
music. Designed to resemble both music video channels and digital distribution 
services like Spotify, players simply surf the channels, find a tune they like 
and start playing along while the music video plays. They can compete against 
other guitarists, either via local multiplayers with friends in the same room 
or online connection.


It is not clear yet whether extra tracks or some form of premium GH TV 
subscription will be available at an extra cost.


First launched in 2005, Guitar Hero was originally developed by music game 
specialist Harmonix. Activision bought the brand in 2006, and Harmonix went on 
to create the rival Rock Band series for Electronic Arts. The Guitar Hero 
series continued to sell well, however, selling more than 30m units worldwide. 
After the release of Guitar Heroes: Warriors of Rock in 2010, sales were 
falling due to a saturation of competing games, as well as an onslaught of 
music add-on packs and DLC offerings.

Hirshberg began the presentation by addressing the age of the franchise, 
noting that the five years since the most recent Guitar Hero had seen a major 
transition to a new generation of consoles, along with other changes. “Most of 
the ways we listen to music today, like streaming services, were barely a blip 
on the radar,” Hirshberg said.

But he was adamant that the series has stayed popular. “We have 10 million 
Facebook fans,” he said. “You know that little music festival going on right 
now, Coachella? They have 2 million Facebook fans. Guitar Hero has five times 
that and we haven’t had a game in five years.”

The executive enthused about the changes made in the new game, especially the 
incorporation of live actors and video. The question Activision wanted to 
answer, according to Hirshberg, was: “Could a Guitar Hero game actually give 
you stage fright?” – a fear, he said, that was for some people stronger than 
the fear of death.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fguitar-hero-live-the-music-game-returns-with-new-guitar-and-fresh-look%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429012405428%2F396070ad-299c-42a3-a482-720badcb86c6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guitar%20Hero%20Live%20%E2%80%93%20music%20game%20returns%20with%20new%20guitar%20and%20fresh%20look&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fguitar-hero-live-the-music-game-returns-with-new-guitar-and-fresh-look%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guitar%20Hero%20Live%20%E2%80%93%20music%20game%20returns%20with%20new%20guitar%20and%20fresh%20look&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fguitar-hero-live-the-music-game-returns-with-new-guitar-and-fresh-look%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429012405428%2F396070ad-299c-42a3-a482-720badcb86c6-1020x612.jpeg>
 The crowd size will depend on the player’s progress through the game. You 
start playing to small crowds in intimate venues before movie toward packed 
stadiums Photograph: Activision 
Guitar Hero Live is set to launch on PlayStation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> 3, PS4, Xbox 360, Xbox One 
and Wii U. There will also be smartphone and tablet versions, which can utilise 
the same guitar controllers. Activision has said that it will provide more 
details on those versions at a later date.

In March, Electronic Arts revealed that Harmonix is working on Rock Band 4, 
which is also set to launch this autumn. Five years after the music genre 
looked to have retired, the battle of the bands continues.
 