
Despite the massacre in Charleston, calls to refocus Congress’s attention on 
gun control have gone unanswered and, rather than a rejuvenation of gun control 
supporters, gun rights groups are increasingly emboldened.

A December Pew poll 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/data-trend/domestic-issues/gun-control/> shows more 
support for protecting gun ownership than ever – the first time gun rights beat 
out gun control since Pew began polling on the issue in 1993. Wisconsin 
Governor and Republican presidential candidate Scott Walkerjust signed 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/06/scott-walker-two-gun-bills-119380.html> 
two laws loosening restrictions on gun-control laws: one removes the mandatory 
48-hour waiting period, and the other allows off-duty and retired police to 
carry concealed guns in schools. New Jersey Governor and fellowpresidential 
hopeful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/30/chris-christie-bully-republican-nomination-announcement>
 Chris Christiehas proposed 
<http://www.nj.com/politics/index.ssf/2015/06/christie_announces_change_to_nj_gun_policy_on_eve.html#incart_big-photo>
 regulatory changes to gun control laws that expand the category of people who 
would qualify for an expedited gun license. And gun-rights supporters have 
launched long-shot recall efforts against five state legislators inOregon 
<http://www.oregonlive.com/politics/index.ssf/2015/04/gun_advocates_hit_three_oregon.html>
 andNew Jersey 
<http://www.nj.com/gloucester-county/index.ssf/2015/04/recall_sen_sweeney_would_you_sign_a_nj_gun_rights.html>
 known to be pro-gun control. Though none of these efforts are likely to get on 
the ballot, they do show a willingness to go on the offensive.

Meanwhile, Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid proposed a certain-to-fail Senate 
vote on increased background checks.

Gun-control advocates know that their opponents are more adept at using 
existing political weapons to get a reaction from politicians – and this 
strength stems from not just from the leadership of gun groups like the 
National Rifle Association, or the deep pockets of the industry, but from the 
grassroots supporters.

For instance, following the mass shootings in Aurora, Colorado and Sandy Hook, 
Connecticut, several statestightened their gun laws 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2013/12/10/us/state-gun-laws-enacted-in-the-year-since-newtown.html>
 (though others loosened them). Gun rights supporters in Colorado, one of the 
most conservative states that passed gun-control legislation, responded by 
immediately launching recalls of three state legislators. Though the recalls 
would have no practical effect on the new laws and national gun rights groups 
were uninterested in, if not opposed to, the effort, locals managed to collect 
enough signatures to get the recalls on the ballot. Two of the senators were 
booted, andthe third resigned 
<http://www.denverpost.com/breakingnews/ci_24611818/colorado-state-sen-evie-hudak-resign>
. The senator who resigned was replaced by a Republican, which flipped control 
of the chamber.

Gun control supporters may do well to take a page from their opponents in 
proving their strength on the electoral battlefield, and the tools of direct 
democracy may be a good way to start the battles. It is unlikely that the gun 
right supporters’ recall efforts in New Jersey and Oregon will be of much a 
model; thanks to the basic principles of redistricting, elected officials are 
probably as protected from recall efforts as legislators in favor of tighter 
restrictions in New Jersey and Oregon.

However, gun control supporters have another powerful weapon at their disposal 
in many states – the ballot initiative process. Initiatives are relatively easy 
to get on the ballot and, while they involve significant outlays of cash, 
groups like Michael Bloomberg’sEverytown for Gun Safety <http://everytown.org/> 
have shown a strong willingness to open their wallets to such a fight. There 
has already been one prominent instance of using initiatives as the new way to 
fight gun-control issues: in 2014, Washington State voterspassed an initiative 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2014/11/gun-control-initiative-594-washington-state-2014-vote-112587.html>
 that would require background checks, and at the same time defeated an 
initiative by gun rights groups that would have prevented them.

Initiatives are an expensive way to fight a battle, but money isn’t the only 
problem with this strategy. Only 24 states allow for the public to place 
initiatives on the ballot, and there is no law allowing it on the federal 
level. So using initiatives may not be a successful way to actually change 
national policy(though same-sex marriage began as a state-by-state effort, too).

But ballot initiatives could alter the discussion and perhaps operate as a 
method to show politicians that gun control can gain, rather than cost them, 
votes. After a continual series of losses and dropping poll numbers, 
gun-control advocates need to show that their issue can do more than attract 
sympathy; they need to show that it can actually bring voters to the polls.
 