
One of the peculiar honours shared by the world’s major cities is a knack for 
getting destroyed on screen. Residents of London, New York and Los Angeles have 
seen their cities fantastically ruined by natural and manmade disasters alike. 
None have experienced this quite as frequently as Tokyo: radioactive monsters, 
giant robots, supernatural forces and earthquakes have taken turns smashing the 
city in films and television shows for the past 60 years. Meticulously 
depicting a city’s demise is, if nothing else, a declaration of its importance: 
these places areworth destroying.

In Edmonton, a quiet city at the northwestern tip of the Canadian prairies, 
those images of mass destruction seem exhilaratingly foreign. Edmonton is often 
forgotten not just in discussions of cities but in discussions of Canadian 
cities; or else it is humorously acknowledged as a place with endless winters 
and harsh, Soviet-like architecture. Those half-truths noted, the city 
nevertheless has its gems, among them an incredible river valley, one of the 
world’s biggest universities (the University of Alberta), and a thriving arts 
scene, including the world’s second largest fringe festival after Edinburgh. 
It’s one of the youngest cities on the continent, with a median age of 36.5, 
and the northernmost city of more than 1 million people.


Yet even here, peace couldn’t last: giant robots finally arrived to tear up 
the place. This spring, the latest iteration ofMobile Suit Gundam 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gundam> chose Edmonton as the location for its 
two-part season finale. One of the longest-running anime series, Gundam 
features giant robot battles interspersed with state politics. The show has a 
vast international following – andone astute Edmonton blogger, Nopy, quickly 
noticed the location. <http://nopybot.com/2016/03/20/gundams-in-edmonton/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fgundam-edmonton-how-city-worthy-blown-up-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b96ac5ae5524aafcaae4e04ba1c3d0c0d1d5365%2F0_0_3840_1080%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gundam%20trashes%20Edmonton%3A%20how%20the%20city%20became%20worthy%20of%20being%20blown%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fgundam-edmonton-how-city-worthy-blown-up-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gundam%20trashes%20Edmonton%3A%20how%20the%20city%20became%20worthy%20of%20being%20blown%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fgundam-edmonton-how-city-worthy-blown-up-anime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b96ac5ae5524aafcaae4e04ba1c3d0c0d1d5365%2F0_0_3840_1080%2F3840.jpg>
 The 4th Street Promenade, a rapidly developing area of Edmonton, in Mobile 
Suit Gundam and Google Street View. Photograph: Nopybot.com 
Unlike Vancouver and Toronto, which often host crews from American film and 
television productions, Edmonton is rarely used as a filming location, and 
seeing it depicted in fiction is extremely uncommon. Having it serve as the 
backdrop in a classic anime series was utterly surreal, not to mention deeply 
amusing. The location was even called Edmonton in the show’s fictional 
universe, removing any shred of ambiguity.

Most of the fighting took place along the city’s main street, Jasper Avenue. A 
number of locations are used, as well as an establishing shot from the east 
edge of the city, and a redesigned version of a government building. A few 
signs are tweaked – my favourite is Scotiabank becoming BankBank – but many of 
the city’s better-known locations were strangely absent: the classically domed 
Provincial legislature, City Hall with its glass pyramid, and the sprawling 
West Edmonton Mall, the largest in North America.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fgundam-edmonton-how-city-worthy-blown-up-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aeaa5e67b274dedfa70f0c77218ac8db1a957dd%2F0_0_3840_1080%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gundam%20trashes%20Edmonton%3A%20how%20the%20city%20became%20worthy%20of%20being%20blown%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fgundam-edmonton-how-city-worthy-blown-up-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gundam%20trashes%20Edmonton%3A%20how%20the%20city%20became%20worthy%20of%20being%20blown%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fgundam-edmonton-how-city-worthy-blown-up-anime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aeaa5e67b274dedfa70f0c77218ac8db1a957dd%2F0_0_3840_1080%2F3840.jpg>
 102 Avenue in Edmonton, with the City Centre Mall and the Don Wheaton YMCA. 
Photograph: Nopybot.com 
Why the series chose Edmonton is unclear. It may be that the bland building 
design made the place desirable: drawing Edmonton would be similar to drawing 
Japan’s own postwar vernacular architecture. It’s also interesting to note that 
while the animators may have reproduced the buildings, they didn’t reproduce 
the North American sprawl. Instead, Edmonton’s buildings were rearranged into 
aerial views much more reminiscent of Japan’s distinctive urbanism.

Like many cities, Edmonton features a large and growing anime convention, and 
this summer’s attendees will likely be taking costumed photographs at these no 
longer quite so bland locations. Edmonton may have been ignorable a few months 
ago, but now we’ve finally made it, earning our place among the great cities 
worth destroying.

Guardian Cities is devoting a week to exploring all things Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/04/guardian-canada-week-what-how-involved>
. Get involved onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities/> and share your thoughts with 
#GuardianCanada
 