
Pro-opposition gunmen locked in a protracted standoff with police in the 
Armenian capital Yerevan have taken four medical staff hostage, officials said, 
after a shootout left five people wounded.

Two doctors and two nurses were held after entering a police compound seized 
by the assailants 10 days ago to treat two gunmen injured in clashes.

“The doctors who went into the captured territory to assist two members of the 
armed group who refused to go to hospital have been taken hostage,” police 
spokesman Ashot Aharonyan said. “The police are taking steps to free the 
doctors through negotiations.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fgunmen-take-medical-staff-hostage-in-armenia-standoff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F305b24bd41d4a3726109b75c88d86584909a97c5%2F0_43_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gunmen%20take%20medical%20staff%20hostage%20in%20Armenia%20standoff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fgunmen-take-medical-staff-hostage-in-armenia-standoff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gunmen%20take%20medical%20staff%20hostage%20in%20Armenia%20standoff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fgunmen-take-medical-staff-hostage-in-armenia-standoff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F305b24bd41d4a3726109b75c88d86584909a97c5%2F0_43_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Supporters of the opposition demand the resignation of Armenia’s president, 
Serzh Sarkisian. Photograph: Hayk Baghdasaryan/EPA 
A health ministry spokesman said later that one of the nurses had been freed. 
“Three other health professionals, two doctors and a nurse, are still being 
held,” he said.

Gunmen – supporters of jailed opposition leader Zhirair Sefilyan – stormed a 
police building in Yerevan on 17 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/17/armenia-opposition-group-hostages-yerevan-police-building>
, killing one officer, taking several more hostage and seizing a store of 
weapons.

Over the weekend they released the final four police officers being held 
captive but remained holed up inside the police building surrounded by law 
enforcement officers.

The group has demanded the resignation of the ex-Soviet nation’s President 
Serzh Sarkisian and the release of Sefilyan.

The lengthy standoff has shaken the tiny Caucasus republic and sparked clashes 
between police and protesters furious over the handling of the incident.

Sefilyan – the leader of a small opposition group named the New Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia> Public Salvation Front – and six of 
his supporters were arrested in June accused of preparing to seize government 
buildings and telecoms facilities in Yerevan.

Armenian police clash with demonstrators as hostage stand-off continues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/armenia-police-clash-demonstrators-hostage-drama>
A fierce critic of the government, he was previously arrested in 2006 over 
calls for “a violent overthrow of the government” and jailed for 18 months. He 
was released in 2008.

Sarkisian, a pro-Russian former military officer, has been president of the 
country of 2.9 million people sincewinning a vote in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/20/4> that saw clashes between 
police and supporters of the defeated opposition candidate in which 10 people 
died.
 