
A lot of people are suddenly finding out about Elena Baltacha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/elena-baltacha> at the Australian Open. More 
significantly, Baltacha is finding out a lot about herself. Tomorrow she will 
play Italy's Silvia Farina Elia, the 15th seed, with the possibility of a 
fourth-round match against the Wimbledon champion Maria Sharapova to follow.

The 32-year-old Farina Elia may prove a little too worldly wise, but Baltacha 
intends to relax and have fun. "Because of the kind of draw I have had so far, 
I knew I had a sniff of winning," she said. "It's going to be much tougher now, 
so I can really just go for it and see what happens. It's going to be a great 
experience."

As she hauled herself out of bed yesterday to face her fifth opponent inside 
the most frantic week of her life, which has included three qualifying matches, 
her body was hurting. The huge emotional surges of undiluted excitement had hit 
her too. She was drained.

This was all too obvious in the first set against France's St√©phanie 
Cohen-Aloro, the daughter of an eminent Parisian doctor who, had he been at 
courtside, might have whispered in Baltacha's ear that she had been overdoing 
it and was in need of a rest.

"I was so tired and kind of thinking, 'Oh my God, I have to do it all over 
again'. These are the matches that you really have to ask questions and find 
out about yourself. I did that."

The 21-year-old's 2-6, 6-3, 6-1 second-round win, which followed an equally 
gutsy 5-7, 6-4, 6-4 first-round victory over Katarina Srebotnik, should be 
shown to all British tennis youngsters, male and female alike, as an example of 
how no cause is ever lost. Virtually nothing went right during that first set, 
when her aching body refused to play ball with the instructions her brain was 
screaming at her.

Forehands went wide, backhands went long and first serves thudded into the 
net. She managed one winner while committing 22 unforced errors. There was no 
doubting either her effort or her defiance; it was simply that mentally and 
physically she was fraying at the edges. There seemed no reason to suppose the 
Frenchwoman would not close the match out with ease.

But this was to totally underestimate Baltacha's fighting spirit. Suddenly and 
dramatically it was Cohen-Aloro who was fading away on a day of intense heat 
when the temperature on the outside court approached 35C (95F).

"Emotionally I was knackered," admitted Baltacha, who will spend today trying 
to wind down. "I haven't been sleeping. I just can't seem to shut down." It is 
hardly surprising. Never before has she dug so deep, but nor have the rewards 
been so great.

In 2002 she reached the third round at Wimbledon, but that was on the back of 
a wild card. This time she has done it entirely off her own bat and if she can 
continue to progress she may soon be ranked high enough to enter the leading 
tournaments as of right.

In 2003 she was diagnosed with a liver problem which threatened her career. A 
six-month break and a medical all-clear saw her return determined to push 
herself to the full; to eat, drink and breathe tennis and fulfil her potential. 
"I'm much more dedicated than I have ever been," she said.

The Scottish saltire was unfurled as those fans who have come to Melbourne to 
support Tim Henman and Greg Rusedski latched on to the bespectacled "Ballie" 
spectacular. "I thought that was really nice," she said, though preferring not 
to think of how her success was being greeted at home.

No British woman has reached the third round in Melbourne since Clare Wood in 
1991, the same year that Jo Durie, Baltacha's joint coach with Alan Jones, made 
it to the fourth round of the US Open. "I just feel so much for her because 
that was a hell of a fight," said Durie. "I really didn't think she was going 
to win that one because it really didn't look good after that first set, did 
it? She was just 'fight, fight, fight'. She's very good at that."

Baltacha is keeping her feet very much on the ground, even if they are hurting 
as much as the rest of her body. "To be honest I don't want to be thinking 
about what is happening at home. I've been speaking to my mum and Alan, and 
there have been a lot of people ringing them. But I just want to get on with it 
and deal with it when I get home."

So another match won, and another delayed flight. Would she eventually be 
treating herself to an upgrade? "No, I'll just stick to the economy and the 
toilet at the back. That will be fine." At least she should be able to sleep.

Best of British


How previous hopes fared

 Annabel Croft 

 At 17 years old she became, in1984, the youngest British player in 
Wimbledon's main draw for 50 years, but the one-time junior Wimbledon and 
junior Australian Open champion never reached the heights expected of her.

 Clare Wood 

 Another former British No1, Wood was tipped for big things after topping her 
age groups from the start. Suffered the indignity in 1989 of losing 6-0, 6-0 to 
Jennifer Capriati when the American became the youngest ever Wightman Cup 
player at 13 years 168 days.

 Anne Hobbs 

 The Nottingham-born player was a stalwart performer over the years for 
Britain but lacked an outstanding shot and enjoyed greater success in doubles.
 