
Comedian Tom Gleeson was the first to go there. Drawing uncomfortable laughter 
from the crowd at theAacta industry awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/05/aacta-awards-2016-hacksaw-ridge-and-rake-win-early-screen-honours>
 on Monday, the host of Hard Quiz joked: “Hacksaw Ridge has been nominated 13 
times, so it’s safe to say that in Australia the film industry isn’t run by 
Jews.”

Gleeson was referring to the director Mel Gibson’s well-publicised antisemitic 
rants. They have caused many commentators to wonder whether the once A-lister 
will ever be able to bounce back, orcan ever be rehabilitated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/can-mel-gibson-ever-be-rehabilitated-hacksaw-ridge>
.


In the Aacta ceremony proper, held last night at Sydney’s Star casino, there 
was no mention of such matters – from Gleeson or anybody else. There were, 
however, lots of cheers and support for Gibson and his fifth feature film as a 
director,Hacksaw Ridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/04/hacksaw-ridge-review-mel-gibson-finds-a-conscience-in-gruesome-war-story>
.


Aacta awards 2016: Australian screen stars walk the red carpet – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/dec/07/aacta-awards-2016-australian-screen-stars-walk-the-red-carpet-in-pictures>
The gut-busting second world war movie scooped this year’s awards, winning 
nine including best film, best actor, best supporting actor, best original 
screenplay and best director. There were many cheers for Gibson and heartfelt 
speeches made in his honour.


Some may wonder why a biographical war film about an American hero, set in the 
US and Japan, was judged by the Australian Academy of Cinema andTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> Arts as the best Australian 
film of the year but such a decision is not unprecedented. In 2013, The Great 
Gatsby – Baz Luhrmann’s glitter-doused adaptation of what many believe to be 
“the great American novel” – took a record 13-gong haul.

The Australian film industry is a flexible beast, forever contracting and 
expanding depending on the size of the body of water it’s dropped into. 
Marquee-name directors such as Gibson, who can bring the big bucks, will always 
be welcome here.


When the mega budget movie circus comes to town, our world-class practitioners 
get to work with state-of-the-art equipment and our actors get a grand stage. 
It’s therefore hardly surprising that the industry’s big thumbs up tend to 
reflect where the work and glory lies.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhacksaw-ridge-dominating-the-aactas-is-no-surprise-blockbusters-always-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F806b50df98bf9d1186d649b5e3707bdff1636a8d%2F0_43_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hacksaw%20Ridge%20dominating%20the%20Aactas%20is%20no%20surprise%20%E2%80%93%20blockbusters%20always%20do%20%7C%20Luke%20Buckmaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhacksaw-ridge-dominating-the-aactas-is-no-surprise-blockbusters-always-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hacksaw%20Ridge%20dominating%20the%20Aactas%20is%20no%20surprise%20%E2%80%93%20blockbusters%20always%20do%20%7C%20Luke%20Buckmaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhacksaw-ridge-dominating-the-aactas-is-no-surprise-blockbusters-always-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F806b50df98bf9d1186d649b5e3707bdff1636a8d%2F0_43_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 A hell of a ride: a scene from Hacksaw Ridge. Photograph: PR 
Needless to say, Hacksaw Ridge is a hell of a ride: very well directed, with a 
sense of pain practically weeping from its pores. But I reckonGoldstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/09/goldstone-review-a-masterpiece-of-outback-noir-that-packs-a-political-punch>
 (also nominated for the top prize) is a superior film. It’s a sumptuously shot 
outback noir with an extraordinary allegorical punch, from writer/director Ivan 
Sen. Unquestionably, it’s a great deal more Australian.


Simon Stone’s expertly calculated drama The Daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/05/the-daughter-review-simon-stone> 
was another ripper; he was swindled out of a nomination for best director. 
Odessa Young did, however, win best lead actress for her faultless performance 
as the titular daughter. Young, an exciting presence, has a bright future ahead.


In commercial terms, Goldstone and The Daughter made chump change compared with
Hacksaw Ridge <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hacksaw-ridge>. That doesn’t 
bode well at this particular ceremony, given the Aacta award for best film has 
always gone to the biggest hit at the box office.


In the six-year history of the event, there has been one exception, sort of. 
In 2014 director Jennifer Kent’s stylish creepy crawly The Babadook tied for 
best film with Russell Crowe’s much more successful (commercially speaking)The 
Water Diviner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/09/the-water-diviner-first-look-review-a-handsome-crowdpleaser-from-russell-crowe>
. The Aacta chief executive, Damian Trewhella, initially described the result 
as a “freakish outcome” and “a mathematical tie”. Resultsleaked to the Sydney 
Morning Herald 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/entertainment/movies/behind-the-baffling-best-film-tie-between-the-water-diviner-and-the-babadook-at-the-aacta-awards-20150731-gim7gy.html?rand=9151337>
 revealed the Aacta board, in fact, decided the top prize would be shared.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhacksaw-ridge-dominating-the-aactas-is-no-surprise-blockbusters-always-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8b6ff936267a4547fc2c3533b8db6d9c80ca2bc%2F0_243_3284_4100%2F3284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hacksaw%20Ridge%20dominating%20the%20Aactas%20is%20no%20surprise%20%E2%80%93%20blockbusters%20always%20do%20%7C%20Luke%20Buckmaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhacksaw-ridge-dominating-the-aactas-is-no-surprise-blockbusters-always-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hacksaw%20Ridge%20dominating%20the%20Aactas%20is%20no%20surprise%20%E2%80%93%20blockbusters%20always%20do%20%7C%20Luke%20Buckmaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhacksaw-ridge-dominating-the-aactas-is-no-surprise-blockbusters-always-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8b6ff936267a4547fc2c3533b8db6d9c80ca2bc%2F0_243_3284_4100%2F3284.jpg>
 Isla Fisher’s zinger-laden acceptance speech was one of the highlights of the 
evening. Photograph: Caroline McCredie/Getty Images for AFI 
Director Eva Orner’s gut-wrenching detention centre exposé Chasing Asylum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/29/chasing-asylum-first-look-review-asylum-seeker-documentary-is-vital-and-gut-wrenching>
 took best feature-length documentary. It was good to see the under-recognised
Remembering the Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/i-just-sat-there-and-cried-the-making-of-remembering-the-man>
 nominated in this category.Ecco Homo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/17/ecco-homo-review-an-intense-surreal-look-at-elusive-australian-artist-troy-davis>
 andThe Baulkham Hills African Ladies Troupe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/04/i-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope>
 weren’t but would have made worthy contenders.


The Aactas don’t just honour Australian cinema; TV, of course, is also very 
much in its purview. Foxtel’s terrific Tasmania-set mystery-thriller The 
Kettering Incident, co-created by Victoria Madden and Vincent Sheehan, 
collected two small-screen awards: best telefeature or miniseries and best lead 
actress (Elizabeth Debicki). Bizarrely, the eight-part series lost best 
screenplay in television to The Letdown – a 27-minute episode inABC’s Comedy 
Showroom <http://www.abc.net.au/tv/programs/comedy-showroom/>.


Samuel Johnson rightly won best lead actor in a television drama for his 
uncanny incarnation of music maestro Ian “Molly” Meldrum in the Seven Network’s 
excellent two-parter Molly, which drew a staggering 2.6m viewers.Isla Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/isla-fisher> was presented the trailblazer 
award, whatever that means, by Geoffrey Rush, who is also Aacta president and 
whose hair now deserves its own postcode.


Fisher’s zinger-laden acceptance speech was the best of the night, by a 
country mile. The actor noted that when she started out, “I had everything 
against me. I was a redhead. I was five foot two. I was a woman. I was from 
Perth. Nothing’s changed.”


Fisher explained that “there aren’t many roles for gingers, particularly 
because Amy Adams stole them all”. She thanked Donald Trump “for showing the 
world that it’s OK for unqualified orange people to win things”. Glorious. The 
next Aacta ceremony should have an MC, as long as it’s her.


Aactas 2016: Mel Gibson's Hacksaw Ridge wins major awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/07/aacta-awards-2016-mel-gibsons-hacksaw-ridge-wins-major-awards>
The night’s big winner, however, was unquestionably Gibson. He is a director 
with enormous presence behind the camera, whose films (particularly Hacksaw 
Ridge, Apocalypto and The Passion of the Christ) are, among other things, 
immensely confronting portraits of pain, rendered in sometimes excruciating 
aesthetic detail.


From standing ovations at the Venice film festival to terrific reviews 
<https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/hacksaw_ridge/> and great word of mouth, 
Hacksaw Ridge is the sort of production that would ordinarily at this point in 
the calendar have “Oscar buzz” written all over it. But Hollywood, however, is 
– as Gleeson said, somewhat more controversially – very different to the 
Australian film industry. Gibson will be hoping the work speaks for itself.

 