
A branch of the hacker group Anonymous has threatened Iggy Azalea following 
her recent criticism of rapperAzealia Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/azealia-banks>. Accusing Azalea of 
“misappropriating black culture” and “making light of Eric Garner’s death”, an 
Anonymous spokesperson claimed that if the rapper does not issue an apology, 
they will release photo stills from her alleged “sex tape”.


“Fuck you, @IGGYAZZALEA. #ICantBreathe,” tweeted the popular Anonymous account 
@TheAnonMessage on Saturday 
<https://twitter.com/TheAnonMessage/status/546143819272814593>. “We have so 
much shit on you, your scandal would be bigger than Bill Cosby’s ... You are 
guilty of misappropriating black culture, insulting peaceful protesters, and 
making light of Eric Garner’s death ... You have exactly 48 hours ... to 
release a statement apologizing to @AzealiaBanks and the protesters in NYC.”


Anonymous also stated that they possess a video of Azalea having sex, footage 
that she has since denied is her 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/entertainment/music/news/iggy-azalea-denies-having-sex-tape-30582174.html>
. “No sex tape of any kind will be released ... however we will release various 
snapshots of her face to confirm,” @TheAnonMessage wrote. Shortly thereafter, 
this Twitter account was suspended. Using their backup account,the group said 
<https://twitter.com/TheAnonMessage2/status/546775593032097792>, “We’ll be 
back. We just have some stuff to take care of.”


Although Azalea and Banks are long-time adversaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/05/azealia-bankss-beef-with-wigger-iggy-azalea-over-us-race-issues-misses-point>
, their feud has intensified amid the outcry over the recent killings of 
Michael Brown and Eric Garner. AfterBanks decried 
<http://www.nme.com/news/iggy-azalea/81541> Azalea’s silence on the matter, the 
AustralianMC said <https://twitter.com/IGGYAZALEA/status/540395514269671424> 
that people shouldn’t “judge another’s support or ‘lack thereof’ solely on if 
they have ranted on twitter about it”. Banks, she wrote, is using “world issues 
... to promote fan battles”.


Furious, Banks singled Azalea out in a subsequent interview regarding race and 
the music industry. “Here’s the thing with Iggy Azalea,” Banks told Hot 97. “I 
feel, in this country, whenever it comes to our things, like black issues or 
black politics or black music or whatever, there’s always this undercurrent of 
a ‘fuck you.’ Like, ‘Fuck y’all niggas, y’all don’t really own shit.’ ... That
Iggy Azalea <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/iggy-azalea> shit is not 
better than any fucking black girl that’s rapping today ... I have a problem 
when you’re trying to say that it’s hip-hop and you’re trying to put it up 
against black culture.”


Azalea denied that race is a problem in contemporary hip-hop. “Special msg for 
[Azealia] Banks,”she tweeted <https://twitter.com/IGGYAZALEA>. “There are many 
black artists succeeding in all genres. The reason you haven’t is because of 
your piss poor attitude ... [You are] a bigot and don’t have the mental 
capacity to realize it ... You are a MISERABLE, angry human being.”


Banks is not the only person to have called out Azalea’s relationship with 
hip-hop. On Saturday, the venerated rapper Q-Tip published a long seriesof 
tweets <https://storify.com/kungfulasers/q-tip>, directed at Azalea, presenting 
the history of hip-hop as an “artist[ic] and socio-political movement” linked 
to African-American culture. “[Eventually hip-hop] reached YOU,” he wrote. “It 
touched your spirit n took u up. now u are fulfilling your dreams ... BUT! you 
have to take into account the HISTORY as you move underneath the banner of 
hiphop.”


Azalea and Banks both released their debut studio albums in 2014.

 