
An exhibition of 49 works by Hadi Hazavei at New York City’s Shirin Gallery 
shows the artist’s material range and conceptual progression. An array of 
colours, lines, and layers come together in his older series, while his 
fingertips and palms have left their imprints amid the chaotic aesthetics of 
his more recent pieces. One wall is filled with minimalist geometric sketches 
reminiscent of glassworks from his Iranian homeland.


Hazavei’s oeuvre revolves around the duality of crude organisms and formal 
abstractions. This interplay is evident more confidently than ever in his new 
brick sculptures, a series both primal and prim. The bricks – some of them from 
around his current home in New Jersey – seem to hover, dancing in different 
directions. Some, around 150 years old, appear on the verge of crumbling, 
highlighting the artist’s fascination with the tension between organic and 
inorganic processes. He describes them as self-portraits.

TA: So tell me about this exhibition and how the works were chosen.


HH: Some of the works you see in this exhibition are from 1982, but most are 
from 2005 onwards. The brick works are from 2011 and 2012.

TA: Where did these bricks come from?


HH: Historically brick was the most fundamental unit in Iranian and Middle 
Eastern architecture and buildings. At some point clay was heated and made into 
bricks. As early as the time of the Achaemenian dynasty, they used bricks that 
were 30cm or 50cm thick. These were glazed, had 3D designs on them, with 
abstract natural figures; you can see examples of this in Persepolis – such as 
[the carvings of] soldiers, which are a masterpiece in colour and execution ...


I wanted to get to the foundation of it. Like how the foundation of the rug is 
the knot, bricks are architecture’s foundation.


TA: Have you had a deep interest in and attraction to architecture?


HH: Always. You know art doesn’t have a border. Painting, architecture, music, 
poetry, literature, and visual arts in general ... they are all summarised in 
one concept and that is the spiritual expression of people, articulated through 
different forms and mediums. Yet architecture has an additional function, which 
is that we live in it. It’s a space that we try to be happy yet also physically 
active in.


I took the purpose of the brick from that simple foundation of buildings and 
changed it to my own artistic expression. When I look at a brick, it is sitting 
there, all dignified, polite and proper, like how our parents always ask us to 
be! And I hate all these words ... Some suggest the same words to describe 
works of art. They want art to follow certain national traditions or to be 
“honest.” These are stupid responsibilities that limit art.


TA: So how do you go against that in your work?


HH: When I bring the bricks to my studio and put them next to another, the 
visual narrative begins. They become alive. They gain a character, a human or 
divine identity. Just like howGiacometti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/giacometti> carved and carved and 
kept going until he revealed a naked body, immersed in the misfortunes of life, 
alone and ill-fated. I discover the skeleton of a building, or a minaret, or 
skyscraper, standing with no other purpose than to stand.


Similarly, art has no responsibility or purpose [other] than to stand. Whoever 
says that art has a responsibility to do good is insulting art.Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> is free and the artist is free.


TA: And I can see this freedom in your works. They’re uninhibited; there’s a 
sense of disobedience in them. Yet there is still a semblance of order. It’s a 
duality present in all your works. Do you think your works have become more 
uninhibited over time?


HH: That’s exactly right! In my day-to-day life, when I drive for example, I 
can’t be disobedient. And disobedience means freedom, means nothing holding you 
back. That’s what I’m moving towards – absolute freedom. The freedom to express 
each moment with the movement of my hands and fingers through the pigments I 
make.


People’s spiritual nature is disobedience. We want to be free. Be free to 
write poems, dance, scream, sing. The more freedom is restricted, the more we 
are inclined towards pure geometric art. When visual arts are limited, for 
whatever reason, be it religious or other, formalist art becomes predominant.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fart-doesnt-have-a-border-talking-with-hadi-hazavei%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F13%2F1392307450196%2F49e6933e-e16c-4a12-b167-6c396e8de36b-788x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hadi%20Hazavei%3A%20'Art%20doesn't%20have%20a%20border'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fart-doesnt-have-a-border-talking-with-hadi-hazavei%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hadi%20Hazavei%3A%20%27Art%20doesn%27t%20have%20a%20border%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fart-doesnt-have-a-border-talking-with-hadi-hazavei%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F13%2F1392307450196%2F49e6933e-e16c-4a12-b167-6c396e8de36b-788x2040.jpeg>
 Hadi Hazavei’s brick structure: crude organisms and formal abstractions  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fart-doesnt-have-a-border-talking-with-hadi-hazavei%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F13%2F1392307300314%2Fa2ca03aa-7022-4fa1-8e3f-a9ec4eec3310-1474x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hadi%20Hazavei%3A%20'Art%20doesn't%20have%20a%20border'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fart-doesnt-have-a-border-talking-with-hadi-hazavei%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hadi%20Hazavei%3A%20%27Art%20doesn%27t%20have%20a%20border%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fart-doesnt-have-a-border-talking-with-hadi-hazavei%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F13%2F1392307300314%2Fa2ca03aa-7022-4fa1-8e3f-a9ec4eec3310-1474x2040.jpeg>
 Hadi Hazavei’s brick structure: crude organisms and formal abstractions 
TA: Where did you grow up and how did it nurture your work or influence the 
viewpoints you’re describing?


HH: The stables! [He laughs.] In there, you have four walls and then a bunch 
of useful animals. The stable has a geometric shape and the animals in it are 
organic. Today we don’t have that organic life. I remember in Arak [capital of 
Markazi province in central Iran] there was no milk, so families had to own a 
cow. Each morning, my classmates and I would take our cows to the shepherd in 
the city square and he’d return them at sunset. Within this reality, so many 
concepts would arise for us kids.


TA: Such as what?


HH: We used to paint them, for example. And the organic life of my childhood 
existed 3,000 years ago. Then all of a sudden, imagine that I’m transported 
here, sitting with you in a gallery in New York chatting. I’m lucky that this 
massive jump didn’t make me go crazy or to crumble like a brick! If you put a 
cold glass in hot water it’ll break. Yet these are the experiences that shaped 
me.


TA: Is this type of ‘organic’ and self-sufficient life that you lived as a 
young boy why you continue to make your own pigments?


HH: It’s true. They’re from a few plant essentials and substances that I’ve 
mixed and distilled.


TA: Where did you learn that?


HH: From my uncle, Hassan Farid, who was a poet and a calligraphist; his main 
profession was mathematics. The material is great. It takes a few seconds to 
dry but once it does, it lasts a very long time.


TA: These works seem to be pages from your own life and experiences as a kid 
in dusty Arak for an audience in Chelsea.


HH: I’ve actually spent most of my life outside of Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>. I experienced the 1960s and ’70s in 
the US where all types of freedoms, of race, sexuality and women’s rights, were 
spreading. You couldn’t just sit there and be polite and proper. Of course that 
affected me. But my intuition comes from the streets of Arak. I’m from a 
generation that saw the Second World War. I saw the shah leave and be replaced 
by the Islamic republic. People moved to apartments, computers were invented. 
So much has happened! You can’t even find a movie this exciting.


The exhibition runs until 27 February at New York’s Shirin Gallery 
<http://www.shiringalleryny.com/>
 