
Anya Hindmarch, the handbag designer inspired by Margaret Thatcher, was named 
Veuve Clicquot businesswoman of the year, beating Helena Morrissey, chief 
executive of Newton Investment Management, and Ruth Rogers, founder of the 
River Café, to become the award's 40th winner.

Previous winners include Dame Anita Roddick, the Body Shop founder, and Dame 
Marjorie Scardino <https://www.theguardian.com/media/marjoriescardino>, head of 
the Pearson media group. Hindmarch said she hoped her success would encourage 
others: "Hopefully, women will sit up and realise it's really exciting starting 
a business." She had started out at age 19 during her gap year in Italy when 
she saw a drawstring duffel bag she thought friends might like. Rather than buy 
a few, she found a factory to produce the design and opened a shop in west 
London's Sloane heartland. Today her company has 57 shops worldwide, selling 
handbags costing up to £2,500 carried by celebrities such as Kate Moss and the 
Duchess of Cambridge.

Now 43, Hindmarch said it had been Thatcher's Britain that made her start her 
business. "There was quite a feeding frenzy of start-ups. And it's very 
catching. That's what's exciting now. If you get one, you get three; if you get 
three ,you get nine." She is a "big fan" of Lady Thatcher. "It's rather 
lovely," says Hindmarch. "She's just had her things put into a collection, and 
they've chosen my handbags to go in." One, apparently, came complete with a 
letter inside from Ronald Reagan.

Hindmarch's 2007 best-selling cotton shopping bag with the slogan I'm not a 
plastic bag won praise from the Veuve Clicquot judges for her commitment to 
socially responsible business and "her ability to inspire change by making it 
fashionable". A friend of Samantha Cameron, Hindmarch was made a UK trade 
ambassador in 2011. She is also a Tory donor, and said the government 
understood the importance of the fashion industry as a contributor to the 
economy as a whole.
 