
Welcome to a special all-pain edition of NBA five things. It wasn’t really 
planned to shape up as a themed column, but sometimes we can only respond to 
what we’re seeing, even if it’s not pleasant. You would think that the injuries 
would have tapered off after last week’s litany ofkey players facing extended 
absences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/25/chris-bosh-kevin-durantderrick-rose-among-nbas-latest-high-profile-disabled>
 but, then again, you would also have probably guessed that there was no way 
that the Chicago Bulls could have an even more depressing week than the 
previous one. This season has been full of surprises, albeit sometimes of the 
unwanted variety.

James Harden hits LeBron in the, well, you know ...


The Houston Rockets defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers on Sunday in one of the 
most narrative-stuffed games of the season. The lowlight of this particular 
match-up was one of the more viscerally painful sights in sports: a 
below-the-belt hit. In this case, it was Houston’s James Harden kicking 
Cleveland’s LeBron James right in what the censors of 1970s rock’n’roll radio 
wouldeuphemistically call “the fun” <http://www.45cat.com/record/1054>.
 <http://www.45cat.com/record/1054>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6uvbMRDIkfA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6uvbMRDIkfA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6uvbMRDIkfA&media=>
 The most honest YouTube title ever. 
One would think that a team would quietly take the win after their headline 
player kicked the biggest star inUS sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/us-sport> in the testicles. But no. The 
Rockets went on social media to call Harden “the new King” because they have 
apparently fully embraced the heel role among the Western Conference contenders.
Houston Rockets (@HoustonRockets) 
Long live the new King. Highlights, photos, recap & reactions from today's big 
OT win onhttp://t.co/VBY18eSOmU <http://t.co/VBY18eSOmU>. 
pic.twitter.com/91utdhnqTx <http://t.co/91utdhnqTx>
 <https://twitter.com/HoustonRockets/status/572239283337076736> March 2, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/HoustonRockets/status/572239283337076736> 
There was a reckoning to come. On Monday, Harden was handed a one-game 
suspension 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nba/2015/03/02/james-harden-lebron-groin-kick-rockets-vs-cavaliers/24285985/>
 when the groin-kicking was upgraded to a “flagrant two” foul. He served the 
suspension, the first game Harden missed all season, in Tuesday night’s loss to 
the Atlanta Hawks, when Atlanta became thefirst team to clinch a play-off spot 
<http://probasketballtalk.nbcsports.com/2015/03/04/five-things-we-learned-in-nba-tuesday-the-hawks-clinched-playoff-spot-in-front-of-josh-smith/>
.

If the kick had been labeled as a flagrant two at the time, it would have led 
to Harden’s ejection, and likely we would not be talking about Houston having a 
105-103 win in overtime. But his flat-out stupid action didn’t end up being the 
narrative of Sunday’s game because that narrative didn’t give any opportunity 
for people to hold James up to the Most Ridiculously High Standards In Sports 
History.

No. Instead, the main storyline became James missing his final two free throws 
<http://www.sbnation.com/nba/2015/3/2/8130695/2015-nba-scores-cavaliers-rockets-lebron-james-harden-2015>
 of the game. If James had made both, he would have given the Cavs the lead. If 
he had made one, he would have tied it up. Instead, James clanged both, Harden 
got the ball and was fouled in the final seconds of overtime, made one of two 
free throws, and the Rockets hung on for a statement win.

It was a doubt a rough moment for James, one emblematic of a game where he 
went 3-for-11 from the charity stripe. Still, the reaction was over the top, as 
it usually is. The common media response that LeBron once again choked, one of 
those huge turning points that occur in a game taking place on the first day of 
March. Presumably, by contrast, Michael Jordan never would have missed a single 
free throw, would have won every fan in the building ice cream with the last 
make, and then somehow won anotherNBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> 
championship six weeks before the playoffs began.

It’s OK, LeBron moved on. On Tuesday, while Harden was on the bench watching 
his team blow a lead to the Hawks without him, James was the one bringing the 
pain. Hescored 27 points to eclipse Ray Allen 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/early-lead/wp/2015/03/03/lebron-james-passes-ray-allen-on-nba-scoring-list-patrick-ewing-up-next/>
 on the NBA’s all-time scoring list in a 110-79 blowout victory over the Boston 
Celtics.

Chicago Bulls keep taking hits

Maybe we shouldn’t talk about Michael Jordan if Bulls fans are reading. When 
things look their bleakest, remembering the best of times can only add to the 
pain.

If Bulls fans thought that the hurting couldn’t get worse after learning that 
they were losing Derrick Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/26/this-isnt-the-end-of-chicago-bulls-star-derrick-rose-that-happened-long-ago>
, yet again, imagine what was going through their minds when they saw Jimmy 
Butler go down with an elbow injury during Sunday’s loss to the Clippers. It’s 
been such a cavalcade of horrors this past week that it’s almost an 
afterthought to mention thatTaj Gibson also suffered an ankle injury 
<http://fantasynews.cbssports.com/fantasybasketball/update/25087017/bulls-taj-gibson-expected-to-miss-one-week-with-ankle-injury>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRrDf2Gsb-k8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRrDf2Gsb-k8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRrDf2Gsb-k8&media=>
Although losing Rose maybe hurt more emotionally because of what he means to 
the team, it’s losing Butler, who will miss three to six weeks with a sprained 
ligament his elbow, that will affect the Bulls the most. He’s been Chicago’s 
most important player this season. Butler’s not just the favorite to win Most 
Improved Player but he’s even beena dark horse MVP candidate 
<http://www.sbnation.com/nba/2015/1/7/7503295/jimmy-butler-nba-mvp-stephen-curry>
.


The silver lining here is that even if Butler’s gone the maximum six weeks, 
that takes Chicago to the end of the regular season. The fourth-year swingman 
should be fine for the postseason when they could even, as the best-case 
scenario suggests, have Rose back. Where will they be in the playoff mix after 
limping in without Butler, Rose and Gibson though? Even if all three are back, 
how healthy will they be? These silver linings look gray from this perspective.

This isn't the end of Chicago Bulls star Derrick Rose – that happened long ago
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/26/this-isnt-the-end-of-chicago-bulls-star-derrick-rose-that-happened-long-ago>
While we’re mostly discussing the pain suffered by players, we must also 
acknowledge the reality that sports includes a risk that fans themselves will 
suffer from genuine emotional pain from time to time. One would think Chicago 
sports fans would need no further reminders of this, but the basketball gods 
apparently thought otherwise.


Westbrook gets dented

It looked worse than it was for the Oklahoma City Thunder, a two-man team 
already dealing without Kevin Durant. Yes, it turned outRussell Westbrook would 
have to miss time 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/russell-westbrook-undergoes-a-procedure-to-repair-a-cheek-fracture-222329389.html>
 with a facial fracture suffered after an accidental collision with teammate 
Anthony Roberson, but it might not be enough to slow down their quest to make 
the play-offs.

“Fracture” doesn’t quite do the injury justice. As ESPN Radio’s Mike & Mike 
quipped, basically, Westbrook suffered from a “dented face.” It certainly 
looked sickening upon first view.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dvo0gVvWekt4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dvo0gVvWekt4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dvo0gVvWekt4&media=>
Westbrook should be back on the court shortly, perhaps as early as Wednesday 
<http://newsok.com/report-russell-westbrook-likely-to-return-wednesday-vs.-sixers/article/5398068>
, although he may have to wear one of those protective masks which tend to look 
rather badass but are probably thoroughly uncomfortable to wear. One expects 
that Westbrook will find a way to revolutionize the whole protective mask thing.

(Personal suggestion: The superhero angle has been done. Why not take a trip 
into “adult themes”and do an Eyes Wide Shut homage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s_b-zpSnoHs>?)

While it’s not cool to imagine that any other team is hoping for injuries to 
be more serious than they end up being, one almost feels bad for theNew Orleans 
Pelicans <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-orleans-hornets>. When they saw 
the injury they had to have been secretly hoping that the Thunder would end up 
playing a few week’s worth of games without Durant and Westbrook. It’s not the 
nicest of wishes, but considering that New Orleans is just a game behind 
Oklahoma City for that eighth and final spot in the standings, one can’t blame 
them.

Larry Sanders shouldn’t have to be the ‘public face’ for anything


The pain professional athletes suffer from isn’t always physical. Although 
that isn’t as immediately obvious to fans, there are many players who suffer 
the far less understood pain involved with mental health issues.

Last week it was announced that center Larry Sanders had finalized a buyout 
with the Milwaukee Bucks that would essentially put his NBA career on hold 
while he would pursue treatment for anxiety and depression. By agreeing to the 
buyout, Sanders hasleft around half of the $33m 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2015/02/the-burden-of-height-and-talent/386120/>
 he had remaining on his contract on the table, and it’s uncertain whether he 
will ever receive any further basketball-related income.

In an exclusive interview with the Players Tribune 
<http://www.theplayerstribune.com/larry-sanders-exclusive-interview/>, Sanders 
said that at one point during his absence from the NBA, while insiders were 
speculating on a possible lack of desire to play basketball, he was actually 
being hospitalized. He also admitted that during the occasions where he was 
suspended by the league for testing positive for marijuana he was using the 
substance to self-medicate.


Following this announcement, ESPN published Kevin Arnovitz’s The Battle within 
Larry Sanders 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/12354422/larry-sanders-battle-anxiety-depression>
, an in-depth article on the process that brought Sanders to this point exposed 
how some around the league treated the player’s off-the-court issues. This 
insightful story begins with a NBA executive who admits “we don’t do a very 
good job with mental health” and includes an anecdote towards the end that does 
little to dispute this:

Sources who have been active in arranging care for Sanders worry that the 
financial security that comes with the buyout of his contract with Milwaukee 
for “about 40¢ on the dollar” presents a real risk that he won’t seek the 
treatment he, by his own admission, desperately needs and will fall into a 
routine of bad habits. One of these sources agrees with the characterization 
that surfaced in December reports that Sanders no longer wanted to play 
basketball.


“This is an important issue, but Larry is not the person to be the public face 
of it,” the source said. “He says all the right things, now he has no 
credibility. You have to ask, ‘Does he sincerely want treatment, or just to be 
left to do whatever he wants?’”


In this anecdote, we immediately see an example of the type of stigma that a 
well-known – and yes, up to this point well-compensated – athlete faces when 
they are dealing with mental illness. Did this source ever consider that 
Sanders himself might not even know what he genuinely wants?

The article mentions that at one point the player apparently abandoned an 
agreed-upon treatment before its end date. While it’s certainly clear why this 
turn of events would be worrisome, it’s disappointing to hear this source spin 
someone’s difficulty in maintaining treatment as a “credibility issue” rather 
than someone dealing with the shifts in mood that come with suffering from 
serious disorders like anxiety and depression.

This quote also calls into question any impulses we may have to approach 
Sanders, or any individual, as “the public face” of mental illness even when 
they express the desire to become such a figure. Arnovitz’s piece includes the 
line: “Sanders said his goal was to start a meaningful conversation about the 
burdens faced by those who suffer from mental health issues and to dispel 
popular perception.” Maybe this source was expressing his skepticism about 
Sanders’ ability to do so.


It strikes me, however, that Sanders has already accomplished these goals just 
in how he has handled this announcement over the last few weeks. The man has 
publicly admitted that the main reason he can’t play is that he’s battling 
mental health issues, something that has clearly exposed him to plenty of 
highly personal criticism. This announcement alone, no matter how Sanders’s 
personal recovery ends up shaping out, has been a significant moment in the 
battle against the ongoing stigmatization of mental illness, especially in his 
own particular professional sphere.


How is this not already more than enough? How? Should we instead hold Sanders, 
an individual already fighting a difficult personal battle, to the standards of 
some imagined idealized Poster Boy who satisfies our desire for the feel-good 
narrative of an Athlete Who Successfully Fought Mental Illness The Right Way? 
Whose interests would this serve?


Sanders doesn’t need to be a role model by doing anything other than getting 
better, by whatever means necessary, and discovering something close to peace. 
Our only hope should be that he succeeds.


Other painful things we’ve learned

• The Miami Heat’s Goran Dragic also absorbed some pain 
<http://www.si.com/nba/2015/03/02/markieff-morris-flagrant-foul-goran-dragic> 
when he faced his old teammates in the Phoenix Suns.


• Painful news for Brian Shaw as the Denver Nuggets fired their head coach  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/03/denver-nuggets-fire-coach-brian-shaw>
yesterday. That came shortly afterthe Nuggets ended a huddle 
<http://probasketballtalk.nbcsports.com/2015/03/01/report-nuggets-players-break-huddle-with-1-2-3-six-weeks/>
 with a “1, 2, 3… Six weeks!” chant. Once your team is literally counting down 
to the end of the season, I think upper management can safely assume that 
you’ve lost them.


• The Golden State Warriors overcame a 26-point deficit to win 
<http://www.sheridanhoops.com/2015/03/01/10-fast-facts-from-last-nights-games-warriors-come-back-from-26-points-down-harden-shines-against-lebron/>
 on Sunday, something you would think would be painful for fans of the opposing 
team, but most Boston Celtics fans probably would rather miss out on that 
eighth seed in the playoffs for a shot at a high lottery pick.


• Sometimes there’s a period of a few days where the entirety of the sports 
journalism world comes to the same conclusion all at once. Last week thatcame 
at the expense of Randy Wittman 
<http://www.deadspin.com/uh-guys-i-think-the-wizards-forgot-to-fire-randy-witt-1687621585>
 andhis Washington Wizards 
<http://grantland.com/the-triangle/whats-wrong-with-the-wizards/>. As we’ve 
examined today, there’s all different brands of pain. Watching one’s team, once 
considered a possible NBA Finals contender,lose to the Philadelphia 76ers 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/wizards-lose-to-sixers-in-another-woeful-performance--need-answers-033837744.html>
 has to be considered one of the more the unique and unexpected varieties.

• Wow. This really has been a completely depressing exercise. I think we all 
need to end this on a positive note, so let’s watch something uplifting after 
all of this pain and suffering. Here’s Kevin Garnett’s introduction and his 
rapturously received return to theMinnesota Timberwolves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/minnesota-timberwolves>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DriojqRjkkMo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DriojqRjkkMo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DriojqRjkkMo&media=>
Warning: since this ended with Minnesota beating Washington, Wizards fans 
might want to avoid this one as well.Perhaps check out Prince’s high school 
basketball photo instead 
<http://deadspin.com/prince-was-an-afro-rocking-coach-hating-high-school-ba-1689252341?utm_campaign=socialflow_deadspin_facebook&utm_source=deadspin_facebook&utm_medium=socialflow>
?

 