
Anthony Horowitz


Author of the Alex Rider series

Children shouldn’t grow up, really … and certainly not the heroes of 
children’s books. Take a look at the last chapter ofPeter Pan, which comes with 
the oppressive title, “When Wendy Grew Up”. Wendy is now a mother with a 
daughter called Jane and they have this exchange:

“Why can’t you fly now, mother?”

“Because I am grown up, dear. When people grow up, they forget the way.”

For Barrie, this was something of an obsession. His older brother, David, had 
died in an ice-skating accident at the age of 14, and the family took solace 
from the fact that the dead child would remain young for ever. This was 
certainly part of the inspiration for Peter Pan. “All children, except one, 
grow up,” he mournfully observed.

The best children’s books celebrate the innocence and joy of childhood. They 
capture and preserve it. Do we really want to know that Just William became an 
accountant or that Charlie sold his chocolate factory to Nestlé and took up 
golf? Speaking personally, I felt a sense of betrayal when we glimpsed Harryas 
an adult <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pEKA6rmVfW8> at the end of Harry 
Potter and the Deathly Hallows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jul/28/booksforchildrenandteenagers.jkjoannekathleenrowling>
. I was reminded of a wonderful film, Joseph Losey’sThe Go-Between, which is as 
much about childhood as it is about love. At the end, the youthful Leo, played 
by Dominic Guard, is transformed into the elderly, ghost-like Michael Redgrave. 
“Leo, you’re all dried up inside,” he’s told and he doesn’t disagree. That’s 
what growing up can do to you. It’s what children’s books fight against.

Curiously, I once flirted with the idea of re-examining my own hero, Alex 
Rider, in his late 20s. He wouldn’t exactly be old, but he would certainly be a 
wreck, psychologically damaged by all the terrible adventures I’d put him 
through. I saw him in the opening chapter, waking up in a dirty, crumpled bed 
in a shabby room, rolling over and lighting two cigarettes; one for himself, 
one for the woman he was sleeping with. My publishers told me, politely, that 
it was a terrible idea. And they were right.

As it happens, I have recently begun a new Alex novel. But he’s still a child. 
After surviving 10 missions, he’s aged just one year – from 14 to 15. Alex 
still embodies, for me, the resilience and the single-mindedness of childhood. 
I don’t want to see him hurt. More to the point, nowadays I often meet people 
in their late 20s and early 30s who read him as a child and who have clearly 
not quite forgotten the joy they felt sharing his adventures. I feel the same 
about Hal and Roger Hunt in theWillard Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/jul/20/conservation-willard-price-adventure-books>
 stories and Jim Hawkins inTreasure Island. Why would any writer want to sully 
that with the withering curse of old age?

Cressida Cowell

Author-illustrator of the How to Train Your Dragon series
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d8ebe88bc163f2dd7936d4174308de6202e5b1d%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d8ebe88bc163f2dd7936d4174308de6202e5b1d%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Hiccup and Toothless in the film adaptation ofHow to Train Your Dragon. 
Photograph: Allstar/Dreamworks 
I began writing How to Train Your Dragon when I’d just had my first baby. 
There’s a moment as a new parent when you look in the back of the car and 
think, “They’re going to let me out of hospital with a baby?” That feeling of 
excitement mixed with terror – still visceral, years later – was a huge 
inspiration to me as an author, because it made me think about what sort of 
childhood I had had, and what sort of parent I wanted to be.

Consequently, the heart of the How to Train Your Dragon series is all about 
growing up. The very beginning of the first book starts with Hiccup looking 
back: “I was not a natural at the heroism business. I had to work at it. This 
is the story of becoming a hero the hard way …”

I include humour and illustrations because I want the books to be accessible 
and encourage kids to get into reading but actually, I’m trying to get them to 
think about deeper issues. Why are there wars? Why do we need to look after the 
environment? What makes a hero? What sort of person is Hiccup growing up to be, 
and who do they want to be?

Growing up is also an integral, inescapable part of being a children’s author. 
I write and illustrate a book a year, but I’m very aware that my audience is 
growing up at the same rate and I want them to stay with me. I write with a 
dual audience in mind: the books are for children, of course, but they’re also 
for the adults who often read with them. I set out with a very specific aim of 
trying to make the adult reading the book with the child cry (sorry, adults!). 
The ultimate ambition of a children’s author is to be part of their readers’ 
childhood, or parenthood, and, of course, to get children reading in the first 
place. A key part of that is getting the adults to enjoy bedtime reading as 
well: I believe that books read in your parents’ voices stay with you all your 
life.

I don’t think that books have to have their characters growing up – I love 
“adventures of” series, such as the Asterix or Tintin books. But for me, 
Hiccup’s journey towards heroism and growing up is the story, and my own, too, 
as a writer and a parent. And that first baby? She’s 18 this year, and leaving 
home, just as I have finished the last book in the series,How to Fight a 
Dragon’s Fury. I’ll let you decide whether that is a coincidence or not …

Charlie Higson

Author of the Young James Bond series

The thing about characters in children’s books is they’re not supposed to grow 
up. Just William managed to remain 11 years old for 50 years, from the 1920s 
right through to the space age. Bart Simpson has pulled off a similar trick, as 
has Dennis the Menace (although, who knows, he may yet appear in a Martin Amis 
novel as a disaffected, state of the nation adult who has problems with his 
“rug”). And as for Peter Pan, the whole point is that he never grows up, which 
is why he’s so sinister and heartless – he’s a permanent boy with all of a 
boy’s limitations. The Spielberg film,Hook, with Robin Williams as a grown up 
Peter who has to regain his youthful spirit in order to set things right, seems 
to miss the point. I think Barrie presents Peter’s arrested development as 
lonely and rather tragic.

That said, ageing was always built in to Harry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter>. Each book took him through a 
year of his life. JK Rowling very cleverly kept the spirit of the books the 
same, and aimed them at a fairly consistent age group, even though Harry was 
growing up and facing new emotional challenges as the series progressed. And 
now she’s done the obvious thing – she’s given Harry three school-age children, 
and one of them, Albus, fills the “Harry Potter” role. This is the alternative 
to the Just William model, to constantly refresh a popular series with new 
children, as was done in stories like the Chalet School books by Elinor 
Brent-Dyer.

My problem, when I was planning the Young James Bond series, was the opposite 
– how to take a well-known adult character and show him as a boy. Ian Fleming 
would no doubt have been appalled at the idea. Bond says a few times in the 
original books that he had a fairly ordinary childhood and that the innocent 
boy he had been would not recognise the deadly adult he has become. But a 
series of adventure books in which the main character makes sand castles and 
goes to the pictures would not have gone down very well. So I used Bond’s 
musings on his past as a starting point and I began my series with James as an 
ordinary boy starting “big” school. He’s already slightly set apart from the 
others because he’s lost both his parents (all children in adventure books have 
to be orphans), but he’s going to be put through the wringer. Over the course 
of the series I showed the traumatic, terrifying and yet exhilarating 
experiences that mould James into the damaged yet resourceful adult we meet in 
Fleming’s books.

Francesca Simon

Author of the Horrid Henry books

“Will Horrid Henry ever grow up?” “What will Horrid Henry be like when he’s an 
adult?”, “No,” and “I don’t know” is how I answer these questions when children 
ask, which they do, frequently. When you create a character, you may know him 
well, but you don’t know everything.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F974358974cb43e1a4941cc35c758c76c8ddb98a5%2F0_0_1153_1368%2F1153.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F974358974cb43e1a4941cc35c758c76c8ddb98a5%2F0_0_1153_1368%2F1153.jpg>
 An illustration of Horrid Henry by Tony Ross. Photograph: Tony Ross/Orion 
What I do know is that Henry’s magic is his youth. Lose that and you lose 
everything that makes him appealing and funny. Without his fizzing energy, his 
plotting, his squabbles with his younger brother, Henry deflates in my mind. I 
could write an adult character called Henry, but it would be someone else.

Horrid Henry isn’t unique as a literary child who never ages. William Brown is 
forever young. So is Pippi Longstocking. Like Horrid Henry, the qualities that 
make them original, imaginative and fearless are tied up with both youth, and 
the constraints of youth – fighting against conformity and the adult world they 
all reject.

Louisa May Alcott aged the March sisters, which works, though I’ve yet to meet 
the person who treasuresJo’s Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/nov/25/little-women-unfortunate-brothers-jo-s-boys-little-men>
 aboveLittle Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/03/100-best-novels-little-women-louisa-may-alcott>
. The reader gets the joy of finding out what happened next, but there is 
always loss, as the adult characters inevitably lack the folly, the insouciance 
and the possibility of their younger selves. We move from a world where 
everything is up for grabs to one where most doors slam shut. (Don’t marry that 
boring professor!) I’ve always admired JK Rowling’s boldness in ageing her 
characters. What makes Harry, Hermione and Ron unique and compelling is much 
more than their youth: Harry Potter lives in such an extraordinarily detailed 
alternative universe that adulthood brings new challenges. In some ways, the 
world itself is more compelling than the characters, so keeping the magical 
background is what keeps the stories –and the characters – forever young.

Horrid Henry for prime minister? I don’t think so. Horrid Henry the bank 
robber? Unlikely. Horrid Henry, Lord High Majesty and Ruler of the Universe? 
Now we’re talking.

Patrick Ness

Author of the Chaos Walking trilogy and A Monster Calls

I call this “the First Four Years question”. As a kid, I read and reread the 
Little House on the Prairie books over and over again (favourite book: The Long 
Winter. I wanted to be trapped in my own blizzard, still do). The final book – 
you may never have heard of it, you’re forgiven, see below – isThe First Four 
Years, which documents the titular time period of Laura Ingalls’ marriage to 
Almanzo. It’s the shortest book in the series, caps everything off and finishes 
a glorious box set. Three decades after I first read Little House in the Big 
Woods, I am yet to reach the end of The First Four Years.

That’s not actually because I was necessarily uninterested in Laura’s married 
life (though I doubt eight-year-old me cared that much). It’s because (whisper 
it) it’s a pretty rubbish novel. They all get a little weird and libertarian by 
the end, that’s true, but this one in particular is an unpolished draft and 
doesn’t match up to the rest of the series. And it has no notable blizzards.

So there’s your dilemma. If you’re going to show your young characters as 
adults, it had better be good. Readers have a say in what their reading 
universe includes, and they’ll leave you behind if you get it wrong. Having 
said that, I absolutely believe that it’s the author alone who needs to make 
this decision. If you’ve got something new to say, then absolutely say it. 
Stories come from all sorts of places and why not, if something grabs you and 
needs to be told?

This is the pressure that Rowling is under. Asking readers to pay for two 
nights of West End tickets is an audacious undertaking. But I like audacious 
undertakings. If by some unforeseen disaster,The Cursed Child doesn’t work, a 
generation will do what I did withThe First Four Years: pretend it doesn’t 
exist and go back to the books I loved. But for the sake of boldness in 
children’s literature, for the sake of widening its already incredible scope, I 
hope it’s a barnstormer.

Michael Rosen

Author of We’re Going on a Bear Hunt and Sad Book

JK Rowling <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling> took a big risk with 
the Harry Potter cycle when she let her heroes grow older. She triumphed over 
one tradition in children’s literature: the one that freezes its heroes in a 
state of permanent childhood. Now she’s fleshing out their adult lives. It’s 
all getting to be a bit like the TV series 7Up. Is Ron driving a taxi? Is 
Hermione teaching gender studies at the University of Sussex?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b1bc1fa47ab31bd9f7a234d8ebe30442419e3bb%2F0_26_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b1bc1fa47ab31bd9f7a234d8ebe30442419e3bb%2F0_26_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
We’re Going on a Bear Hunt by Michael Rosen 
One of the many falsities of fiction that we accept quite happily is the 
non-ageing of characters as they appear across series and sequels. Perhaps it 
all started with tales of gods, goddesses and superheroes who may well start 
out as infants (or chunks of matter), grow up, but then plateau out into a 
state of permanent warring, lusting and vanquishing. Storytellers would garnish 
or add extra courses according to taste. Down on earth, the same goes for the 
animal heroes of folk tales and fables: Europe’s Reynard, north America’s 
Coyote, the Caribbean’s Anansi. One generation of tales was like an invitation 
to people to add on new adventures. The cunning animal lived on.

The effect of all this is to offer us something we can’t realise in life, a 
permanent youth in which we experience daily time but not lifespan time. By the 
end of the Victorian era, key examples from the canon of children’s literature 
were laying down a blueprint: the Alice books, George MacDonald’sThe Princess 
and the Goblin. In popular children’s literature – chapbooks and comics – the 
old folk tradition of ageless heroes, like the characters themselves, never 
died, whether that’s 19th-century figures such as Aly Sloper or 20th-century 
ones such as Dennis the Menace.

With the two Winnie-the-Pooh books, AA Milne grappled with this permanent 
childhood problem in the last pages of the second book, apparently accepting 
thatthere is a place where Christopher Robin is going to 
<http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/808360-then-suddenly-again-christopher-robin-who-was-still-looking-at>
, but where Pooh and Eeyore and the rest cannot follow. Thankfully, Just 
William, the Famous Five and the Secret Seven have never become the 
stockbrokers, MPs and headteachers they all sounded as if they would become.

Kate Saunders

Author of Five Children on the Western Front

If I loved a fictional child when I was a child, I always wondered what 
happened to them afterwards. Did Mary in Frances Hodgson Burnett’sThe Secret 
Garden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/05/secret-garden-frances-hodgson-burnett>
 grow up to marry gorgeous Dickon? Did Bobbie in E Nesbit’sThe Railway Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/23/book-corner-railway-children-lucy-mangan>
 marry the boy with the broken leg, who happened to be the grandson of the Kind 
Old Gentleman? And what about poor old Susan Pevensie in CS Lewis’s Narnia 
series? The end ofThe Last Battle made me want to shake the tweedy old 
misogynist until his dentures rattled. Susan is left all alone after a train 
smash whisks her entire family off to an eternity of tea with Mr and Mrs Beaver 
(still my idea of heaven), when her only crime was turning into a pretty young 
woman.

The point is that when great characters enter the reader’s imagination, they 
take on a life of their own. Millions have dreamed of the further adventures of 
Harry Potter – will they be disappointed to see him on stage as a grownup with 
kids and a stressful job? This is the risk a writer runs, when he or she lets 
in the drab colours of real life. JK Rowling is far too brilliant to burst her 
own bubble, but some writers have shown that they can’t be trusted with their 
own creations.

I was disappointed by LM Montgomery’s endless sequels to her classic Anne of 
Green Gables. In the first book Anne is utterly charming, brimming with promise 
and possibility, and it was painful to watch her dwindling into the rather smug 
wife of a country doctor. I was never entirely satisfied with the later lives 
of the Fossil girls fromBallet Shoes either, when they made guest appearances 
in Noel Streatfeild’s later novels (sadly I won’t be alive whenBallet Shoes 
goes out of copyright – so I’ll never get to write about the stormy early life 
of Madame Fidolia).

While I was writing Five Children on the Western Front, in which the five 
children from Nesbit’s Psammead books grow up to experience the first world 
war, I was incredibly careful not to break faith with the spirit of the 
originals; I couldn’t forget how much I loved them, and “love” isn’t too strong 
a word to describe the feelings children have for their favourite fictional 
characters. Some of us never grow out of it.

Chris Riddell

Children’s laureate and author-illustrator of the Ottoline and Goth Girl series
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34e177feeb5ce5e4fbb61393c026b0df00da5d2c%2F0_0_2257_3036%2F2257.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34e177feeb5ce5e4fbb61393c026b0df00da5d2c%2F0_0_2257_3036%2F2257.jpg>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85ce2b705b5d540b4cd1995bd210413f8c96310b%2F0_0_2091_3036%2F2091.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85ce2b705b5d540b4cd1995bd210413f8c96310b%2F0_0_2091_3036%2F2091.jpg>
SF Said

Author of Varjak Paw and Phoenix

When I first read Ursula Le Guin’s Earthsea books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/15/sf-said-my-inspiration-ursula-le-guin>
, they were a trilogy about a hero in his prime. InA Wizard of Earthsea (1968), 
The Tombs of Atuan(1971) and The Farthest Shore (1972), she told the story of 
Ged, also known as Sparrowhawk, as he grew from Gontish goatherd to 
world-saving wizard: a classic children’s book narrative.

That seemed to be the end of it. But then she found new stories to tell. In 
Tehanu (1990), she showed Ged living a life without magic, learning to take 
satisfaction in the pleasures and pains of an ordinary existence with Tenar, 
the priestess who shared his greatest adventure. The book follows her story as 
much as Ged’s. Then inThe Other Wind (2001), Le Guin showed Ged near the end of 
his days: still wise, but almost an absence now, reconciled to his irrelevance. 
The story was about other characters finding their way without him.

Le Guin wrote a new story whenever she had something new to say. That seems to 
me exactly right. I’ve never wanted to give my own characters new adventures in 
which nothing changes. Repetition seems to me a much bigger risk than letting 
them grow. So in my first book,Varjak Paw, Varjak is a kitten: a very young 
character who learns a secret martial art from very ancient cats. InThe Outlaw 
Varjak Paw, he is a grownup cat, and the questions he faces are grownup 
questions about law and justice, politics and morality. I stopped there, 
because I didn’t have another story to tell about him.

To my surprise, now a decade has gone by, I find myself thinking more and more 
about Varjak. He seems to be ageing with me. I now feel sure there will be a 
third book, in which the story comes full circle. Varjak will now be an old cat 
himself, teaching the secret martial art to much younger kittens: passing it 
on. That makes sense to me as the shape of a trilogy, and the shape of a life.

But to write a story about an old character, perhaps you should be old 
yourself, to know what it feels like. I’m getting there faster than I thought 
possible, but I’m not quite ready yet. I am keeping notes, though, making 
plans, gathering material for that time. It’s comforting to know that far 
greater writers have made this journey. I look at Le Guin’s example. As she
recently said of Earthsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/15/ursula-k-le-guin-to-publish-earthsea-story-in-print-for-first-time>
: “Authors and wizards learn to be patient while the magic works.” I just hope 
readers can be patient too.

Jamila Gavin

Author of Coram Boy and the Surya trilogy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a925c676f17dab01a8a3f5647c95c2e4d976e0b%2F0_44_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a925c676f17dab01a8a3f5647c95c2e4d976e0b%2F0_44_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 A production ofCoram Boy at the National Theatre in 2005. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
The first time I confronted this was in The Wheel of Surya, the first of the 
trilogy. Readers asked, “What happened next?” and I loved it. In Coram Boy, 
there is a development from boy to man within the novel. When you have created 
characters, you do grow up with them.

Dickens did it in Great Expectations, which I read as a child and again as an 
adult. He was interested in how the child develops into the man, and JK Rowling 
seems to have the same interest. With characters as strong as Harry, Ron and 
Hermione, I think it will be a success. Writers instinctively know when there’s 
more to be discovered.

Laura Dockrill

Author of the Darcy Burdock books

Watching Darcy Burdock grow up has been one of the most gut-twisting 
experiences of my writing life. Creating and falling in love with a character, 
nurturing them and seeing them through a book series is the closest thing I’ve 
ever known to being an actual real-life mum. As the writer, you start to care 
about the tiny things your character cares about; your favourite food becomes 
dippy egg and chips, your favourite colour is “sparkles” too. If Darcy wasreal, 
I know these things most likely would not be her favourite things for ever, but 
isn’t it scary to think they could end up being mine? Your fictional character 
could end up growing up and leaving you behind.

I like to see my characters as fixed. Loyal. Take The Simpsons, for example. 
Bart doesn’t one day have an Adam’s apple and Lisa never starts talking about 
her period pains. In one episode Bart gets a stupid tattoo, but in the next, 
where is the tattoo? Nowhere to be seen. Good. We love them because they are 
the same. They are our friends. Friends who appear when we want them to. Who 
keep making mistakes for us, so we don’t have to. We write and read children’s 
books because we want to grasp that precious tender age of 
anything-could-happen-ness. I don’t want to see Tracy Beaker argue with her 
boyfriend outside a pub, I don’t want to see Sophie fromThe BFG with a walking 
stick and grey hair, nor do I want to see Max fromWhere The Wild Things Are 
sipping champagne at his gallery opening.

I don’t want Darcy to get insecure about turning 30. I want her full of hope. 
Maybe it’s selfish. Maybe I’m just terrified of change or maybe – quite 
possibly – it’s me who needs to do the growing up.

Leila Rasheed


Author of the Bathsheba Clarice de Trop books

I love the idea of my child characters growing up. In a sense, that’s what 
children’s literature is always about – children or teenagers learning and 
growing and developing so at the end of the story they’re a step closer to the 
adult they will one day become.

I am sure Bathsheba will grow up to be a happier person because of what 
happens to her and the choices (including the mistakes) she makes. Having said 
that, I can understand that readers might not want characters to grow up. As a 
child I loved the Earthsea books by Ursula Le Guin, but when I came across a 
fourth,Tehanu, in which Tenar is an adult, I felt as if I’d been slapped. I 
shut the book and put it back on the shelf. I saw Tenar as a girl, not a woman.

Another traumatic moment was reading the first of the Laura Ingalls Wilder 
books that depicts Laura as a woman. The change from carefree child, often in 
danger but always, ultimately, safe because her parents loved her, to an adult 
with no safety net, was really shocking. Sometimes readers want a child to stay 
a child.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc47f3a35f346d84de48416ae602f3dfa96a6fe87%2F256_351_4384_2631%2F4384.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20middle%20age%3A%20should%20fictional%20children%20ever%20grow%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fharry-potter-fictional-children-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc47f3a35f346d84de48416ae602f3dfa96a6fe87%2F256_351_4384_2631%2F4384.jpg>
 When Harry Potter grows up … Illustration by Alex Hahn. 
Jennifer Bell


Author of The Crooked Sixpence

Characters exist beyond the pages of a book. They live and grow in readers’ 
minds, especially when those readers are children whose imaginations are 
boundless. I would be fascinated to read about the journeys my favourite child 
characters were embarking on as adults, but I would be nervous too. After all 
they had gone through in their youth – and all I had gone through with them – 
would I really want to see what had happened to them? Would that kill the magic 
of the original story or trivialise it in some way?

It is an exceptionally powerful thing to see a child transform into an adult. 
In the time slip adventureTom’s Midnight Garden by Philippa Pearce, young 
protagonist Tom befriends Hatty – a girl he witnesses ageing each time they 
meet. As Hatty leaves her youth behind, the story inevitably darkens; she 
becomes more of a stranger. Ageing a child is used just as effectively in the 
final chapter of JM Barrie’sPeter and Wendy, in which Mrs Darling and Nana have 
died, the lost boys are “grown up and done for” and Wendy is married with a 
daughter. When Peter sees Wendy as an adult he is terrified, and the reader is 
too. The brutality of the passage resonates throughout the whole story, forcing 
you to consider what it really means to grow up.

Philip Reeve


Author of the Mortal Engines quartet

My characters keep growing up on me. I don’t plan it that way, because I 
seldom plan ahead when I’m starting a new book. I just write it, and if I’m 
aiming it at older children and teens, I tend to make the main characters 15 or 
16. But then it turns out to want a sequel, and maybe evolves into a series. 
Time passes in the world I’ve created, and I soon find that I’m writing about 
adults.

I’m not alone in this. The Harry Potter series is a good example. If readers 
start withThe Philosopher’s Stone when they’re nine or 10, and read one book 
per year, they’ll age at the same rate as Harry and co. When the books were 
new, and fans were waiting for each one to be released, that was exactly what 
was happening, and I’m sure part of the affection today’s twentysomethings feel 
for Potter comes from the sense that he grew up with them. But now that the 
whole series is available, it’s far more likely that a keen young reader who 
burns through the whole lot in a couple of months will read about 17-year-old 
Harry while they’re still nine or 10 themselves.

This is not a problem, of course. Fiction is all about putting yourself in 
someone else’s shoes, and it can add to the thrill if they’re a few sizes too 
big. Contemporary children’s books tend to feature child protagonists, but I 
grew up reading books from the 50s and 60s, in which the characters were often 
grownups, like Biggles, or the heroes of Ronald Welch’s military tales. 
Tolkien’s hobbits are mostly well into middle age by the time their adventures 
begin. Many of Rosemary Sutcliff’s historical novels, likeWarrior Scarlet, 
follow their central character from boyhood into adult life. In one of them,
Dawn Wind, he turns out to be a rather bitter and troubled adult, which I’ve 
always thought was a brave move.

Because there is a problem in writing adult protagonists for children. Even 
the lives of happy children are beset with fears and difficulties – bullies, 
school, exams. They tend to look forward to being grownups, when they imagine 
they’ll be able to do what they want and cope with whatever life chucks at 
them. But a writer trying to write seriously about adulthood can’t shy away 
from the fact that it involves a lot of worry, compromise and disappointment, 
and that many adults look back on childhood as the best time of their lives.

In the end, like everything, it comes down to tone. Are you aiming for fun, or 
comfort, or escapist adventure, or brutal honesty? There’s room enough in the 
broad church of children’s fiction for stories that look unflinchingly at 
growing up and for those whose brave young protagonists mature into happy 
adults. And there’s also a place for characters who never age at all, and whose 
adventures unfold endlessly in an eternal golden childhood.

• Harry Potter and the Cursed Child opens at the Palace theatre, London W1D, 
on 30 July.harrypottertheplay.com <http://www.harrypottertheplay.com>. The 
official script is published by Little, Brown on 31 August. To order a copy for 
the special price of £9 (RRP £20), or browse the rest of the books featured, go 
tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-parts-i-ii-special-rehearsal-edition.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 