
After years of hovering in the wings, this could be Haruki Murakami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harukimurakami>'s year to clinch the Nobel 
prize for literature <https://www.theguardian.com/books/nobel-prize-literature> 
– at least if you go by the odds offered by Ladbrokes on the Japanese author, 
who is 3-1 favourite.

Other favoured contenders include US author Joyce Carol Oates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/joyce-carol-oates> (6-1), Hungarian writer 
Peter Nádas (7-1), South Korean poet Ko Un (10-1), andAlice Munro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-munro>, the short story writer from 
Canada (12-1).

Piecing together the odds is a question of informed guesswork, since the 
nominations and cogitations of the members of the Nobel Committee for 
Literature are kept under wraps by the Swedish Academy, which only reveals the 
conversations of the judicial huddle 50 years after the decision is made.

Sixth favourite is Syrian poet Adonis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/adonis>, 14-1, who was tipped to 
win in 2011 following the Arab spring uprisings but lost out to another poet, 
Sweden'sTomas Tranströmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/tomas-transtromer>, the second 
favourite.

Murakami has been considered a frontrunner for the past 10 years. His 
emergence as favourite this time round comes as his latest novel – the title of 
which translates as Colourless Tsukuru Tazaki and His Years of Pilgrimage –is 
being translated into English 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/14/translation-new-haruki-murakami-novel-2014>
 ahead of publication in 2014.

The Nobel prize for literature is awarded each October, in accordance with the 
wishes written in Alfred Nobel's will, to "the person who shall have produced 
in the field of literature the most outstanding work in an ideal direction". 
The precise date is kept vague until the last minute; on Wednesday,the Nobel 
website said <http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/> only that it 
was a minimum of 29 days off. The 2013 prize is worth 8m Swedish kronor 
(£780,000).

Though the Nobel administration prides itself on being inscrutable, it has 
experimented with a little light leaking. In May, it tantalisingly tweeted: "5 
candidates have been selected for 2013 #NobelPrize in #Literature according to 
Permanent Secretary of the Swedish Academy," provokinga flurry of speculation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/may/21/five-authors-nobel-prize-2013>
 as to whether this could be America's year, withPhilip Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiproth> and Don DeLillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dondelillo> floated as possible recipients.

Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> is running with 
Murakami, but the firm has got it wrong before. In 2011, a run of bets prompted 
it to slash odds on Bob Dylan from 100-1 to 10-1 24 hours preceding the 
announcement of the winner. That year, Adonis was a 6-1 favourite, followed by 
Murakami (8-1) and the eventual winner, Tranströmer (10-1).

Last year, the prize went to Mo Yan <https://www.theguardian.com/books/mo-yan>
, who became the first Chinese writer to win it, at odds of 9-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/11/mo-yan-nobel-prize-literature>. 
Since 1901, a total of 109 individuals have won the Noble prize for literature, 
12 of them women.
 