
With just three days to go before the 2014 Nobel prize for literature is 
awarded,Haruki Murakami <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harukimurakami> and 
the Kenyan writer Ngũgĩ wa Thiong’o are joint favourites to win the literary 
world’s greatest honour.

The Swedish Academy announced this morning that the winner of the literature 
Nobel would be revealed on Thursday 9 October at 1pm CET (noon BST). Ladbrokes, 
which has frequently seen the eventual victor surge to the top of its odds in 
the days before the announcement, said today that Ngũgĩ and Murakami were, at 
4/1, joint favourites to win Thursday’s eight million kronor (£693,000) prize.

“It was looking for months as though Murakami would head into the announcement 
day as the hot favourite, but [Ngũgĩ] has captured the imagination late on 
(odds cut from 12/1, to 6/1 then 4/1) and he could easily become the clear 
favourite very soon,” said Ladbrokes spokesmanAlex Donohue 
<https://twitter.com/LadsAlex>.

Third placed at Ladbrokes is Svetlana Alexievich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2005/apr/25/energy.ukraine>, the 
Belarusian investigative journalist, at 7/1, with theSyrian poet Adonis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jan/27/adonis-syrian-poet-life-in-writing>
 at 10/1, together with the French novelistPatrick Modiano 
<http://www.francetoday.com/articles/2011/11/15/patrick_modiano_literary_giant.html>
. The US novelistPhilip Roth <https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiproth>, 
Norwegian playwrightJon Fosse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/12/jon-fosse-writing-another-play-doesnt-give-me-pleasure>
 and Austrian writerPeter Handke <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/handke> – 
who recently won theInternational Ibsen prize 
<http://www.internationalibsenaward.com/> – are all at 12/1.

“Alexievich was at the centre of an eyebrow-raising late gamble last year but 
the public seem to have gone cold on her this time as only seven bets have been 
placed on her to win. On that basis, it could be argued that her odds should be 
longer than 7/1; however, we’re still aware of her popularity after last year 
and we don’t want to be lulled into dismissing her,” said Donohue.

“Philip Roth is currently the most popular writer on this list and incredibly, 
despite getting their fingers burnt last time, it seems that literary punters 
and fans alike are happy to back Bob Dylan again at 50/1. Sixty-five per cent 
of stakes for Dylan are from Sweden, too, which is always interesting. The 
writer who has seen their odds crash in the biggest way isPeter Handke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/handke>, who [fell] 12/1 from 50/1, thanks 
to his win in the Ibsen prize.”

Murakami was described by Ladbrokes as the “readers’ favourite”. He has been 
at the top of the list since the publication of his novelColorless Tsukuru 
Tazaki and His Years of Pilgrimage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/28/colorless-tsukuru-tazaki-his-years-pilgrimage-review-haruki-murakami-man>
 earlier this year. 

In February, the permanent secretary of the Swedish Academy, Peter Englund 
<http://akademiblogg.wordpress.com/2014/02/14/langa-listan-2013/>, said it had 
received 271 nominations for this year’s Nobel literature laureate, which 
resulted in a list of 210 names, 36 of which were being considered by judges 
for the first time. The academy – 18 members; a mix of writers, poets, literary 
scholars and others – sets out to reward the author “who shall have produced in 
the field of literature the most outstanding work in an ideal direction”.Last 
year’s winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/10/alice-munro-wins-nobel-prize-in-literature>
, the Canadian short story writer Alice Munro, was praised as the “master of 
the contemporary short story”;the previous year Chinese writer Mo Yan won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/11/mo-yan-nobel-prize-literature> 
for his “hallucinatory realism [which] merges folk tales, history and the 
contemporary”.

Englund explained a little more about the judging process 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nomination/literature/questions-peter-englund-2013.html>
 on the Nobel’s website. “In February all the received nominations, usually a 
bit over 200, are reviewed. They are then processed by the Nobel committee. The 
work is supported by the Academy’s own employees, but also outside experts are 
hired for translations, statements and the like. First, we make a list of over 
20 names. From this, we eventually make a shortlist of five names. The 
shortlist is discussed and approved by the Academy in its entirety in May. Then 
the members have the summer to learn about the five authors on the shortlist. 
When the Academy then meet again in mid-September, it is always the Nobel prize 
that is the top priority. We usually have agreed on a decision in early 
October,” he wrote.

Englund added that it was “not difficult to find worthy candidates”. “There 
are many: the world is so big … The hard part is to select who will get it,” he 
wrote, revealing that when judges disagree, “the prize is determined after long 
discussions and with a majority vote.”

“I’ve never experienced a prize where everyone was in full agreement. If so, 
it would be really strange,” he said.

The Academy attempts to inform each year’s winner of their victory half an 
hour before the official announcement. Last year, however, Munro was told of 
her win by her daughter, while in 2007Doris Lessing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dorislessing> was enlightened by reporters 
as she exited a London cab <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vuBODHFBZ8k>.
 