
The island paradise is under attack. Thanks to destabilizing forces of climate 
change – rising sea levels and strengthening storms, particularly – some of 
Earth’s most picturesque locations are being scrubbed from the map. And the 
residents of these postcard settings are being forced to consider relocating to 
avoid being swept away into the sea.

In Tuvalu <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/tuvalu>, a collection of reef 
islands and atolls midway between Hawaii and Australia, saltwater intrusion has 
already made it difficult to grow traditional crops, and the rainfall that 
provides much of the drinking water has become unreliable. Despite investments 
in freshwater storage systems and makeshift bulwarks to slow coastal erosion, 
much of the nation – where the average land height is a mere 2 meters (about 
6.5 feet) above sea level – will likely be under water by the end of the 
century.

“It’s already like a weapon of mass destruction,” Tuvalu Prime Minister Enele 
Sopoagasaid last month 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-08-15/an-tuvalu-president-is-climate-change-27like-a-weapon-of-mass-/5672696>
 of the impact climate change is having on his nation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410668796666%2F472b9f8d-feaf-4d8f-b520-cdb564ba94d5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410668796666%2F472b9f8d-feaf-4d8f-b520-cdb564ba94d5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fongafale Island, the capital island of Tuvalu, is about 150 meters (less than 
500 miles) wide at its widest point. A breach can be seen at the curve on the 
right, weakening the island. Photograph: Matthieu Paley/Corbis 
In what has been called a landmark ruling, New Zealand’s immigration court in 
August granted a Tuvaluan family legal residency 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=11303331> after 
the pair’s attorneys argued, in part, that climate change and overpopulation 
has made life untenable on their native island. The ruling in favor of Sigeo 
Alesana and his family came just three months afterNew Zealand rejected the 
world’s first climate refugee claim 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/australasia/worlds-first-climate-change-refugee-has-appeal-rejected-as-new-zealand-rules-ioane-teitiota-must-return-to-south-pacific-island-nation-of-kiribati-9358547.html>
, that of Ioane Teitiota from Kiribati.

Because the 1951 United Nations Convention on the Status of Refugees still 
doesn’t recognize climate change as valid factor for refugee status, the New 
Zealand attorneys representing the Tuvaluan couple also relied on more 
traditional arguments – including the existence of established family 
relationships insideNew Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> 
– to make their clients’ claim.

“To be successful, it need[ed] to be argued beyond the convention, which is 
what we did,” Carole Curtis wrote the Guardian by email.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410663488462%2Faff5caea-fe5f-42df-83d0-79266873d9eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410663488462%2Faff5caea-fe5f-42df-83d0-79266873d9eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Funafuti, the most populated atoll in Tuvalu, is suffering a severe drought 
and water shortage, coupled with contaminated ground water due to rising sea 
levels. Photograph: Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images 
But the roughly 10,800 residents of Tuvalu are by no means the only ones at 
risk of losing their homes to climate change. While theestimates of future 
migrants vary widely, from tens of thousands 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-23899195> to one billion 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/climate-change/climate-change-could-force-1-billion-from-their-homes-by-2050-817223.html>
, there’s little question that anincrease in climate refugees 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2013/09/04/2572471/climate-migrants-uncountable/>
 is on the way.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reported in a 2012 paper that 
forced migrations will likely grow in the years ahead. “For locations such as 
atolls,” the report reads, “in some cases it is possible that many residents 
will have to relocate.”

A thousand miles due west of Tuvalu, a staged relocation effort has been 
underway for years, as hundreds of islanders from theCarteret atoll make their 
way to the larger island of Bougainville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/carteret-atoll-island-climate-refugees-cacao-chocolate>
, 50 miles southwest.
 Palm trees topple due to coastal erosion on the Carteret islands, which is at 
risk from rising sea levels. Photograph: Citt/flickr 
The increasing infertility of the atoll soils, a consequence of increasing 
saltwater intrusion, has been a major factor in the decision to relocate, said 
Ursula Rakova, who is helping lead the Carteret islanders to the “big island”.

“On mainland Bougainville, food crops do not necessarily have to be planted, 
you leave something on the ground and within the next couple of days it is 
growing,” she said.

However, on the Carterets, is it difficult to get things to grow in the 
increasingly saline soil and malnourishment is common. “Women and children may 
drink a young coconut in the morning and this [must] hold them for the rest of 
the day,” Rakova said.

Considered the most climate-vulnerable nation in South Asia 
<http://minivannews.com/society/maldives-economy-hardest-hit-by-climate-change-asian-development-bank-89709>
 by the Asian Development Bank, Maldives is also suffering the brunt of rising 
seas. As with the Tuvalu, talk of back-channel negotiations for future mass 
migrations to Australia,has long buzzed among residents 
<http://www.smh.com.au/environment/climate-change/climate-change-castaways-consider-move-to-australia-20120106-1pobf.html>
 of this chain of 26 atolls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410665417681%2F4930ca5c-b228-4823-93bd-c5061cf4f11e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410665417681%2F4930ca5c-b228-4823-93bd-c5061cf4f11e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 This atoll in the Maldives is at risk of disappearing under rising seas and 
more intense storms. Photograph: Reinhard Krause/Reuters 
“It’s a slow onset, little impacts,” said Thilmeeza Hussain, a former UN 
representative from the Maldives who has since founded Voice of Women, which 
she describes as the only NGO addressing climate change and women in the 
world’s lowest-lying country.

“For example, people living closest to the beach, their houses may get washed 
away by a storm but nobody’s talking about it because it’s just one or two 
houses. But what do they do? It’s a small country and we don’t have homeowner’s 
insurance and things like that. People spend their whole life savings to build 
these homes and they’re left with nothing.”

The observation highlights the IPCC’s finding that the worst elements of the 
climate-driven disasters in the next 20 to 30 years will likely be due more to 
a lack of resources within a community than a dramatic shift in storm intensity.

It’s a point that Texas-based climate scientist, Katharine Hayhoe, named 
earlier this year as one of the world’s most influential people by Time 
Magazine, drives home.

“The biggest reason I study climate change is because of the impact that it 
has on the people who don’t have the resources to adapt,” Hayhoe said. “We have 
a perception, many of us, that climate change is about saving the polar bears.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410733845906%2F308a1ca0-4f39-454b-99c5-25b15920b61a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410733845906%2F308a1ca0-4f39-454b-99c5-25b15920b61a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kashmiri residents walk past a house damaged by flooding in Srinagar on 
Sunday. Fresh rain hampered rescue operations in Indian Kashmir a week after 
deadly floods swamped the Himalayan region. Floods and landslides have claimed 
at least 490 lives in India and neighboring Pakistan. Photograph: TAUSEEF 
MUSTAFA/AFP/Getty Images 
Of course, it’s not only island dwellers who are being forced from their homes 
by human-caused global warming events: the 2010 Pakistani floods, one of the 
largest displacement events of the last decade, drove millions from their homes 
powered by the additional heat generated by industrial greenhouse gas emissions 
thickening in the upper atmosphere,according to the World Meteorological 
Organization 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/03/climate-change-study-wmo_n_3539545.html>
.

And today’s extreme drought gripping California, threatening to settle into a 
potentially decades-long megadrought, may come to cause major conflict and 
dislocation, according to prominent climatologist and author Michael E Mann.

“It’s not just record drought, it’s off-the-scales drought,” he said. “We 
think of environmental refugeeism as something that afflicts the developing 
nations but not us. But if the drought in California becomes the new normal, 
and there’s a very real possibility that it does, then we are going to see 
people driven from their communities, driven from that state. It will not be 
able to meet the water needs of its population if we continue on this course 
that we’re on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410733511285%2F96fd1e3c-8074-4a7a-8b70-1a2f7ae0fd0a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410733511285%2F96fd1e3c-8074-4a7a-8b70-1a2f7ae0fd0a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Flood victims wade through receding flood waters after collecting relief 
materials in Teing, a village near Srinagar in Indian-controlled Kashmir, on 
Sunday. Military specialists blew up dikes in central Pakistan to divert 
swollen rivers and save cities from raging floods that have killed hundreds of 
people. Photograph: Altaf Qadri/AP 
The difference between an extreme climate event and a humanitarian disaster 
has a lot to do with a community’s preparedness and resources, Hayhoe stressed.

“When Hurricane Katrina struck, for example, most of those with the resources 
to evacuate – both in terms of transportation and information – did,” she said. 
“The people who did not have access to that struggled to get away, maybe 
couldn’t get away, and didn’t have the insurance to rebuild their houses.”

Itza Carbajal was 14 years old when the United States’ costliest disaster 
smacked the coast with a nearly 30-foot wall of water. The next day, she and 
her mother joined a three-car caravan out of the city as the flood-control 
levies – mere blocks from their newly purchased home – began to fail and the 
mayor ordered a mandatory evacuation.


“I think that the situation of New Orleans presents us with a prime example of 
what happens when vulnerable people are left to fend completely for themselves 
both before, during, and after the storm,” Carbajal, now a community organizer 
in San Antonio, Texas, wrote the Guardian. “As a natural disaster, I think 
Katrina demonstrates more about our own negligence as humans towards the needs 
of our earth, as well as our own arrogance as to how much control we have over 
this planet.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410668372575%2Fd3e959ea-5156-44fd-9340-5f37255d73c1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20great%20climate%20change%20migration%20already%20begun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2014%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-refugees-un-storms-natural-disasters-sea-levels-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F14%2F1410668372575%2Fd3e959ea-5156-44fd-9340-5f37255d73c1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In 2005, Hurricane Katrina ravaged through the state of Louisiana and the Gulf 
Coast, leaving hundreds of thousands of people displaced, a death toll of over 
1,800 and $108bn in damage. Photograph: Rex 
Most of New Orleans sits below sea level and the storm eventually left most of 
the city – including the Carbajal’s home – submerged in as much as 20 feet of 
water.

Of course, the resources available to weather such an event are even more 
limited in tinyTuvalu <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tuvalu>.

So while the most recent gathering of small island states held in Samoa this 
month failed to take up the pressing issue of expanding definitions under the 
UN Convention on the Status of Refugees, you can expect Prime Minister Sopoaga 
to be less gentlewhen he co-chairs a UN climate summit 
<http://www.un.org/climatechange/summit/> in New York City on 23 September.

“There are no boundaries to the effects of climate change,” he told 
Australia’s ABC. “We are dealing with saving human lives – and therefore saving 
Tuvalu is also saving the world.”

The Vital Signs <https://www.theguardian.com/vital-signs> platform is funded by
Avery Dennison, Domtar and Chiquita.All content is editorially independent 
except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 