
One day in the late 1970s, Jude Kelly went to meet the leader of Portsmouth 
city council. A year or two out of university and armed with a drama degree, 
she was the new artistic director of Solent People’s Theatre, and she wanted 
cash.

“I wore a red skirt” – she indicates a wide arc across her legs, suggesting 
the garment was of the circular type popular in those days – “and a red 
headscarf, and I think I had little red boots on as well.” She found out later 
that when she left the meeting the leader turned to colleagues and said: “She’s 
obviously a communist. No one dresses like that unless they want to make a 
point.”

Women of the world, unite!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/08/women-of-the-world-unite-wow-festival-katharine-whitehorn>
Kelly was horrified. She wasn’t a communist, though she had been a feminist 
since the age of 19 thanks to Germaine Greer, and the awful-sounding Birmingham 
lecturers who told her, in a line “burnt into my brain”, that “there are three 
women directors: there’s Joan Knight, who’s a lesbian,Joan Littlewood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/sep/23/guardianobituaries.arts>, who’s 
retired, andBuzz Goodbody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/11/buzz-goodbody-other-place-royal-shakespeare-company>
, who’s just killed herself. So which would you like to be?” She stopped 
attending classes in protest and set up a women’s theatre group.

We meet on International Women’s Day. Kelly is celebrating the launch of her 
flagship feminist festival,Women of the World 
<http://wow.southbankcentre.co.uk/> (known as Wow), and a decade as artistic 
director of London’s Southbank Centre. We are in a dressing room behind the 
Royal Festival Hall, where Kelly has just interviewedSarah Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sarah-brown>, campaigner and wife of 
former prime minister Gordon Brown, in front of 1,000 teenage girls.

She may have learned early on the perils of being mistaken for a 
revolutionary, but Kelly has not given up on politics. Instead, she has 
channelled her activism through the arts. As a strategy this is not risk-free, 
and people have not always been polite about her.When she got the Southbank job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/apr/10/1>, her classical music 
credentials were questioned, as was her vision of a less hierarchical and more 
holistic cultural space in which art forms, artists and audiences would come 
together in new ways.

It is true that her answers can be lengthy, and her thoughts do not always 
find the neatest form of words. But 10 years on, Kelly is in a commanding 
position. Partly this is because she is still (still!) virtually the only woman 
running a major national arts organisation (the National Gallery, Tate, 
National Portrait Gallery, Royal Shakespeare Company, Royal Opera and all the 
South Kensington museums are headed by white males). But it is also because her 
lifelong commitment to access and inclusion (the Southbank Centre holds annual 
festivals aimed at theAfrican diaspora 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/africa-utopia> and 
British-Asian community 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/alchemy>, as well as 
children, men and other groups) looks to have been right – perhaps now more 
than ever, in light ofrecent controversies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/12/baftas-2016-more-diverse-than-oscars>
 over diversity and discrimination at the Oscars, the Brits, the BBC and in 
British cultural life in general.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsouthbank-centre-director-jude-kelly-health-education-and-arts-funding-sacrosanct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ef9961b3227271591752e657ef04279bbbbd886%2F0_199_4671_2807%2F4671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Health%2C%20education%20and%20arts%20should%20be%20sacrosanct%2C%20says%20Southbank's%20Jude%20Kelly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsouthbank-centre-director-jude-kelly-health-education-and-arts-funding-sacrosanct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Health%2C%20education%20and%20arts%20should%20be%20sacrosanct%2C%20says%20Southbank%27s%20Jude%20Kelly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsouthbank-centre-director-jude-kelly-health-education-and-arts-funding-sacrosanct%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ef9961b3227271591752e657ef04279bbbbd886%2F0_199_4671_2807%2F4671.jpg>
 Jude Kelly (left) with the Duchess of Cornwall and Clare Balding at a 
reception for the Women of the World festival in London this week. Photograph: 
WPA/Getty 
Does she feel vindicated?

“Yes, I do. Not triumphalist, because I’m not saying we have finished that 
journey or succeeded in total. But it’s a big part of what we’re trying to do 
and I think we’ve made people take responsibility for diversity in cultural 
situations as a starting point, not a nice-to-have add-on. Diversity is such a” 
– she pauses – “worn word, sometimes it feels as though it is meant to activate 
reality. But you have to do a lot of work, and have a lot of conversations. 
It’s not about standing in the middle and saying, ‘I’d like to include you’ – 
you have to stand in a different place.”

She thinks the lack of women as leaders in the arts remains “a tense 
question”, and that “the whole territory of unconscious bias is huge” – as is 
women’s tendency to self-exclude because they dread the scrutiny that goes with 
big jobs. She says it is a serious problem that most taxpayer-funded work in 
the arts “is really done by and for white, solvent, educated people – you’ve 
got to examine the purpose of public subsidy”.

The point, she thinks, is that culture, like literacy, should belong to 
everyone, and “when you end up with most discussion [of the arts] being along 
the lines of ‘Is that a wonderful rendition of Brahms?’, it recycles all the 
time the idea that the most important thing is virtuosity. And while virtuosity 
is a hugely important thing, there is another thing that is equally important.”

That other thing is the human instinct for creative expression – one of 
Kelly’s most deeply held beliefs. “All my life I’ve been intrigued by the 
realisation we take from cave paintings – that humans don’t need to reach any 
level of sophistication before they feel the compulsion to express who they are 
through making art,” she says, “but then, for a variety of reasons, we have 
arrived at societies that place the arts in an area where you achieve once 
you’ve moved up through class, education and entitlement systems. That 
disadvantages billions of people for whom art is a natural pursuit, but who are 
made to feel that it isn’t.”

Kelly knows firsthand, and from experience, how creativity can be squashed. 
Her grandmother left school at 12, and had 10 children. One of the youngest was 
Kelly’s father, who won a scholarship, and was acutely aware of having had 
chances his siblings didn’t. Kelly, who grew up in Liverpool, says that, even 
as a student, “I was very aware that in two generations my family had gone from 
that to [me being] at university doing the thing I most wanted. That doesn’t 
come because of your talent but because other people organise the world so you 
get opportunities.”

The Festival of Britain, 60 years on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/apr/22/iain-sinclair-festival-of-britain>
Her biggest job before the Southbank was at the West Yorkshire Playhouse, 
where she attracted stars includingIan McKellen 
<http://www.mckellen.com/stage/index14.htm>, and pioneered her vigorous style 
of community engagement. But while her belief in widening participation 
predated her arrival in London, what she found on the Southbank was a template, 
in the form of the 1951Festival of Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/apr/22/iain-sinclair-festival-of-britain>
, for her visions of a cross-disciplinary and uplifting showcase.

Rolled up in her open-plan, riverfront office, from where she can watch 
punters arriving across the Golden Jubilee footbridges, are four huge diagrams 
she made soon after her arrival, which show her staking her claim to half a 
century of heritage. On the far left are the dark clouds, bombs and explosions 
of the second world war – the Battle of Britain fought over central London, the 
unimaginable destruction of the Holocaust and the atomic bombs dropped on Japan.

Across the pages unfurl the hopes and dreams encapsulated by the festival and 
the postwar period – the times of crisis and stagnation, the arrival of 
concrete in the 1960s (the National Theatre, Hayward Gallery and Queen 
Elizabeth Hall), and Kelly’s vision of a 21st-century rebirth. The architect 
Cedric Price was a mentor, and “roared with laughter” when she told him she had 
been approached about the job: “He said: ‘It’s a basket case, you’ll be 
perfect.’”

“Celebrating humanity was so needed after the world had practically 
annihilated itself,” she says. “I felt it was a world site that had slightly 
forgotten what it was there for.”

Her answer was “the Festival model”, as it is called in the annual reports: a 
programme built around festivals, which Kelly believes are more stimulating 
than regular arts events because people are more likely to dip in and out, to 
feel more like participants and less like spectators, to be bolder and more, 
well, festive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsouthbank-centre-director-jude-kelly-health-education-and-arts-funding-sacrosanct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe9d93d1925482531938534bbbc17692a5580815%2F0_0_5150_3088%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Health%2C%20education%20and%20arts%20should%20be%20sacrosanct%2C%20says%20Southbank's%20Jude%20Kelly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsouthbank-centre-director-jude-kelly-health-education-and-arts-funding-sacrosanct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Health%2C%20education%20and%20arts%20should%20be%20sacrosanct%2C%20says%20Southbank%27s%20Jude%20Kelly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsouthbank-centre-director-jude-kelly-health-education-and-arts-funding-sacrosanct%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe9d93d1925482531938534bbbc17692a5580815%2F0_0_5150_3088%2F5150.jpg>
 The National Theatre next to the Southbank Centre in London, where arguments 
still rage over plans for refurbishment. Photograph: Alamy 
But if the Grade I-listed Royal Festival Hall, filled as it is every day by 
all sorts of people and free events – from early-evening concerts on Fridays to 
Boxing Day tango shows and kids’ film screenings – is the pinnacle of Kelly’s 
achievements, the rest of the 21-acre site has proved more resistant, with 
artist Antony Gormley arguing in 2013 thatit should be bulldozed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/nov/25/antony-gormley-sculpting-south-bank>
.

Around the same time, a sponsorship deal with oil giant Shell was ended by 
mutual agreement, after a series of protests by environmentalists,including one 
by a pop-up choir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/mar/01/shell-music-protest-south-bank>
. This week Tate, the campaigners’ principal target,announced its 26-year 
relationship with BP is to end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/bp-to-end-tate-sponsorship-climate-protests>
. Kelly says organisations like hers need corporate sponsorship, but debates 
around the ethics of these arrangements are “entirely legitimate”.

In 2014 the Southbank Centre abandoned plans for extravagant redevelopment, 
following a bruising fight with skateboarders whodid not want to leave the 
graffiti-covered Undercroft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/18/skaters-southbank-centre-undercroft-london-remains-open>
, and the National Theatre, which claimed the plans would lead to a loss of 
light.

Skaters will stay at the undercroft as London's Southbank Centre gives in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/18/skaters-southbank-centre-undercroft-london-remains-open>
The result was that the Hayward Gallery and Queen Elizabeth Hall closed last 
year for more conservative refurbishments, but Kelly says with a laugh that she 
“hasn’t really given up. The starting all over again has begun. I think we got 
it wrong. We’ve done lots of really great things, but that wasn’t one of them.”

A slight, spry figure with dramatic black-and-white hair, Kelly is drinking 
green tea when I meet her, and wearing a beige leather jacket with platform 
trainers. She may have learned young that she would be judged on her 
appearance, but she doesn’t power-dress, believing “there are moments when 
putting on a suit might be the right strategy, but in the main you have to be 
the person you are”. She is going for lunch at Downing Street.

Her ease comes partly from her age: she is nearly 62. “All my life I’ve seen 
people say, ‘Gender equality is very important, once we’ve sorted out whatever 
it is, we will get back to it’,” she says when I ask about her membership of 
the Women’s Equality party, whichcelebrates its first birthday 
<http://wow.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/womens-equality-party-1st-birthday-celebration-2022>
 in the Royal Festival Hall this weekend. “Well, it hasn’t been got back to – 
and I’m probably old enough and have a long enough track record to know.”

Though much that Kelly says – and indeed her whole sense of the Southbank 
Centre, dating back as it does to Clement Atlee’s postwar Labour government (it 
was Churchill who, when re-elected, orderedthe iconic Skylon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jan/19/festival-of-britain-anniversary-skylon>
’s demolition) – makes it sound as though she is a left-of-centre person, she 
says the Women’s Equality party “is not of the left or the right or the centre; 
it is about putting a voice in the arena to say there are about six things we 
want looked at by whoever is in power. I think that is totally legitimate and a 
good place to do politics from.”

But Kelly won’t say whether the party’s candidate, Sophie Walker, will get her 
first-choice vote as London mayor, nor which way she plans to vote in the EU 
referendum. Asked which of the two London mayors and many culture secretaries 
she has worked with are her favourites, she mentions one Labour (Chris Smith), 
one Tory (David Mellor), and says “arts doesn’t belong to the left. It’s a 
silly idea that it does.” Alliances can be unexpected. The current culture 
minister, Ed Vaizey, knows a lot about the arts; his mother, art historian 
Marina Vaizey, used to be a Southbank Centre trustee.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsouthbank-centre-director-jude-kelly-health-education-and-arts-funding-sacrosanct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38d24930efdb36be50091ad9edbb20c46be34b06%2F149_310_4797_2880%2F4797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Health%2C%20education%20and%20arts%20should%20be%20sacrosanct%2C%20says%20Southbank's%20Jude%20Kelly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsouthbank-centre-director-jude-kelly-health-education-and-arts-funding-sacrosanct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Health%2C%20education%20and%20arts%20should%20be%20sacrosanct%2C%20says%20Southbank%27s%20Jude%20Kelly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsouthbank-centre-director-jude-kelly-health-education-and-arts-funding-sacrosanct%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38d24930efdb36be50091ad9edbb20c46be34b06%2F149_310_4797_2880%2F4797.jpg>
 Kelly addressing a Women of the World event at the Royal Festival Hall on 
International Women’s Day in 2011. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
She blames successive governments for failing to see the value of arts 
education: “Creativity has had a real battering, from different political 
persuasions, and I would say the backlash against a more expressive education 
is really frightening, because the creative industries – everything Britain is 
famous for now – aren’t the product of the last 10-15 years, but of what went 
before.” This year’s Wow features a new set of creative industries awards.

If she were to ask policymakers for one thing, apart from more money to fly 
international artists to the UK, it would be to put arts funding by local 
authorities on a statutory footing: “I would like to see health, education and 
arts as sacrosanct.” She has strong regional links and is planning a roadshow 
at which she will ask what the Southbank Centre, with its almost £1m-a-week 
budget, can do to help.

As for journalists, she would like us to pay less attention to the brilliant 
(and lucky) few, and more to the grassroots: “We can all admireTony Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/26/tony-harrison-celebration-winner-2015-david-cohen-prize>
 the great classical poet, but there’s not enough effort going towards ensuring 
that new Tony Harrisons are allowed to spring up. It’s the activism of cultural 
journalism that I question,” she says. Not, she quickly adds, that cultural 
journalism is her “big beef”.

Next year the Southbank Centre hosts an investigation of Nordic culture; Kelly 
would loveBjörk <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bjork> to direct the 
Meltdown music festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/08/guy-garvey-meltdown-robert-plant-femi-kuti-laura-marling>
. In the meantime, day to day, and even with most venues shuttered, she feels 
“completely compelled” by her job, which she thinks of as one continuous piece 
of work: “It’s like being in love with somebody – you’re not looking for 
anybody else. If you start falling out of love, then you look around. So I’m 
not looking around.”

• The Women of the World festival is at the Southbank Centre, London SE1, 
until Sunday. Details:wow.southbankcentre.co.uk 
<http://wow.southbankcentre.co.uk/>
 