
On the set of ITV’s costume drama Mr Selfridge, in a quiet moment between 
takes, actor Greg Austin is a world away from his co-stars. Although dressed as 
an Edwardian gentlemen, he is glued to hisiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>, and to one game in particular. 
Hearthstone.

“I got into it somewhat late, about a year after its release,” he says. “But 
since then I’ve been playing avidly. It is easy to learn, which means anyone 
can play it and enjoy themselves, but it is also difficult to master.” Austin 
loves the game so much, he now has his own dedicated YouTube gaming channel,
EuphAuric <https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC1Hn3XTvusU08qb68WR0hOA>, posting 
regular Hearthstone videos.

He is not alone with this obsession. A year after its release on PC and iPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad>, Hearthstone boasts over 30 
million registered players, and together with online shooter Destiny, drew in 
$850m (£540m) of revenue for Activision last year. It is one of the most 
watched titles on the video game streaming site Twitch, and professional gamers 
can earn tens of thousands of pounds in dedicated tournaments. One reviewer for 
influential US games site Polygon wrote simply: “It’s kept me rapt longer than 
any games I’ve played in years.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fhearthstone-blizzard-strategy-trading-cards-greg-austin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435059831597%2Fdd8fcf51-ea6b-46f5-b241-9fb90ea03b2b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hearthstone%3A%20how%20a%20game%20developer%20turned%2030m%20people%20into%20card%20geeks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fhearthstone-blizzard-strategy-trading-cards-greg-austin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hearthstone%3A%20how%20a%20game%20developer%20turned%2030m%20people%20into%20card%20geeks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fhearthstone-blizzard-strategy-trading-cards-greg-austin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435059831597%2Fdd8fcf51-ea6b-46f5-b241-9fb90ea03b2b-1020x612.jpeg>
 A Priest takes on a Paladin in this Heathstone match. The Hero characters are 
at the top and bottom of the screen with the minions meeting in the middle of 
the board. Photograph: Activision 
For those yet to be indoctrinated, Hearthstone is a turn-based strategy game 
based in an esoteric fantasy universe and inspired by complex collectible 
trading card sets like Magic: The Gathering. Players select one of nine 
character classes such as hunters, warriors and priests, then build decks of 
soldiers called Minions, each with their own abilities and weaknesses. These 
mini armies are pitched against an opponent on a table-top warzone, with a 
resource named mana governing how many cards a participant is able to play in 
their turn. The aim is to destroy your opponent’s main Hero character by 
playing stronger Minion cards at the right times, and making effective use of 
special spell cards that add force to compatible moves.

It sounds complicated and geeky, which is perhaps why so many industry 
insiders were caught off guard by its sudden and phenomenal success – 
including, it turns out, the game’s own developer. To Blizzard Entertainment, 
Hearthstone was supposed to be a niche project, an experimental diversion. But 
then something weird happened. Everybody loved it.

The Blizzard way

Based in a sprawling campus facility in Irvine, California, Blizzard is the 
veteran studio behind acclaimed strategy simulation titles Starcraft and 
Warcraft, and the massively multiplayer online game, World of Warcraft (WoW). 
Its games are the very definition of “hardcore”: deep, demanding and riddled 
with complex mechanics. In 2008, however, the company’s directors looked at how 
they were relying exclusively on three key brands – the action role-playing 
adventure Diablo, the strategy simulation sequel Starcraft II, and WoW – and 
they were concerned. In some ways it was fine, the games were, after all, doing 
spectacularly well. Starcraft was about to get its Wings of Liberty add-on and 
work was progressing on the long-awaited Diablo III.

Elsewhere, however, something big was happening in the games industry. A group 
of idiosyncratic independent projects like Braid and World of Goo had 
kickstarted a new era of experimental game design. The arrival of digital 
download platforms like Xbox Live and the Apple App Store, together with the 
increasing availability of broadband internet, meant that suddenly small teams 
were able to get interesting offbeat projects to potentially huge audiences.
Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> didn’t have to be burned 
onto discs and sold in stores anymore, they could be created by small teams 
then made available on the internet or on smartphones. The culture of the 
industry was shifting. Blizzard wanted to shift too.

“We realised we didn’t have a competency here at the company to be a little 
bit more experimental, a little more nimble,” recalls Hearthstone co-creator 
and production director, Jason Chayes. “Some of our executives got together and 
said, we need to start up a small team, kind of a scrappy team, that can, with 
few resources, find ways to do more experimental types of games. We wanted to 
try out different ideas and platforms – things we don’t usually do because our 
teams are focused on those key franchises.”

The studio pulled a small group of experienced designers together, including 
Jason Chayes and designer Eric Dodds, and gave them the codename Team Five. The 
brief was effectively, go create something. “We started where we always do, by 
asking each other about the games we really love ,” says Chayes. “We discussed 
the games we played in our lunch breaks or with our friends in a pub on a 
Friday evening. For about twenty years, a lot of us had been playing 
collectible card games (CCGs) together. The coupling of a small team and an 
online CCG felt like a natural fit. That’s where Hearthstone began.”


A magic gathering 

Although there have been trading cards with simple gaming mechanics for many 
years, it was the 1993 release of Magic: The Gathering that revolutinised the 
CCG concept. Published by veteran fantasy game creator Wizards of the Coast, 
and set in a Dungeons and Dragons-style fantasy world, it featured a starter 
pack of creature, spell and artifact cards all with different strengths and 
weaknesses, as well as random booster packs allowing players to build their own 
custom decks. Part of the fun was simply purchasing packs and amassing a 
collection, enjoying the exotic creature descriptions and fantasy art. But 
being able to sit down and play a highly tactical game added to the appeal. 
Magic became a smash hit, selling out its initial 2.6m print run almost 
immediately and going on to build a community of over 10m active players. It 
wasn’t long before it earned the nickname cardboard crack.

Team Five was looking into what made a compelling collectible card game – and 
that meant playing them. A lot of them. They played endless rounds of Magic, as 
well as subsequent CCG hits – Battletech, Netrunner, Legend of the Five Rings 
and Rage – learning the flow, the interplay, the conventions of the genre. “We 
thought, well, what does a card game need to give it interesting depth?” says 
Chayes. “We wanted a style of play where minions could duke it out against each 
other – a very quick, dynamic engaging experience. There was a process of 
working out what sort of things would facilitate that form of gameplay.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fhearthstone-blizzard-strategy-trading-cards-greg-austin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435164401284%2F453ecd8e-dabd-401e-b398-ea82bce48ffe-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hearthstone%3A%20how%20a%20game%20developer%20turned%2030m%20people%20into%20card%20geeks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fhearthstone-blizzard-strategy-trading-cards-greg-austin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hearthstone%3A%20how%20a%20game%20developer%20turned%2030m%20people%20into%20card%20geeks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fhearthstone-blizzard-strategy-trading-cards-greg-austin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435164401284%2F453ecd8e-dabd-401e-b398-ea82bce48ffe-1020x612.jpeg>
 Hearthstone’s Tavern Brawl mode. Photograph: Blizzard 
And of course, they borrowed from the World of Warcraft card trading game 
produced by Upper Deck in 2006. This hugely successful spin-off from Blizzard’s 
massively multiplayer online game was a massive success on the CCG market, with 
over 20 expansion sets and a lively competitive scene. It has similar hero 
classes, it duplicates a lot of the minion cards, and card art, and many of the 
systems are the same. And when Hearthstone was nearing completion, Blizzard 
ended its licensing agreement with Upper Deck, effectively killing the physical 
Warcraft card game in favour of its digital counterpart.

But Team Five was also looking back to the origin of the Warcraft titles and 
its universe, the dark fantasy realm known as Azeroth, swarming with warriors, 
elves and orcs. As Chayes explains, “We thought about the various classes that 
are represented there – hunter, mage, paladin, all of these – and discussed 
what it is that people think about when they consider what a paladin is, the 
buffs they may use, or the burst energy spell of a mage. We looked for ways to 
introduce those mechanics into a card game. That was a key influence: how we 
could be faithful to that source material?”

The Starcraft experience

A year after work started, the team had developed a simple Flash prototype – a 
very basic digital card game with no real visual identity; it was just a set of 
mechanics, based around the nine classes of hero from the Warcraft real-time 
strategy titles. At this critical point, several of the staff were temporarily 
moved on to Starcraft II – and far from being a disruption, this proved an 
important element in Hearthstone’s development. “There were 10 or 11 months 
where the two people on the design team – Eric Dodds and Ben Brode – were free 
to do a lot of fast iteration,” says Chayes. “They were actually making and 
using physical playing cards.”


Meanwhile, the others learned a lot from Starcraft, especially the asymmetric 
nature of the races. “That definitely carried over into Hearthstone,” says 
Chayes. “The idea that each of the classes needs to remain balanced but at the 
same time has to have its own flavour and feel. When the team started 
reconverging, having done our tour of duty on Starcraft, that’s when things 
started to migrate into a very robust example of where we wanted Hearthstone to 
go.”

Behind it all were two guiding principles: accessibility and charm. It had to 
be funny, it had to be warm and it had to be intuitive. “When we first started 
working on it, the most important thing was that this would be a game for 
everybody,” says Dodds. “That idea quickly spread throughout the entire game. 
We wanted to make it feel good to drag cards, to attack, we wanted it to look 
fun if you just watched it over someone’s shoulder.

“We talked about the text on the cards - we wanted to make it very readable. 
We have a rule when we’re building a card that if someone reads the text for 
the first time and they don’t immediately understand what the card does, we 
need to change that power or re-word it – that is critical.”

Indeed, the game is so intuitive, players are able to effectively let it play 
itself. There are pre-built card decks for each class so players don’t have to 
make their own. But if they do decide to make custom decks, the game will make 
suggestions, or even build the whole deck based on the cards available. Then, 
when you’re in the game, the user interface highlights all the cards that you 
can play in any one turn. As with casual puzzle titles like Candy Crush Saga, 
you can just do what the game tells you.

“It’s very apparent that Blizzard wanted the game to be quick, and reasonably 
easy,” says keen player and eSports writer, Kevin Hovdestad. “Turns are short, 
games are short, and you can’t act in any way during your opponent’s turn. 
Strategically, each class has inherently valuable cards that fit it 
thematically, so the game sort-of guides players towards certain natural 
synergies.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU0oj8FnqQW8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU0oj8FnqQW8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU0oj8FnqQW8&media=>
Dodds agrees. “It’s important that you don’t have to spend a lot of time 
understanding the rules to play the game, the depth grows as you go,” he says. 
“A number of players will just drag the card that goes green onto the board – 
they’re sort of playing the game, sort of not. But as they progress they start 
to think, ‘no, I’m going to play a different way’.

“Really, throughout the design, the interface, the experience, Hearthstone is 
designed to say ‘the first time you see this, you know how to play, you know 
how to use it’”.

Meanwhile, back on the set of Mr Selfridge, Austin regularly finds himself 
showing off the game to other cast members as they mill about on set. For him, 
performance is part of its appeal. “It is extremely watchable,” he says. “The 
other actors are always asking what I’m doing, and I’ll tell them about the 
game and get them to have a go. That’s how I really started to learn the finer 
details – by watching popular streamers and YouTubers likeTrump and Kripparian 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U0oj8FnqQW8>. There’s always more to learn and 
understand with Hearthstone, and watching other people is one of the best ways 
of getting better. I wouldn’t be surprised if I’ve managed to get a few of the 
other actors into it.”

Part Two: the design process, and how Hearthstone evolved into an eSport  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/26/hearthstone-how-one-game-developer-turned-30m-people-into-geeks-part-two>
 