
There are some big questions floating around in politics right now, none more 
so than the one relating to the forces behind Brexit, Trump and – in the eyes 
of oneCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> 
frontbencher – Australia’s federal election.

Assistant cities minister Angus Taylor believes the answer lies in the outer 
suburbs of big cities, peri-urban areas and regional towns.


“If you look at the UK, if you look at Australia, if you look at the US, there 
is political disruption going on,” Taylor told Guardian Australia.

“And the disruption is coming from the outer suburbs and regional cities. 
That’s where Trump has focused, that’s where Brexit was focused and we saw that 
in the recent federal election.

People in those areas are crying out for solutions
Angus Taylor 
“And that is because people in those areas are crying out for solutions. They 
want governments to come up with solutions and so that’s where we are focused.”

Taylor is one of the younger, driven, ambitious generation. He is of the class 
of 2013, one rung below the more senior members of the Coalition. He floats 
between the right and centre right, resisting categorisation. While the former 
McKinsey partner and Rhodes scholar was omitted from the first Turnbull 
ministry, thespectacular departure of former ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/malcolm-turnbull-loses-two-ministers-but-the-stench-of-one-could-linger>
 Jamie Briggs and Mal Brough meant he did not have long to wait.

At the same time as he was given the cities portfolio earlier this year, 
Taylor’s southern NSW seat of Hume was pushed further north towards Sydney 
after a redistribution. It now straddles rural towns such as the farming 
community of Boorowa and regional cities such as Goulburn, stretching into 
peri-urban areas leading up to Camden in south-west Sydney. While he suffered a 
swing of only 3.4%, his colleagues inwestern Sydney took much bigger hits 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-the-five-ways-western-sydney-was-lost-20160704-gpxwr8.html>
. Liberal MP Russell Matheson lost the neighbouring seat of Macarthur to 
Labor’s Mike Freelander on an 11.7% swing.

Trump supporters look to Brexit and see only one thing: freedom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/30/donald-trump-supporters-brexit-closed-borders-immigration>
When party pollster Mark Textor joined Liberal federal director Tony Nutt to 
address the partyroom in the post-election briefing, one of the factors he 
named was lifestyle pressures such as high mortgages and commuting. Voters in 
western Sydney,Textor said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/18/conservatives-pull-punches-as-malcolm-turnbull-faces-post-election-party-room>
, had a “greater level of cynicism” than other Australian voters.

“I think it is a pattern everywhere, I don’t think it’s confined to western 
Sydney, though clearly we saw it in westernSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney>,” Taylor said in a 
wide-ranging interview with Guardian Australia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fheart-modern-politics-city-fringes-turnbulls-urban-thinker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa37a99ea02e7b5e2f7a5ea8b92c09ad1c90793e9%2F0_77_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Heart%20of%20modern%20politics%20is%20on%20the%20city%20fringes%2C%20says%20Turnbull's%20urban%20thinker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fheart-modern-politics-city-fringes-turnbulls-urban-thinker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Heart%20of%20modern%20politics%20is%20on%20the%20city%20fringes%2C%20says%20Turnbull%27s%20urban%20thinker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fheart-modern-politics-city-fringes-turnbulls-urban-thinker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa37a99ea02e7b5e2f7a5ea8b92c09ad1c90793e9%2F0_77_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Property construction on Sydney’s north-western fringe. Angus Taylor pinpoints 
the outer suburbs as a key political and economic battleground. Photograph: 
Will Burgess/REUTERS 
“This is true in the outer suburbs of Perth or the outer suburbs and the 
peri-urban areas of Brisbane and that message – we don’t need a pollster to 
give us that message.

“That message is embedded in the results at the election and has been embedded 
in the results of the United States primaries and the UK Brexit debate. If 
politicians weren’t seeing this now they would be ignoring the very obvious 
signals.”

But what do politicians do with this message in a post-Brexit world? 

To include or enable?

George Megalogenis, in his Quarterly Essay Balancing Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/18/a-shift-in-political-thinking-is-giving-labor-a-sense-of-purpose>
, argued the political system could not restore public confidence without a 
more responsive government.

“And the economy won’t stabilise without a more active government,” 
Megalogenis wrote.

“The default setting of politics in the 21st century – to trust in the market 
– has proven to be bad economics, even for Australia, the only high-income 
nation to avoid the Great Recession. It has left us with gridlocked cities, 
growing inequality and a corporate sector that feels no obligation to pay tax.”

Inequality has also been troubling Labor policy minds such as frontbencher and 
economist Jenny Macklin. Her opposition project has been awide ranging report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/16/tackling-rising-inequality-a-priority-for-government-labor-research-finds>
 into policies which tackle inequality, wrapping the notion of economic growth 
in the notion of inclusion. She has quoted the work ofNobel laureate Joseph 
Stiglitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/09/australia-american-path-to-inequality>
, who has argued inequality is bad for economic growth.

As a conservative, Taylor sees government as an enabler. He rejects increased 
default government spending in favour of providing opportunities, to 
individuals, communities and business. Infrastructure spending is necessary to 
create liveable cities and regions and he favours public-private partnerships 
where government sees infrastructure as an investment to drive economic growth.

Stress in the city

While the political rip pulled Australia towards a double dissolution 
election, one of the lesser known government policies released in April was the 
cities deal. It was worked up by Taylor with Malcolm Turnbull’s new cities 
division in the department of prime minister and cabinet.

$50m 'investment-banking style' unit to fund transport projects
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/29/50bn-investment-banking-style-unit-to-fund-transport-projects>
“The plan will draw on the Commonwealth’s coordination capacity and the 
strength of its balance sheet at a time of historically low interest rates, to 
get the best infrastructure projects off the ground,” their statement said.

But what does that mean for people squeezed by mortgage stress and long 
commutes?

Enter the 30-minute city – a favourite for both sides of politics 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/anthony-albaneses-30minute-plan-for-your-better-life/news-story/5b3b512a93ee63712c85108a455a4d52>
. In Taylor’s version, it does not mean you can get across the city in 30 
minutes – in a city the size of Sydney or Melbourne you never will. It means 
reversing the jobs tide rushing towards the central business districts by 
creating “job hubs”.

For example he believes Sydney should be three cities - the CBD, Parramatta 
and Badgerys Creek/Penrith. In another era, it might be known as 
decentralisation. But rather than move a big government department, Taylor says 
its all about laying down the infrastructure for business to provide jobs and 
to give people a comfortable place to live. That means transport, roads and 
amenities.

“We [government] are not the job creator, the private sector is the job 
creator, but we are an important enabler,” Taylor said.

“We create the infrastructure, we can influence the planning decisions, we can 
influence whether these places are great places to live that are well connected.

“Just the fact that we are committed to Badgerys Creek [airport] and the 
infrastructure that will surround Badgerys Creek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/16/malcolm-turnbull-sydney-airport-badgerys-creek-airport-rail>
 as well as spending billions of dollars in western Sydney on infrastructure, 
we are an extremely important enabler.”

Swing city – where politics and policy collide

As counting continued in the Queensland seat of Herbert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/malcolm-turnbull-signals-likely-challenge-in-herbert-after-labor-claims-victory>
, where Liberal MP Ewen Jones continues to trail Labor’s Cathy O’Toole by a 
handful of votes, Taylor and Turnbull travelled to its heart in Townsville this 
week.

They announced the federal government was in discussions with the state and 
local governments for a Townsvillecity deal 
<http://ministers.dpmc.gov.au/taylor/2016/townsville-city-deal-discussions-underway>
, which would create an agreement to work on providing infrastructure, 
attracting businesses and jobs in a town where unemployment has hit 13.2%.

The city deal sounds a little airy fairy until you remember the fight between 
the Andrews Victorian Labor government and the Abbott Coalition government over 
the East West Link, a $3bn, 18km toll road project in Melbourne.

'Quietly confident' Cathy O’Toole awaits Herbert's cliffhanger result
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/quietly-confident-cathy-otoole-awaits-herberts-cliffhanger-result>
The tied federal funding of $1.5bn was promised by Abbott and rejected by 
Andrews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/10/-sp-east-west-link-18km-road-election-flashpoint>
, who said he wanted to prioritise the Melbourne Metro rail project. The money 
was never handed over because the two tiers of government could not decide on a 
priority.

On the Townsville deal, Taylor described the Queensland government as 
“extremely collaborative”.

The political and policy synergy which meet in the most marginal seat in the 
land is no accident. Another city deal is expected in Launceston, in northern 
Tasmania. (The Coalition lost all three of its seats Bass, Braddon and Lyons in 
Tasmania.) The third? Swing city – western Sydney.

It could sound like pork barrelling in the marginals. But Taylor says the 
policy solution is required because those areas were reacting to issues of 
liveability.

“I think it is very symbolic, it says the outer suburbs and the regional 
cities have to be a priority for any government in the western world now,” he 
said.

“At the ballot box, they have made that clear. And rightly so, because there 
are issues to be resolved.”
 