
Comedy has no equivalent to the cover version; comics seldom appropriate one 
another’s material – give or takeWill Mars’s Joke Thieves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/09/edinburgh-festival-comedy-joke-thieves>
 format, and Stewart Lee’s droll fake plan to perform a Michael McIntyre 
routine verbatim. But there are other ways of paying homage – or getting a leg 
up on someone else’s hard work, if you choose to see it that way. Several 
fringe standup shows explicitly reference other standups, sometimes by way of 
tribute, sometimes as Oedipal forebear to be slain. You could call this 
intertextuality, or an in-joke too far – according to taste.

 Two shows I saw in the first week provide contrasting examples. Adrienne 
Truscott’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/08/adrienne-truscott-edinburgh-festival-review-standup-gilded-balloon>
 act used footage of the American anti-comic Andy Kaufman – his Mighty Mouse 
routine from thedebut episode of Saturday Night Live 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t-wUe5aEwHM>, and “Inter-Gender Wrestling 
Champion” stunts. The context was Truscott’s discussion of the limbo she works 
in between feminist comedy and performance art. (The late Kaufman,she claimed 
last month in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/31/adrienne-truscott-on-andy-kaufman-mercurial-and-feminist-prankster>
, was “one of our best-known feminist performance artists”.) Kaufman was being 
visually quoted, in effect, to support Truscott’s argument for an art that is 
both comedy and not comedy – which is fine, except that on this occasion, at a 
performance that wasn’t firing, the live parts of the show risked seeming less 
funny than the 40-year-old footage.

 There’s an obvious risk in letting a comedy legend share your stage – and 
it’s a risk Zoe Coombs Marr doesn’t take. She is the Australian comic 
pretending to be a misogynist male in herEdinburgh debut, Dave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/10/zoe-coombs-marr-edinburgh-festival-review>
.

In it, Coombs Marr’s alter ego – a dissolute wannabe standup – is obsessed 
with the sunshineyLast Leg presenter Adam Hills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/23/adam-hills-review>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fedinburgh-acts-comedy-heroes-adrienne-truscott-zoe-coombs-marr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440078023968%2F05abad39-0482-4ed3-a223-cafb82314aa5-1766x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Heard%20the%20one%20about%20the%20comedian%3F%20The%20standups%20joking%20about%20each%20other&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fedinburgh-acts-comedy-heroes-adrienne-truscott-zoe-coombs-marr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Heard%20the%20one%20about%20the%20comedian%3F%20The%20standups%20joking%20about%20each%20other&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fedinburgh-acts-comedy-heroes-adrienne-truscott-zoe-coombs-marr%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440078023968%2F05abad39-0482-4ed3-a223-cafb82314aa5-1766x2040.jpeg>
 Sending up … Zoe Coombs Marr. Photograph: Dave Head 
But this isn’t a tribute, it’s a mickey-take, and Hills’s role in the show is 
the opposite of Kaufman’s in Truscott’s: he’s here not because he’s great, but 
because he’s middle-of-the-road. Referencing Hills is a way of revealing Dave’s 
character (low-horizoned, uninspired) and his ineptitude – the contrast with 
consummately professional Hills is stark. It also signals Coombs Marr’s taste, 
by implied distance from those, like Dave, to whom Adam Hills represents the 
apex of comic achievement.

 A similar process is at work in Luke McQueen’s new show. McQueen is the 
ruthlessly un-commercialstunt-comic who dramatises his own career collapse on 
stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/14/luke-mcqueen-edinburgh-festival-2014-review-standup-comedy>
.

This year’s show tells the story of his erstwhile double act with Jack 
Whitehall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/06/jack-whitehall-stand-up-for-camerons-britain>
, and how it was sabotaged by Whitehall’s jealous dad. It’s an enjoyable 
confection, less harsh than last year, and there’s a greatKim Noble-alike video 
interlude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/26/kim-noble-interview-comedy-mental-health>
 in which McQueen tries out his new “invisibility powder” in public. He also 
wrings some neat comedy from the Whitehall material, which gives him a new spin 
on his self-pitying narrative of professional inertia, while taking 
well-merited pops at theWhitehalls’ nepotistic double act 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01kcbzz>.

 As in Coombs Marr’s show, Whitehall is here to give McQueen clarity – the 
three-time UK “king of comedy” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-30511102> is everything McQueen 
is not. The way Whitehall and dad are treated here reinforces McQueen’s 
iconoclastic credentials: Whitehall stands for everything that’s successful and 
conventional, media-friendly, unthreatening and patrician about inbred modern 
entertainment. By sending them up so crudely (Michael Whitehall appears like a 
witch in a cape, singing a spooky song invoking McQueen’s downfall), McQueen 
telegraphs his scorn of all that – or inability to operate within it. Yes, the 
show would be lost on you if you knew nothing of Whitehall and his work. But 
that applies to almost none of us. As it is, McQueen’s show is a fine example 
of how other acts can be co-opted to sharpen any given comedian’s definition, 
and to focus the mind on what they’re trying to do.

Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> may well eat itself, but – 
for now at least – it’s proving fun to watch.
 