
The novelist Kamila Shamsie measures out her life as an author in chapters, 
punctuated by a familiar ritual.

“Usually at the end of writing every chapter I’ll print out and read aloud,” 
she says. It’s something she’s been doing since university, she continues, 
citing the Kashmiri poetAgha Shahid Ali 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/agha-shahid-ali>, who told her “there are 
things the ears pick up which the eyes don’t”. As she sits on the lookout for 
repeated words, unexpected clunks or unwanted dissonances, it “feels like 
listening”.

“I don’t know how to say that any better. It’s about the sound of the 
sentences.” After years of “developing your ear for the sounds of language” she 
doesn’t have to think about “why a particular clump of syllables sounds wrong 
to my ear. I just know that it does.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fhearing-words-writing-sounds-examining-the-authors-brain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435331059638%2F491b48b3-b4d3-41e3-8636-0f2f8fac0b61-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hearing%20words%2C%20writing%20sounds%3A%20examining%20the%20author's%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fhearing-words-writing-sounds-examining-the-authors-brain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hearing%20words%2C%20writing%20sounds%3A%20examining%20the%20author%27s%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fhearing-words-writing-sounds-examining-the-authors-brain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435331059638%2F491b48b3-b4d3-41e3-8636-0f2f8fac0b61-1360x2040.jpeg>
 ‘It feels like listening’ ... Kamila Shamsie. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the 
Guardian 
At the heart of Shamsie’s process of revision is a delicate dance between 
regions of the brain dedicated to producing and interpreting speech and 
writing; regions that, according toan elegant study led by Professor Brenda 
Rapp at Johns Hopkins <http://hub.jhu.edu/2015/05/06/language-reading-writing>, 
are separated at a very deep level.

After following patients with specific difficulties in speech and writing for 
15 years, Rapp has demonstrated that writing and speaking are supported by 
different parts of the brain, not just in terms of the processes controlling 
the hand and mouth, but at deeper levels of the language system that contain 
knowledge of how words are put together.

Researchers showed participants pictures of an action, and asked them to 
describe what they saw. Some subjects would say “the boy is walking”, but write 
“the boy is walked”, while others would say “Dave is eating an apple”, and 
write “Dave is eats an apple.”

“It’s as though there were two quasi-independent language systems in the 
brain,” Rapp explains.

This separation between systems for producing speech and writing is mirrored 
in divisions between regions of the brain associated with understanding spoken 
and written words. Connections across multiple scales of both size and time 
mean these systems do not function in isolation, Rapp continues, but their 
interactions are still an ongoing area of study. “In neuro-imaging research we 
have developed reasonable methods for identifying where things are, but are 
only just starting to develop methods for understanding how things happen, what 
the detailed mechanisms are.”

How do writers find their voices?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/aug/25/edinburgh-book-festival-edinburgh-international-book-festival-2014>
For Philip Davis, professor of literature 
<https://www.liv.ac.uk/psychology-health-and-society/staff/phil-davis/> at 
Liverpool’s Institute of Psychology, Health and Society, the story of 
literature is that “where speaking has to stop, writing has to take over and 
‘talk’ in a different medium of what cannot be said direct”.

“Some writers will take the written more than the spoken as their writerly 
model,” he says, “others will want more of the spoken translated into the 
written.”

But that notion of “translation” from one mode to another is vital, Davis 
continues. “It is crucial to the generation of meaning that in reading what is 
seen by the eyes is registered in a non-written area of appreciation and 
recognition, including emotion, memory and their sub-vocal voices viscerally 
saying ‘Ouch’ or ‘Wow’ or ‘A-ha!’ The separate but related areas are crucial 
for meaning to explode across the realms.”

For the novelist and professor of psychology Charles Fernyhough 
<http://www.charlesfernyhough.com/>, it’s certainly possible to write without 
sounding out the words in your head, but for literary writing – and fiction in 
particular – it is quite a different matter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fhearing-words-writing-sounds-examining-the-authors-brain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435331653624%2Feb82930d-af16-491b-a42c-35726b2e2096-1020x510.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hearing%20words%2C%20writing%20sounds%3A%20examining%20the%20author's%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fhearing-words-writing-sounds-examining-the-authors-brain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hearing%20words%2C%20writing%20sounds%3A%20examining%20the%20author%27s%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fhearing-words-writing-sounds-examining-the-authors-brain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435331653624%2Feb82930d-af16-491b-a42c-35726b2e2096-1020x510.jpeg>
 False colour montage of sagittal brain scans from two participants in the 
Johns Hopkins study, showing lesions causing difficulties in speech (left) and 
writing. Photograph: Johns Hopkins 
“My hunch is that, in creating fiction, you have to do a lot of the 
imaginative simulation that relies on phonological and other, for example 
visual, forms of processing,” Fernyhough says. “Put simply, you have to put 
yourself there in the situation.” Some writers may be able to pull off the 
trick of total immersion required without hearing the words in their heads or 
reading them back to themselves, he continues, but reading fiction “fills the 
mind with voices. We’re starting to understand more about the science of this, 
and I imagine it will back up the instincts of writers, expressed over many 
centuries.”

He says he sounds his own writing out “vividly” in his head, and often reads 
it aloud as well. “A writer’s perspective would probably be: my brain might be 
able to do this without phonology, but my readers need it.”

Rapp isn’t so sure narrative voices are what she calls “auditory” voices, 
proposing they might instead be “more abstract, transcending modality”.

“Theories of language generally assume – based on various types of evidence – 
that we have representations of words and syntactic structure that are neither 
spoken nor written but ‘abstract’, which can be given written or spoken form,” 
she says. “This means that a writer could compose largely at the level of 
abstraction, and that the reader can experience text at this abstract, formless 
level as well, with the forms in the background.”

Rapp is unwilling to speculate whether her research might suggest that writers 
who read their work aloud are trying to produce a text that promotes coherence 
between systems in the brain designed for understanding speech and those for 
processing writing.

“All we know is that it is not necessary to use the spoken form to mediate 
between meaning and the written word,” she explains. “One can go directly from 
meaning to the written word and vice versa – for both the reader and the 
writer.” The spoken clearly can mediate between the two, she continues, but “we 
just don’t know when it does so, if one can foster or promote one mode or the 
other and so on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fhearing-words-writing-sounds-examining-the-authors-brain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435331270005%2F1f2bdc96-af2e-47c3-a4fc-fcced52f074a-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hearing%20words%2C%20writing%20sounds%3A%20examining%20the%20author's%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fhearing-words-writing-sounds-examining-the-authors-brain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hearing%20words%2C%20writing%20sounds%3A%20examining%20the%20author%27s%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fhearing-words-writing-sounds-examining-the-authors-brain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435331270005%2F1f2bdc96-af2e-47c3-a4fc-fcced52f074a-680x1020.jpeg>
 ‘I need written rhythms’ ... AS Byatt. 
According to Davis, writers reading their own work back to themselves is a 
“complicated and varied phenomenon”.

“It is not necessarily at the end of a session,” he says, “or out loud – some 
reading back happens near automatically in the almost immediate revision of a 
sentence, for example.” Authors may not even need to read anything aloud in 
order to truly hear it, he continues. “There are no tests that a writer can 
provide that allow him or her now to be the reader rather than the writer, as 
if the two were mechanically interchangeable or wholly different.”

Many novels use a narrative voice that shares something of the vibrancy of 
spoken language, and yet they still, defiantly, written. The isle of fiction 
may be full of noises, but these voices must, by their very nature, function on 
the page.

It is perhaps this iron law which means that the novelist AS Byatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asbyatt> never reads her work aloud while 
she is writing, insisting instead that there are “clearly distinct forms of 
written and spoken language”.

“My hands hurt a lot now and everyone tells me I can dictate to the computer – 
but the rhythms would be wrong,” she says. Byatt has never “completely mastered 
the rhythms of computer writing”, preferring to write fiction by hand. “I need 
written rhythms which I feel in my fingers and eyes.”

 