
The federal government could raise $716m a year by applying a 15% loan fee to 
all student loans in an attempt to recoup the cost of subsidised interest 
rates, the Grattan Institute has found.

The move would hit postgraduates and commonwealth-supported undergraduates the 
hardest – they now pay no loan fees.

“Loan fees would contribute to budget repair, but leave per-student university 
funding unchanged, reduce pressure to cap student numbers, avoid upfront 
charges, and preserve protections for low-income graduates,” the report 
concluded.

The policy would reduce loan fees for full-fee paying undergraduates, who now 
pay 25%, and those on vocational education and training loans, who pay 20%.

Universities Australia urges government to abandon proposed funding cut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/03/universities-australia-urges-government-to-drop-planned-cut-to-higher-education>
Those taking out student loans under Hecs-Help pay a nominal rate of interest, 
meaning the government subsidises their loans. In 2016, that subsidy was worth 
a little more than $600m, but the Grattan Institute report, released on Monday, 
warns that the bill will top $1bn if interest rates return to historical 
averages.

The report, by Grattan’s education director Andrew Norton and senior associate 
Ittima Cherastidtham, found that the 15% loan fee would have raised a net total 
of $716m in 2016 (after accounting for reductions in existing fees), in effect 
wiping out the cost of the interest subsidy.

The 15% loan fee could prove an attractive alternative for the Coalition 
government, whichtried to introduce real interest rates on student loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-university-students-to-pay-more-with-removal-of-caps-on-fees>
 in the 2014 budget, onlyto back down in the face of a hostile Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/01/student-loan-interest-backdown-hostile-senators>
.

The Grattan report argued that loan fees were progressive compared with 
charging real interest, which would punish students who took breaks from work 
or earned low incomes. It said the differences in the current rates of loan 
fees “are unfair and lack a policy rationale”.

The report said loan fees would extend the time it took students to repay 
loans but leave annual repayments unchanged. “As a result, loan fees would have 
little impact on access to higher education,” it said.

The fee would add about a year’s repayments to pay back the loan for men and 
women alike.

Cash-poor students could continue to borrow with no upfront charges, and 
low-income graduates would still not have to repay until their income reached 
the $54,869 threshold, the report said.

Education minister's Hecs gaffe forgivable as long as he doesn't forget rising 
tide of debt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/apr/11/education-ministers-hecs-gaffe-forgivable-as-long-as-he-doesnt-forget-rising-tide-of-debt>
Under the current system, women receive on average 17% of their original 
borrowing in interest subsidies while men receive 16%, showing that the 15% fee 
would almost entirely wipe out the subsidy.

But the Grattan Institute proposed that high-income graduates, who repaid 
their loans more quickly, would help cross-subsidise the cost of low-income 
graduates who repaid more slowly.

The report noted that even with a 15% loan fee, low-income graduates would 
still receive an interest subsidy to their loans. For example, the 15% fee 
would almost halve the subsidy of women earning $65,000 and cut a quarter of 
the subsidy for men earning that amount.

Men and women earning $95,000 would be disadvantaged because their current 
interest subsidy is less than 15%.

The Grattan Institute said the previous Coalition and Labor governments had 
attempted to reduce higher education costs, but the difficulty was in finding a 
saving consistent with economic and social goals. It haspreviously modelled 
lowering the loan repayment threshold to $42,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/29/hecs-loans-repayment-threshold-should-drop-to-42000-report-says>
, a move that would save the budget at least $500m a year.
 