
This blog contains spoilers for the several TV shows, including Sherlock, 
Agents of SHIELD,Battlestar Galactica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/battlestar-galactica> and 24.

It can often feel like the majority of TV drama – or at least the cluster of 
shows that get endlessly buzzed and blogged about – asks us to sympathise with, 
and even cheer for, the anti-heroes. As audiences, we've also become familiar 
with watching a character make one questionable decision that becomes moral 
quicksand, pulling them toward the dark side.

But there's another type of TV baddie around at the moment: the long-standing, 
often beloved character who suddenly and almost arbitrarily reveals that 
they've been working for the other team all along. In the turbocharged opera of
professional wrestling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wrestling>, this is 
called "turning heel". It can be shocking, and even exciting, to discover that 
the person you least expected mild-mannered comic relief in one of your 
favourite shows is actually a criminal mastermind. But once the initial 
surprise fades, the unanticipated heel turn will usually create more questions 
than it answers.

The latest series to deploy this potentially volatile dramatic device is 
Channel 4'sAgents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> where, in the final 
moments of the most recent episode, a core cast member was exposed as a 
malicious Hydra operative. Agents of SHIELD is the TV adjunct to Marvel's movie 
universe, so this was partly fallout from the recentCaptain America film sequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/27/captain-america-the-winter-soldier-review-marvel>
, which pulled a heel turn on an audacious macro scale. But it also felt like 
an attempt to defibrillate a show that has had problems finding its feet, and 
an audience, in its first season. Certainly, the actor involved – who, like 
most of the SHIELD cast, had been accused of blandness – has now thrown himself 
into being wicked after 17 episodes of straight-shooting heroism.

It's a risky tactic because fans who have invested in a show could feel 
resentful at a sudden heel turn. Everyone thinks of themselves as a good judge 
of character – and it's part of the fun of watching TV – so to have trusted or 
liked someone on-screen without suspecting their true nature essentially makes 
you feel like a dum-dum - perhaps unnecessarily. Unearned heel turns can also 
pull you right out of the viewing experience: instead of considering the 
dramatic repercussions, you might instead imagine the tense, sweaty writers' 
room where this plot twist was determined by an exhausted show of hands.

When it works, though, it can be wonderful. It can be hard to differentiate 
between the eight seasons of24 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/24>, 
but everyone remembers Evil Nina, the CTU traitor who waited until the eleventh 
– or at least 23rd – hour of Day One before showing her true colours. 
Considering the creators had only plotted out the first dozen or so episodes 
when 24 began filming, it's unlikely Sarah Clarke was aware that her character 
would becomeJack Bauer's most successful nemesis 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9I7maHLp4ow>.

Often, these abrupt character reboots occur in the US, where the seasons are 
longer and the plots burn faster. It's not that we have a shortage of 
psychopaths and murderers over here – bodies are forever stacking up in country 
houses and urban alleys – it's just that everyone involved in UK TV production 
tends to know whodunnit before the cameras start rolling. After bumbling around 
in the margins of the first season of Sherlock as Molly's boyfriend Jim, Andrew 
Scott had a great "ta-dah!" moment when heouted himself as Moriarty 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pOGXSFK3Xsw>. But, appropriately, it felt like 
part of an elaborate evil scheme rather than an improvised reveal.

Perhaps UK drama is just too considered to fully embrace the last-minute heel 
turn, though things may be changing. InBroadchurch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch> the actor who played the 
killer over eight episodes only found out he had blood on his hands in the last 
fortnight of filming. More recently, in the second series of bad-cop nailbiter
Line of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/line-of-duty-episode-by-episode>
, someelements of the ending were still being finalised close to transmission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/16/line-of-duty-is-di-denton-guilty-keeley-hawes-jed-mercurio>
, even if the identity of the baddie was locked in. ("I wasn't 100% clear about 
the denouement," said creatorJed Mercurio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/24/line-of-duty-jed-mercurio-lady-chatterleys-lover>
. "But we did tell the actors before we started filming, so they knew how to 
play it.")

The most audacious heel turn in recent memory though– one that seemed to split 
the difference between being part of an original outline and late-stage 
writers' room panic – occurred inBattlestar Galactica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/battlestar-galactica>. In this gritty 
sci-fi reboot, where a sneak attack by synthetic Cylons wipes out most of 
mankind at the outset, there were particular Cylon models indistinguishable 
from humans. Unaware of their true nature, they were the ultimate sleeper 
agents. As well as seeding the dramatic ground for distrust and paranoia (and 
helping keep the CGI budget down), the threat of undetectable deep-cover 
robo-humanoids came to a head at the end of the third season, when four 
characters the audience had come to know – and mostly love – were activated bya 
signal embedded in a Bob Dylan song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BigolJfoANw> and simultaneously revealed 
themselves to have been Cylons all along. Opinions vary over whether the 
remaining seasons of Battlestar Galactica lived up to that high point, but as 
heel turns go, it was the ultimate what the frak moment.

So the question is: do unexpected heel turns make you want to turn off or keep 
watching? Are the best baddies the ones who had believed they were good, or is 
it just lazily retrospective writing? Have your say in the comments below.
 