
Novelists are straying into "dangerous territory" when they fictionalise the 
lives of real historical figures, the Orange prize-winning writerHelen Dunmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/helen-dunmore> – author of bestselling 
novels about Stalinist Russia – told an audience at the Guardian Hay festival 
today.

Although there were a host of interesting real-life figures living in Russia 
during the siege of Leningrad and the years leading up to Stalin's death, 
Dunmore said, which she wrote about in The Siege and The Betrayal respectively, 
she was "very wary" of putting words into the mouths of real characters.

"I've deliberately avoided this," she told a packed room at Hay. "There are 
some fascinating characters and it was tempting to write about them, but I 
decided my secret policeman [in The Betrayal] would be fictional so I wasn't 
restrained by the need to keep within, or to break with, real-life events.

"I find it very frustrating when I read something about a period I know well 
and I find there are differences or travesties, or it's been done in a 
different way. It also gave me the freedom to develop this man [Volkov, a 
senior secret police operative] and his encounters with other characters."

Dunmore was in conversation with Antony Beevor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/antony-beevor>, an expert in the same period 
of Russian history. Beevor praised Dunmore's writing for its historical 
accuracy, and said he appreciated that "in comparison with some historical 
novelists she does not try to novelise characters". "As a historian, I feel 
very strongly that this grey area of fact and fiction is actually very 
dangerous," he said.

The historian also criticised "a lot of historical fiction" for "trying to 
impose today's moral values on its era", and Dunmore admitted that this "has 
been a problem" for today's novelists. "I like to give an idea of my characters 
living in the present moment, which is another reason why I'm very interested 
in the sensory qualities of daily life – how people ate and dressed," she said.

"I like your approach of recreating the period – it adds as much to our 
understanding of the period as history does," said Beevor. "Some say fiction 
can be inimical to history, but it can be a help, an adjunct, in our 
understanding of the period. That, of course, depends on the research quality 
and the recreation." And, Dunmore added, on the power of the characters.

However, both were adamant that research, although hugely important for the 
historical novelist, must take second place to the story. "My job as a novelist 
is to do research and then to forget it," said Dunmore. "Wearing your research 
on your sleeve is a great mistake – it's slightly patronising to the reader, as 
if they won't guess what you've done anyway."
 