
Q We recently discovered that the dry cleaning company has lost my wife's 
wedding dress, or to be precise the courier firm that they sub-contracted lost 
the dress. As you might imagine the loss is quite distressing for my wife, not 
just in terms of material value but also the fond memories that go with it. We 
are in process of asking the cleaner for damages but it is unclear how we deal 
with the sentimental loss involved. Is there a precedent for this sort of 
thing, and what is the best way to approach this problem?


A The dry cleaning company is legally responsible for the negligence of their 
sub contractors so they cannot wriggle out of their responsibility to your wife 
because the courier was at fault when transporting the dress.

The mere fact they lost your wife's wedding dress is enough to show that the 
dry cleaner is in breach of contract, and this means your wife must be paid 
adequate compensation. Obviously, she can claim for the value of the dress, but 
the cleaner must have known how much a wedding dress would mean to you. It is 
therefore reasonably foreseeable that she should recover an additional amount 
of money to compensate for her disappointment, distress and upset at the loss 
of the item.

Of course, it is difficult to predict the award a court might make to cover 
this so your wife should seek advice from your local Citizens Advice Bureau 
<http://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/> as to how much to claim. However, I would 
suggest she should insist on at least Â£75 for her upset and disappointment.

Do bear in mind that in reality the dry cleaning company is likely to pass the 
claim to their insurers who may strongly resist the claim, so your wife may 
need to pursue this to the end, taking her case to the small claims court if 
necessary to make sure she is not sold short.
 