
It was the match that launched Justine Henin-Hardenne's meteoric rise to 
becoming a double grand slam champion and world No1. Prior to last year's 
Australian Open Lindsay Davenport had recorded five consecutive wins against 
the diminutive Belgian; then, in the fourth round here, Henin finally turned 
the tables. They have not played each other since and tomorrow meet again, this 
time in the quarter-finals.

Last year's meeting had been billed as a grudge match, yet had genuine 
animosity ever really existed they were both too exhausted to prolong any 
verbal arguments afterwards. The match lasted three hours and 13 minutes and 
ended with Henin, having fallen to the ground with cramp at 7-7 in the third 
set, winning 7-5, 5-7, 9-7.

"I thought I was going to die," said Henin, who had been in danger of 
defaulting. Davenport, who squandered a 4-1 third-set lead, just as Henin had 
in the second set, was forced to wait at a critical moment while the Belgian 
was allowed to recover, ironic at the time as Henin had accused Davenport of 
faking injury in their previous match.

Henin frequently provoked controversy as she clambered up the ranking ladder, 
although now that she has reached the top her opponents are generally rather 
more respectful.

"When she beat me last year I probably would not have guessed that a year 
later she was going to be No1, but she's improved physically, as well as her 
game," said Davenport yesterday after reaching the last eight with a 6-1, 6-3 
victory over Russia's Vera Zvonareva.

Henin seemed set for a similar cruise in the park against the lowly ranked 
Mara Santangelo, an Italian qualifier, but she lost her way a little, saving a 
set point before winning 6-1, 7-6. "I didn't serve so well, which I shall need 
to do against Lindsay. She's very, very strong, and I don't see myself as the 
big favourite because I have had many troubles against her in the past."

The two were due to meet just before the Australian Open began in the 
semi-finals in Sydney, but Davenport had to pull out with a sore shoulder, an 
injury that appears to have cleared up. "That win over Lindsay last year was 
something amazing. It made me believe that I could beat the top players on all 
surfaces," said Henin who, although she later lost in the semi-finals here, 
went on to win the French and US Opens.

France's Am√©lie Mauresmo, the No4 seed, also reached the quarter-finals, 
defeating Australia's Alicia Molik 7-5, 7-5 in what was the best of yesterday's 
four women's fourth-round matches. Molik, 22, has had her promising career 
continually brought to a halt by injuries, but will surely challenge for a 
place in the top 20 this year if she stays fit.

She has a classic service action, moves well and is strong on both sides, 
frequently troubling the grimacing Mauresmo, who appeared to be having back 
problems. Or maybe it was nerves. Certainly she did not hide her delight at 
winning, letting out a huge yelp of delight in the direction of her coach, Loic 
Courteau, and her Fed Cup captain, Guy Forget. Tomorrow she plays Colombia's 
Fabiola Zuluaga who reached her first slam quarter-final with a 6-4, 6-2 
victory over Aniko Kapros of Hungary.

It is a match Mauresmo should win as she holds a 5-2 career advantage over the 
Colombian. When the French woman reached the Australian Open final in 1999, 
losing to Switzerland's Martina Hingis, she was little known, although she had 
been an exceptional junior. So had that final come a little too early in her 
career?

"No, I don't think so. I was only 19 but I don't think it's ever too early to 
play in the final of a slam.

"The thing is that I certainly was not ready to keep competing at that sort of 
level immediately afterwards, even though some people expected me to. So now 
I'm waiting for my second chance. Maybe this time, we'll see."

The upset of the weekend was the third-round defeat of Venus Williams, the No3 
seed, beaten 6-4, 7-6 on Saturday by her fellow American Lisa Raymond. Coming 
into this event Williams had not played a competitive match since last year's 
Wimbledon final, which she lost to her sister Serena, who pulled out here 
having not recovered from a knee operation.

Both sisters have often taken a somewhat cavalier approach to this tournament 
in the past, and Raymond's win was greeted enthusiastically by many of the 
players. They were both delighted for the 30-year-old American, and secretly 
pleased to see that Venus could not simply waltz back into tennis at this level 
without any real preparation.

As usual with Venus, it was impossible to be certain whether the public face 
reflected the inner reality. Superficially at least she did not appear unduly 
troubled or vexed: "Obviously each loss is not a barrel of laughs, but I've 
definitely had losses that were more disappointing than this."

Most of those, she might perhaps have added, were against her sister.
 