
If Justine Henin-Hardenne felt in any way unnerved to begin the Australian 
Open as such an overwhelming favourite, she showed no traces of it during a 
6-0, 6-0 first-round victory - what the professionals call double bagel - over 
Olivia Lukaszewicz, a 15-year-old Australian wild card.

It was hardly surprising, given the teenager's paucity of experience, but 
greater players than Henin have found being favourite a burden and been 
embarrassed in the opening week of a grand slam event.

Henin, the world No1 and French and US champion, exudes confidence. She has 
always been a fighter, as shown in her semi-final wins over Serena Williams at 
Roland Garros last year and against Jennifer Capriati at Flushing Meadows, but 
never has she looked so assured and at ease with herself, both on and off court.

"My win in Sydney [at the WTA Adidas International] last week gave me a lot of 
confidence," she said. "It was the first tournament where I was No1 player in 
the world, and that's not easy to deal with. But it was pretty good and now I'm 
really excited."

Undoubtedly it is an excitement underpinned by the fact that both Serena 
Williams, the reigning champion, and Capriati are absent injured while her 
great Belgian rival Kim Clijsters, the world No2, turned an ankle in the Hopman 
Cup and is struggling.

Her path was further eased when no fewer than six seeds fell on the first day, 
leading off with the Russians Elena Dementieva and Nadia Petrova, both in the 
top 10, along with Spain's Magui Serna, the American Meghann Shaughnessy, 
Slovenia's Tinu Pisnik and the Thai Tamarine Tanasugarn.

Of course Henin feels the need for a modicum of self-effacement. "I don't 
consider myself as the favourite. So many players can win this tournament, it's 
still very early to be talking."

Perhaps, but apart from France's Am√©lie Mauresmo, who is notoriously suscep 
tible to nerves, and Venus Williams, whose last tournament was Wimbledon, the 
rest of the opposition did not cast too menacing a shadow yesterday.

Mauresmo, beaten in the 1999 final by Martina Hingis (now retired at 23 and 
working here for television), also made an impressive start yesterday with a 
6-1, 6-0 win over Chia-Jung Chuang of Tapei, while Lindsay Davenport, the 
champion in 2000, beat Ruxandra Dragomir Ilie of Romania 6-2, 6-3.

It was a poor day for the Russians with the exit of both the No7 seed 
Dementieva - beaten 6-1, 6-4 by the up-and-coming Slovakian world No79 Jelena 
Jankovic - and Petrova, the No10 seed. Dementieva, as often with first-round 
losers, whinged on about this Open being too early in the year and the close 
season too short.

"I had Christmas with my family in Russia and did not get time to practise," 
she said. "My life is more important than my tennis."

And they call themselves professionals.
 