
Coming Up Short - The Life and Times of Tim Henman. The book has not been 
written, nor has the film been made, but in terms of his grand slam career the 
title is apposite. Indeed, outside of Wimbledon the word "considerably" would 
need to be added. In 25 attempts at the Australian, French and US Opens, he has 
never progressed beyond the last 16.

His 6-7, 5-7, 7-6, 7-5, 9-7 defeat here by Argentina's Guillermo Canas was a 
third-round match teeming with drama, often exquisite tennis, and incredible 
athleticism. In all Henman hit 100 winners and had a first-serve success rate 
of close to 70%. He should have won, most particularly in that, having let slip 
a two-set lead, he was 4-1 up in the fifth. Yet he failed to put his foot 
across the Argentinian's neck. Same old story.

And so he must pick himself up, brush himself down and start all over again. 
It is not as if he isn't used to it. Wimbledon was the only slam he has ever 
had the remotest chance of winning, and that chance almost certainly went for 
good in 2001 when he lost in the semi-finals to Croatia's Goran Ivanisevic - a 
match, like the one last Saturday, which he should have won.

There will have been those who imagined because he had won the Paris Indoor 
Open last year, the first title of any real note to come his way, that a sea 
change had occurred and that late in his career - he will be 30 next September 
- he had learned how to play his very best tennis under pressure and, above 
all, hold his nerve.

Without a doubt it was a fine achievement, matching Greg Rusedski's own 
victory in the same tournament in 1998. But the four majors, with their 
five-set formula, are the acid test of character and nerve, and it is in this 
arena, Wimbledon apart, that Henman, time and time again, has failed to live up 
to his ranking and fallen short of his own ambitions.

Those who have watched him year in, year out since his first Wimbledon 
quarter-final in 1996 know how talented he is and how much wonderful tennis he 
has played. They also know that he has never had the weapon - the power - to be 
a major player at the very highest level. Nor the nerve.

Paul Annacone, his new part-time coach and former coach of Pete Sampras, has 
certainly managed to get him to play to his strengths, by getting to the net at 
every opportunity and trying to remain positive in all situations. This defeat 
should not distract Henman from continuing to pursue this strategy. Better to 
lose the way he did on Saturday than freeze horribly as he did here a couple of 
years ago when the draw had gaped open in his favour.

This was Henman's fourth successive defeat against Canas, and the second 
involving five sets. In all the Argentinian has now won nine of his 16 five-set 
matches, whereas Henman has lost 13 out of 25. "I know before I start each 
match they're going to be long," said Canas yesterday. "The first two sets were 
close so I knew I had a chance to come back. Maybe it helps me when I go to the 
final set that people know I'm very tough. It gives me a lot of confidence."

Henman may take some comfort from the statistics. In four hours 13 minutes, 
all that separated him from Canas was a meagre two points. And an ocean of 
emotion.
 