
Aggregation and curation get talked about as one of those distinctive 
digital-media things – a special threat to the world of dead trees – but they 
were at the roots of some very old-media enterprises. The New York Times's 
Paper Cuts blogjust posted Henry Luce's original June 1936 prospectus for what 
became Life magazine 
<http://papercuts.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/04/23/the-show-book-of-the-world-henry-luces-life-magazine-prospectus/>
. It was known at this stage of its development as "THE SHOW-BOOK OF THE 
WORLD". And parts of the description sound like a Tumblr on glossy paper:

"In the course of a week the US citizen sees many pictures. He sees a few in 
the newspapers and more on Sundays. He may see travel pictures in travel 
magazines, art pictures in art digests, cinema pictures in cinemagazines, 
scientific pictures in scientific journals. But nowhere can he see the cream of 
all the world's pictures brought together for him to enjoy and study in one 
sitting."

The section on sources mentions that SHOW-BOOK will have "a corps of crack 
photographers", but they are given second fiddle to the systematic, edited 
reuse of other sources: photos from agencies (four main ones, "about a dozen 
minor"); stills from the newsreels already produced byTime magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/time-magazine>, Life's parent; portraits 
taken for its sister magazine Fortune; even whole sets of stills used to digest 
the story of a movie.

Time magazine itself began life (small l) with aggregational ambitions; Luce 
and his friend Briton Haddon conceived it as "a weekly digest of news and 
analysis culled from other publications 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/25/books/review/Keller-t.html?pagewanted=2>".

I'm not suggesting there's no difference, obviously. Nobody's Tumblr sets out 
to be "the complete and reliable record" of every news event visible to the 
human eye. Nor do I believe thatMichael Wolff's Newser <http://www.newser.com/> 
is going to end up fillinga 48-storey landmark building on 6th Avenue 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time-Life_Building>. You can see 9m of Life's 
images here <http://www.life.com/>; Life.com is also on Timblr 
<http://life.tumblr.com/>.

It is worth remembering, though, how many apparent innovations draw on old 
desires – even if the means and resources are new.

(Oh, and you already knew that the complete run of Life magazine is available 
on Google Books 
<http://books.google.com/books?id=R1cEAAAAMBAJ&source=gbs_all_issues_r&cad=3&atm_aiy=1935#all_issues_anchor>
, didn't you? So I haven't just written off your afternoon? Good.)
 