
As a band, the Beatles were famed for their adoption of new recording 
technology, everything from tape-looped studio effects to double-tracked 
vocals. But in more recent years their songs have been absent from that most 
modern of ways to consume music: streaming websites. Until now, that is.

From Christmas Eve the full Beatles catalogue will become available on nine 
separate music streaming sites, including Spotify, Google Play and Amazon 
Prime. It will even be on Apple Music, eight years after the end ofa long and 
brutal legal battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/may/08/citynews.artsnews> between 
the technology company and the Beatles’ Apple record label over the use of the 
Apple logo in the music business.

The Beatles let it stream – showing that the format is the future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/23/beatles-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music>
It will all happen at 12.01am local time “here, there and everywhere”, 
according to a heavily Beatles song-referencingstatement on the band’s official 
website <http://www.thebeatles.com/sites/st_nick/index.html>, which ends: 
“Happy Crimble, with love from us to you.”

The world’s most celebrated popular music group had long left a conspicuous 
gap in the offerings of streaming sites, which have become increasingly 
mainstream despite some acts’ concerns over royalties and other issues.


Last year, Taylor Swift removed her music from Spotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/04/taylor-swift-spotify-streaming-album-sales-snub>
, though her catalogue remains available to stream on Apple Music. In June this 
year, Australian rock behemoth AC/DCfinally abandoned their no-streaming stance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/30/acdc-streaming-catalogue-spotify-apple-music>
.

Beatles songs were initially also absent from Apple’s pay-to-own music site, 
iTunes, butappeared five years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/16/beatles-apple-itunes-emi>, after 
negotiations described by this newspaper, inevitably, as a “a long and winding 
download”. Solo material from Beatles members has previously been available on 
streaming sites.
The Beatles (@thebeatles) 
December 24 at 12:01am local time, The Beatles’ music is available for 
streaming worldwide:https://t.co/99cigizLza <https://t.co/99cigizLza> 
pic.twitter.com/42vZSNGVHG <https://t.co/42vZSNGVHG>
 <https://twitter.com/thebeatles/status/679617771416760321> December 23, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/thebeatles/status/679617771416760321> 
From midnight the Beatles’ 13 remastered studio albums and four compilation 
albums will be available to users of the free, advert-financed users of 
Spotify, as well as its claimed 20 million paying subscribers. Along withApple 
Music <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music>, which has 15 
million users, Google Play and Amazon Prime, the songs will be also be on 
Slacker, Tidal, Groove, Rhapsody and Deezer.

Gennaro Castaldo, spokesman for music industry body the BPI, said that the 
announcement meant “streaming’s journey towards the mainstream will nearly be 
complete”, and predicted the Beatles would help streaming services sign up more 
users.


He said: “An increasing number of music consumers are switching to streaming 
for their day to day needs, while still also buying and collecting their 
favourite artists on vinyl and CD, so the addition of such iconic albums can 
only accelerate the dramatic growth of this digital platform.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF8dooVupRSc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF8dooVupRSc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF8dooVupRSc&media=>
There is seemingly huge demand for the band’s music on streaming sites. Nearly 
1.1 million people are already followingthe official Beatles profile 
<https://open.spotify.com/artist/3WrFJ7ztbogyGnTHbHJFl2> on Spotify, and due to 
a smattering of compilation tracks, the band already has nearly 350,000 monthly 
listeners. One song, Ain’t She Sweet, has so far been streamed 5.7m times.

The Beatles back catalogue proved popular in 2010 as iTunes downloads, selling 
more than 450,000 albums and 2m singles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/nov/23/beatles-itunes-album-sales> in 
the first week after going live. In the streaming world, their main competition 
will be younger pop acts. Justin Bieber is currently the most popular artist on 
Spotify with 31.7 million monthly listeners.














 