
She reminds me of the other Audrey. Long thin arms that should be wearing 
Breakfast at Tiffany's gloves, long dark eyebrows that rise to sceptical 
circumflexes when the questions get irksome.

Audrey Tautou <https://www.theguardian.com/film/audrey-tautou> is small, 
wan-skinned, dark-haired and lost in the vast Louis XIV-style sofa of a suite 
in the Hotel Raphael, near the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. She has two giant 
cushions shoved under her armpits that look as though they were made for giant 
kings and queens. Audrey Hepburn would never have used cushions so inelegantly.

Tautou has a porcelain fragility, a cutesy upturned nose, and lips that, while 
they may not be Emanuelle Béart's, still have a Gallic pout to them. True, she 
has the underwhelming handshake of a tranquillised lemur, but, hey, that's 
French girls for you.

It's the eyes, though, that are Tautou's fortune. One day a couple of years 
ago, film director Jean-Pierre Jeunet was wandering through Paris wondering how 
he could save his new picture. He'd just got home from directing Alien 
Resurrection in the US and now wanted to make a small, romantic film set in 
Montmartre about a diffident Parisian waitress.

But his lead, British actress Emily Watson, had just quit. What was he going 
to do? Jeunet turned a street corner and looked at a poster for a film called 
Venus Beauty. "I was struck by a pair of dark eyes, a flash of innocence, an 
unusual demeanour. I set up a meeting and she tried for the part. After 10 
seconds, I knew she was the one."

Today in Paris you can't turn a corner without those dark eyes confronting you 
from another poster - the one for Jeunet's film. The dark eyes, the pageboy 
haircut and the impish smile of Tautou. In French, the movie has the lovely 
rhyming title Le Fabuleux Destin d'Amélie Poulain, translated into English 
simply asAmelie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amelie>.

The movie has been the French box office hit of the year. It saw off Pearl 
Harbor and became one of those rare films that everybody - young and old, dim 
and bright, provincial and Parisian - has been queueing up to see. The last 
time all France was captivated at the cinema in this way was when Robert 
Carlyle stripped to the buff in The Full Monty.

But Amelie is different. Set in 1997, just after the death of Princess Diana, 
it is steeped in sentiment for a France fast disappearing, teems with a cast of 
putatively lovable eccentrics, and is larded with the clever special effects 
that recall Jeunet's 1991 feature film debut Delicatessen.

Amelie is set up as an appealingly quirky character. During the film, she 
lists her likes and dislikes. Likes: breaking the skin of crème brlée with the 
back of her spoon, easing her hands into great sacks of lentils, skimming 
stones on the Canal Saint Martin. Dislikes: the injustice of little people 
sucking on the fuzzy end of the lollipop. People think she's backward; she 
knows she's romantically inept. She wears sensible cardigans, long skirts and 
shoes that are clumpier than Doc Martens. You expect that in the last reel 
she'll change her wardrobe and emerge in a drop-dead frock to cries of: "You're 
beautiful!" It doesn't quite end that way, but even hard-faced French matrons 
and their sour, Napoleonic spouses have been leaving cinemas with tears in 
their eyes and warm glows in their hearts.

But the tears and warm glows have been chiefly caused by Tautou. She slipped 
under the skin of Amelie and found it a perfect fit. She's shy, charming, 
modest, with just enough wickedness to keep her interesting, just like her 
character in the film. Unfortunately, she now seems to be rather stuck in that 
rut: in her new film, God Is Big But I Am Small, she plays it coy, wee and 
cutesy. Such pigeonholing at the start of a career seems ill-advised.

What are her likes and dislikes? "I like the light that comes off metal 
shutters at siesta time in the summer, having a break from driving in the shops 
at motorway services, the odour of petrol at petrol stations, rolling down 
little slopes. I hate it when you tread in a puddle and the water soaks your 
socks." Oh stop, Tautou, stop, stop. Please...

She was born 24 years ago and raised in the small town of Montlucon, north of 
Paris. Her father is a dental surgeon, her mother a teacher. "When I was a 
little girl, I loved monkeys," says Tautou, eyebrows in circumflex overdrive. 
"I wanted to be a primatologist. I went to the careers office to ask how. 
Because nobody could give me a good answer, I opted for acting." Until Amelie, 
she'd been quietly forging a film career in modest roles.

"I started off in this dreadful, vulgar film called The Libertine. I was just 
learning. I needed the money." Then she was cast as a gauche beautician in 
Venus Beauty, which also starred one of the greats of French cinema, Nathalie 
Baye (who just played Patsy in a French film version of Absolutely Fabulous). 
The director Tonie Marshall saw Tautou come into the audition for that film. 
"She looked awkward, blushed. Then she undid her hair. In five minutes, she 
gave me what I wanted for the character: a young little girl who wants to be - 
and will become - a woman." The film was a hit in France and, at the 1999 
Caesars (the French equivalent of the Oscars), Tautou was voted best female 
newcomer for her performance.

Now France has gone Amelie crazy. President Jacques Chirac and prime minister 
Lionel Jospin both praised the film. And Japanese tourists in Montmartre now 
jostle with French fans checking out the film's locations: the cafe where 
Amelie works, the greengrocer, Abbesses metro station, where she meets the love 
of her life. "I think it's been such a big success because it makes you happy," 
says Tautou. "It's positive. It makes you dream - and we need that. There 
aren't many French films like that."

What's it like being a national icon, mobbed on the street and asked intrusive 
questions by rude journalists? Tautou fixes me with those amazing eyes, those 
vast blank black pupils that make the dark eyes of other beauties look like 
anthracite dots. "It's too much. I always convinced myself that I would pay no 
heed to that attention. But I haven't managed. It's difficult to feel that 
people are looking at you in the street. I don't like the fuss."

She particularly doesn't like being asked about her private life. "In France, 
we don't do that kind of thing. But today I've done seven interviews and it's 
been non-stop: 'Tell me about your boyfriend.' Nobody asks me about the films, 
or that I wanted to be a primatologist when I was young."

Despite being propelled to instant stardom, Tautou is in no hurry to shoot 
over to Hollywood. "God, no. I would like to work with people whose films I 
really like: Walter Salles, Woody Allen, Julio Medem. It's tough for French 
actresses to make it in Hollywood: think of Béart in Mission Impossible - what 
a waste of time. I wouldn't mind being in an American film for a laugh, but I 
certainly don't want to be in Thingy Blah Blah 3, if you know what I mean."

 Amelie is out this Friday.
 