
A 21st-century grassroots movement faces many pitfalls. This was as true back 
in 1968 as it is today. It could be infiltrated by law enforcement and 
intelligence agencies, or co-opted by a major party. As the state continues to 
creep further into our lives, activists can expect that it will use all its 
resources – not just theviolent reaction seen in New York overnight, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2011/nov/15/occupy-wall-street-police-action-live>
 but also its agents, informants and surveillance packages – in its effort to 
monitor both sides of any serious social debate. Even bleaker, however, is the 
possibility that the movement was actually planned and launched by the very 
establishment activists thought they were waging a battle against in the first 
place. The larger the movement, the more interested a major party becomes in 
absorbing it into either the left or the right side of the current two-party 
paradigm.

The sudden emergence of America's Tea Party movement in 2007 is a good 
example. Republican presidential candidate Ron Paul, its inventor, used it as a 
springboard to highlight libertarian and constitutional issues during his 2008 
campaign. Soon after, it was co-opted by key political and media influencers 
from the US right wing,associating itself less with a libertarian manifesto 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/washington/2009/04/ron-paul-tea-party-tea-parties-income-tax.html>
, and more with emerging figures within the Republican establishment. Now it is 
has morphed into nothing more than a block of voters whom the Republican party 
can rely to strike a deal with during an election cycle.

Arguably, the Occupy Wall Street movement has already drifted into the shadow 
of the Democratic party – with a number of Democratic establishment figures 
from the top down endorsing it. The Democrats' own media fundraising and media 
machine,Move On <http://front.moveon.org/>, has visibly adopted the cause. Like 
the Tea Party before it, the Occupy block would swing a close election during a 
national two-party race, functioning as a pressure-release valve for any issue 
too radical for the traditional platform.

Alongside this is the threat of being infiltrated. Scores of declassified 
documents, along with accounts from veteran activists, will reveal many stories 
of members who were actuallyundercover police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/23/police-spy-tricked-lover-activist>, 
FBI or M15. In the worst cases of infiltration, undercover agentshave acted as 
provocateurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/nov/13/undercover-policeman-admits-spying-danish-activists>
. Such incidents normally serve to radicalise a movement, thus demonising it in 
the eyes of society and effectively lessening its wider political appeal.

Although the global Occupy movement has branched out in an open-source way, 
many of its participants and spectators might be completely unaware of who 
actually launched it. Upon investigation, what one finds is a daisy chain of 
non-profit foundations, all tied together by hundreds of millions per year in 
operational funding. The original call for Occupy Wall Street came from 
non-profit international media foundationAdbusters <http://www.adbusters.org/>. 
Like many non-profits, Adbusters receives its funding and operating capital 
from other behind-the-scenes organisations.According to research 
<http://activistcash.com/organization_connections.cfm/o/36-adbusters> conducted 
by watchdog Activistcash, Adbusters takes a significant portion of its money 
from theTides Foundation <http://www.tides.org/>, an organisation partnered 
with one of Wall Street billionaire oligarch George Soros's foundations, the 
Open Society Institute [see footnote].

Although mostly hidden from the public eye, all major foundations and 
professional thinktanks undertake research and host training seminars, which 
are used to influence certain public and foreign policies, and thus, must have 
a political agenda. Theirs is the venue of choice for activities that cannot 
officially be conducted on the government clock.

Freedom House is another of Soros's Open Society partners. It supports the 
Centre for Applied Nonviolent Action and Strategies (Canvas 
<http://www.canvasopedia.org/>), an organisation started by Serbians Ivan 
Marovic and Srdja Popovic. After playing a pivotal role in the CIA-backed 
deposing of Serbia's Slobodan Milosevic, the western media hailed Marovic as a 
democratic genius, but it came out later that his programme came out of an 
elite Boston thinktank's "regime change" manual,From Dictatorship to Democracy 
<http://www.aeinstein.org/organizations98ce.html>, written by Harvard professor 
Gene Sharp. Sharp's book is abible of the colour revolutions 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-12522848> – a "regime change for 
dummies". HisAlbert Einstein Institution 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Albert+Einstein+Institute&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&aq=t&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&client=firefox-a>
 has received funds from theNational Endowment for Democracy 
<http://www.ned.org/> and the Open Society Foundations <http://www.soros.org/>, 
and his work serves as a template for western-backed opposition leaders in soft 
coups all around the world.

There are also reports of Canvas activity during the early days of Occupy Wall 
Street,including a video <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LkM3BBtc7N0> of 
Marovic himself addressing the general assembly. Currently, Canvas are touting 
their recent role inworking with Egyptian 
<http://www.canvasopedia.org/serbian-ousters-of-milosevic-make-mark-in-egypt.php>
 andTunisian 
<http://www.canvasopedia.org/serbian-activist-teaches-lessons-in-revolution.php>
 protesters from as early as 2009, teaching skills that helped bring down their 
presidents and spark regional revolt.

When the dust settles and it's all said and done, millions of Occupy 
participants may very well be given a sober lesson under the heading of 
"controlled opposition". In the end, theOccupy movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/occupy> could easily end up doing the 
bidding of the very elite globalist powers that they were demonstrating against 
to begin with. To avoid such an outcome, it's important for a movement to have 
a good knowledge of history and the levers of power in the 21st century.

• Patrick Henningsen is speaking on Deep Politics and the Revolutions Business 
at Tent City University at St Paul's on Sunday, 20 November at 4pm

• This footnote was added on 17 November 2011. Adbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/adbusters> points out that 95% of its income 
comes from subscriptions to its magazine and that the Tides Foundation is a 
'fiscal sponsor' which takes donations from US citizens and passes them on.
 