
So where - where - is the iPhone 5? (Or, as we've been hearing from informed 
sources, what will actually be called theiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 4GS/iPhone 4G?)

Obvious answer: not at WWDC.

Second obvious answer: it's coming in September/October, and will be right up 
there when iOS 5 comes out of beta and is released properly.

This might seem blindingly obvious, but lots of people were hanging on to the 
hope that Apple would launch the iPhone 5/4GS/4G on Monday. The fact that it 
hasn't - unlike the past two years, when it has announced new versions of the 
iPhone at, guess where, WWDC - indicates thatApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> is shifting its strategy in 
phones.

Presently, Apple's phone market segmentation strategy is to sell the newest 
model (the iPhone 4, now around a year old) at the highest price, and the 
second-oldest model (the 3GS, two years old) at a lower price. Hence you can 
find carriers such as Orange selling the 3GS for free with a £25 per month 
contract, while the iPhone 4 is still has an upfront price plus a £30+/month 
contract.

Presently this is as much segmentation that Apple is able to achieve, because 
it was locked into the yearly release schedule. That's not surprising; Apple 
was a comparative newcomer to the mobile phone industry. Remember how the 
original iPhone couldn't forward SMS or send MMS? How we laughed.

Now Apple is a serious player. And (we're hearing from the supply chain) it is 
shifting the release date of the newest phone to September/October, which means 
a lot can change.

Why the iPhone is not like the iPod

A few months back there was lots of talk about Apple working on an "iPhone 
nano" which would cost £125. This was nonsense (not that this stopped lots of 
sites from writing it; wheat, chaff, who cares) but the reason that some were 
taken in by the idea of a "low-end iPhone" was that this sort of segmentation - 
start at the top (iPod classic) and own it, and then diversify down to the 
middle (iPod mini) and finally scoop out the low end (iPod shuffle).

Great strategy if you dominate the market and plan to continue doing so; it 
worked for a long time for Nokia until smartphones arrived in force, when 
suddenly it stopped working.

But Apple has nothing like a commanding share of the overall mobile market, 
nor of the smartphone market. (In the first quarter, when it had the largest 
revenue in the entire mobile market, it had a 17% share of the worldwide 
smartphone market, and about 4% of the entire 428m mobile phone market.)

So what can it do? An "iPhone nano" won't work, partly because it just can't 
segment the market into "featurephone" and "smartphone" in the way that Nokia 
has.

Why the iPhone 5 will be like the iPhone 4

Instead, look to Apple to consider iPhone updates on a six-monthly basis. One 
model in September/October; another in March/April. That allows for incremental 
differences between versions which provides the updraft for sales, which 
carriers will like. But it also means that Apple doesn't have to sweat too hard 
on how different to make the next handset - unlike the present situation, where 
every new model has to blow the bloody doors off.

Yet it also means that it will have a wider range of handsets to offer over 
time because of the natural segmentation of age: the iPhone 4, iPhone 4GS, some 
time next spring, the iPhone 5; in the autumn, the iPhone 5G (or whatever). And 
so on. The ages of the devices will create the tiers, which will allow it to 
slice the market into different price tiers and compete with Android - and more 
importantly RIM, which Apple clearly has in its sights as a rival to be crushed 
(why else introduceiMessage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/jun/06/apple-pins-hopes-on-icloud>
, which looks like a clone ofBlackBerry Messenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/aug/02/blackberry-iphone-sales-technology>
?).

So that's it: if you're wondering where your iPhone 5 (4GS/4G) is, it's being 
built in a factory in China. And Apple is getting ready to unveil a completely 
different way of slicing and dicing the phone market.

The questions that remain:
• how well can Nokia's Symbian smartphones resist at the low- and middle-end, 
given that the iPhone is already taking much of the top-end business?
• can RIM stem the churn away from its platform 
<http://feedproxy.google.com/~r/Asymco/~3/GP3zf4F9Fhs/> (put at 3m lost to the 
US user base since September 2010 by Horace Dediu)?
• are Android phones from Samsung and HTC going to be able to challenge for 
the top-end smartphone that the iPhone has? Android use is growing faster in 
the US over the past year (6m to 27m, compared to 12m growing to 20m iPhone 
users by Dediu's calculation).
 