
Abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> today is an extremely 
safe, straightforward procedure, provided in a highly regulated environment. 
One in three women in the UK will have an abortion in her lifetime, funded by 
the NHS (except if she lives in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/northern-ireland-nhs-abortions-supreme-court-law>
). This will usually take place within an NHS hospital or in a centre run by 
one of the independent charitable providers – theBritish Pregnancy Advisory 
Service (BPAS) <https://www.bpas.org/> or Marie Stopes International (MSI) 
<https://mariestopes.org/>. But just because it is safe doesn’t mean corners 
can be cut, or providers can pick and mix from rules and regulations, as was 
unearthed in the course of thecare quality commission’s investigation of MSI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/marie-stopes-uk-abortion-clinics-women-at-risk-cqc-report>
.

Some of the failings found at MSI have no implications for safety. The batch 
signing of abortion forms, for example, has no clinical significance – it is 
simply a legal requirement that all women have their abortion request legally 
authorised by two doctors. But the other problems uncovered – from clear 
deficits in clinical governance at the top level through to problems with 
safeguarding and consent, to the report of the appalling handling of a 
vulnerable patient – can leave us in no doubt that the CQC was not 
over-reacting when it requested MSIsuspend its services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/marie-stopes-suspends-some-abortion-services-over-safety-issues>
 over safety concerns earlier this year.

With NHS funds shaved, the price commissioners will pay is driven down

Clinical supervision and governance structures, training and upskilling staff 
and recruiting the right people to leadership positions takes time – and money. 
Adhering to legal requirements that have no clinical benefit may be irksome and 
expensive, but that’s life. If you operate in a highly regulated environment 
and believe women deserve high-quality care, these measures are not optional.

Abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> is an easy procedure 
when everything goes right – but you can’t run a clinical service on the 
assumption that everything runs to plan. The best doctors experience patients 
who develop complications, unexpected problems arise in the healthiest 
patients, clients need access to good counselling services and support. 
Research and innovation is essential to determine best practice. This costs – 
but it’s not just a matter of cost but of commitment, and focus on values.

The BPAS has been delivering not-for-profit services since the 1967 Abortion 
Act <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1967/87/contents> came into force, 
providing high-quality, compassionate care that the NHS either could not, or 
would not provide from its own facilities. It was founded by a former abortion 
law reformer who saw that the inability of the NHS to meet women’s needs would 
push them into paying extortionate sums for poor-quality care by private 
doctors.

In the 1970s, MSI joined BPAS as a charitable provider. Today some 200,000 
women a year in the UK have an abortion. MSI provides about a third of all 
abortion care , BPAS a further third, and the remainder are performed inNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> premises.

Marie Stopes suspends some abortion services over safety issues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/marie-stopes-suspends-some-abortion-services-over-safety-issues>
In a parody of market economics, the two charities now compete with each other 
and with local NHS hospitals for regional contracts to provide NHS abortion 
services. With NHS funds shaved, the price commissioners will pay is driven 
down. In the current commissioning environment a cheaper service will trump a 
quality service almost every time.

We all deserve an honest and open discussion about how this essential women’s 
healthcare service is commissioned and provided in an environment of 
cost-cutting. On the brink of the 50th anniversary of the Abortion Act, BPAS is 
absolutely clear, abortion must befully decriminalised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/abortion-campaign-scrap-victorian-law-womens-equality-party>
 and women finally trusted to make their own reproductive choices for 
themselves – and they must be able to exercise those choices in clinics 
providing safe, high-quality abortion care.
 