
The German writer Norman Ohler lives on the top floor of a 19th-century 
apartment building on the south bank of the river Spree in Kreuzberg, Berlin. 
Visiting him there is a vertiginous experience. For one thing, he works – and 
likes to entertain visitors – in what he calls his “writing tower”, a 
flimsy-seeming, glass-walled turret perched right on the very edge of the roof. 
(Look down, if you dare, and you will see his little boat moored far below.) 
For another, there is the fact that from this vantage point it is possible to 
discern two Berlins, one thrusting and breezy, the other spectral and grey. To 
our left, busy with traffic, is the Oberbaum Bridge, where there was once a 
cold war checkpoint, and beyond it the longest remaining section of the Berlin 
Wall, its doleful length rudely interrupted by the block of luxury flats that 
went up in 2013. As for the large building immediately opposite, these days 
it’s the home of Universal Music. Not so very long ago, however, it was the 
GDR’s egg storage facility.

Does all this press on Ohler as he sits at his desk, the light bouncing off 
the screen of his laptop? Is it ghostly sometimes? “Yes, it is strange,” he 
says, smiling at my giddiness. But then he has long believed in a certain kind 
of time travel. “I remember the 90s. The wall had just come down, and I was 
experimenting with party drugs like ecstasy and LSD. The techno scene had 
started up, and there were all these empty buildings in the east where the 
youth [from east and west] would meet for the first time. They were hardcore, 
some of those guys from the east – they didn’t understand foreigners at all – 
and the ecstasy helped them to lose some of their hatred and suspicion. 
Sometimes, then, you could step into a room, and you could justsee the past. Of 
course, it’s not like that now. I don’t take drugs any more. But I can remember 
it, and maybe that was why I was able to write this book.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff707d85c4e11113d55b5d118f5c964700abee29d%2F307_1677_3991_4989%2F3991.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High%20Hitler%3A%20how%20Nazi%20drug%20abuse%20steered%20the%20course%20of%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High%20Hitler%3A%20how%20Nazi%20drug%20abuse%20steered%20the%20course%20of%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff707d85c4e11113d55b5d118f5c964700abee29d%2F307_1677_3991_4989%2F3991.jpg>
 Norman Ohler photographed in Berlin last week. Photograph: MalteJaeger/laif 
The book in question is The Total Rush – or, to use its superior English title,
Blitzed – which reveals the astonishing and hitherto largely untold story of 
the Third Reich’s relationship with drugs, including cocaine, heroin, morphine 
and, above all, methamphetamines (aka crystal meth), and of their effect not 
only on Hitler’s final days – the Führer, by Ohler’s account, was an absolute 
junkie with ruined veins by the time he retreated to the last of his bunkers – 
but on the Wehrmacht’s successful invasion of France in 1940. Published in 
Germany last year, where it became a bestseller, it has since been translated 
into 18 languages, a fact that delights Ohler, but also amazes him.

It’s not only that he is – as Der Spiegel helpfully pointed out – a 
non-historian (the author of three novels and the co-writer of the Wim Wenders 
filmPalermo Shooting, this is his first work of nonfiction). It’s that there 
was anything new to be said at all. Arrange all the books that have been 
written about the Nazis end to end and they’d be longer than the Spree.

“I guess drugs weren’t a priority for the historians,” he says. “A crazy guy 
like me had to come along.” Still, crazy or not, he has done a remarkable job. 
IfBlitzed is gripping, it is also convincing. Ian Kershaw, the British 
historian who is probably the world’s leading authority on Hitler and Nazi 
Germany, has described it as “a serious piece of scholarship”.

The invasion of France was made possible by the drugs. Rommel and all those 
tank commanders were high

Unlikely as it sounds, it was Ohler’s friend, the Berlin DJ Alexander Kramer, 
who first put him on to the idea. “He’s like a medium for that time,” says 
Ohler. “He has this huge library, and he knows all the music from the 20s. One 
night he said to me: ‘Do you know the massive role drugs played in National 
Socialism?’ I told him that I didn’t, but that it sounded true – and I knew 
immediately it would be the subject of my next book.”

His plan was to write a novel, but with his first visit to the archives that 
changed completely. There he found the papers of Dr Theodor Morell, Hitler’s 
personal physician, previously only a minor character in most studies of the 
Führer. “I knew then that this was already better than fiction.” In the months 
that followed, supported by the late, great German historian of the Third Reich
Hans Mommsen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/12/hans-mommsen>, 
Ohler travelled from archive to archive, carefully gathering his material – and 
how much of it there was! He didn’t use half of what he found. “Look at this,” 
he says, jumping up. When he returns, in his hand is a copy of a letter from 
Martin Bormann, Hitler’s private secretary, in which he suggests that the 
“medication” Morell is giving the Führer needs to be regulated for the sake of 
his increasingly wobbly health.

The story Ohler tells begins in the days of the Weimar Republic, when 
Germany’s pharmaceutical industry was thriving – the country was a leading 
exporter both of opiates, such as morphine, and of cocaine – and drugs were 
available on every street corner. It was during this period that Hitler’s inner 
circle established an image of him as an unassailable figure who was willing to 
work tirelessly on behalf of his country, and who would permit no toxins – not 
even coffee – to enter his body.

“He is all genius and body,” reported one of his allies in 1930. “And he 
mortifies that body in a way that would shock people like us! He doesn’t drink, 
he practically only eats vegetables, and he doesn’t touch women.” No wonder 
that when the Nazis seized power in 1933, “seductive poisons” were immediately 
outlawed. In the years that followed, drug users would be deemed “criminally 
insane”; some would be killed by the state using a lethal injection; others 
would be sent to concentration camps. Drug use also began to be associated with 
Jews. The Nazi party’s office of racial purity claimed that the Jewish 
character was essentially drug-dependent. Both needed to be eradicated from 
Germany.

Some drugs, however, had their uses, particularly in a society hell bent on 
keeping up with the energetic Hitler (“Germany awake!” the Nazis ordered, and 
the nation had no choice but to snap to attention). A substance that could 
“integrate shirkers, malingerers, defeatists and whiners” into the labour 
market might even be sanctioned. At a company called Temmler in Berlin, Dr 
Fritz Hauschild, its head chemist, inspired by the successful use of the 
American amphetamineBenzedrine at the 1936 Olympic Games 
<http://www.liquisearch.com/doping_in_sport/benzedrine>, began trying to 
develop his own wonder drug – and a year later, he patented the first German 
methyl-amphetamine. Pervitin, as it was known, quickly became a sensation, used 
as a confidence booster and performance enhancer by everyone from secretaries 
to actors to train drivers (initially, it could be bought without 
prescription). It even made its way into confectionery. “Hildebrand chocolates 
are always a delight,” went the slogan. Women were recommended to eat two or 
three, after which they would be able to get through their housework in no time 
at all – with the added bonus that they would also lose weight, given the 
deleterious effect Pervitin had on the appetite. Ohler describes it as National 
Socialism in pill form.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e03fc24ad9b14754ce2e8be9ba554fb046b8af3%2F3_0_1012_607%2F1012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High%20Hitler%3A%20how%20Nazi%20drug%20abuse%20steered%20the%20course%20of%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High%20Hitler%3A%20how%20Nazi%20drug%20abuse%20steered%20the%20course%20of%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e03fc24ad9b14754ce2e8be9ba554fb046b8af3%2F3_0_1012_607%2F1012.jpg>
 Workers at the Temmler factory in Berlin produced 35m tablets of Pervitin for 
the German army and Luftwaffe in 1940. Photograph: Temmler Pharma GmbH & Co KG, 
Marburg 
Naturally, it wasn’t long before soldiers were relying on it too. In Blitzed, 
Ohler reproduces a letter sent in 1939 by Heinrich Böll, the future Nobel 
laureate, from the frontline to his parents back at home, in which he begs them 
for Pervitin, the only way he knew to fight the great enemy – sleep. In Berlin, 
it was the job of Dr Otto Ranke, the director of the Institute for General and 
Defence Physiology, to protect the Wehrmacht’s “animated machines” – ie its 
soldiers – from wear, and after conducting some tests he concluded that 
Pervitin was indeed excellent medicine for exhausted soldiers. Not only did it 
make sleep unnecessary (Ranke, who would himself become addicted to the drug, 
observed that he could work for 50 hours on Pervitin without feeling fatigued), 
it also switched off inhibitions, making fighting easier, or at any rate less 
terrifying.

In 1940, as plans were made to invade France through the Ardennes mountains, a 
“stimulant decree” was sent out to army doctors, recommending that soldiers 
take one tablet per day, two at night in short sequence, and another one or two 
tablets after two or three hours if necessary. The Wehrmacht ordered 35m 
tablets for the army and Luftwaffe, and the Temmler factory increased 
production. The likes of Böll, it’s fair to say, wouldn’t need to ask their 
parents for Pervitin again.

Was Blitzkrieg, then, largely the result of the Wehrmacht’s reliance on 
crystal meth? How far is Ohler willing to go with this? He smiles. “Well, 
Mommsen always told me not to be mono-causal. But the invasion of France was 
made possible by the drugs. No drugs, no invasion. When Hitler heard about the 
plan to invade through Ardennes, he loved it [the allies were massed in 
northern Belgium]. But the high command said: it’s not possible, at night we 
have to rest, and they [the allies] will retreat and we will be stuck in the 
mountains. But then the stimulant decree was released, and that enabled them to 
stay awake for three days and three nights. Rommel [who then led one of the 
panzer divisions] and all those tank commanders were high – and without the 
tanks, they certainly wouldn’t have won.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ac735dbed31252301672e421a0e07622084bfce%2F0_98_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High%20Hitler%3A%20how%20Nazi%20drug%20abuse%20steered%20the%20course%20of%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High%20Hitler%3A%20how%20Nazi%20drug%20abuse%20steered%20the%20course%20of%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ac735dbed31252301672e421a0e07622084bfce%2F0_98_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Pervitin: Nazi Germany’s drug of choice. 
Thereafter, drugs were regarded as an effective weapon by high command, one 
that could be deployed against the greatest odds. In 1944-45, for instance, 
when it was increasingly clear that victory against the allies was all but 
impossible, the German navy developed a range of one-man U-boats; the 
fantastical idea was that these pint-sized submarines would make their way up 
the Thames estuary. But since they could only be used if the lone marines 
piloting them could stay awake for days at a time, Dr Gerhard Orzechowski, the 
head pharmacologist of the naval supreme command on the Baltic, had no choice 
but to begin working on the development of a new super-medication – a cocaine 
chewing gum that would be the hardest drug German soldiers had ever taken. It 
was tested at the Sachsenhausen concentration camp, on a track used to trial 
new shoe soles for German factories; prisoners were required to walk – and walk 
– until they dropped.

“It was crazy, horrifying,” says Ohler, quietly. “Even Mommsen was shocked by 
this. He had never heard about it before.” The young marines, strapped in their 
metal boxes, unable to move at all and cut off from the outside world, suffered 
psychotic episodes as the drugs took hold, and frequently got lost, at which 
point the fact that they could stay awake for up to seven days became 
irrelevant. “It was unreal,” says Ohler. “This wasn’t reality. But if you’re 
fighting an enemy bigger than yourself, you have no choice. You must, somehow, 
exceed your own strength. That’s why terrorists use suicide bombers. It’s an 
unfair weapon. If you’re going to send a bomb into a crowd of civilians, of 
course you’re going to have a success.”

Meanwhile, in Berlin, Hitler was experiencing his own unreality, with his only 
ally in the world his podgy, insecure personal physician, Dr Morell. In the 
late 20s, Morell had grown a thriving private practice in Berlin, his 
reputation built on the modish vitamin injections he liked to give his 
patients. He met Hitler after he treated Heinrich Hoffman, the official Reich 
photographer, and sensing an opportunity quickly ingratiated himself with the 
Führer, who had long suffered from severe intestinal pains. Morell prescribed 
Mutaflor, a preparation based on bacteria, and when his patient’s condition – 
Patient A, as Hitler was thereafter known – began to improve, their codependent 
relationship began. Both were isolated. Hitler increasingly trusted no one but 
his doctor, while Morell relied solely on the Führer for his position.

Everyone describes the bad health of Hitler in those final days. To me, it's 
pretty clear that it was partly withdrawal

When Hitler fell seriously ill in 1941, however, the vitamin injections that 
Morell had counted on no longer had any effect – and so he began to ramp things 
up. First, there were injections of animal hormones for this most notorious of 
vegetarians, and then a whole series of ever stronger medications until, at 
last, he began giving him a “wonder drug” called Eukodal, a designer opiate and 
close cousin of heroin whose chief characteristic was its potential to induce a 
euphoric state in the patient (today it is known as oxycodone). It wasn’t long 
before Hitler was receiving injections of Eukodal several times a day. 
Eventually he would combine it with twice daily doses of the high grade cocaine 
he had originally been prescribed for a problem with his ears, following an 
explosion in the Wolf’s Lair, his bunker on the eastern front.

Did Morell deliberately turn Hitler into an addict? Or was he simply powerless 
to resist the Führer’s addictive personality? “I don’t think it was 
deliberate,” says Ohler. “But Hitler trusted him. When those around him tried 
to remove Morell in the fall of 1944, Hitler stood up for him – though by then, 
he knew that if he was to go, he [Hitler] would be finished. They got along 
very well. Morell loved to give injections, and Hitler liked to have them. He 
didn’t like pills because of his weak stomach and he wanted a quick effect. He 
was time-pressed; he thought he was going to die young.” When did Hitler 
realise he was an addict? “Quite late. Someone quotes him as saying to Morell: 
you’ve been giving me opiates all the time. But mostly, they talked about it in 
oblique terms. Hitler didn’t like to refer to the Eukodal. Maybe he was trying 
to block it off from his mind. And like any dealer, Morell was never going to 
say: yeah, you’re addicted, and I have something to feed that for you.” So he 
talked in terms of health rather than addiction? “Yes, exactly.”

The effect of the drugs could appear to onlookers to be little short of 
miraculous. One minute the Führer was so frail he could barely stand up. The 
next, he would be ranting unstoppably at Mussolini. Ah, yes: Mussolini. In 
Italy,Blitzed will come with an extra chapter. “I found out that Mussolini – 
patient D, for Il Duce – was another of Morell’s patients. After the Germans 
installed him as the puppet leader of the Republic of Italy in 1943, they 
ordered him to be put under the eyes of the doctor.” Again, Ohler springs up. 
Again, he returns with a document in his hand. “There’s not enough material to 
say he was an addict. But he was being given the same drugs as Hitler. Every 
week there was a doctorly report.” He runs his finger along the typewritten 
lines, translating for me as he goes. “He has improved, he is playing tennis 
again, the swelling of his liver is normal… It’s like he’s a racehorse.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e10fa2d77365ddab48729b2a1fb92917f7777aa%2F0_111_1181_1476%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High%20Hitler%3A%20how%20Nazi%20drug%20abuse%20steered%20the%20course%20of%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High%20Hitler%3A%20how%20Nazi%20drug%20abuse%20steered%20the%20course%20of%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fblitzed-norman-ohler-adolf-hitler-nazi-drug-abuse-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e10fa2d77365ddab48729b2a1fb92917f7777aa%2F0_111_1181_1476%2F1181.jpg>
 An unwell-looking Adolf Hitler in July 1944. Photograph: ullsteinbild/Getty 
Images 
For Hitler, though, a crisis was coming. When the factories where Pervitin and 
Eukodal were made were bombed by the allies, supplies of his favourite drugs 
began to run out, and by February 1945 he was suffering withdrawal. Bowed and 
drooling and stabbing at his skin with a pair of golden tweezers, he cut a 
pitiful sight. “Everyone describes the bad health of Hitler in those final days 
[in the Führerbunker in Berlin],” says Ohler. “But there’s no clear explanation 
for it. It has been suggested that he was suffering from Parkinson’s disease. 
To me, though, it’s pretty clear that it was partly withdrawal.” He grins. 
“Yeah, it must have been pretty awful. He’s losing a world war, and he’s coming 
off drugs.”

Two months later, Hitler and his new wife, Eva Braun (like Leni Riefenstahl, 
another of Morell’s patients), killed themselves, as the world knows. What 
happened to Morell? We know he survived, but did he get away unscathed?

“I think a lot of Nazis did get away with it,” says Ohler. “But not him. He 
wasn’t able to shed his skin, make a new career, get rich on his memoirs – even 
though he could have said, truly, that he hadn’t committed any war crimes. He 
lost his mind. He disintegrated. He’s a tragic figure. He wasn’t evil. He was 
only an opportunist.”

In 1947, the Americans, having tried and failed to extract useful information 
from him, deposited Morell in Munich. There he was picked up by a half-Jewish 
Red Cross nurse who took pity on this dishevelled, shoeless figure. She 
delivered him to the hospital in Tegernsee, where he died a year later.

Nazi Germany was a place of complete chaos. Meth kept people in the system 
without their having to think about it

Blitzed looks set to reframe the way certain aspects of the Third Reich will 
be viewed in the future. But Ohler’s thesis doesn’t, of course, make National 
Socialism any more fathomable, and for him, perhaps, there is an element of 
disappointment in this, for he has been seeking to understand it ever since he 
was a boy (the son of a judge, he grew up close to the border with France). “It 
was the whole reason why I wanted to write,” he says. “I thought with writing 
that you could counter propaganda.”

His maternal grandfather worked as a railway engineer during the war, the head 
of a small station in occupied Bohemia. “One day at school we watched a film of 
the liberation of a concentration camp, and it was so shocking to me. That same 
day, I asked him about the trains going to the camps. He told me that he saw 
one in the winter coming from the west, and that he said to himself: these are 
Russian POWs. But since it came from the west, and he heard children, and it 
was a cattle train, he kind of realised something weird was happening.

“I wasn’t much older than 10, and I was trying to understand: what kind of 
person is this, my grandfather? Because he continued being a railway engineer. 
He didn’t join the resistance. He said the SS was guarding the train, and he 
was afraid, and so he just went back into his little office to continue with 
his drawings. He always said Hitler wasn’t so bad. In the 80s, you used to hear 
that a lot: that it was all exaggerated, that Hitler didn’t know about the bad 
things, that he created order.”

He pauses. “You think it [nazism] was orderly. But it was complete chaos. I 
suppose working onBlitzed has helped me understand that at least. Meth kept 
people in the system without their having to think about it.” His hope is that 
his book will be read by a younger generation of Germans who would rather look 
to the future than dwell on the past. Is the right rising again? Is that why he 
wants them to read it? “It is quite a dangerous time. I hate theseattacks on 
foreigners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/22/germany-braces-for-rise-in-anti-immigrant-attacks>
, but then our governments do it, too, in Iraq and places. Our democracies 
haven’t done a very good job in this globalised world.” That said, he doesn’t 
think the new party of the right, Alternative for Germany, may be the threat it 
appears (in elections earlier this month, itoutperformed Angela Merkel’s 
Christian Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/mecklenburg-vorpommern-german-anti-immigrant-party-strong-regional-election-exit-polls-merkel>
). “The right wing always had so little purchase here [after the war] because 
of our history,” he says. “When I was young, you would never even see a German 
flag. The first time I did was in 1990, when Germany won the World Cup. So 
perhaps this is just a correction.”

Before I head to the airport, Ohler agrees to take me to see what remains of 
the Temmler factory – which last time he looked still stood in 
Berlin-Johannisthal, a part of the city that used to be in the east – and so it 
is that we set off on a bright blue day (in the movies, the east seems always 
to be grey and cold) in search of what remains of Dr Hauschild’s white-tiled 
laboratory. Twenty minutes later, we pull up in a residential street, all 
window boxes and net curtains, as quiet as the grave. “Oh, my God,” he says, 
unfolding his long, thin legs from the car. “Wow. It’s completely gone.”

For a few moments, we peer wonderingly through a chain link fence at the 
barren expanse of dust and concrete, and the neat white and red houses beyond 
it. But there’s nothing to be done: try as I might, I can’t superimpose the 
eery monochrome photographs I’ve seen of the factory inBlitzed on to this 
Technicolor suburban scene. What was almost tangible to me on Ohler’s roof, 
only half an hour ago, now takes on the unreal quality of a dream – or, 
perhaps, just a very bad trip.

Blitzed is published by Penguin on 6 October (£20). Click here 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/blitzed-434323.html> to order a copy for 
£16.40 go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846
 