
It was not until I was looking over the rugged mountain ranges of south-west 
Tasmania, my stomach dropping with every bump of the six-seater plane from 
Hobart, that I realised just what I was in for – and that it was too late to 
turn back.

I hadn’t even done an overnight walk before and I was flying into the 
heritage-listed wilderness of Tasmania to hike theSouth Coast track 
<http://www.southcoasttrack.com.au/>, from Melaleuca to Cockle Creek, over the 
next seven days. I was nervous. The mountains looked impossibly steep. The 
pilot kindly pointed out where the land had become bog up to six metres deep 
and my perspective from the plane clearly revealed just how absolutely isolated 
the track was – a tiny trail through dense ancient rainforest.

I’m not a bush walker. I’m pretty active but walking for days on end has never 
been something that appealed to me – mainly because I thought I would be bored. 
But recently I’ve had the urge to do more adventuring. I’d love to do a trip to 
South America, especially Patagonia, in the next few years so I thought the 
84km South Coast track would be good practice. It was January, peak time of 
year to walk in Tasmania, and our weather forecast was looking good for the 
next three days at least – after that, we’d find out when it happened.

The South Coast track is not like the Overland track, 
<http://www.parks.tas.gov.au/?base=7771> Tasmania’s most popular walk. There 
are no huts and it’s not guided. We would be cooking all our own food, carrying 
our gear the whole way and carrying out all our rubbish.

The rivulet we needed to cross had turned into a torrential gushing river, 
clearly unsafe to cross.

But first the preparation. My attempt to wear in my new boots consisted of one 
15km day walk in the  
<http://www.tams.act.gov.au/parks-recreation/parks_and_reserves/namadgi_national_park>
Namadgi national park <http://www.tams.act.gov.au/parks-conservation> in the 
ACT. Packing consisted of laying out everything I was going to take and 
swinging wildly between “I have to carry all of this!” and “This is all I get 
for seven days?”

Our menu for the week consisted of muesli with milk powder for breakfast, 
dried fruit, nuts, jelly beans and chocolate bullets for snacks, mountain 
bread, cheese, sun dried tomato and salami for lunch and freeze-dried meals for 
dinner. We went withBackcountry Cuisine <http://backcountrycuisine.co.nz/bcc/>. 
My favourite meal, due to its close resemblance to real food, was the spaghetti 
bolognaise.

For clothing I took shorts and a shirt to walk in and warm and wet weather 
gear – thermals, down jacket, beanie and gloves, plus some comfy clothes to 
wear around camp (I chose my Wonderwoman T-shirt for morale). My pack ended up 
weighing 14kg, but there were others on the track who carried up to 26kg, 
lugging around fold-up chairs, ingredients to cook a three-course meal, and 
luxurious toiletries such as soap and camping showers. And this was without 
water – we drank from beautiful spring-water creeks the whole way and only used 
water purifying tablets once.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b6229c86e8800f390a78ef8238f51433b364d05%2F0_116_1772_1064%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hiking%20Tasmania's%20beautiful%20South%20Coast%20track%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hiking%20Tasmania%27s%20beautiful%20South%20Coast%20track%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b6229c86e8800f390a78ef8238f51433b364d05%2F0_116_1772_1064%2F1772.jpg>
 Trying to stay calm: the view from the tiny plane. Photograph: Anna Madeleine 
for the Guardian 
The only access to the starting point at Melalueca is by light plane, mostly 
viaPar-Avion Wilderness Tours <http://paravion.com.au/>. A false start on day 
one – the fog was too thick for the plane to land – made it clear why most 
hikers choose to fly in and walk out rather than the other way, risking getting 
stuck in bad weather waiting for a flight back to Hobart.

But we woke up the next day to clear blue skies and finally touched down at 
Melalueca’s tiny airstrip. We had our last real toilet stop (before having to 
dig our own loos), lathered on the sunscreen, and filled our hydration packs – 
the plastic bladders we attached to our packs with a hose for drinking from 
(amazingly convenient! I wanted to hang one above my desk at work when I got 
back.) After snapping the standard “before” shot next to the track sign, we set 
off through Tasmania’s classic button-grass plains of scratchy bush scrub to 
our first campsite at Cox Bight.

The South Coast track is notoriously muddy. And not even 2km into our journey, 
I misjudged a step on the narrow boardwalk and my entire left leg sunk thigh 
deep into a swamp. But making that first stumble made it easier – I was wet and 
dirty now, why try to avoid it?

The first day was one of the shortest and easiest days of walking, but for me 
it was more about getting used to it mentally – the gear, the food, the rhythm. 
I had a newfound appreciation for things like my gators – the funny looking 
bits of fabric hikers wear over their shins and boots – which protected my legs 
from scratches, mud and most importantly, snakes (apparently, I walk faster 
after seeing a snake).
What I also noticed that first day was the feeling of disconnecting from the 
world. I had no phone, no internet, no Twitter – nothing – but I could feel 
myself instinctively looking to check them every few minutes.

That night we set up camp and enjoyed the novelty (which wore off quickly) of 
freeze-dried food. I was comfortable and content, even if still a bit nervous 
about the next day – which at 17km was to be our longest on the whole trip.

We needed to time the start of our second day with low tide so our tide chart, 
which we printed from theBureau of Meteorology 
<http://www.bom.gov.au/australia/tides/> site, was essential – I had even 
laminated mine. With various creek, river and ocean point crossings, I 
discovered quickly that “just trying to cross quickly” doesn’t keep the water 
out of your shoes. Take them off – it’s worth it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe667442076334c5c3194cf873d6e0a74b4dfb3b1%2F0_0_1772_1181%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hiking%20Tasmania's%20beautiful%20South%20Coast%20track%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hiking%20Tasmania%27s%20beautiful%20South%20Coast%20track%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe667442076334c5c3194cf873d6e0a74b4dfb3b1%2F0_0_1772_1181%2F1772.jpg>
 The view from the top of the Ironbound ranges. Photograph: Anna Madeleine for 
the Guardian 
The next day was the big one: the Ironbound ranges 
<http://www.southcoasttrack.com.au/walk-notes/3-louisa-river-to-little-deadmans-cove/>
. At 12km, it’s not a long day in distance but the 905m climb is steep, rocky 
and full of false summits. We started early to avoid full sunlight and as we 
reached the peak, the sun burnt through the clouds and revealed spectacular 
views of Tasmania’s rolling mountain ranges, where we’d come from, and 
stretching coastlines, where we were going.

With frequent stops for jelly beans and water, the way up wasn’t as hard as I 
expected. What I wasn’t prepared for was the descent down the other side. It 
was so dense I decided it classified as jungle with mossy branches, big tree 
roots and rocks constantly obstructing the path. It was then that I discovered 
the magic of trekking poles – not just walking sticks for old people! I used 
mine to balance and also as a mud gauge to avoid the full-leg disappearing act 
I had on day one. After setting up camp that night, I felt the exhaustion and 
sore muscles beginning to set in, worse than anything my lame attempt at 
sunrise yoga could fix.

For the next two days we walked along the edge of Australia – across the vast 
white sand and clear water expanse of Prion beach, to Surprise bay (clearly 
signposted, disappointingly) and Granite Beach, where we ended day five with a 
refreshing – actually freezing cold – shower under a beautiful beachside 
waterfall. The days were full of extremes – when the sun was out, it burned. 
The ocean was incredibly clear but also freezing cold and full of rips. Our 
swims were always brief.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff45258ede239aa553365ddf9ca768c6aa976e6d0%2F0_0_1772_1181%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hiking%20Tasmania's%20beautiful%20South%20Coast%20track%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hiking%20Tasmania%27s%20beautiful%20South%20Coast%20track%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff45258ede239aa553365ddf9ca768c6aa976e6d0%2F0_0_1772_1181%2F1772.jpg>
 Harsh sun and clear blue water on the 4km walk along Prion beach. Photograph: 
Anna Madeleine for the Guardian 
That night, what began as a few drops of rain pattering peacefully on our tent 
turned into the heaviest rainfall Hobart has had in three years and the Huon 
valley had two months of rain in 24 hours.

The next day, the muddy paths had turned to creeks and we were walking through 
knee deep rushing water and wading through swamps at least 10 metres wide.

I got used to the rain, and the mud. What didn’t get easier were the leeches. 
They fell from the trees. It was raining leeches! I don’t usually care much 
about bugs, but leeches are in a different league. It got to the point where we 
were stopping every few minutes to peel them off ourselves, with salt ready for 
the more stubborn ones. Worse than the leeches themselves was the paranoia they 
set off in me – you can’t feel them, so I was constantly imagining them or 
squealing at a twig or leaf which simply looked like it could maybe be a leech.

That day I went into survival mode – I just walked. We hardly stopped for 
food, I didn’t drink much water to avoid having to pee. Wet, cold and tired, we 
finally reached the beach, but pretty quickly our hopes were dashed. The 
rivulet we needed to cross had turned into a torrential gushing river, clearly 
unsafe to cross. So we buckled down for the night, in the leech forest, waiting 
for low tide, with our fingers crossed the rain would ease overnight.

I was anxious: we were already delayed one day because of our false start and 
we only had one extra day’s worth of food. I was stuck inside a tent watching 
leeches crawl over the outside but I eventually realised there was nothing I 
could do except wait. Exhausted from the day, I finally feel asleep.

The currents were weaker the next day, but crossing involved walking in water 
so deep I didn’t even bother wearing my shorts. But we made it! On the other 
side, we set off at a fast pace (once fully clothed) and made it just in time 
to catch the bus along the windy road back to Hobart feeling relaxed, sore, 
proud and not as happy as I thought I’d be to switch my phone back on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ec91a3166d8206d14cd509265640d4ef8c0c26f%2F0_54_1772_1064%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hiking%20Tasmania's%20beautiful%20South%20Coast%20track%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hiking%20Tasmania%27s%20beautiful%20South%20Coast%20track%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fhiking-tasmanias-beautiful-south-coast-track-and-how-to-survive-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ec91a3166d8206d14cd509265640d4ef8c0c26f%2F0_54_1772_1064%2F1772.jpg>
 Walking out at Cockle Creek, muddy but happy. Photograph: Anna Madeleine for 
the Guardian 
The South Coast track was incredible – the spectacular coastal views, rugged 
landscapes, dense forests and vast deserted beaches far outweighed the two days 
of bad weather. But three sets of bush walkers had to berescued 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-01-20/more-bushwalkers-rescued-as-heavy-rainfall-keeps-crews-busy/6026866>
 in the week after we walked out. We got lucky – if the weather had turned 
earlier, this could have been a completely different story.

Unexpectedly, seven days didn’t feel all that long and I’ve starting 
researching the world’s best long distance hikes. Walking the South Coast track 
proved I could do it and I couldn’t have been more wrong about being bored. I 
found I settled into a pace – not only physically but also mentally – which was 
peaceful and I liked that there was no option to do anything but walk – all I 
had to do was keep on going.
 