
Readers of Wolf Hall and Bring Up the Bodies still waiting for the final 
instalment of Hilary Mantel's Cromwell trilogy will get another glimpse of 
Henry VIII's wily adviser, as the double Booker-winning author contributes a 
pen portrait of the chief minister for theNational Portrait Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/national-portrait-gallery>.

Inspired by the portrait after Holbein of Cromwell that hangs in the National 
Portrait Gallery, Mantel writes: "In black legend he is a greedy thug, a 
spymaster, a torturer. But to John Foxe, 'a valiant captain of Christ.' To 
Archbishop Cranmer, 'such a servant … in wisdom, diligence, faithfulness and 
experience, as no prince in this realm ever had.'

"He doesn't care what you think of him," writes Mantel in her profile for the 
National Portrait Gallery. "No man more immune to insult. Truth is the daughter 
of time. Time is what we haven't got."

In Mantel's Booker-winning novel Wolf Hall, Cromwell dismisses Holbein's 
original portrait, telling his son: "I look like a murderer." Gregory responds: 
"Didn't you know?"

The author has said that her next book will be a collection of short stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/16/hilary-mantel-new-book-no-thomas-cromwell>
, The Assassination of Margaret Thatcher, with the third in her trilogy of 
novels about Cromwell, The Mirror and the Light, due to be completed this year.

She is one of many authors to write portraits to complement pictures in the 
National Portrait Gallery, as part of a fundraising event on 11 February, which 
has just been announced. Jacqueline Wilson has taken onDelmar Banner's portrait 
of Beatrix Potter 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw05106/Beatrix-Potter>, AS 
Byatt an unknownpainting of John Donne 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw111844/John-Donne>, Ben 
Okri a 17th-century picture of Shakespeare, Michael Holroyd aself-portrait of 
Gwen John <http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw03484/Gwen-John>
, and Joanna Trollope one ofPaule Vézelay 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw07995/Paule-Vzelay?LinkID=mp05868&role=sit&rNo=0>
.

Wilson's portrait has it that Potter's "extraordinary" tales paint the true 
portrait of an author who was "downright honest, humorous, eccentric, 
painstaking and utterly original".

"Potter bunnies and squirrels and puddleducks adorn countless nurseries but 
these aren't cosy little tales," Wilson writes. "Rabbits end up in pies, 
kittens in rolypoly puddings…"
 Self-portrait by Paule Vézelay (Marjorie Watson-Williams). Photograph: 
National Portrait Gallery London 
Trollope, meanwhile, imagines the voice of Vézelay 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw07995/Paule-Vzelay?LinkID=mp05868&role=sit&rNo=0>
 as she writes about her. "I like to think of you standing there in front of 
me, wondering … I hope you're trying to work me out, my slightly veiled 
expression, my hint of a smile. You are, at least, intrigued, aren't you? Yes. 
I thought so. Perfect," writes the novelist in her portrait.

Holroyd, taking on the portrait of John 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw03484/Gwen-John>, writes: 
"She is not shadowed by the past but confidently awaits the future. Instead of 
inviting us into her world, she advances into ours."

And Byatt writes that Donne was "a great man and a passionate writer. Or, a 
passionate man and a great writer. There is no one like him."

The pen portraits will be sold for £500 at the National Portrait Gallery's 
fundraising event next month, which is sponsored by Leon Max. Sandy Nairne, 
director of the gallery, said: "The 2014 Portrait Gala is a great occasion of 
celebration, benefiting the gallery's collection through the Portrait Fund and 
its work more generally. I am hugely grateful to all those who are helping make 
this possible, including very notable writers and artists."
 