
Marcelo Rios provoked a fiery response from the leading players on the women's 
circuit yesterday by describing many of their early encounters in grand-slam 
tournaments as "a joke".

"All the matches in the men's game are tough," said Rios, who meets Nicolas 
Lapentti of Ecuador in the fourth round today. "Anybody can beat anybody. It's 
not like the girls where they can win 6-1, 6-0 until the quarter-finals. It's 
like a joke."

Martina Hingis, three times the champion here from 1997-99, was vehement in 
her defence.

"Obviously the men's game is tough, but I think the depth in women's tennis 
has also gotten much better," she said. "You can always have a hard time and if 
you don't take your preparation seriously enough, you may always get beaten."

It is a perennial argument that erupts whenever somebody such as Rios is 
prompted to rake over the coals.

Venus Williams, who beat Magdalena Maleeva 6-0, 6-3, responded with political 
ease. "I enjoy the women's game," she said. "Every single one of us worked hard 
to be here and we are here because we deserve it. We all have to work together. 
The top players take extreme pride in what we do. We don't slack at any time 
and we don't just bring our best games to the slams. We bring it to every 
event."

This is a claim that might be disputed, but the battle goes on. Billie Jean 
King, who was instrumental in helping the women's game reach parity with the 
men, suggested at the weekend that, considering Australian women's influence on 
tennis, the Rod Laver arena, Melbourne Park's centre court, might have been 
better named the Margaret Court arena.

It is a valid point, but generally the women have won their battle for parity 
at grand-slam level, even if Wimbledon continues to refuse to pay equal prize 
money. But it can surely be only a matter of time before the All England Club 
recognises the true facts of life in the modern world and concedes equality, as 
it should.
 