
Martina Hingis's return to the game has given the women's draw here an extra 
dimension but yesterday was a reminder of why she left in the first place. Her 
failure to cope with the rise of power tennis three years ago resurfaced in the 
Rod Laver Arena when she struggled to close out her fourth-round match against
Samantha Stosur <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur>, an 
Australian who has never won a singles title and has been ranked no higher than 
No44 in the world. Hingis eventually won 6-1, 7-5.

Kim Clijsters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kim-clijsters>, who had 
battled through a physical encounter 7-6, 6-4 against Francesca Schiavone 
without apparent ill effect, no doubt watched Hingis's match with increasing 
optimism in light of their quarter-final. Clijsters, whose participation here 
was in the balance because of a hip problem that triggered back troubles, has 
apparently sloughed off the injury and must once again be considered the 
tournament favourite.

Hingis holds a 4-1 career advantage over the Belgian, although this is 
irrelevant in the current circumstances. They last met in 2002 when the Swiss 
beat Clijsters in Sydney to record her 500th career match win. Later that same 
year, after ankle surgery, Hingis turned her back on the game, before playing a 
single tournament late last year and then announcing her full-scale return.

In the opening set against the inexperienced Stosur Hingis unveiled her full 
repertoire of loop, spin and angles. The double-fisted backhand down the line, 
her old trademark shot, was particularly effective and her coverage of the net 
re-ignited memories of those glorious days when touch was every bit as 
important as pace. Here, briefly, was the women's answer to Roger Federer, or 
so the dreamers might have dreamed.

In fact Federer's multiple skills are backed up with a turbo charger, as he 
showed later last night in his five-set victory over Tommy Haas. There was that 
wonderful subtlety but there was savage power as well.

Hingis lacks that; she can generate considerable pace off her opponent's shots 
but in the second set, against a player reckoned to be one of the fittest on 
the WTA Tour, she notably lacked the killer blow when she chose to trade shots. 
Had Stosur possessed a little more experience and a little more nous, she would 
have won the tie-break and then, in all probability, Hingis would not have 
lasted the third set.

Clijsters, the US Open champion and world No2, will surely not be so generous. 
"I'm happy with the way everything is going, so I'm not complaining at all," 
she said after her match, although obviously all depends on how the 
inflammation is contained from day to day. "Hopefully nothing will flare up.

"It's been a long time since I played Martina and she's a great champion. 
Against Francesca I was going for my winners a bit too soon and against Martina 
I will need to wait for the right time."

Stosur involved Hingis in many long rallies in the second set and frequently 
came out on top. It was when she tried to mix matters at the net that her 
troubles multiplied, for her touch let her down time and again. Hingis was 
patently tiring, just as she often used to against the Williams sisters, 
Lindsay Davenport and Jennifer Capriati, and it was then that her own errors 
multiplied. Stosur tried to capitalise on Hingis's weaker forehand, only to 
choke in the tie-break when 5-3 ahead.

Whatever the outcome against Clijsters, this run by Hingis has been 
remarkable, and she was candid about her weaknesses. "Easy or tough, I take it 
as it comes but I was a little tired and then I just started being short with 
my shots," she said. "It was something I struggled with five years ago. I came 
through it today but I know I have to play better against Kim. She's the 
favourite and I'm just the underdog. But right now all that counts is that I 
made the last eight."

Tomorrow's other quarter-final will be between Am√©lie Mauresmo and Patty 
Schnyder, both top-10 players although neither has won a major. Mauresmo, whose 
success at last year's end-of-season WTA Tour championship lifted her 
confidence considerably, had an easy win over the 16-year-old Czech Nicole 
Vaidisova, who froze, and Schnyder beat the former French Open champion 
Anastasia Myskina 6-2, 6-1.

It was quite a day for Swiss tennis, in fact. "It's great that we are so 
successful and that tennis is booming in our country," said Schnyder. "As for 
having Martina being back, it's incredible." Not quite as incredible as 
Federer, though.

Quarter-finals Men's singles R Federer (Switz, 1) v N Davydenko (Rus, 5); N 
Kiefer (Ger, 21) v S Grosjean (Fr, 25); F Santoro (Fr) v D Nalbandian (Arg, 4); 
I Ljubicic (Cro, 7) v M Baghdatis (Cyp)

Women's singles L Davenport (US, 1) v J Henin-Hardenne (Bel, 8); M Sharapova 
(Rus, 4) v N Petrova (Rus, 6); P Schnyder (Switz, 7) v A Mauresmo (Fr, 3); M 
Hingis (Switz) v K Clijsters (Bel, 2)
 