
Your report that Niall Ferguson and Simon Schama (Empire strikes back: 
rightwing historian to get curriculum role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/may/30/niall-ferguson-school-curriculum-role>
, 31 May) both want to advise the government on overhauling history in schools 
raises important concerns. Is it wise to rely on the opinions of one or two 
high-profile individuals? How far can historians based in the US truly 
understand the daily problems encountered by history teachers and lecturers 
here? In particular, the disastrous narrowing of the history curriculum in 
schools has damaged the historical understanding of a generation of 
undergraduates. University lecturers use far too much of their time trying to 
remedy this defect. The government must not be seduced by celebrity, but should 
consult widely with the Historical Association, the Royal Historical Society, 
the Higher Education Academy History Subject Centre and History UK (HE), the 
latter representing historians teaching in universities. These professional 
bodies also look forward to Michael Gove's ministerial call.

Professor Jackie Eales 
<http://www.canterbury.ac.uk/arts-humanities/history-and-american-studies/history/StaffResearch/jackie-eales.aspx>

Co-Convenor, History UK (HE) <http://www.history-uk.ac.uk/>

• "Media studies is seen as a bad joke," Antony Beevor says, whereas history 
produces employable skills (Beevor: Journalism now the enemy of historians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/may/31/antony-beevor-iraq-hay-festival>, 1 
June). Unless historians were at the events they describe then they're only 
dealing with mediations – with surviving sources that mediate the past. History 
and media studies share the same goal: evaluation and analysis of media forms 
and information for understanding. I'm sure most employers would want someone 
who could apply those skills to the present, as much as to events of half a 
century ago.

William Merrin <http://www.swansea.ac.uk/staff/academic/Arts/merrinw/>

Media studies lecturer, Swansea University
 