
In her canonical 1939 essay, A Sketch of the Past 
<https://richardgilbert.wordpress.com/2011/12/14/virginia-woolfs-a-sketch-of-the-past/>
, Virginia Woolf wonders how a coherent past may be reconstructed from 
countless angles, styles, and past selves. How do we choose from so many 
snapshots and memories? And how do we differentiate ourselves from the people 
and surroundings that shaped us?

Woolf ultimately decides to begin with one of her earliest memories, an image 
of “red and purple flowers on a black ground — my mother’s dress; and she was 
sitting either in a train or in an omnibus, and I was on her lap.” Soon after, 
she adds another memory of the nursery, and of her mother, “come out onto her 
balcony in a white dressing gown.” For Woolf, as for so many memoirists, the 
starting point of an excursion into the self is the mother.

Many would agree that it is through our mothers that we first come to see 
ourselves. This seems to be the central reason that Nadja Spiegelman chose to 
write her nonfiction debut,I’m Supposed to Protect You from All This, about her 
mother, Françoise Mouly. Spiegelman’s memoir, which spans over 350 pages, 
begins with an admission that the mother who dominated her daughter’s worldview 
from an early age has remained something of a mystery. “How could my mother 
ever have been a girl?” an older Spiegelman wonders. The question stems as much 
from her inability to imagine a world before she, the daughter, existed, as it 
does from her mother’s larger-than-life presence. “When I was six, and my 
brother a year and a half old,” Spiegelman explains, “my mother accepted the 
position of art editor atThe New Yorker.” She portrays her mother as in 
“constant motion,” full of an energy that could feel by turns comforting, 
awe-inspiring, and disquieting. “It made her furious to see me sitting still.”

It is one thing to dig into your mother’s past – and another to publish that 
while that mother is still very much alive

It is one thing to dig into your mother’s past, quite another to publish that 
exploration, particularly while that mother is still very much alive. In 
creating her mother’s story for the world to see, Spiegelman, in a sense, is 
joining a family business. Her father,Art Spiegelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/art-spiegelman>, is the author of the 
Pulitzer Prize–winningMaus, a groundbreaking two-volume memoir composed in 
comic form that tells the story of howhis father survived the Holocaust. This 
testimony of his father’s past life — his life before Art — is interwoven with 
an honest, sometimes scathing record of the relationship between father and son 
in the “present” tense of the work’s early composition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhistory-repeating-nadja-spiegelmans-painful-motherdaughter-memoir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c1daa86d34164b08e22323abb273220c83e7e83%2F0_0_3671_2202%2F3671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=History%20repeating%3A%20Nadja%20Spiegelman's%20painful%20mother%2Fdaughter%20memoir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhistory-repeating-nadja-spiegelmans-painful-motherdaughter-memoir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=History%20repeating%3A%20Nadja%20Spiegelman%27s%20painful%20mother%2Fdaughter%20memoir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhistory-repeating-nadja-spiegelmans-painful-motherdaughter-memoir%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c1daa86d34164b08e22323abb273220c83e7e83%2F0_0_3671_2202%2F3671.jpg>
 US comic book artist Art Spiegelman pictured in 2012. Maus is the only comic 
book to have won a Pulitzer prize. Photograph: Bertrand Langlois/AFP 
I’m Supposed to Protect You from All This is not a graphic memoir. But much 
like her father inMaus, Spiegelman braids the past with the present. In sharing 
stories from her own life, Spiegelman simultaneously chronicles her mother’s 
adventurous spirit (letting her underage daughter drive a rental jeep), her 
disdain for certain American cultural norms (taking offense when guests arrive 
on time for a dinner party), her secrecy, and her anger. The book reads, at 
first, almost like a settling of scores: Spiegelman calls her mother a 
“ferociously private person,” and then goes on to relay in detail the tense 
atmosphere of their early life together, “the outbursts that made the house 
tremble and just as quickly disappeared.”

Art Spiegelman: 'Auschwitz became for us a safe place'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/23/art-spiegelman-maus-25th-anniversary>
But what emerges above all else over the course of the narrative is a daughter 
seeking to understand her mother, to excavate the past in order to move more 
confidently into the present. “I have always known what it means to be a 
character in someone else’s story,” Spiegelman writes. She is, of course, 
referring to those bits of her history told in her father’s works, including the
Mausseries and his later book In the Shadow of No Towers, a memoir of living 
through the 9/11 attacks in New York City.

With this debut, Spiegelman transforms herself from a character in someone 
else’s books into her own character. She notes the difficulty she often has in 
distinguishing her memories from other people’s, and particularly from her 
mother’s version of their shared past. Now, in writing the past from her own 
perspective, Spiegelman can begin to distinguish her outlook from the ones that 
have crowded and influenced it. She can begin to differentiate herself. One 
example where we can see this in action is when her mother tells the adult 
Spiegelman that “I have always loved both my children equally.” In her memoir, 
reflecting on the incident, Spiegelman counters with evidence to the contrary, 
solidifying her own version of her life story. “I clung to the moment one of 
[my mother’s] friends pulled me aside and told me that the imbalance in our 
treatment wasn’t normal,” she writes. “It was the only proof I had. Neither my 
mother, my father, nor my brother remembered things the way I did.”

Françoise's ability to overcome a brutal childhood offers hope for her 
daughter and for all women

Through detailed conversations with her mother and her mother’s mother, Nadja 
learns all she can about her mother’s life before their shared history. Much of 
the book concerns the life Françoise ran away from in Paris, including 
childhood struggles with her family. Françoise describes her mother, Josée, as 
beautiful, inattentive, and sometimes cruel. Josée had three daughters with her 
husband, Paul, a famed plastic surgeon whom she eventually divorced. Paul was a 
man known for his frequent affairs, gambling addiction, and, most disturbingly, 
sexually inappropriate advances toward his daughter and granddaughter. This 
last violation is never validated by Françoise herself, and remains a point of 
contention between both sets of mothers and daughters.

Spiegelman juxtaposes her mother’s painful past, which includes several 
instances of sexual assault as well as an unwanted abortion, with memories of 
her own childhood and adolescence. This tactic demonstrates how the past often 
repeats itself, albeit unevenly. In one chapter, Spiegelman describes her 
mother’s violent panic attacks. These attacks, according to Françoise, began 
when she was 13 andonly occurred around her mother. Spiegelman follows this 
with stories of her own memories of being 13 — when she gained 15 pounds and 
began struggling with her weight —and how her mother’s attitudes were hurtful. 
“I felt that mother was ashamed of my weight,” she writes, recalling a 
confrontation in which she confesses to Françoise that she had started “ripping 
out all of my hair” and then feels embarrassed by her mother’s nonplussed 
reaction. Later, she describes her parents’s steely response when she announces 
to them that she has a girlfriend, her mother insisting Spiegelman not kiss the 
girl in public.

At the core of these culled recollections is less a tally of pain and 
grievances than a testament to survival. As Alison Bechdel puts it inAre You My 
Mother?, a graphic memoir that similarly explores the mother-daughter 
relationship, “I have not been maimed, only wounded, and perhaps not 
irreparably.” Spiegelman’s mother survived her childhood to become a flawed but 
ultimately loving mother as well as a renowned editor and publisher. Her 
ability to overcome a brutal childhood offers hope for her daughter and for all 
women, whose mothers come to them bearing their own fraught pasts.

Spiegelman insists on this point by giving voice to her mother’s mother (a 
notable difference between this memoir and other records of mother-daughter 
relationships such as Woolf’sTo the Lighthouse and Vivian Gornick’s Fierce 
Attachments). About halfway through the book, Spiegelman temporarily moves to 
France and decides to record her grandmother’s version of the past. Just as 
Spiegelman remembers the past differently from her own mother, many of Josée’s 
recollections contradict Françoise’s version of the story. There are gaps and 
discrepancies that can never, will never, be filled in or reconciled.

All three women at the center of Spiegelman’s book find that adolescence 
transforms them into what Jessica Valenti so aptly terms a “sex object” in a 
recently published book by that title. Valenti realises that sexual 
exploitation links all the women of her family and fears that “having a girl 
means passing this thing on to her, this violence and violations without end.” 
Similarly, the women in Spiegelman’s book all find their selfhood violently 
interrupted by people and forces that seek to shame them. Their own mothers can 
be blind to those forces, and sometimes even embody them. By putting three 
generations of women’s memories on paper, Spiegelman cannot heal their wounds. 
But she can finally enable them to become the chroniclers of their own stories.

 * Tahneer Oksman is assistant professor and director of the academic writing 
program at Marymount Manhattan College. She recently published her first book,
How Come Boys Get to Keep Their Noses?: Women and Jewish American Identity in 
Contemporary Graphic Memoirs.  