
An image of Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
with his arm raised in a salute has been included on the cover of a collection 
of Adolf Hitler’s speeches.

Publisher Ishi Press International has illustrated the back cover of Hitler’s 
collected speeches My New Order: volume one 
<https://www.amazon.com/Order-Collection-Speeches-Adolph-Hitler/dp/4871879089/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1475492077&sr=8-1&keywords=my+new+order+hitler>
 andthe front cover of volume two 
<https://www.amazon.com/Order-Collection-Speeches-Adolph-Hitler/dp/4871879097/ref=pd_bxgy_14_img_2?ie=UTF8&psc=1&refRID=M2Z3K3KQ8J9ZTBHHPG3K>
 with photographs of the presidential candidate. It declares in the book’s 
blurb that: “There are clear similarities between the speeches of Trump and the 
speeches of Hitler”, citing everything from repetition to name calling and a 
lack of logical justification for views held.
 Back cover of volume one of My New Order by Adolf Hitler, which has the 10 
December front page of the Philadelphia News printed on the back. Illustration: 
Ishi Press 
“They never admit they have made a mistake nor do they ever take anything 
back,” Ishi Press writes on both volumes. “To any criticism, they respond by 
insults and name calling. They use a low form of language, with simple 
sentences even a person with the lowest level of education or no education at 
all can understand.”

The jackets of both volumes read: “My New Order has attracted the attention of 
the press with the rise of Donald Trump as candidate for president of the 
United States, because his first wife Ivana Trump revealed that Donald Trump 
reads a book of Hitler’s collected speeches, My New Order, which he keeps in a 
cabinet by his bed.” The publisher is referring toa 1990 Vanity Fair article by 
Marie Brenner 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/magazine/2015/07/donald-ivana-trump-divorce-prenup-marie-brenner>
. Brenner interviewed Trump, who said it was a gift from “my friend Marty Davis 
from Paramount who gave me a copy of Mein Kampf, and he’s a Jew” and denied 
having read the book: “If I had these speeches, and I am not saying that I do, 
I would never read them.’”

Davis later told Brenner: “I did give him a book about Hitler, but it was My 
New Order, Hitler’s speeches, not Mein Kampf. I thought he would find it 
interesting. I am his friend, but I’m not Jewish.”

Brenner points out in her Vanity Fair piece that “Trump is no reader or 
history buff”, adding that “perhaps his possession of Hitler’s speeches merely 
indicates an interest in Hitler’s genius at propaganda”.

‘Could he actually win?’ Dave Eggers at a Donald Trump rally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/17/could-he-actually-win-dave-eggers-donald-trump-rally-presidential-campaign>
Sam Sloan, head of Ishi Press International’s US arm, told the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/donald-trump-hitler-book-my-new-order_us_57ed36c9e4b082aad9b9a2d3>
 that when My New Order was published in 1941, there was “nothing on the back 
cover … so I decided to use that empty space for an advertisement for the 
book”. The Huffington Post identifies the photograph used by Ishi as from the 
10 December front page of the Philadelphia News, which used the headline “The 
New Furor” to refer to the presidential candidate’s “latest hair-raising idea … 
to keep out all Muslims” from the US.
 