
Be water, my friend, advised action film star Bruce Lee 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=APx2yFA0-B4>. Empty your mind. Be formless, 
shapeless like water. Becoming like water is the central, surging theme inHito 
Steyerl's new HD video projection <http://www.ica.org.uk/whats-on/hito-steyerl> 
Liquidity Inc, one of five works the Berlin-based artist is presenting in the 
ICA's theatre.

Liquidity Inc tells the story of Jacob Wood, who lost his job when investment 
bank Lehman Brothers went under 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/13/lehman-brothers-collapse-five-years-later-shiver-spine>
 in 2008. Wood, born in Vietnam and a war orphan, came to the US underGerald 
Ford's Operation Babylift 
<http://www.coldwar.org/articles/70s/OperationBabylift.asp>. After investment 
banking, he turned to the fight game. Images of cage fights and surfers, waves 
and weather take strange turns in Liquidity Inc's 30 minute duration. The 1990s 
net-boom and dotcom bubble, the economic weather systems circling the globe and 
spoof TV weather reports delivered by meteorologists in balaclavas (inspired by 
the 1970s militant leftwing group theWeather Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/sep/21/londonfilmfestival2003.londonfilmfestival>
) intersperse the action. The screen surges with electronically enhanced 
versions ofHokusai's The Great Wave 
<https://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_image.aspx?image=hokusai.jpg&retpage=16638>
, andPaul Klee's Angelus Novus <http://www.english.imjnet.org.il/popup?c0=13336>
 flaps its wings in a corner of the screen, like an aberrant storm warning. The 
storm, my friend, is history.

Steyerl's art is extremely rich, dense and rewarding. This befits an artist 
who trained in Japan, got a PhD in philosophy in Vienna and is a professor of 
new media art in Berlin. She is also a performer, and two of her "lecture 
performances" are also in the show, tucked away on monitor screens in the ICA's 
cavernous theatre, which has become a kind of darkened labyrinth. The staging 
of her work matters, because what she deals with is itself often about the 
hidden, the buried, the invisible to the eye.
 A still from Hito Steyerl's Liquidity Inc 
How Not to Be Seen, a sardonic TV-trained voice-over sneers, announcing the 
title of what he goes on to call A Fucking Didactic Educational .MOV File. The 
sardonic, disembodied voice is familiar from TV adverts and cinema 
announcements. How Not to Be Seen offers instructions on how to disappear by 
going off-screen and offline, by hiding in plain sight, cloaking and 
camouflage. You can also be disappeared by the authorities, eradicated or 
annihilated.

Paranoia mounts as the announcer runs through the possibilities. You can also 
become invisible by being poor or undocumented, living in a gated community or 
in a military zone. Being a woman over 50, owning an "anti-paparazzi handbag" 
or "being a dead pixel" also work.

Much of the imagery was shot in a militarised area in the California desert, 
where strange geometric patterns decay on broken tarmac, the remains of 
resolution targets for drone and spy-plane cameras. The technology has moved 
on, and these painted signs have been abandoned. In the video, people wear 
black-and-white boxes on their heads and dance, disappearing into abstract 
pixelation. A couple twirl in green bodysuits, and a troupe of women in green 
hijabs dance on the painted tarmac. Ghostly white silhouettes wander manicured 
hotel gardens and The Three Degrees sing the 1978 hit,When Will I See You Again 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B7sfs4gWI0E>. Never, perhaps. We've fallen 
through the digital cracks.
 Hito Steyerl: How Not to Be Seen 
In the museum, no one is safe. Steyerl's 2012 Guards, filmed in the Art 
Institute of Chicago <http://www.artic.edu>, focuses on two black museum 
guards, Ron Hicks and Martin Whitfield. Usually, the guards are invisible to 
us. Here they stand before us on a tall, vertically oriented video screen and 
talk, and have a terrific aura of alert self-containment and presence, like 
well-disciplined cops or marines standing post. These were their previous jobs. 
Whitfield was a "shit-magnet" cop, always finding himself within a block or two 
of gang fights and random drive-by shootings. Hicks was in the military. They 
pace and talk and treat the galleries as their beat, their zones of conflict. 
The camera follows them as they patrol their rooms, passing the De Koonings and 
Twomblys, Rothkos and Richters and Eva Hesses. The art's more than incidental 
backdrop. They're what these guys are here to protect.

"I run my walls, I run my walls and I'm gonna clean this room," says Hicks, 
proffering an invisible gun. He enters a dark video installation as though it 
harboured a criminal. "Get on your knees, git down," he yells, as he hunts the 
dark. I am surprised the floors aren't littered with dead visitors, who'd 
looked the wrong way at an abstract expressionist masterpiece, and curators 
neutralised for getting too close to the objects in their care.

Brilliantly shot, staged and choreographed, Guards has tremendous punch, not 
least because of the air of controlled menace projected by these guards, whom 
Steyerl has asked to tell their stories. I'll never feel safe in a gallery 
again. InIs the Museum a Battlefield <http://vimeo.com/76011774>, one of two 
recordings of Steyerl's performance lectures, we watch her talk atthe 2013 
Istanbul Biennial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2013/sep/14/istanbul-biennial-2013-art-in-pictures>
, while outside on the streetsthe demonstrating populace was being hounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/14/istanbul-biennial-art-protest-under-fire>
 and teargassed by the authorities.

Taking her theme from a visit to an abandoned "minor" battlefield near Van in 
south-east Turkey, where the artist's militant friendAndrea Wolf 
<http://en.firatnews.com/news/news/monumental-tomb-in-van-named-after-german-activist-andrea-wolf.htm>
,who had joined the PPK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/08/kurdistan-workers-party-is-war-over>
, was killed in 1998, Steyerl weaves a long and complicated story about the 
interconnectedness of war and art museums. She rests on the paradox that the 
biennial's sponsors and subsiduaries – including Siemens, Lockheed and other 
corporations – also manufactured military hardware used by the Turkish 
authorities. Steyerl begins with a shell-casing she found on the battlefield, 
and sucks in Angelina Jolie, starchitects Frank Gehry and Zaha Hadid,
Eisenstein's film October <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ob_O0Da-Ujk>, the 
AK-47 and the rebuilding of the St Petersburg's Hermitage Museum as an outpost 
of the Guggenheim museum.

The bullet, like a talisman, ricochets through the lecture. Who knows its 
destination? Everything connects in Steyerl's arguments, which she develops by 
way of humorous asides, flights of fantasy, and real and imaginary bullets. 
She's digging the dirt at the heart of the art world. A second lecture,recorded 
in Berlin last year <http://vimeo.com/64703899>, presents a mordant picture of 
the present, through a reading of Victor Hugo's Les Misérables and the gameshow 
success of Susan Boyle.

With Steyerl, you can't always tell fact from fabulation, where the jokes end 
and seriousness begins, what is truth and what is a lie. A pleasure in art can 
unhinge us in everyday life, where we are undone by falsehoods at every turn. 
At several points in Steyerl's show, I felt out of my depth, deluged by digital 
rain, swamped by information, caught in the undertow of conspiracy. She makes 
me want to go offline, become invisible, flow like water and drain away.
 