
Hollywood has publicly condemned Sony Pictures’ decision to cancel release of 
the film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/17/sony-pictures-cancels-christmas-release-the-interview>
 at the heart of the hacking crisis, calling it an ignominious blow to freedom 
of speech, but some are quietly relieved at the removal of a threat to the 
Christmas box office.


Actors, directors and writers erupted in anger and scorn on Wednesday night 
after the studio announced it no longer planned to releaseThe Interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-interview>, a comedy which depicts the 
assassination of North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, because of terrorist threats 
to cinemagoers.

The wave of indignation called the decision un-American, spineless, 
disgraceful and a dangerous precedent, with some comparing it to the 
appeasement ofAdolf Hitler <https://www.theguardian.com/world/adolf-hitler>.

“Wow. Everyone caved. The hackers won. A complete and utter victory for them. 
Hollywood has done Neville Chamberlain proud today,” tweeted the actorRob Lowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/rob-lowe>, citing the British prime 
minister who abandoned Czechoslovakia to the Nazis.

The talkshow host Jimmy Kimmel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jimmy-kimmel> tweeted: “An 
un-American act of cowardice that validates terrorist actions and sets a 
terrifying precedent.”

“Damn. Bad guys won,” said Mia Farrow.

Judd Apatow, the director of Knocked Up and The 40-Year-Old Virgin, said 
freedom of expression had been compromised. “Are we going to suppress ourselves 
every time someone posts something online? It’s a dark future.” He worried 
Hollywood would shrink from making films about the Islamic State (Isis) or 
other “bad guys”.

Even Charlie Beck, the head of the Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> police department, weighed 
in. “It does play into the desires of the people that did this and I find that 
unfortunate.”

On cue, New Regency studio pulled the plug on Pyongyang 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/steve-carells-north-korea-thriller-758901>
, a North Korea-set thriller starring Steve Carell which was due to start 
filming in March, according to the Hollywood Reporter.

Sony Pictures <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sony-pictures>, a Los 
Angeles-based subsidiary of the Japanese electronics giant, announced the 
cancellation of its Christmas release hours after major cinema chains said they 
would not screen it, citing safety concerns.

“We respect and understand our partners’ decision and, of course, completely 
share their paramount interest in the safety of employees and theatergoers,” 
the studio said in a statement.

Seth Rogen and James Franco, who star in the film, made no immediate comment.

A group calling itself Guardians of Peace (GOP) published an online message on 
Tuesday warning people to stay away from screenings.

The same group claimed responsibility for a huge hack on Sony’s computer 
systems in November which splashed unreleased films, confidential documents, 
personal email correspondence and employee social security numbers across the 
internet.

Anonymous Obama administration officials told some media outlets on Wednesday 
thatNorth Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> was behind the 
attack. The regime has denied responsibility but said sympathisers may have 
committed the “righteous deed”.

After nightmarish weeks trying and failing to undo the sabotage and stem 
embarrassing media reports based on the leaked documents, Sony recently drew 
sympathy from an industry more famous for schadenfreude.

The scale of the cyber-pillaging and the drip-drip manner of its leaking 
frightened everyone, said Husam Sam Asi, a member of the Hollywood Foreign 
Press Association and a Golden Globes voter. “The infrastructure of some 
departments in Sony has been completely obliterated. They are in suspense. They 
keep asking what’s next? They don’t know.”

Tinseltown is still wondering how to protect its communications, gossip or 
otherwise. Turner Broadcasting is obliging employees to change computer 
passwords as a precaution,The Wrap reported 
<http://www.thewrap.com/turner-orders-staff-to-change-computer-passwords-in-wake-of-sony-hack-read-internal-memo-exclusive/>
.

The writer Aaron Sorkin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin>, 
among others, faulted the media for exploiting the Sony leaks. Peter Bart, a 
veteran studio executive, said details about executives bickering and movies 
falling apart or going over budget was a distraction: “It’s telling the public 
more about the process than they want to know.”

Sony’s decision to pull the film shredded sympathy in the creative community 
and drew ridicule as well as recrimination.

“Dear Sony Hackers: now that u run Hollywood, I’d also like less romantic 
comedies, fewer Michael Bay movies and no more Transformers,” tweeted the 
filmmakerMichael Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michaelmoore>.

Sony was labelled the coward, but others quietly lobbied to drop the film.

Cinema chains feared audiences would steer clear of theatres showing The 
Interview <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-interview>. AMC cited “overall 
confusion and uncertainty that has been created in the marketplace”.

Shopping malls also reportedly lobbied to drop the film lest screenings deter 
skittish Christmas shoppers.

Legal experts warned of potentially enormous liability for Sony and theatres 
if there were any incident, whether committed by terrorists or copycat 
attention-seekers.

Rival studio executives with their own Christmas films worried about losing 
revenues during a key box office month.

“We’re all afraid people aren’t going to go to theaters in general because of 
the threat,”an unnamed studio executive told the LA Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/envelope/cotown/la-et-ct-sony-box-office-20141218-story.html>
. “The theaters are supposed to be an escape for people to get entertained … If 
they don’t show up, it could be disastrous.”
 