
There were only two other people in the theater when I saw Ang Lee’s Billy 
Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk this Sunday evening in Chicago. One of them kept 
wandering out to the lobby and then coming back. Meanwhile, people were 
standing in line to get into Fantastic Beasts. Light-hearted mystical adventure 
is more popular than deliberately slow-paced and banal anti-war drama. Who knew?


Billy Lynn's Long Halftime Walk review – Ang Lee war drama is a misfiring folly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/15/billy-lynn-long-halftime-walk-review-ang-lee-war-drama>
The indifference generated by Lee’s film wasn’t confined to my showing. The 
wide release this week was in line to capture a disappointing $5m; instead, 
after bad reviews, it only generatedabout 
<http://www.darkhorizons.com/beasts-tops-billy-lynn-bombs-at-box-office/> 
$900,000. Its poor showing echoes a string of other Iraq war box office flops,
including 
<http://www.popmatters.com/article/122365-green-zone-is-latest-iraq-war-film-to-flop-at-box-office/>
 Green Zone (2010), Body of Lies (2008), Rendition (2007) and Stop-Loss (2008). 
A singular exception is Clint Eastwood’sAmerican Sniper 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/08/american-sniper-highest-grossing-movie_n_6827212.html>
 – the highest-grossing movie of 2014 in the United States, and the highest 
grossing war film of all time.

It’s not hard to understand why American Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper> did exponentially better 
than Billy Lynn. The second is a downbeat art film which deliberately eschews 
narrative excitement to undermine heroism and emphasize trauma and crass 
profiteering. The first is a gung-ho celebration of noble American heroism. 
Pro-war beats anti-war.

It seems odd that a pro-war film about the Iraq war would resonate with a wide 
audience, given the fact that the Iraq war was, by its conclusion, wildly 
unpopular. In 2014, when Bradley Cooper as Chris Kyle was gazing manfully out 
of movie screens and delivering terse lines about the importance of fighting 
them over there rather than over here,75% of the American public 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/most-americans-say-iraq-war-wasnt-worth-the-costs-poll/>
 agreed Bush’s war was not worth the costs. Even 65% of Republicans believed 
the war had been a bad decision. Overwhelmingly, bipartisanly, Americans in 
2014 believed American Sniper’s central message was inaccurate. They bought 
tickets anyway.

Most likely they bought tickets not because they supported the Iraq war, but 
because people like to buy tickets to big-budget action films. American 
Sniper’s simplistic hero-worshipping shoot-em-up fits neatly into the 
simplistic, hero-worshipping tropes of standard Hollywood adrenaline-junkie 
fare. Hero Chris Kyle (Bradley Cooper) is a familiar superdude with ultrahuman 
sniper skills. He fights the good fight against a bad guy, black-garbed evil 
super-sniper Mustafa (Sammy Sheik). If everyone were wearing masks and tights 
rather than camouflage, it could have been a Marvel feature.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F06%2Famerican-sniper-trailer-bradley-cooper-clint-eastwood-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F6%2F1412604768637%2FAmerican-Sniper-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Sniper%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20Iraq%20war%20film%20starring%20Bradley%20Cooper%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F06%2Famerican-sniper-trailer-bradley-cooper-clint-eastwood-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Sniper%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20Iraq%20war%20film%20starring%20Bradley%20Cooper%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F06%2Famerican-sniper-trailer-bradley-cooper-clint-eastwood-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F6%2F1412604768637%2FAmerican-Sniper-017.jpg>
American Sniper: watch the trailer for the Iraq war film starring Bradley Cooper
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/oct/06/american-sniper-trailer-bradley-cooper-clint-eastwood-video>
Why American Sniper is fighting an uphill battle in Hollywood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/13/why-american-sniper-is-fighting-an-uphill-battle-in-hollywood>
In fact, in structure, theme, and success, American Sniper isn’t so much a war 
film as a terrorsploitation shoot-em-up. Forget Billy Lynn; closer analogues 
are the television show 24 or London Has Fallen (2016). Chris Kyle is given 
marginally more of a conscience than Secret Service agent Mike Banning (Gerald 
Butler) in London Has Fallen, but the celebration of spiraling body counts and 
uber-masculine hyper-competence is the same, as are the occasional cuts to show 
the womenfolk weeping and praying back home. London Has Fallen did very 
respectably at the box office (a sequel is on the way). So did Hacksaw Ridge, 
Mel Gibson’s second world war drama about a conscientious objector medic, which 
presents the Japanese as an undifferentiated nightmare horde and revels in the 
spectacle of courage in the face of horrific, viscerally filmed violence. Good 
v evil, with lots of explosions – it’s what the public wants.

The best thing about Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk is that it is quite aware 
that, as a film, it is not what the public wants. Based on Ben Fountain’s novel 
of the same name, the narrative involves Bravo Company and particularly Billy 
Lynn (Joe Alwyn), who was captured on news footage trying to save his sergeant 
during a gun battle in Iraq. The footage went viral, and the company is brought 
back stateside to appear in a halftime Thanksgiving show with Destiny’s Child 
at a Dallas Cowboys home game. There are scenes of combat in flashback, but 
most of the film is Bravo company being ushered from photo op to photo op by 
banal media apparatchiks.

Too big? Too loud? Too real? Billy Lynn and other failed cinematic innovations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/11/billy-lynn-long-halftime-walk-3d-cinema-innovation-movies>
The owner of the Dallas team (Steve Martin) wants to buy Bravo’s story on the 
cheap to make an inspirational rah-rah America film and reignite support for 
the war. A cheerleader (Mackenzie Leigh) wants to be Billy Lynn’s girlfriend – 
as long as he plays the role of selfless hero and takes himself back to Iraq to 
get shot at again.

Ang Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anglee> has been criticized for the 
overly perfect sheen of the film; he shot it at 120 frames per second, but even 
at normal 24 fps, the movie has a scrubbed clarity. That’s especially the case 
during the bloated half-time extravaganza, in which Billy stands frozen in his 
combat fatigues while dancers slither around the stage and fireworks go off all 
around him. It’s ridiculous, embarrassing and traumatizing, as the explosions 
make Lynn forcibly recall combat. Lynn isn’t a hero fighting the bad guys to 
save us all; he’s a prop used to symbolize a hero fighting the bad guys to save 
us all. Billy Lynn is about the dull, humiliating mechanics of turning soldiers 
into something that the public wants to consume. The civilians are the ones who 
control the war. “It’s their film,” as one of Lynn’s fellow soldiers comments 
bitterly.

Americans don’t necessarily like war, and they certainly don’t like the Iraq 
war. But they do like war narratives that remind them comfortably of action 
movies. That’s why wars are generally sold as Hollywood thrills, with Bush 
sloganeering about an “axis of evil”, like a trailer promoting the latest 
release. Everybody agrees: it’s fun to watch our heroes blow up the nefarious 
bad guys. And if “our heroes” don’t want to, or don’t enjoy, fulfilling that 
role? Or if those bad guys aren’t quite as nefarious as we’d like? Well, we’ll 
just watch a different movie.
 