
Hardly had a despondent Andy Murray had time to slump on his courtside seat 
than my mobile lit up with a series of text messages. The gist was: what a 
chump for suggesting in a lengthy tribute to Murray a week earlier that he was 
a player whose brilliance matched that of Roger Federer and that he was good 
enough to win theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

Hang on, did you watch the first-round match? Did you see how the other guy 
played? No to both questions in every case.

Some of the passages of play Murray produced against Jo-Wilfried Tsonga fully 
vindicated the glowing assessment of him as a player - notably during the third 
set, which he won to love. It was just that he ran into an opponent in magical 
form. The error was to have minimised the threat posed by Tsonga, but the facts 
were that the 22-year-old Frenchman had arrived in Melbourne after a distinctly 
average start to the year - won three matches, lost two (compared to Murray's 
victory in the Qatar Open) - and with a record that boasted not a single 
appearance in a final on the main tour, never mind a title.

If anything, Tsonga played better against Murray than he did in any of the 
subsequent five matches that took him to today's final against Novak Djokovic, 
and that includes last Thursday's semi-final in which he battered the second 
seed, Rafael Nadal, for the loss of nine games.

In that first-round match against Murray, the unseeded Tsonga, who is a second 
cousin of the Newcastle United winger Charles N'Zogbia, not only combined 
technical soundness with extraordinary flair, he produced a couple of shots at 
important moments that were freakily good.

For the first, Tsonga had his back turned to Murray as he chased a perfectly 
placed lob into the backhand corner. It seemed a doomed cause, yet not only did 
he reach the ball but arced an answering lob into the corresponding spot on 
Murray's side of the court and won the point. On another occasion, again facing 
the wrong way, he managed to guide the ball back by swinging the racket between 
his legs - a stunning example of the hotdog, which players love to try but very 
rarely execute successfully.

There seemed more than a lunge and a prayer to both these shots. Tsonga made 
them look as though he had control of his luck along with everything else.

It will be a pity, as well as a surprise, if Tsonga turns out to be just 
another of the Australian Open chimeras exemplified by players such as the 
Swede Thomas Johansson and Germany's Rainer Sch√ºttler, who have returned to the 
obscurity from whence they came since reaching finals in Melbourne in the past 
six years. Tsonga himself wondered whether part of the reason for his sudden 
success would not last beyond this tournament. 'Being absent so often with 
injuries might have helped me because a lot of the players don't know my game,' 
he said.

Tsonga's rise to wider prominence - on the circuit the huge promise he 
exhibited as a junior who won the US Open boys' title in 2003 is common 
knowledge - has been delayed by these injuries. The worst was a herniated disc 
in his back that manifested itself three years ago and has given him the sort 
of searing pain that ends some careers. His uninhibited form in the past two 
weeks, during which he has flaunted the touch and thunder of a truly gifted 
player, suggests he has finally found the faith to trust his body not to let 
him down.

'It was very depressing and sure I thought sometimes would I ever come back to 
top-level tennis,' he told Observer Sport. 'I got a little bit depressed, yes, 
but my family always supported me and they were there to talk to when it got 
really bad. My father [a professional handball player in his youth] was a great 
help to me.'

His father, Didier, was born in Congo and went to France to study chemistry in 
the late 1970s. He met his French wife, Evelyne, after arriving in the country 
and the family - there is an elder sister, Sasha, and a younger brother, Enzo, 
who plays basketball - now live in Le Mans, where both parents are teachers. 
'From my mother I've inherited my coolness and serenity,' Tsonga said. 'From my 
father I've inherited respect for the rules and respect for the people around 
me. I also thank him for the physical qualities that I've inherited from him.'

In particular, he gives credit to his father for his serve, which came totally 
naturally. He says there is an amazing photograph of him as a one-year-old 
throwing up a ball with one hand while his other arm was raised as if to serve.

In contrast to Tsonga's leap from the shadows, Djokovic's progress has been 
brilliantly illuminated since he won his first titles on the tour two years 
ago. In 2007, the 20-year-old from Belgrade reached the semi-finals of the 
French Open and Wimbledon and was runner-up to Federer at the US Open last 
September.

Until he beat Federer in the semi-finals two days ago, Djokovic was not alone 
in wondering whether his nerve would withstand the tension of a grand-slam 
showdown against the world number one. He now knows that it will, which makes 
him a devastatingly good player when this confidence is joined to his 
athleticism, the power and accuracy of his groundstrokes and a serve that is 
not only effective but drives opponents nuts by the time he has finished his 
routine of umpteen preparatory bounces.

With his victory in straight sets over Federer, Djokovic may well have brought 
an end to an era in the sense that Federer may no longer be able to dominate as 
he did when winning eight out of 10 grand slams before the 2008 Australian 
Open. Federer argued after losing to Djokovic that the monster he had created 
for himself - a beast who had to win every tournament - had now been slain and 
he could be the one who benefited most.

What is more likely is that although Federer will almost certainly win more 
grand slams, adding to the 12 that leave him two behind Pete Sampras's record, 
he will not do so with anything like the consistency of the past two-and-a-half 
years. Djokovic is not the only one who now realises that Federer, who will be 
27 this year, is fallible.

Additional reporting by Veronica Lee
 