
January is traditionally a seasonal high for online news sites because of a 
combination of back-to-work enthusiasm and a long calendar month. Consequently, 
February traffic often drops a little - but not for Sun Online and 
Telgraph.co.uk, according to this month's results from theAudit Bureau of 
Circulations Electronic <http://www.abce.org.uk>. 

In fact, the network of Sun Online <http://www.thesun.co.uk> sites saw a 
massive jump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/mar/26/sun-online-most-popular-newspaper-website>
 in unique users from January to February - up 25% to the Sun record of 27.3 
million, andTelegraph.co.uk <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/> also had record 
traffic. So what happened?


February: a good month for Sun Online and Telegraph.co.uk. Photograph: inju 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/inju/112082907/>/Flickr/Some right reserved 
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en_GB>

It would be sensible to assume that a more strategic, traffic-focused approach 
had been brought on by the credit crunch, with sites pushed to working more 
efficiently on their core stories. For the Sun and News of the World, this 
meant making the most of their exclusive story aboutAlfie Patten 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/article2233878.ece> and a succession 
of stories on diagnosis ofJade Goody 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/tv/article2264631.ece>'s terminal 
illness.

Site editor Pete Picton said it wasn't all Alfie and Jade, however. "Lots of 
things came together last month," he said. "We have been rewarded by work that 
[search and development manager]Chris Chivrall has been doing around social 
media, adding Digg buttons to our story pages, and we've also benefited from 
the site redesign before Christmas that is starting to pay off."

That design, he said, was inspired by the Swedish news site Aftonbladet 
<http://www.aftonbladet.se/> in showcasing more of their content further down 
the page. He believes having a story on the front page - even if users have to 
scroll - really helps push traffic to story pages and that has been combined 
with work getting stories picked up by aggregators.

Sun Online's page views actually fell slightly from January, indicating that 
search engine optimisation, as well as the site's work pushing stories to those 
aggregator sites, has paid off. It means a wider range of new users finding and 
accessing the site, even if the average number of pages per user has declined. 
It's also worth remembering that the Sun web figures include Page3, fantasy 
football site DreamTeamFC and Sun Bingo, all of which are quite page view 
intensive.

News <http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/>, Woman 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/woman/> and the discussion site MySun 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/portal/site/mysun/> all had record months, and the 
News of the World had a big story with a photo of OlympianMichael Phelps 
<http://www.newsoftheworld.co.uk/news/168726/Michael-Phelps-could-face-prosecution-by-US-police-after-photos-revealed-the-Olympic-gold-medallist-smoked-a-drug-pipe.html>
 smoking a bong. Picton added that in the race to optimise stories so that they 
can be found by search engines, it's important not to make headlines dull.

Keep the personality of newspaper headlines

"Many Sun headlines don't work online - we call people things like Posh and 
Becks, for example - and though we do make headlines search friendly there's a 
balance there. You have to be careful not to totally throw out your headlines - 
it's what makes us different, and what makes us stand out from other sites. 
You've got to differentiate yourself - that's extremely important."

Telegraph.co.uk also had a good month and, of the seven UK national newspapers 
that release their monthly ABCe data, was one of only three sites to record 
month-on-month growth in what is traditionally a quieter month. Mirror.co.uk 
was the third, adding 340,000 users to reach nearly 7 million.

Telegraph.co.uk added slightly less at 240,000 to top 26 million unique users 
for the first time. The February news agenda was just as packed for the quality 
news sites but with a very different news agenda.

Telegraph.co.uk digital editor Edward Roussel said the financial crisis 
continues to be a huge traffic driver for their site, and not just in the UK 
but overseas, too. Internal unique user numbers for thefinance 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/> section have tripled since February last 
year, he said, but theOscars and Baftas also pushed traffic to the Culture 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/> section up 150% year on year.

"We've tried to be structured in how we handle big events wand in addition to 
planning who does what we've been thinking about how we SEO, organise and 
curate content," he said. "We're beginning to see the benefits of that. Finance 
is just one example: while it's an ongoing story, there are peaks and troughs 
like the AIG or Bank of England stories."

The site's blogs have also done well, he said, tripling their user numbers 
from the previous year.

It's not about volume, but about expertise

"The mistake we all made early on was thinking it was all about speed and 
volume, and really that's wrong. Speed does matter, but as good as that is it's 
the quality of your curation of content that makes you a good news organisation.

"Twelve or 18 months ago it was all about getting stories out but now it's 
about how we tag, organise and curate those stories, how you combine them with 
info-graphics or SEO. That's the key to the future of news on the web, and how 
you build the long tail."

Telegraph.co.uk has also been working to set up jargon-busting pages, he said, 
particularly to add context to the terminology of the economic recession. That 
context, he said, is another essential element for news sites.

Roussel singled out the intersection of media and technology as a key area of 
growth for them and said they have recruited a new reporter to build up their 
coverage in this area. Tech traffic is up 10 fold from last year, albeit from a 
low base, he said.

"The nexus of media and technology is an important area for us as an 
organisation because it's about understanding how people are communicating. 
It's also important for our coverage because it's very hot - there's enormous 
demand, so we will be steadily ratcheting up this area." Tech, politics and 
business are all prioritised for growth, he said.

Stuffy US papers create an American opportunity

Roussel pointed to recent Nielsen data that shows Telegraph.co.uk among the 
top 30 most visited sites in the US. For the Telegraph,Times, Guardian and Mail 
in particular, their popularity in the US has been striking - particularly 
because the reverse is not true. TheNew York Times has even recorded a decline 
in its UK audience.

US sites have a more parochial attitude to news, whereas UK sites are better 
at global stories, he said. "[US newspapers] are quite grand in writing about 
major news events like Pakistan or US political events, and opinion is quite 
hidden on the site - not packaged with the news. UK news organisations are 
better with quick, sharp analysis.

"The UK is arguably the most competitive newspaper market in the world... that 
makes us more fleet-footed than our competitors in the US."

The San Francisco Chronicle, he said, has changed little in the past 150 years 
but the Times, Sunday Times and Guardian have changed remarkably - even in the 
past three years - and it is because of the more competitive market.

The economic climate has inevitably impacted editorial, he said, though he 
added the company had been prepared for what it knew would be a sharp downturn 
in the first quarter of this year.

"What we have to do is fulfil the basic elements of information, entertainment 
and strong views, and it's the fluffy stuff that goes by the way. The 
journalism won't and can't be compromised or we'd have no role to play. It's 
about common sense, and not trying to be all things to all people.

"News organisations have to think about their premium content and what readers 
really need."
 