
Ahead of the Activate London Summit 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>
, Arnaud Bertrand, CEO and co-founder ofHouseTrip <http://www.housetrip.com/>, 
spoke to us about updating private holiday home rental for the 21st century and 
why the sharing economy may need a common regulatory framework.

Can you tell us a little about HouseTrip and your reasons for founding it?
HouseTrip is one of the largest holiday rental websites in the world. My wife 
and I founded the company after a holiday in Edinburgh where we rented an 
apartment rather than a hotel – we loved the experience and the freedom but 
hated the process of booking the home. With our experience of the hospitality 
sector, we saw immediately that there was a commercial opportunity to bring a 
proposition that had indeed existed for a long time – private holiday home 
rental – into the 21st century, putting in place a smooth web-based experience 
for finding and booking quality homes for holiday trips in locations around the 
world.

How does HouseTrip differ from other holiday rental sites?
HouseTrip puts listings online in a way that's easy for hosts to list and 
guests to find their ideal rental. We have an incredible, industry-leading 
customer care team in place to make the booking and stay as smooth and 
effortless as possible. Our innovation lies in our technology to make the 
holiday experience of booking and staying in a home easy and memorable. That's 
our passion and we have an exciting vision for where we think technology 
innovation can take us. This is just the start.

Since launching four years ago, more than seven million nights have been 
booked on HouseTrip. What factors do you think have contributed to your success?
We're different from other holiday home rental companies, web-based or 
otherwise. Unlike some of our competitors, our stock of properties is focused 
on entire homes, not rooms in somebody's house, where the host may also be 
staying. As such, our primary market is families and couples holidaying without 
the kids. In our experience, these customers want quality and the reassurance 
that the home will meet a certain standard. So we have a team that vets every 
property that is listed on our website, which is one of the reasons our 
customer satisfaction scores are industry-leading.

How do you think the sharing economy will develop?
Like other companies in the sharing economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/behavioural-insights/sharing-economy-sustainable-alternative-economics>
, we are faced with an evolving regulatory environment that varies across 
geographies. We believe our proposition delivers great value, choice and 
flexibility for consumers and that ultimately, consumers – who are of course 
citizens and voters – will determine the services they want. There is need for 
an honest debate about the future of the industry and whether a common 
regulatory framework would benefit consumers.

What's next for HouseTrip?
We believe we can be a major global consumer brand. The company has been 
incredibly successful in the five years since it was founded, with no marketing 
spend, but now it's time to step up to the next level. With the funding we 
have, the unrivalled experience of our executive team, as well as customer 
satisfaction scores that are through the roof, we have all the ingredients to 
succeed. When we ask, "Have you HouseTripped yet?", we're posing a challenge to 
people – come and experience what we have to offer, and we know you'll be 
hooked. We're aiming at nothing less than creating a movement.

Finally, what is your message for the delegates attending the Guardian's 
Activate London <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-london> 
Summit?
Have focus. When HouseTrip was founded, it had all sorts of additional 
functionality: an eBay-esque marketplace function, a Yelp-like local guide 
function. We stripped it all out. My wife and co-founder Junjun always says: 
"If you fail, fail quickly so you don't waste time."

Arnaud Bertrand will be speaking at this year's Guardian Activate London Summit
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>
, 17 July.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> content 
is editorially independent except for pieces labelled "advertisement feature". 
Find out morehere <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 