
As 2015 comes to a close, we can look forward to starting a new year with a 
global climate change agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations>
 that has been signed by 95% of the world’s governments. We’re equipped with a 
multitude of reports that parse all of its endless details. But the deal leaves 
many companies with a big question: how can they continue to grow while cutting 
their environmental impacts in line with the new climate goals?

Several businesses have attempted to answer this question, but most have 
acknowledged that theywon’t be able to  
<http://www.outsideonline.com/2039491/climate-action-open-letter-north-face-president-todd-spaletto>
significantly grow their efforts 
<http://www.outsideonline.com/2039491/climate-action-open-letter-north-face-president-todd-spaletto>
 without strong policy support.With this in mind, it’s clear that the focus of 
business and governments must now shift from advocacy and cheerleading to 
implementation, whether that involves true funding of new product innovation or 
rolling out localized plans for sustainable development.



As we head into 2016, climate change news will likely recede 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/dec/23/2016-predictions-csr-cop21-donald-trump-isis-vw-dieselgate-climate-change>
 to make room for other headlines. But the initiatives outlined in the Paris 
agreement – which the International Energy Agency estimates willcost $16.5tn by 
2030 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/climate-change/cop21-hitting-the-climate-change-targets-agreed-in-paris-will-cost-165trn-a6771816.html>
 – are likely to emerge as a critical tool for companies. Among other things, 
they will enable planners to align their growth plans, assess their product 
portfolios, refine their innovation pipelines, redefine their key performance 
metrics and take stock of all the programs and processes needed to address 
these changes.

Hand in hand with these programs and processes is a big elephant in the room: 
cost mitigation. The White House projects that theincremental costs of an 
additional degree of warming 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/the_cost_of_delaying_action_to_stem_climate_change.pdf>
 will reach $700bn by 2030. And that’s a recurringyearly cost 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/effects-of-climate-change-2014-6>, not a 
one-time penalty.

Companies will likely bear the brunt of this expense. With that in mind, here 
are five key considerations to help clarify the breadth of the scope of this 
change – and how it is likely to affect business:

What can a global temperature rise of 1.5-2C mean for businesses?

A recurring theme at COP21’s business events was the growing awareness of 
climate science. Whether the people talking were CEOs, energy professionals or 
NGOs, they all displayed a rising consciousness of the impact of global warming.

Companies looking to weather climate change need to address this problem in 
scenario planning. They must ask where their suppliers live and operate, and 
what will happen to those regions if business continues as usual – or, 
alternately, if regulation intervenes.

They need to weigh whether it would be cheaper to find new partners or work 
with their current ones on adaptation tools and technologies. They need to 
address customer behavior and consider whether it will shift based on resource 
availability, weather conditions and new lifestyles. For those in the service 
industry, this translates into the need for a lot more knowledge. For example, 
accountants must brush up their sustainability accounting standards, doctors 
must weave sustainability elements into the science of healthcare and cleaners 
must understand what components go into the products they use and what impact 
those can have on the environment.

Many of these service professionals will also need to address the issue of how 
best to continue to grow their businesses without harming the environment. For 
a bank, law firm or brick and mortar store, this could mean understanding how 
opening more branches, stores and offices could improve access for communities 
but potentially hurt the local environment through increased emissions caused 
by infrastructure, transportation, waste and other factors.

What is the potential cost of climate change?

From the dangerous levels of pollution in Delhi and Beijing to the haze in 
Indonesia and the water crisis in California, we’re already seeing financial 
impacts from climate change. These costs will extend across a range traditional 
economic indicators. For instance, warmer wintertemperatures on the US East 
Coast are costing retailers money in sales of cold weather gear 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/16/business/retailers-feel-the-heat-of-lost-winter-clothing-sales.html?_r=0>
. Further south, Miami is facing serious infrastructural issues as its sea 
level rises – and, in response, it’s creatinginnovative financing models 
<http://fortune.com/2015/12/16/pace-climate-change/> to tackle situations in 
which traditional funding won’t suffice.

Accounting for these unintended costs will give companies greater 
predictability and a surer path to growth, but doing so will also require 
broadening the scope of their accounting sheets and potentially attaching a 
price to every resource they consume. Some companies, like Microsoft, are 
already leading the way by adopting internal carbon pricing. (Microsoft says 
its program has reduced its emissions by 7.5m metric tons 
<http://www.greenbiz.com/article/how-microsofts-internal-price-carbon-saved-it-10-million-year>
 and saved it $10m per year.)

How will climate change impact a company’s valuation?

The financial services sector is refining its investment criteria and 
strategies to address climate change, and companies should take note of how 
these evaluations can impact their stock performance. It’s hardly coincidental 
thatGoldman Sachs 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/2015/11/02/goldman-bets-on-being-green/> and 
Citi <http://www.citigroup.com/citi/environment/policies.htm> both recently 
updated their respective environmental and social risk management policies to 
prominently incorporate climate and other environmental, social and corporate 
governance (ESG) factors into their investment strategies. For that matter, 
it’s hardly surprising that Citi has also decided toreduce its coal lending 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-10-05/citigroup-citing-climate-change-will-reduce-financing-for-coal>
.

With six of the largest US banks calling for a strong climate agreement 
<http://www.greenbiz.com/article/six-largest-us-banks-call-strong-cop21-agreement-and-carbon-pricing>
 earlier this year, chances are the trend towards embedding ESG metrics into 
investment criteria will continue. To successfully adapt to this change, 
companies will need to get their investor relations teams in the same room with 
their sustainability teams, risk management teams and their boards.

Do employees understand how climate change links to their business?

Amid a tsunami of news and information, awareness of the impacts of climate 
change is growing and deepening. Educating employees about the specifics of how 
climate change will affect their jobs will require consistent and deliberate 
outreach, opportunities for engagement, and informal and formal conversations 
at all levels.

It will become vital for workers to understand the links between planetary 
boundaries and a company’s product portfolio, between their decisions and the 
company’s future, and between consumer behavior and the company’s pipeline – 
same as above. They will need to understand how every element of their work can 
impact the natural environment and resulting social conditions.

Do different departments talk to each other?

For companies hoping to adapt to climate change, communication between 
departments is vital. The investor relations team needs to connect with the 
marketing department so that they can communicate more cohesively on issues 
including ESG disclosure, sustainability stories and stock performance. The 
board of directors needs to link up with the chief financial officer so that 
corporate governance and business accounting stay aligned with new scorecards 
and demands for transparency – and so the CFO understands and recognizes these 
metrics of business performance.

The same goes for corporate philanthropy: it needs to move from a linear, 
foundation-led activity to one that aligns with the company’s business 
strategies. Doing so could help ensure that all of a company’s efforts – the 
sum of its collective action, including business and philanthropy – lead to 
clear, tangible impact on the world’s social and environmental conditions.

As for decision makers, they need to understand how climate change could 
impact their companies’ procurement policies and market growth so they can 
consider how best to adapt their companies’ structures and processes to these 
changes.

There’s a lot more to dig into of course, based on a company’s sector, 
industry, ambition and appetite. However, the inevitability of climate change 
has never been clearer. It’s no longer a question of if climate change is going 
to happen or why a company needs to prepare, but when it is coming, what its 
impacts are going to be and how a company plans to adapt. For many companies, 
it’s time to reach for a scratch pad and start plotting a new course.
 