
Why isn't there someplace on the internet where you can see all the world's 
art?Artsy <http://artsy.net/> was founded five years ago to answer that 
question. Since then, our team has worked to build a resource that will help 
anyone with an internet connection to discover, learn about and collect art. 
Our partners, 600 of the world's most respected galleries, museums, art fairs, 
and private collections, have helped us to build one of the most comprehensive 
online database of contemporary and historical art.

With the vision to make all the world's art accessible, our focus naturally 
turned to making artworks available on the move and at people's fingertips. So 
we've just released our newiPhone app <http://iphone.artsy.net/>, designed 
specifically forApple's new iOS 7 operating system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/18/ios-7-review-apple>. We've 
already been featured by Apple worldwide as a best new app, and we've had 
90,000 downloads to date – more from the UK than anywhere else in the world.

When we first started thinking about the project, we interviewed collectors 
and art enthusiasts about how they engage with art, how they use mobile 
technology, and what they hoped to see from our firstiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> app. One thing we heard again 
and again is that the art world is so broad that even experts have a hard time 
keeping up. With that in mind, we focused on building an app experience that 
lets you explore a huge range of high-resolution artworks (over 60,000 of 
them). Most importantly, we wanted users to be able to do it in a way that's 
fast, fun to engage with, and casual.

We also wanted the app to present works in a way that way that lives up to the 
meaning, creativity and quality of the artworks themselves. Tapping a piece of 
art on your screen opens a detailed view where you can zoom into a 
high-resolution image, see important information regarding process, materials 
and dimensions, and explore similar works recommend by our search technology,
The Art Genome Project <http://artsy.net/theartgenomeproject>.
 Users can tap the 'heart' icon and save a work for later 
The app features a mix of commercial and non-commercial art. Seasoned 
collectors as well as beginners can easily contact a gallery or inquire with a 
dedicated member of Artsy's art advisors when they find a work that captures 
their interest. Or they can tap the 'heart' icon and save a work for later. The 
process is intuitive, easy, and we think, unintimidating. We want to encourage 
interaction without necessarily pushing a sale as well; it's primarily about 
discovery and inspiring content.

Initial work on the Artsy app began in early 2013, long before Apple announced 
the beta version of iOS 7. With the earliest demos, however, it became apparent 
that our vision to streamline design elements in user experience complemented 
whatApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> promised for its new 
operating system. We got word in the middle of August that iOS 7 might launch 
much sooner than we'd anticipated, so our team went into overdrive – we would 
have just over two weeks to finish the app, which was a challenge. But despite 
being scattered through nine time zones, it all came together in the end.

iOS 7 is all about disappearing interfaces – letting content speak for itself 
and guide user interactions. We wanted to put art front and centre, with our 
brand barely visible in the background. You won't see mentions of Artsy when 
you browse the app: instead it is all about the works of art themselves. Even 
our navigation buttons disappear when you start to scroll so as not to distract 
attention from the content, and there's no persistent navigation bar, which is 
commonplace in most apps. Immediacy and delight are crucial: flip the phone on 
its side and see a work of art scaled into a gallery space.

Over 650 galleries and museums around the world such as White Cube, Victoria 
Miro, the British Museum, V&A, Guggenheim and Serpentine Gallery are promoting 
their exhibitions and artworks on Artsy. Even galleries and museums usually 
reticent about the digital space have realised the opportunity to connect with 
a wide, international base of art lovers.

While institutions both public and private are investing in exciting mobile 
tools to make their collections accessible, Artsy attempts to be a 
comprehensive source that can make connections across the entire art world, 
inspire creativity and discourse, as well as enable and educate existing and 
new audiences.

Alexander Fabry and Robert Lenne both work for Artsy <http://artsy.net/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 