 Cameron and Farage by Nicola Jennings. 
Politicians rarely find it easy to say sorry but, in April, culture secretary 
Maria Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/07/maria-miller-expenses-row-apology>
 did manage to find a 32-second window in her diary to come to the House of 
Commons to mutter: “Yeah whatevs I dun nuthin wrong and though I’m sayin soz I 
don’t mean it cos what’s wrong with claimin to live in wun house and livin in 
anuva I mean everywunz at it innit?”

One of the shortest parliamentary apologies on record was the preface to one 
of the longest general election campaigns. The unforeseen consequence of the 
Fixed Term Parliament Act of 2011, which was introduced to ensure the 
coalition’s survival for five years, was that parliament had little to do in 
the government’s final year. Time and again, the then leader of the house, 
Andrew Lansley,was forced to explain why there wasn’t much government business 
going on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/10/andrew-lansley-how-not-to-succeed>
; his nadir came when he had to find a reason, other than inactivity, why the 
Commons was being prorogued a week earlier than usual at Easter. “I am 
surprised at the honourable lady’s argument that we are not busy,” he said 
wearily, before the tumbleweed carried him away. “We are busy. When we return 
from recess, we have a busy two days.”

Ed Miliband and David Cameron found they had rather more time on their hands 
than Lansley and used it to try to win hearts and minds. Starting with the MPs 
of their own parties. Having chosen Ed as its party leader four years 
previously primarily because he wasn’t his brother David, Labour was now having 
second thoughts;Miliband’s speech to the party conference in September did not 
help his cause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/27/labour-lead-conservatives-falls-two-points-miliband-conference-speech-deficit>
.

“Now here’s the thing, friends,” he said. “The other day I had a bit of a 
snuffle and Justine thought it wouldn’t be a good idea for me to go for a walk 
in Primrose Hill. So I didn’t get to meet Alexandra and Andy who were out there 
waiting to tell me how worried they were about the deficit … ” Ever since this 
deficit deficit, Ed has been playing catch-up – with some success recently, 
after George Osborne’s autumn statement revealed that not only had the Tories 
failed to meet their own commitments on cutting the deficit, but they were 
planning to takeBritain’s welfare spending back to the 1930s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/autumn-statement-2014-george-osborne-spending-cuts>
. By and large, the British people prefer their lives to be made miserable by 
politicians who just aren’t very good at their job rather than by those who 
aren’t very good at their job and hate them into the bargain.

The Conservative leader also came under pressure from his own party on Europe 
and immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/oct/20/miliband-strategy-europe-cameron-hardens-immigration>
, and found himself being dragged further and further to the right to stop
haemorrhaging MPs to Ukip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/17/seats-could-be-left-vacant-if-more-tory-mps-defect-to-ukip-before-election>
. He didn’t seem to find the experience wholly disagreeable.Ukip, meanwhile, 
went from strength to strength 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/12/observer-editorial-ukip-rise-on-the-back-of-broken-politics>
 – as much because it wasn’t either Labour or the Tories as for its policies. 
Which wasn’t wholly surprising as it didn’t have much to say on anything but 
immigration and Europe. Those, too, had elements of contradiction, withNigel 
Farage aligning himself with a Polish holocaust denier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/oct/20/ukip-does-deal-with-far-right-to-save-european-grouping>
 to screw an extra £1.5m in expenses from the EU so he didn’t have to go to 
Brussels. Ukip’s biggest attraction, though, was its nominative determinism.
Mark Reckless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/27/tory-mp-mark-reckless-defects-ukip>
.Natasha Bolter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/10/ukip-natasha-bolter-ruined-life-speaking-out-roger-bird>
.Roger Bird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/09/ukips-suspended-roger-bird-denies-sexual-harassment>
. If it fields Ray Cyst, Fidel Expenses and Lee Gover as candidates next May, 
it could win by a landslide.

The biggest event of the year – a far bigger one than Cameron ever anticipated 
several years ago when he had congratulated himself on his negotiation skills 
for keeping devo max off the ballot paper – was the Scottish referendum. As 
everyone south of the border, including the Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/16/scottish-independence-queen-intervene-yes-vote-fears>
 – “If you fark this arp, Cameron, your farking feet won’t touch the farking 
grindæ” – hit Defcon 1, the Scots were assured of devo max even before the 
first vote had been cast, afterGordon Brown had been sent north 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/08/fgordon-brown-leads-scottish-labour-drive-rescue-no-campaign>
 to vow to voters they could have anything – sunshine, cash, yachts – as long 
as they didn’t vote for independence.

Somewhere along the way the vow, which is ordinarily worth 12 commitments or 4 
pledges, became upgraded to a solemn vow. This was unprecedented. No one quite 
knew just what a solemn vow entailed; they soon found out. It was a vow to which
Evel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2014/nov/20/cameron-questioned-by-mps-about-scotland-devolution-and-evel-politics-live-blog>
 strings could be attached the next day. Defeat had been snatched from the jaws 
of defeat.

South of the border, other politicians found themselves running round in 
circles trying to prevent the country unravelling through their own 
incompetence. Theresa May discovered the government’s longterm economic plan 
was working so well that far more people than she expected wanted to get the 
hell out of the country and go on holiday shortly after she hadclosed half the 
passport offices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/08/passport-office-chief-denies-chaos-backlog>
, refused to admit there was anyone other thanacquaintances of Leon Brittan to 
head the child abuse inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/21/fiona-woolf-urged-step-down-abuse-inquiry-leon-brittan-links>
 and was astonished to find thatnet migration was about 200,000 more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/22/net-migration-uk-212000-final-quarter-2013>
 than she expected. Despite all this, she managed to see off the education 
secretary, Michael Gove, in what was seen as a battle to succeed Cameron. Gove 
has rarely been seen in the Commons since.

One can’t say the same for Iain Duncan Smith who repeatedly insists that the 
universal credit system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/25/universal-credit-rolled-out-england-benefits-ids>
, that has so far cost £2.2bn to deliver payments to about 231 people, is a 
once-in-a-lifetime success story. Let’s hope so. Nick Clegg and the Lib Dems 
all but became an endangered species. “The reason I was in Penzance for the 
autumn statement” said the incredible shrinking man, “was that if I’d gone any 
further west I’d have drowned.” Some might say he already has.

Into these dizzy waves of over-achievement stepped Russell Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/russell-brand>. “Yeah mate I love your 
tits love sorry I dont mean to be sexist you know what money is shit no one 
should have any thing is the world is much deeper than anyone knows did I 
mention I use to take a lot of smack there’s this weird psychic thing going on 
with other planets and money is shit and the best thing really is not to vote 
stop looking at me chest hairs … ” For want of anything better to believe in at 
Christmas, some chose to call him the Messiah. Hallefuckinglujah.

• I Never Promised You a Rose Garden: A Short Guide to Modern Politics, the 
Coalition and the General Election 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-never-promised-you-a-rose-garden-2.html> by 
John Crace is published by Bantam at £12.99 and is available through the 
Guardian Bookshop

 