
The journey into arts and culture is one we can all enjoy for free. Cultural 
spaces up and down the country offer myriad experiences and objects to 
appreciate, educate and inspire. But the big question is: are we, the art 
lovers, being shortchanged in our experiences? Equally, do we shortchange the 
organisations who work tirelessly to bring us these experiences?

Coming from a background of delivering actionable customer insight to venues 
in the ticketed world of culture, we atPurple Seven 
<http://www.purpleseven.co.uk/> realised that we didn’t know who the millions 
of visitors to museums, arts spaces and cultural venues actually were. We knew 
that these visitors appreciated arts and culture, but we wanted to get to know 
them at a deeper level. What do they really like? What do they especially 
enjoy? How often do they visit venues? Where precisely do they visit? This was 
a larger question than ticketed events and one the sector was not tackling 
particularly well.

We wanted to take on the challenge of plugging this knowledge gap. The key to 
success was ensuring that while we as a sector were improving our understanding 
of visitors, that visitors also received an enhanced experience. We wanted to 
improve data collection, but there has to be a quid pro quo for the visitor: 
why would any consumer share their information if not getting anything in 
return? Simply using the visitor as a means to capture data and therefore 
insights for arts organisations was not an option for us. Better experience in 
the venue will create better engagement, and in turn better insights. The power 
of data is not the amount you collect, but the insight you draw from it.

We needed to build an offering that was dual-purpose, with the key objective 
being to enrich both visitor and venue. This is when we realisedan app 
<http://www.im-at-app.com/> would be the best way to improve the users’ 
experience and in turn collect data for organisations.

Our first step in making this happen was to research, test and understand the 
potential of beacon technology. This tech is already being usedon the high 
street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/04/beacon-technology-house-of-fraser-waitrose>
 to push promotional offers out to consumer smartphones at a very specific 
level, for example, very precise aisle locations in-store. This technology was 
perfect to deliver the right content to the right people at the right time – it 
would allow us to collect data on what content was engaged with, how visitors 
moved around the venue, how long they spent in parts of the venue, and whether 
they socially shared comments or content.

Once we had in place the goals we wanted to achieve, we needed a brave soul to 
test it with: a single venue with lots of ambition. At this point in time, we 
were having many conversations regarding data withLiverpool Vision 
<http://www.liverpoolvision.co.uk/>, who themselves had a major project with 
the International Festival of Business (IFB <http://www.ifb2014.com/>), and so 
the beta trial was born. Our outputs would aim to engage the business user of 
IFB, the city visitor and the local dweller, turning that information into 
insights.

We had a city, but no venues. This changed rapidly when Liverpool Culture, FACT
 <http://www.fact.co.uk/>, Tate Liverpool 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-liverpool>, Open Eye Gallery 
<http://www.openeye.org.uk/>, Liverpool Biennial <http://www.biennial.com/>, 
the Bluecoat <http://www.thebluecoat.org.uk/> and the National Museums of 
Liverpool <http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/> all signed up for the beta 
trial. Our trial had now turned into a city-level trial, which meant delivering 
a cross-venue app, cross-venue reporting and cross-city insight.

Ready for take off, there were some issues we had to overcome: first, getting 
the right content from the venues for the app; second, being smart about the 
technology we use.

We had the venues, but no content and six weeks to get it live. All the venues 
gave us the content that was available, but we also set to work building video, 
written, audio and photographic content of our own. We know that content is 
king and we had to ensure that the visitor’s experience was more insightful and 
enjoyable because of the app. This meant spending time with the people who make 
these exhibitions and shows happen, turning their knowledge into a visitor 
journey.

The beacon technology was great and we also chose to use geo-fence technology 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geo-fence> (virtual perimeters for real-world 
geographic areas) to action parts of the app to welcome people to venues. This 
was a mistake. We learned that geo-fence technology had issues with users 
moving from the street into a building; it can distort your actual location and 
spend time dropping in and out, which changes actions in the app. Our geo-fence 
triggers were used to notify the user they were at the venue, deliver a welcome 
message and take them to the content menu page for that venue. If the tech 
could not find you it would not trigger, or in some cases, multi-trigger. We 
should have left it to the user to go in to the app when at the venue and open 
up the menu. It was an update we put into action very quickly as we felt it 
distorted the user journey and reporting.

Our initial objective set out to trial in a single environment with 1,000 
people. We ended up with 10 venues and 7,000 people using the app. The findings 
are encouraging with, on average, each user using the app across five venues, 
the biggest age group being 25-44-years-old, and an arts and culture report 
that allows great insight into the visitors of Liverpool and its cultural 
organisations.

Now that the beta trial is complete, we are building an updated version from 
our learnings to go live in January 2015, with a further significant update in 
June. This will see more cities involved, which is hugely exciting.

App facts

• Length of the project: two months’ research and planning, two months’ 
building, two months’ data science and reports building
• Companies involved: Purple Seven <http://www.purpleseven.co.uk/>, Liverpool 
Vision <http://www.liverpoolvision.co.uk/>, Liverpool Culture, FACT 
<http://www.fact.co.uk/>, Tate Liverpool 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-liverpool>, Open Eye Gallery 
<http://www.openeye.org.uk/>, Liverpool Biennial <http://www.biennial.com/>, 
the Bluecoat <http://www.thebluecoat.org.uk/>, National Museums of Liverpool 
<http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/>
• Size of the team: one creative director/project manager, two data 
scientists, one designer, three developers, one content manager/copywriter, 
plus one intern

More App stories

• How we made the Dozens & Trails library app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/07/dozens-trails-app-library-birmingham>
• How we made the Show and Tell circus app for children with autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/07/dozens-trails-app-library-birmingham>
• How we made the Centenary Connections first world war app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/08/centenary-connections-first-world-war-app>

Jeff Boardman is engagement director at Purple Seven 
<http://www.purpleseven.co.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 