
 It’s raining. One of us tries to use a laptop to shield the phone while the 
other puts a jacket over their head – not to keep themselves dry, but to stop 
the laptop getting drenched, all the while trying not to break the tether 
between computer and phone. Walking around town with this set-up at dusk may 
not be the smartest idea, nor the most efficient way to find bugs, but we’re 
trying to solve an issue. We’re due to submit to the App Store the following 
day and, in a couple of hours, have to get on a train to another city to do it 
all again.

This is the story of how we at Invisible Flock <http://invisibleflock.com/> 
madeIf You Go Away <http://invisibleflock.com/portfolio/ifyougoaway/> (IYGA), a 
locative game for iOS. We’re a company of artists based in Leeds who create 
large-scale interactive and public art that uses technology. We believe in 
creating all of our work in-house.

 Making IYGA meant that we had to learn the entire development pipeline from 
scratch, and to say we underestimated the learning curve would be putting it 
mildly. Throw in the fact that the app is created for specific locations, plus 
the realities of keeping a small studio afloat, and you end up with two people 
catching trains up and down the country, bug-fixing and pushing builds to the 
App Store using a smartphone 4G connection.

We’ve always used phones in our practice, mainly SMS for playful experiences 
outside or for longer works connecting participants across borders. We’ve made 
apps previously but felt that we hadn’t really explored the phone itself, 
rather used it as a platform for content delivery as part of a larger 
experience. With IYGA we set ourselves the challenge to really interrogate what 
experiences could be made for mobile devices, exploring the handset and what it 
affords: location, rendering, connectivity, orientation and audio.

 Our projects are always concerned with place in some way – how we exist in 
and experience certain places. With IYGA we wanted to superimpose a deeply 
personal narrative experience on top of the city that you walk through every 
day, to maybe change the way you see and behave in it.

 IYGA is a GPS-driven experience where you move through the game holding your 
phone in front of you like a camera to show a virtually abstracted version of 
the city overlaid on top of the real one.

It’s designed for multiple cities, layered on top of each other to create a 
shared virtual space where players can affect each other’s environment by 
changing the words written on giant billboards or graffiti on the walls of 
buildings.

 At dusk the world of IYGA really comes to life as a story begins and takes 
participants on a journey through the city, following a small girl sneaking 
away from a funeral party. It begins with you waking up to the steps of an art 
gallery (which one depends on which city you are playing in). The landscape 
shown on the screen as you pan around is purposefully sparse, like how you 
might remember a place from your childhood – a half memory of a place.

 A mixture of interactive text on the screen and conversations to navigate and 
a lot of way-finding, IYGA unravels what we hope is a beautiful story about 
loss. We wanted to take the mechanics of pervasive gaming and strip away the 
high-octane tropes that it traditionally follows and instead create something 
slow that makes you navigate the real world around you differently.

 IYGA is an experimental project and one of the most fascinating elements, and 
one of the most problematic, is this necessary physicality of the work. GPS, 
use of the phone’s accelerometers and time of day all mean that a player’s 
physical relationship to the real world defines and drives the game. With 360 
degrees of real-world freedom to contend with, the physical limitations of the 
player’s body and stamina, as well as environmental factors – cold, rain and 
other people interrupting the experience – all come into play.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F139334991&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F139334991>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F139334991&media=>
 The teaser trailer for If You Go Away 
 Designing a long-form experience with so many factors out of our control was 
the biggest area of friction, but when it works is where the project’s full joy 
and potential is realised – the unpredictable “doing” of an experience half on 
your phone and half in the city around you.

 IYGA has been available for six weeks in Leeds, Southampton, Warwick 
University, Middlesbrough and London (South Kensington, beginning at theV&A 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/>). We created it to begin from art galleries and to be 
picked up in those contexts, and its reach is growing. In a few months we will 
be creating a special version for an area of Lagos that will bring a whole new 
context to the work. The story will collide with an entirely different 
environment and create a shared multiplayer space between the UK and Nigeria, 
presented as part of The Lagos Theatre Festival and the British Council’s
UK/Nigeria 2015-16 programme 
<https://www.britishcouncil.org.ng/uk-nigeria-2015-16>.

 App facts

Length of the project: two years beginning to end, with an eight-month intense 
development period
Companies involved: Invisible Flock <http://invisibleflock.com/>
Size of the team: three artists as game designers (one lead developer, one 
lead game artist, one lead writer); one project manager; seven musicians; one 
pianist and one vocal performer

Ben Eaton is a founding lead artist at Invisible Flock 
<http://invisibleflock.com/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 