
Electronic invoicing could streamline government administration at a stroke, 
save taxpayers billions of pounds and enable the government to use its immense 
purchasing power to open new markets.

We believe electronic invoicing is a test case, offering the government a 
chance to give a practical demonstration of British digital leadership.

Not only would e-invoicing save huge amounts of taxpayers' money, it would, if 
implemented properly, stimulate the almost instantaneous emergence of online 
services for e-invoicing and the adoption of electronic open standards. Britain 
could become a world leader in the field, creating thousands of new jobs and a 
lasting boost to economic growth. Advocates of e-invoicinghave suggested 
<http://www.accountis.com/blog/2010/09/09/uk-e-invoicing-advocacy-group-update> 
that its full adoption by the government could result in economic benefits of 
£22bn-£28bn a year for only modest levels of investment.

In this age of austerity, e-invoicing is too good an opportunity to miss. Yet 
we face an enemy from within: an often cumbersome civil service bureaucracy 
that is slow to accept change. Britain must escape the stranglehold of the 
political-bureaucratic obsession that often places a premium on process over 
outcome. The government must push on if Britain is to fulfil its potential and 
become a global leader in a digital revolution, having the power to increase 
national productivity overnight.

Britain already lags behind most of Europe and many of our global competitors. 
In Denmark, paper invoicing has been banned in the public sector since 2005. 
E-invoicing in the public sector has been in operation in Sweden since 2008. 
The Finnish government has accepted e-invoices only since January 2010. Britain 
must step up its game.

Embracing enterprise, innovation and technology holds the key to releasing the 
economic growth and new jobs for which our country is crying out. That process 
must begin with the process of government itself. As individual consumers and 
businesses, we now use e-invoicing every day . The benefits are simply too good 
to miss .

But it's not all doom and gloom. Francis Maude, minister for the Cabinet 
Office, and others in government have shown tenacity in pursuing savings for 
taxpayers by eliminating waste and improving public sector productivity. To 
introduce e-invoicing as the default for public bodies will take strong 
political will. But be assured that, as forward-thinking MPs with experience of 
business and industry, we will do what we can to press for its introduction at 
the earliest opportunity.

Adam Afriyie and Stephen McPartland are Conservative MPs for Windsor and 
Stevenage respectively.

• To respond to this, or any other article on the Guardian public leaders 
network <http://www.guardian.co.uk/public-leaders-network>, email 
public.leaders@guardian.co.uk. You must bea member 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/public-leaders/> of the network to submit 
articles for publication.

• For the latest public leadership updates, follow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Publicleaders>

Why not join our community? Becoming a member of the Guardian public leaders 
network <http://www.guardian.co.uk/public-leaders-network>means you get sent 
weekly email updates on policy and leadership. You can sign up – for free –
online here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/public-leaders/start.php> 
 