
The concept for an app based on the war poetry of Wilfred Owen came as the 
result of reading a very early e-book containing a collection of his work. 
While I appreciated the portability of an e-book, I felt that such powerful and 
moving words could be so much better delivered if more use was made of the 
interactivity offered by devices such as iPads.

Owen’s words didn’t read like the poetry to which I’d previously been exposed. 
To me they provided vivid eye-witness reports from the frontline and described 
the horrors faced by the ordinary British soldier. As I read them, I heard them 
being spoken by a woman, a maternal figure, and this triggered a creative 
string of events.

Outlining my basic ideas to my faculty at Anglia Ruskin University 
<http://www.anglia.ac.uk/ruskin/en/home.html> and a leading expert in this 
field atGirton College <http://www.girton.cam.ac.uk/> resulted in positive 
encouragement and offers of support. There was no going back.

The main concept of The War Poetry of Wilfred Owen app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/owen/id892169435?mt=8> was to provide 
interactive access to the poems, both written and audio. Poetry is, after all, 
meant to be read out loud and therefore listened to, something digital 
platforms can easily accommodate. Then followed two further ideas: the reader 
might also be interested in finding out more about the work, so why not include 
academic commentary and an illustration relevant to each poem? This way the 
reader would be drawn into a rich and informative experience.

The app not only had to provide the essential ingredients but also look the 
part so a lengthy process of design evolution began. It was a process that 
helped to “sell” the idea to prospective contributors and supporters; the more 
it progressed the more it developed. Much like throwing a pebble into a stream, 
the ripples continued to flow outwards to trigger other ideas and attract 
interest.

Using a female voice for the poems upset the traditionalists. Some said that 
“it must be voiced by a young man” while a large majority found it a unique and 
stimulating perspective. The approach was to assume the position of a soldier, 
not necessarily Owen, writing words both descriptive and artistic which he then 
sent home.

In all likelihood the first person to open and read a letter recognisable as 
being from the front would be a mother or wife. The words would provide a 
glimpse into both the physical experience and of the soldier’s state of mind. 
It was never the intention to try and represent Owen and his situation but 
rather use his words to conjure up the assumed setting. During the many hours 
of recording, all who took part voiced similar feelings of emotion, 
thoughtfulness and of being incredibly moved. Indeed, the contemporary serving 
officers and partners of those still serving (who read some of the poems for 
the app) found that Owen’s words have a powerful resonance even today.

A task of this size and complexity (45 poems, 15 readers and four academic 
commentators) consumed huge amounts of time and energy, so it was essential to 
structure the process to ensure all elements were ready when needed for the 
build process. More so given it was, essentially, produced by one person (me).

A typical day would involve illustration in the morning and page design or 
build in the afternoon, interspersed with audio and video recording sessions 
and subsequent editing of those files. Without this discipline it might still 
be swirling around in the vortex that accompanies such projects, all the while 
threatening to suck you down into the abyss along with all the other projects 
that didn’t see the light of day.

Initially I tried to obtain funding to ease the process but this proved to be 
exceptionally difficult. There were plenty of favourable comments but nothing 
tangible. This resulted in the opinion that if I wanted to get this produced 
then I would have to do it myself, together with those readers and academics 
who so generously donated their time to the app.

I’m extremely pleased with the result and I’m delighted with the reception it 
has received among reviewers and users. I’m also working on various “spin-off” 
projects from the Owen app and have now been asked to produce something similar 
focusing on the life and work of poet and composer Ivor Gurney, as well as an 
app that features the words and images of contemporary military conflicts, 
enabling those who experience modern warfare to share a platform with great 
voices such as Owen.


App facts

Length of the project: three months’ planning, 15 months’ development
Size of the team: one (me!)

Ian Bennett is a lecturer at Anglia Ruskin University 
<http://www.anglia.ac.uk/ruskin/en/home.html>

More App stories

• How we made the Centenary Connections first world war app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/08/centenary-connections-first-world-war-app>
• How we made kscope, an image-sharing app for university applicants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jun/27/how-we-made-kscope-app-university>
• How we made the Romans app for iPad, iPhone and Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jan/10/romans-app-ipad-iphone-android>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 