
Judging by the movies they’re making about cancer, terminal illness and 
imminent death, the kids are alright.Me and Earl and the Dying Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/01/sundance-film-festival-me-and-earl-and-the-dying-girl-sweeps-top-prizes>
 is the latest in a recent surge of movies about young people dying that have 
all been uncommonly realistic and unflinching about the uglier, more sombre 
aspects of death. Like last summer’s champion tearjerkerThe Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/19/fault-in-our-stars-review-john-green>
, Me and Earl and the Dying Girl gives us another terminally ill girl, 
befriended by two movie-crazy high school boys who decide to make a movie 
especially for her.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fhollywood-death-film-fault-in-our-stars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F588f6244bf1832a049a13e0b4ffb0fbbb7d94f64%2F0_0_2331_3497%2F2331.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Hollywood%20has%20learned%20to%20embrace%20the%20realities%20of%20death%20in%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fhollywood-death-film-fault-in-our-stars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Hollywood%20has%20learned%20to%20embrace%20the%20realities%20of%20death%20in%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fhollywood-death-film-fault-in-our-stars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F588f6244bf1832a049a13e0b4ffb0fbbb7d94f64%2F0_0_2331_3497%2F2331.jpg>
 Joseph Gordon-Levitt and Seth Rogen in 50/50. Photograph: Allstar/Lionsgate 
It’s all very lighthearted then, but the movie’s protagonists, as in Fault, 
must sooner or later face up to the increasing likelihood of death. Their 
initial responses – rage followed by a macabre, black-comic embrace of the 
patient’s horror, and a fragile, chin-up, show-must-go-on attitude – give way 
to unfeigned anger and grief as the end draws near. The boys’ friendship is 
tested to its limits (just like the friendship between tumor patient Joseph 
Gordon Levitt and his stoner pal Seth Rogen in 50/50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/24/5050-review>) as the diagnosis 
leads to chemotherapy, baldness, vomiting, denial once more, and that familiar 
rage against death.

 Another approach can be seen in My Life Without Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/oct/24/londonfilmfestival2003.londonfilmfestival1>
, in which Sarah Polley, with two months to live, tells nobody, but instead 
begins to prepare those she will leave behind: setting her unemployed husband 
up with work and a new partner, and working out what will happen to her 
daughters. It’s like a downbeat version ofThe Bucket List 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/15/comedy.drama>, and she never 
mentions her plight to a soul.

Sundance 2015 review: Me & Earl & the Dying Girl – a slacker film with heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/29/sundance-me-earl-dying-girl-review>
 Time was, death was kept out of the movies, cancer was a stigma deriving from 
something bad in your karma and a culture of euphemism prevailed until 
surprisingly recently. If a character died of a terminal disease in movies from 
the 1930s to the 1970s, it was more often than not some sanitized, entirely 
symptomless ailment, one that left the body quite free of ravages, no buboes, 
no lesions, no vomiting blood into a bedpan, no adult diapers, no skeletal 
remnant, no gargling death rattle. In fact, in movies as diverse as Camille, 
Letter From anUnknown Woman andDark Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/nov/04/features.weekend>, one might have 
been forgiven for never realising what a protagonist was dying of. The only 
symptoms common to the deaths in these movies seem to be extreme soft-focus and 
an ethereally gentle and diffuse light around the deathbed.

 And this never really went away. Even as our familiarity with death 
increased, that soft lighting would glow on undimmed. We never even get a 
diagnosis for Ali McGraw’s Jenny in Love Story, though we can probably assume 
it’s leukemia, which destroys you from within, not without, so she too dies 
under the tender ministrations of the lighting department. Ditto Dying Young, 
in which Campbell Scott (leukemia) stays young and handsome to the bitter end, 
Charlize Theron (non-Hodgkin lymphoma) in Sweet November, and Winona Ryder 
(neuroblastoma) in Autumn in New York.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fhollywood-death-film-fault-in-our-stars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a49adff6cdfb386a1b6d6bbdb6b1a6653fe760b%2F0_51_2299_1380%2F2299.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Hollywood%20has%20learned%20to%20embrace%20the%20realities%20of%20death%20in%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fhollywood-death-film-fault-in-our-stars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Hollywood%20has%20learned%20to%20embrace%20the%20realities%20of%20death%20in%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fhollywood-death-film-fault-in-our-stars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a49adff6cdfb386a1b6d6bbdb6b1a6653fe760b%2F0_51_2299_1380%2F2299.jpg>
 Ride the lighting: Bette Davis and George Brent in Dark Victory. Photograph: 
Allstar/Warner Bros 
 What about the end of life when it arrives at the actual end, rather than far 
too early? We get the bitterest sense of loss, even before death, in movies 
about Alzheimer’s and dementia like Iris, Still Alice and Away From Her, in 
which spouses Jim Broadbent, Alex Baldwin and Gordon Pinsent can only stand by 
as their beloved partners’ minds and memories cave in on them, the bitterness 
only increased by their occasional returns to lucidity. “Old age is a 
shipwreck,” De Gaulle said of the Vichy-era Pétain, and we get raw glimpses of 
that disintegration in Magnolia, in which Jason Robards’ formerly vibrant and 
difficult family patriarch is reduced to a drooling, gargling shape under the 
bedsheets, but more especially in Michael Haneke’s Amour,which spares us 
nothing in the physical realm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/15/amour-review> – changing sheets, 
diapers, and bath-time – but adds, for extra discomfort, as is Haneke’s habit, 
the emotional toil taken on the equally elderly but less ill partner doing the 
caring. That these two ancient people are played by Jean-Louis Trintignant and 
Emmanuelle Riva, known to us through five decades of European cinema as 
imperishable specimens of male and female beauty, makes the nakedness of their 
ageing, failing and fading all the more poignant.

Still Alice review – moving meditation on who we really are
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/05/still-alice-julianne-moore-oscar-alzheimers>
 And then there is Aids, unique to itself in some ways, but an enormous 
influence on modern thinking about mortality and final care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/27/how-survive-plague-aids-activism-film>
, and likewise on movies. The epidemic of the 1980s was the first time since 
the Somme and Passchendaele that death had concentrated its focus so fiercely 
and narrowly on such a specific demographic, largely youthful gay men of the 
Baby Boom. And death came in such horrifying ways; with the antiviral 
gatekeepers of the body all disabled and suddenly useless, men were dying of 
things cured decades and centuries before. And all of it compounded by a 
largely ignorant, scared and homophobic public, and the callously indifferent 
Reagan administration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fhollywood-death-film-fault-in-our-stars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b8ec7ba789400b2dcb4d79fd012d541b5e314fe%2F0_51_2713_1624%2F2713.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Hollywood%20has%20learned%20to%20embrace%20the%20realities%20of%20death%20in%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fhollywood-death-film-fault-in-our-stars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Hollywood%20has%20learned%20to%20embrace%20the%20realities%20of%20death%20in%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fhollywood-death-film-fault-in-our-stars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b8ec7ba789400b2dcb4d79fd012d541b5e314fe%2F0_51_2713_1624%2F2713.jpg>
 Tom Hanks as Andrew Beckett in Philadelphia. Photograph: Allstar/Tristar 
Pictures 
 And Hollywood didn’t do much better, making its first studio-backed statement 
on the disease only in 1993 with Philadelphia (much like the 
too-little-too-late Oscar-winning Vietnam movies of the late 70s). Until then 
it had been left to the independent sector. Bill Sherwood’s Parting Glances 
spoke from within the crisis, and did so with subtlety, wit and poise, but 
Sherwood himself died of Aids in 1990 and never made another movie. Longtime 
Companion is more handsomely mounted and built to jerk tears, but packs an 
enormous emotional wallop, pacing itself out one day per year over a decade of 
diagnoses, rapid declines, funerals and the steady narrowing down of a 
once-vibrant circle of friends. In these movies, death is faced squarely and 
head-on, and so are all its symptoms and dislocation. In the mainstream, movies 
like Dallas Buyers’ Club go full-tilt on the emaciation, lesions and gruesome 
symptoms only now, 30 years later, when the epidemic is safely a part of 
ancient history.

 In the end, how badly do we wish to witness death at the movies? A full-scale 
recreation of the worst symptoms of the Aids epidemic would be as tasteless and 
controversial as recreating aspects of the Holocaust, verging, in Claude 
Lanzmann’s formulation, on the pornographic. And, to be crass, such a film 
would be neither entertaining to audiences nor remunerative to its backers. 
Even away from all that, to see a man or woman patently dying on screen is 
grievously upsetting under any terms.

 To watch elderly movie director Nicholas Ray (Rebel Without a Cause, They 
Live by Night) dying slowly, for real, in Lightning over Water, co-directed by 
Ray and his protege Wim Wenders, is grueling and semi-exploitative even if 
Ray’s name is on the box. Here is a man whose work venerated the young and 
rebellious; and here he is in his eye-patch and hospital gown getting chemo, 
literally shrinking before our eyes. Young or old, death doesn’t improve with 
closer acquaintance, even if the movies about it are getting better all the 
time.
 