
The Associated Press (AP) news piece 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/237fa4c447d74698804be210512c3ed1/rampaging-south-sudan-troops-raped-foreigners-killed-local>
 that broke the story of rapes and attacks on aid workers in South Sudan read 
like a pitch for a Hollywood movie. But real women and men were victims of the 
attack on the Terrain hotel complex in South Sudan, which included gang-rape of 
aid workers, torture and looting.

This was an abhorrent attack and it is important that journalists covered it. 
The attack raises concerns about the safety and security of aid workers in 
South Sudan, and highlights the increasing dangers that aid workers face 
worldwide as they work to help people in desperate need. Credit is due to the 
reporter for his persistence in tracking down witnesses and piecing the events 
together.


We have had clients contact us who we haven’t worked with for years, because 
they were re-triggered by the article
Natalie McCauley, counsellor, Humanitarian Wellbeing 
However, the way it is written does the survivors’ courage a disservice. The 
survivors who came forward must be commended. They are incredibly brave women 
and men. Their experience and ability to speak so soon after the incident is a 
testament to their strength. Apparently they are receiving the support that 
they need from their organisations, which is fantastic news. Their voices will 
hopefully help to drive change in the sector to protect other aid workers.

But I can’t help but feel that Jason Patinkin, the writer of the AP article, 
shows a lack of empathy with the survivors and a lack of experience with 
reporting on rape issues. This inexperience threatens to undermine the 
important message that a properly drafted article on the attacks might have 
conveyed.


Firstly, the level of detail is, in my opinion, salacious. (A subsequent 
report on the UK’s Channel 4 news <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LD1Wwb5jXME> 
similarly resorted to graphic recounts and a video of Terrain in disarray, 
rather than focusing on the broader issues raised by the attack.) “We have had 
clients contact us who we haven’t worked with for years, because they were 
re-triggered by the article,” said Natalie McCauley fromHumanitarian Wellbeing 
<http://www.humanitarianwellbeing.com/>, an organisation which provides 
counselling services to aid workers, who also felt the report included an 
unnecessary level of detail.

Aid worker: I was drugged and raped by another humanitarian in South Sudan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>
Secondly, Patinkin’s article breaks guidelines 
<http://gbvaor.net/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2013/07/GBV-Media-Guidelines-Final-Provisional-25July2013.pdf>
 (pdf) for reporting on gender-based violence in humanitarian contexts. No 
mention of resources or support is provided in the piece. No gender-based 
violence experts were quoted or appear to have been consulted. It was a raw 
description of a charged sexual and violent attack on a group of expatriates 
and nationals in South Sudan – one that titillates and inspires fear, one that 
fails to provide context on either the broader issue of attacks on aid workers 
or even the conflict in South Sudan.

I’m also concerned that the survivors may be identified from his piece. After 
my own experience with rape in South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>
, I chose to go public. But no one should have that choice forced on them and 
within hours there was speculation about the identities in increasingly large 
circles among tight-knit humanitarian networks. Anonymity must be considered in 
the much larger context of a piece, and one must always err on the side of 
caution.

Secret aid worker: there is a new trend of sexual violence in South Sudan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/20/secret-aid-worker-south-sudan-personal-attacks>
Finally, no forethought appears to have been put into the impact this will 
have on nationals in South Sudan. The article notes minute details about the 
uniforms of the attackers. For those outside of South Sudan, these details 
appear inconsequential. However, they are the insignia of a powerful and 
dangerous armed group of individuals in South Sudan, one that has already 
committed multiple gang-rapes on both expatriates and nationals over the past 
year, with utter impunity. By obliquely naming this group, every single 
national that was present at the attack is now placed in additional danger, and 
they are not offered the protective measures that expatriates have been.

However, Paul Colford, AP vice president and director of media relations says:

“Our story was carefully reported and edited, and given the extreme 
sensitivity of the subject matter the reporting process included sharing the 
text with the anonymously quoted victims before publication to ensure that AP’s 
report would accurately reflect their accounts of what happened to them and 
around them, and to ensure the article would not put them and their colleagues 
at risk. The victims have since expressed their appreciation for the story that 
AP published for a global audience.”

Setting aside concerns about the way Patinkin wrote the article, it does raise 
the issue of rape being used as a weapon against aid workers. So, what can be 
done to address the problem?

Rape is usually ignored in trainings and the risk is downplayed
Sarah Martin, gender-based violence humanitarian consultant 
Security managers claim that rape, particularly when perpetrators are in armed 
groups, cannot be prevented, and that is why they don’t raise it in training. 
“I have heard that myth so many times from security personnel,” says Sarah 
Martin, a consultant who has worked on gender-based violence issues in 
emergency contexts throughout the globe.

“Rape is usually ignored in trainings and the risk is downplayed. But even if 
you cannot prevent an act of rape, it is important that organisations and 
individuals are aware whether there is a plan in place to medically and 
emotionally support the survivor.”

Knowing organisation’s reporting procedures – if they exist – are vital to 
addressing the problem. However, areport (pdf) 
<http://www.reporttheabuse.org/website/wp-content/uploads/Prevention-Policy-and-Procedure-Checklist-Report-the-Abuse-August-2016.pdf>
 on how the humanitarian system addresses sexual violence byReport the Abuse 
<https://reporttheabuse.org/> found that only 16% of the organisations examined 
have any sort of response strategy, policy or procedure that mentioned sexual 
violence against their employees. With an overwhelming number of organisations 
not having structures in place, it is essential to get a straight answer from 
them before something happens – how will you handle a case of rape?

Sexual violence in the aid sector: what should NGOs be doing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/19/sexual-violence-aid-sector-ngo-action>
Trainings such as hostile environment awareness – often mandatory before being 
deployed – could do more by giving people a place to discuss their fears and 
give them some basic information on how (and how not) to talk to survivors. 
They can also be used to communicate necessary information regarding post-rape 
kits, evacuation plans, access to therapy and procedures for compassionate 
leave. Organisations likeILS <http://www.locationsafety.com/> and Humanitrain 
<http://humanitrain.com/> are already provide resources like this.

How can we report on incidents of rape in a way that is productive and 
nurturing, that does not resort to salacious details? Through media reports 
that are thoughtful and that do not expose those who have had horrible 
experiences to further trauma. By supporting survivors and honouring their 
confidentiality. By refusing to play into the media desire for details and 
drama, and taking calculated steps back.

As a fellow rape survivor, I send my utmost gratitude to those who were 
attacked in South Sudan last month. You have been in my thoughts, and I am 
available should you wish to talk. You deserved to be treated better by the 
journalist you trusted, and I genuinely hope people will respect your right to 
remain anonymous. I am sorry that my speaking out could not stop what happened 
to you, but I am hopeful that your strong voices will help to stop this from 
happening to others. We have to try.

Sexual assaults against aid workers: it's time to take a stand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/19/sexual-assault-rape-against-aid-worker-its-time-to-take-a-stand>
We are reporting stories on this subject; you can contact us confidentially at 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com with “Sexual violence against aid workers” in the 
subject line.

• If you are have been affected by the story in this article, Rape Crisis 
England and Wales <http://rapecrisis.org.uk/> or Rape, Abuse, Incest National 
Network <https://www.rainn.org/> can provide support. If you are not in the UK 
or the US, Hot Peach Pages <http://www.hotpeachpages.net/index.html> provides a 
directory of gender-based violence organisations all over the world.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 