
Ahead of the Activate London Summit 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>
, Anna Bance, co-founder of Girl Meets Dress, spoke to us about how the online 
fashion rental service is riding the wave of collaborative consumption as 
people increasingly value experience and time over ownership.

1) Can you tell us a little about girlmeetsdress.com 
<http://www.girlmeetsdress.com/> and your reasons for founding it?
Girl Meets Dress is a disruptive e-commerce business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/technology-in-retail> with a mission 
to democratise luxury – believing that everybody deserves a Cinderella 
experience. We provide millions of women with the ability to rent designer 
dresses and accessories for a fraction of the retail price.

The Girl Meets Dress story began in 2009 when I was working as UK PR manager 
for French luxury brand Hermes – and like my previous roles in the fashion 
industry, it involved lending the collection of dresses and accessories out on 
a daily basis to fashion magazines, shoots, celebrities and journalists. I 
thought to myself "wouldn't it be amazing if we could all borrow dresses for 
just one event, and wear a different designer for every event in our calendar?" 
When my co-founder Xavier and I looked into the market we saw that no one was 
doing it.

2) As an online fashion rental service, you've benefited from the growing rise 
of collaborative consumption. How do you explain the popularity of the sharing 
economy?
Collaborative consumption is drastically changing the way we live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/behavioural-insights/sharing-economy-sustainable-alternative-economics>
. Consumers are no longer confined to owning goods and services. The abundance 
of assets along with the relative affordability of almost anything, high-tech 
consumer platforms, the digitisation of products, close-knit social media 
communities and the economic downturn of 2008 have all meant that collaborative 
consumption is flourishing.

Many of us are used to bartering, swapping or trading. But these networks are 
now wired up globally, so this kind of networking and exchanging is second 
nature, even between strangers and across myriad commodities. When we launched 
back in 2009, the recession mindset dominated. It meant that "cost per use" was 
a huge driver, as being smart with money and where to spend it was highly 
regarded. But it was also clear that people have since realised that experience 
and time are the most precious commodities we have, and that consequently 
ownership is becoming more irrelevant than ever before.

3) The sharing economy business model does however have its critics who point 
to companiesevading regulations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/27/airbnb-uber-taxes-regulation>
. What's your take on this?
Of course not everybody is going to agree on the sharing economy, especially 
hotels and taxi firms who are losing out on business from peer-to-peer services.
But new businesses will appear as old economies fail, with these services 
adapting to emerging gaps in the market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/jun/05/sharing-economy-critics-airbnb-uber>
. Since we are not peer-to-peer we are not breaking any rules or regulations 
specifically discussed in this article, and it will not be surprising to see 
more of these articles being written to discourage the sharing economy as the 
hotel and taxi industry suffers.

Fashion designers have never had a reluctance towards rental services the same 
way hotel and taxi firms have been to Airbnb and Uber. In fact, it is the 
opposite. Girl Meets Dress is very attractive to designers because many women 
will typically only have tried a few high-end designer brands in their 
lifetime, if any. With rental, designer labels get to be introduced to 
potential customers on a regular basis. That is a huge marketing opportunity 
for designers trying to reach new customers and the next generation on a mass 
scale. Instead of picking holes in the sharing economy we should continue to 
embrace it.

4) Beyond offering more affordable fashion, how is Girl Meets Dress.com 
changing the shopping experience?
98% of our customers try a new brand they have never worn previously in their 
life. Many women will typically only have tried a few high-end designer brands 
in their lifetime, if any. With rental, everything is suddenly affordable. The 
trend for fast fashion over the past few years has been fuelled by mass market 
retailers' abilities to manufacture and retail in very short time cycles. 
Similarly celebrities are promoting ever more products at every opportunity; so 
much so that consumers have ended up buying at such a rapid rate that women now 
buy four times as much clothing as 30 years ago and the average woman has 22 
garments in her wardrobe that she has never worn. Designer dress rental is the 
evolution from this and it means that by spending the same a woman can always 
be on trend and in a different dress for every event. This is the perfect 
retail cocktail for the customer which the fashion industry has been unable to 
provide until now.

5) You've recently launched your first showroom in the UK, in Battersea, 
London. What's the rationale behind this?
Retail and consumer habits are changing significantly, both in terms of 
expectations but also in terms of value. The growth in rental highlights 
consumers growing preference for experience over ownership. We wanted to keep 
up our high-level of customer service by creating an initiative that added to 
customers overall dress rental experience. Showroom appointments allow women to 
play designer dress-up and try on as many dresses as they like. They will also 
receive personal styling advice from our style team, and from here can book up 
their social calendar with dresses. This initiative was a large reason as to 
why we moved to bigger offices a few months ago.

6) What's next for Girl Meets Dress?
We have ambitious and exciting plans for the year ahead. We want to continue 
to grow the collection of stock, the team, and to innovate within the wider 
fashion space. We will continue our leadership of this emerging space and be in 
a position to wow our customers in every way possible and to forge a brand and 
quality of service which women will wonder how they managed without, giving 
women access to the biggest closet in the world.

7) Finally, what is your message for the delegates attending the Guardian's 
Activate London Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>
?
The pay-as-you-live lifestyle enables you to easily access a better and more 
affordable lifestyle by hiring or sharing goods and services on a temporary 
basis, rather than buying and owning outright. This is a concept that is 
rapidly changing the way we look at consumerism, and now is the time to stand 
up and take notice.

Anna Bance is the co-founder of Girl Meets Dress 
<http://www.girlmeetsdress.com/>. She is speaking at this year's Guardian 
Activate Summit, 17 July 2014. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 