
The decision by Atos <https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> to pull out of 
the "fit to work" tests contract presents another headache for a government 
that has been keen for the private sector to deliver public services.

One thing that all failing major outsourcing contracts have in common is that 
failure is built in from the outset.The Laidlaw report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/west-coast-main-line-final-report-of-the-laidlaw-inquiry>
 on the failed west coast mainline exercise suggested that the Department for 
Transport had tried to let the contract on the cheap. Risk transfer is a 
frequent problem and contracts management arrangements are often weak. Public 
sector bodies cannot outsource risk. The tagging contracts, the A4e "welfare to 
work" and Atos "fit to work" contracts appear to have attempted to place all 
risk onto the suppliers. The reality is, whatever the contract states, when 
things go wrong the public sector discovers that it still gets the blame. 
However, the person letting the contract will likely have moved to another job 
by then and it becomes someone else's problem.

Outsourcing companies have been at fault in accepting unknown risks. Was it 
that they considered that weaknesses in government contracts management would 
enable them to find rather unorthodox ways to mitigate financial risk? The
Public Accounts Committee report 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/democracylive/house-of-commons-25092239> on four large 
suppliers indicated that much of their business came from contract extensions – 
which would mean much more profit due to no further set-up costs.

I have spent years sorting out outsourcing contracts that had gone wrong, and 
have produced a guide for successful outsourcing, together with some red flags 
which indicate "this is not going to work".

What to do

• Fully understand the business to be outsourced, including the full costs, 
current and future business volumes and risks. Be honest about the degree of 
uncertainty.

• Before the formal procurement process starts, assess the ability of the 
outsourcing services provider market to take on the business being outsourced. 
This has been UK government policy for 25 years and is specifically encouraged 
in the new EUProcurement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/procurement> Directive.

• Organisations need to change their business models when they outsource 
functions. Roles and responsibilities of personnel can change and the 
organisation may need to be re-structured in line with the new model.

• Consider how the contract should be future proofed

• Good planning and project management is key. Develop a sensible 
specification – 'must haves', not 'would like to haves' – with appropriate 
allocation of risk and reward and a clear and realistic execution, contracts 
management plan and exit strategy.

• Understand the motivations of people in different parts of the supplier 
organisations. They will vary, partly according to how they are remunerated.

What not to do

• Outsourcing <https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/outsourcing> 
is disruptive and can be damaging if it is not done as a coherent part of the 
overall business strategy. Clear objectives must be agreed at outset, linked to 
the long term aims of the organisation.

• If the success or failure of key objectives cannot be measured accurately, 
that is a red flag. Key performance indicators should be focused on outcomes to 
allow for efficiency and innovation.

• Suppliers need to make a profit. As a rule of thumb, if their costs are more 
than about 85% of what it would cost the public sector to perform the service, 
the contract may be unviable.

Colin Cram is a public sector consultant specialising in procurement and the 
former director of the North West Centre of Excellence

• Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com

Join the Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>, 
direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 