
Silent Opera's latest production, Live/Revive/Lament 
<http://www.silentopera.co.uk/future.html>, is a trio of short operatic 
installations that take place in three different performance spaces. The 
performers – an actor, a dancer and an opera singer – interpret the sound 
worlds at each place, simultaneously, before it's all change and they move on 
to the next one. As an audience member, you can either follow a single 
performer around the three story sections or stay put, for example seeing how 
the dancer or the opera singer might interpret what the actor just heard.

The purpose of the app for Live/Revive/Lament is to connect the audience with 
the performance. As a company, we think of technology as another performer (a 
very flexible one) and in this case, the app was to be the opera's guide: the 
impartial ferryman.

So, how does it work? When you reserve your space for the event, you are 
instantly provided with a unique QR code that is sent to you via email. This is 
your ticket and proof of purchase, as well as your entry into the 
Live/Revive/Lament experience. It leads you to the app, an all-in-one 
performance experience: you can click on options to view information about 
cast, crew, the company and the show, as well the map of the current 
performance space. From the map, you can tap a graphic representation of each 
section to access video and audio from that section from previous performances, 
hopefully informing your choice of how to watch the show.

Our very first move was to make this a web app. Applying to the App Store had 
a long lead time and it would have been difficult to update content as often as 
the performance requires. A web app on the other hand provides flexibility in 
editing, sales and use of third-party tools such as video and audio hosting.

Once we knew that we would be going ahead with a web-based app, we had a clear 
path of research and development, focused mainly on the quality and speed of 
streaming of each section's audio and video. Especially sound, as it plays such 
a huge part in the audience's enjoyment of opera.

The live nature of the project – streaming material, maps and info that need 
to be updated for every performance – were big considerations, and a web app 
seemed the clearest way to accommodate that need for constant updates. However, 
that meant another big set of challenges; we needed a way to deliver this 
content across large spaces that may or may not have any existing Wi-Fi access. 
In some spaces, there were no 3G/4G capabilities or even a mobile tower signal.

We considered embedded video and audio paired with a caching system so that 
audience members could download all of the content pre-show, for example when 
connected to the Wi-Fi in the foyer, which meant they could take the whole app 
with them through the performance.

We tried a web server, signal buffers and even considered satellite broadband 
providers to take our own internet access anywhere the show went. But having 
tried caching pre-recorded material for our Aldeburgh performance and using 
lower-bandwidth-consumption social media at our Saatchi Gallery performance, 
we're now looking at our own server hosting for the future.

With our own server, we'd be able to guarantee access and speed to our 
audience members every time. Eventually, the server will also host the app and 
all video and audio streaming that comes with it. That variation in 
environment, the system having to be totally portable and dynamic, is probably 
the biggest hurdle in making the whole thing run smoothly.

One of the striking things about our app is how it subverts tradition; there's 
such a scarcity of mobile technology being used within performance; just think 
of the amount of times you've been asked to switch off your phone at a show. 
Our app isn't a side element, it's meant to be used with and during the 
performance.

The feedback has been really positive and we've been able to improve a lot. I 
wouldn't have thought to add adesktop-optimal version 
<http://www.live-revive-lament.com/> if an audience member hadn't asked to 
watch one pathway of the show from home later (she didn't have a smartphone). 
The stats have been encouraging and it spurs us on to create more exclusive 
content for ticket buyers prior to the show, such as secret clues and 
background info, knowing that people are interested in checking out the lay of 
the land before attending.

App facts

Length of the project: six months' development before first launch; research 
and development ongoing
Size of the team: for the app, one director, one sound designer, one art 
designer, one tech designer/programmer and one producer

More App stories

• How we made the Lumo Deliveries Inc game for mobile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jun/13/how-we-made-lumo-deliveries-inc-game>
• How we made kscope, an image-sharing app for uni applicants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jun/27/how-we-made-kscope-app-university>
• How we made the Curiator iPhone app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/may/30/how-we-made-curiator-iphone-app>

Ziggy Jacobs is technical designer at Silent Opera 
<http://www.silentopera.co.uk/> – follow the company on Twitter @SilentOpera_ 
<https://twitter.com/SilentOpera_>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 