
At the heart of our app Artory <http://www.artory.co.uk/> is a question: if it 
was possible to measure the intangible qualities of cultural experiences, how 
could this empower the individual and transform cultural programming?

For users, Artory is a “what’s on” app for culture that gathers feedback. In 
exchange, users earn Art Miles® to be redeemed for exclusive offers at venues 
acrossPlymouth <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/plymouth>. But it’s also a 
groundbreaking collaborative research and development initiative that measures 
the quality of cultural experiences, allowing organisations to better 
understand their audiences.

How we made the DeviantArt Mobile App | App story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jan/23/how-we-made-deviantart-mobile-app>
The journey started with twelve leading cultural organisations from across 
Plymouth, a digital agency, a social scientist and a shared vision. The 
intention was to co-develop a metric and mechanism for measuring quality and 
for collectively promoting cultural events.

Then came the crux: how we incentivise audiences to leave feedback in the 
first place. The solution took the form of Art Miles – a scheme that allows 
users to accumulate points by visiting venues and leaving feedback. These 
points can be exchanged in participating arts and cultural venues for drinks, 
concessions as well as access to VIP events. The term was originally 
trademarked by the Southbank Centre, which supports Artory by granting it a 
license for use of the term.


The metric and the Art Miles scheme were then implemented with the development 
of the Artory smartphone app (iOS and Android). The app is designed to work 
with an open-source platform to provide a slick, personalised and easy-to-use 
“what’s on” functionality for audiences while seamlessly gathering feedback 
data – in real-time – for the participating cultural organisations.

Importantly, this data is not only collected but also processed in Artory’s 
analytics engine, giving venues vital information about their audiences that 
can inform programming and investment. With this kind of data required more and 
more for securing arts funding, this aspect is invaluable. Artory also ensures 
that data protection is adhered to and that users have control over the 
transactional and qualitative data they leave behind.


The Artory project was created with a not-for-profit and open-source ethos, 
where all income generated is reinvested into the ongoing development that 
benefits all participants. The open-source software platform that powers the 
app is calledQualia <http://qualia.org.uk/about/>, which allows organisations 
to freely install and modify the code under the GNU General Public License: one 
of the most widely used free software licenses.

As with many cultural and grassroots initiatives, Artory has been developed on 
a shoestring budget. The partners involved have all invested huge amounts of 
time and resource into launching this service. There are always additional 
functionalities, platforms and user tests we would have liked to include for 
the launch, but this is by no means a completed product.

The Artory project so far has been all about collaborative innovation and 
investment. The partners see this as a long journey, which is as much about 
creating a shared cultural economy as it is about measuring. One of the central 
challenges to overcome will be ensuring Artory users feel empowered and 
incentivised enough by the app to engage in deeper conversations about their 
cultural experiences. An even greater challenge is whether we – the producers 
and curators of arts and culture – can embrace the revelations of this data to 
make meaningful change.

Since its launch on 30 January 2015, downloads of the app are well on their 
way to meeting the group’s targets and it is currently in the top five of the 
new lifestyle apps on Google Play. The key to the app’s ongoing success will be 
making sure that the user experience is excellent, that the event listing is 
exceptional and that incentives are attractive enough to build and retain user 
loyalty.

The real success of Artory will be when it rolls out throughout the country: 
when you can find out what’s happening; express what you feel about your arts 
and cultural experiences; and spend your Art Miles not just in Plymouth, but 
all over the UK.

App facts

Length of the project: one year of planning and securing partnerships and 
investment, plus eight months’ development
Funding: the app is funded by i-DAT <http://i-dat.org/> with Plymouth 
University <https://www.plymouth.ac.uk/>, Elixel <http://www.elixel.co.uk/>, 
Destination Plymouth,Plymouth Arts Centre <http://www.plymouthartscentre.org/>, 
Plymouth City Council andPlymouth Culture <http://www.plymouthculture.co.uk/>

More App stories

• How we made the DeviantArt Mobile App 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jan/23/how-we-made-deviantart-mobile-app>
• How we made the cultural data app, I’m@app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/dec/12/how-we-made-im-at-app-liverpool-culture>
• How we made the Hidden Newcastle app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jan/09/hidden-newcastle-app-culture-heritage>

Find out about Artory’s design and development partners here 
<http://www.artory.co.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.

 