
AOL has spent the past few years insisting that its media businesses – 
including flagship brand the Huffington Post and technology sites such as 
TechCrunch – are a core part of its raison d’être, but the digital brands look 
distinctly less relevant toit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/12/verizon-to-buy-aol-44bn-deal>
s new owner <>, telecoms giant Verizon.

Soon after joining AOL, chief executive Tim Armstrong talked about his desire 
to turn the company into what has been described as the Time Inc of the 21st 
century, and has overseen a host of media acquisitions, most notablyHuffington 
Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post>, TechCrunch and 
Engadget, as well as the failed hyperlocal news project Patch.

His memo to staff on the deal says Verizon will “give our content businesses 
more distribution” and put a “mobile lens” on everythingAOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> does, including content.

Yet the fastest-growing parts of AOL are in online ad serving to third 
parties, in particular video adverts delivered using algorithms, not 
advertising on its own sites. Meanwhile, the company still makes the bulk of 
its operating profit from its shrinking but still sizeable dial-up business.

Both of those operations make some sort of sense for Verizon. It could use 
AOL’s tech – bolstered by the$405m acquisition of video ad company Adap.tv 
<http://mashable.com/2013/08/07/aol-acquires-adaptv/> in 2013 – to sell ads 
through online channels such as the web video service it is about to launch.

The key quote in the Verizon statement announcing the deal 
<http://www.verizon.com/about/news/verizon-acquire-aol> from chief executive 
and chairman Lowell McAdam makes it clear where the company’s main interest 
lies: “AOL’s advertising model aligns with this approach, and the advertising 
platform provides a key tool for us to develop future revenue streams.”

Verizon could also hope to convert some of those dial-up laggards to broadband.

That leaves the low-growth (though relatively high margin) media holdings as a 
decidedly non-core part of Verizon.

Huffington Post has global scale – 214 million unique users worldwide, 
according to AOL – but Verizon has more than 100 million people in the US 
actually paying for mobile contracts. AsVox has pointed out 
<http://www.vox.com/2015/5/12/8590829/verizon-buys-aol>, serving ads to mobile 
subscribers would give Verizon a little more room to be aggressive in taking 
subscribers from rivals such as AT&T, a more lucrative play than the wider 
display advertising game.

And while there are obvious potential tie-ups between a telecoms giant and 
tech sites such as TechCrunch and Engadget which review and report on mobile 
devices and services, the deal is unlikely to do much for their credibility, 
especially given the fate ofVerizon’s recent foray 
<http://www.theverge.com/2014/12/2/7324063/verizon-kills-off-sugarstring> into 
branded publishing with Sugarstring.

It is difficult to see what Huffington Post and the others could bring to 
Verizon’s big picture.

There is speculation Verizon might seek to spin off or sell  
<http://recode.net/2015/05/12/verizon-buys-aol-for-4-4-billion/>the media 
operation, with Germany’s Axel Springer named as one potential buyer. Finding a 
generous new owner might be the best hope for Huffington Post and AOL’s other 
sites. They never seemed an especially great fit for AOL, and they are at best 
an irrelevance for Verizon.
 