
When Ben Wheatley <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ben-wheatley> was 
preparing to makeA Field in England, his mind-altering foray into the English 
civil war, released 5 July , he took a lot of test shots to help him determine 
how the film should look. Some of the shots were in colour, others were in 
black and white, and Wheatley recalls being struck by the disparity between the 
two. With the colour shots, he says, "it was all about the colour of a 
character's clothes and the grass and the sky. It was really distracting. 
Whereas in black and white, it was all about his face and his hair and the lace 
and the texture of the grass. That's what drew us to it."

Wheatley, who rose to prominence with Kill List 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/sep/01/kill-list-film-review> and 
Sightseers <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/dec/02/sightseers-film-review>, 
isn't the only high-profile director to be seduced by monochrome this year. A 
couple of weeks ago, Joss Whedon followed up his superhero extravaganzaAvengers 
Assemble, the third-highest-grossing movie of all time, with a low-budget 
adaptation ofMuch Ado About Nothing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jun/16/much-ado-about-nothing-review>, 
shot over 12 days with a cast of little-known actors at his home in Santa 
Monica. The film is in black and white, as are Noah Baumbach's delightful
Frances Ha, out on 26 July, and Alexander Payne's Nebraska 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/cannes-2013-nebraska-first-look-review>
, which was warmly received at Cannes in May and is released later this year.

It's unusual to have so many new black-and-white films cropping up at the same 
time; according toVariety, moviegoers are having more exposure to the format in 
a two-year span than during any other comparable time-frame in recent history. 
The big success story here is clearlyThe Artist, though let's not forget about 
Miguel Gomes'sTabu <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/sep/06/tabu-review>, 
Tim Burton'sFrankenweenie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/oct/21/frankenweenie-review-tim-burton> 
and Pablo Berger'sBlancanieves (also out next month). In spite of this trend, 
however, making movies in black and white is still perceived as a commercial 
risk. When Alexander Payne, the Oscar-winning writer-director ofSideways and 
The Descendants, announced his intentions for Nebraska, the studio tried to 
change his mind. The trade-off, when he stood his ground, was a reduced budget.

What is it about black and white that appeals to contemporary film-makers, in 
spite of the obstacles it throws up? "It's such a beautiful form," enthused 
Payne at Cannes last month, "and it left our cinema because of commercial, not 
artistic reasons." Speaking aboutNebraska, in which a father and son go on a 
road trip together across the American midwest, he said: "This modest, austere 
story seemed to lend itself to being shot in black and white – a visual style 
as austere as the lives of the people in the film."

According to Geoff Andrew, head of film programme at the BFI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bfi>, black and white is often used in 
contemporary cinema to deal with the past or to express nostalgia in some form. 
"Nebraska isn't actually set in the past," he says, "but it's very much about 
the past. As we come to know the Bruce Dern character in the film, we find out 
what he used to be like, and we glimpse an American way of life that has since 
vanished. It's a very nostalgic film."

Frances Ha, by contrast, is about a young woman in modern-day New York 
puzzling over her future. Although its protagonist, played by Greta Gerwig, is 
struggling to move forward in life, the film is clearly looking back to French 
new wave directors, particularly François Truffaut, and to black-and-white 
classics such as Woody Allen'sManhattan, itself a homage to an earlier era of 
film-making. According to Baumbach, "There was something about black and white 
that makes the movie almost immediately nostalgic".

Joss Whedon <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joss-whedon>, meanwhile, used 
the format to enrich the tone of his Shakespeare adaptation, which he describes 
as a noir comedy. "I wanted to give this movie some of that old Hollywood 
glamour," he said recently, "and I think we would have had more of a challenge 
if it wasn't in black and white."

The venerable format also offers more practical advantages. All four films 
were shot in colour, digitally, and converted to black and white in 
post-production. When Ben Wheatley was makingA Field in England, he took pains 
to ensure that they never saw any of the footage in colour, on set or during 
the edit. "One thing we realised with black and white is that you have a lot 
more latitude for shooting outdoors and matching shots together than you have 
in colour. Obviously the English weather's terrible: the sun's in and out like 
nobody's business. If you have an overcast shot cut against a high-contrast 
shot in colour, you wouldn't get away with it at all, but black and white 
covers a lot of it up."

As well as giving Joss Whedon room to manoeuvre in outdoor scenes, the format 
saved him from having to repaint his house – he felt the walls at home were too 
bright to be filmed in colour. On a broader level, it's a relief thatMuch Ado 
About Nothing was made in black and white. With its glossy Californian location 
and handsome TV actors, it could have ended up looking less like a Shakespeare 
adaptation with echoes of classic Hollywood and more like a daytime soap.

It's hard to imagine any of these films working better in colour. Whatever the 
studio said to the contrary, the wayNebraska looks is a perfect match for the 
story it tells. What's striking about the extended hallucinatory episode 
towards the end ofA Field in England is that the absence of colour seems to 
heighten its psychedelic effect rather than muting it. Sam Levy's luminous 
cinematography makesFrances Ha one of the most beautiful New York films in 
years, but the real surprise is how fresh it feels despite the supposedly 
antiquated format.

While it would be premature to herald a major comeback for black and white, 
it's heartening to see more directors fighting to make it part of the 
contemporary palette. For critic and film-maker Mark Cousins, the format 
connects us with the most exalted days of the movies. "Cinema became an art in 
black and white," he reminds me, "and its gods were Orson Welles, Charlie 
Chaplin, Yasujiro Ozu, Carl Theodor Dreyer. To shoot in black and white, even 
today, still feels, for many film-makers, like being among the gods."

LIFE IN MONOCHROME: New films in black and white
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fy9YKHRQkf7k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fy9YKHRQkf7k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fy9YKHRQkf7k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YBn5dgXFMis>

FRANCES HA
Dir: Noah Baumbach
 "Most film-makers, if you ask them, at some point would like to make a 
black-and-white movie," Noah Baumbach toldVariety recently. "It's such a 
specific and whole other way to photograph a story." With his new film, Frances 
Ha, Baumbach has fulfilled that ambition and created the most distinctive work 
of his career (his previous films includeGreenberg, starring Ben Stiller and 
Greta Gerwig, andThe Squid and the Whale). Set in modern-day New York and lit 
by cinematographer Sam Levy in shadowy monochrome, the comedy follows a 
27-year-old dancer (Gerwig) as she apartment-hops between boroughs and 
struggles to adapt to upheavals in her life. Baumbach wrote it with Gerwig and, 
working on a lower-than-usual budget, he shot the film guerrilla-style on the 
streets of New York using an inconspicuous DSLR camera. "Working in black and 
white allowed me to see the city with new eyes," Baumbach said.


A FIELD IN ENGLAND
Dir: Ben Wheatley
 Over the past two years, with Kill List and Sightseers, Ben Wheatley has 
emerged as one of Britain's most promising young film-makers. Before he moved 
on to larger-scale projects, however, Wheatley decided to pare everything back 
and direct this freaky, hallucinatory movie, set during the English civil war, 
on a tiny budget with a cast of seven. Putting the resulting creative freedom 
to good use, Wheatley chose to shoot the film in black and white. "If you're 
makingIron Man 3, the commercial considerations would be massive," he tells me, 
"but when you're making a film about the English civil war, it doesn't really 
matter. Nobody was trying to talk me out of it." In the film, a group of 
battle-weary men, includingKill List star Michael Smiley and a cowardly 
alchemist's assistant played by Reece Shearsmith, search for treasure in a 
muddy English field. The action builds towards a crescendo that will leave 
heads spinning.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FWnmZc8uoEbo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FWnmZc8uoEbo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FWnmZc8uoEbo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jk5kkLNPg8g>

MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING
Dir: Joss Whedon
 After shooting the $220m superhero film Avengers Assemble, Joss Whedon 
decided to do something closer to home – literally. He shot this adaptation of 
the Shakespeare comedy in 12 days at his house in Los Angeles, using a cast of 
regulars from his TV shows (Firefly, Buffy the Vampire Slayer) and paying for 
it out of his own pocket. Although the play is updated to the present, Whedon 
describes the film as a "noir comedy" and his decision to make it in black and 
white is, in part, a nod to the great screwball comedies of the 1930s and 40s. 
Currently on general release in the UK, the film was met with generally 
positive reviews when it came out earlier this month. In theObserver, Philip 
French "warmed to [its] charm, intelligence and good humour, and ended up 
thinking the film something of a triumph".
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkqIR22t5AI0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkqIR22t5AI0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkqIR22t5AI0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kqIR22t5AI0>

NEBRASKA
Dir: Alexander Payne 
 "I've wanted to make this movie in black and white ever since I read the 
script eight years ago," saidAlexander Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne> last year of his latest film,
Nebraska, balking at the notion that a recent surge of interest in monochrome 
had influenced his decision in any way. "I don't need to seeThe Artist to know 
I can make a black-and-white movie," he went on. "I watch and am influenced by 
black-and-white movies all the time." Nonetheless, Payne was forced to accept a 
budget cut in order to makeNebraska as he envisaged it. The film follows an 
elderly father, played by Bruce Dern, and his son (Will Forte) as they embark 
on a slow-paced journey from Montana to Nebraska, ostensibly to claim a 
sweepstakes prize. The story is told with the keen psychological insight we've 
come to expect of Payne from films such asSideways and About Schmidt, and 
Phedon Papamichael's handsome cinematography throws the rolling midwest 
landscape into sharp relief.
 