
Some students will feel a growing sense of dread as exam season approaches – 
while others may appear irritatingly unfazed. Shelly Asquith, vice president 
for welfare at the National Union ofStudents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> (NUS), says that exam 
confidence “comes with good wellbeing in general”.


“I don’t think it’s necessarily about feeling confident in yourself, but 
feeling that you’re able to do the work,” she says. But that’s easier said than 
done perhaps. So how can students manage anxiety and stress during exam time – 
and still get the grades they need?


Know you’re not alone


It’s a good idea to talk to course mates and lecturers to share fears. You 
won’t be the only person who is nervous. Nadia Violets, 24, has recently 
completed a master’s at LSE in gender policy and inequality. She panicked 
during one of her exams when she first opened the paper. “My self doubt meant 
that as soon as I opened the page and looked down at the questions, I 
immediately thought I didn’t understand any of them,” she says.


It’s important to ask for help if ​​you​ feel anxious or panicky

“That cut off a lot of my time. But then when I calmly read the questions 
again they started to make sense.” Because she has been diagnosed with anxiety, 
Violets was allowed extra time, sat the exam in a smaller room, and was able to 
go out for breathers. She says she “ended up doing that about five times”.

Katrina Wigzell, 29, is in her last year studying nutrition at London 
Metropolitan University. She says she likes the pressure of exams, even though 
that makes her “a bit of an odd one”. “I work better that way,” she says. “If I 
attend my lectures and do a bit of revision there is no reason why I shouldn’t 
feel confident enough to sit an exam.” Her tips are to “learn your subject and 
remember you aren’t the only person who is stressed”.

Ask for help and let people know how you feel


Asquith says it’s important to ask for help if you feel anxious or panicky. 
“Confidence comes through having good networks and knowing that you’ve got 
friends and support around you when you find it difficult to cope. It’s also 
about having access to certain services,” she says.


Wish you were more confident at uni? Six myths are stopping you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/02/wish-you-were-more-confident-at-uni-six-myths-are-stopping-you>
“There are routes available for you to get extenuating circumstances if you 
are suffering from mental ill health and can’t do the exam. If someone is 
having a panic attack then let a staff member know, because that’s not a state 
you should go into the exam in.”

Violets found the university’s counselling service very helpful. “I would 
really recommend using them,” she says. “And don’t be ashamed if you have 
mental health problems.”

Stay focused on your work


Choosing topics that inspire you will help you to feel enthusiastic. It will 
also mean that you are more inclined to focus on your work. “I ended up 
focusing on feminist theory around environmental philosophy,” Violets says. 
“Because it fascinated me, I managed to do really well.”

Violets adds that prioritising and identifying what is important at that 
moment and what isn’t is helpful. She says meditation is useful for this. “Like 
a lot of us, I get caught up in social things. At that point in your life, your 
priority needs to be your exams and your qualification.”

Asquith agrees that mindfulness meditation can help avoid last minute panics, 
because it teaches you how to acknowledge that “when you’re about to go into an 
exam there’s not much else you can do but just go through that experience.”

A bit of stress can be good – but not too much


A bit of stress can be good in exams, says Violets. “When I’m doing 
performances and I’m a bit blasé about them and I’m not stressed, I perform 
really badly. A bit of stress is essential.”

Six things students can do to boost their mental health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/03/students-how-to-boost-mental-health-at-university>
Professionals agree that a small amount of stress can be good. “Normal levels 
of stress can help you to work and think faster and more effectively, as well 
as improve your performance,”advises Catherine McPhail 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/student-psychological-services/other-resources/ExamAnxiety>
 from the University of Dundee’s counselling service. But she adds that, “if 
you find your anxiety overwhelming, your performance could be badly affected. 
Becoming aware of what causes your anxiety will help to reduce the stress.”

Too much stress however, can stop students from performing as well as they 
could in exams, all agree. “Stress is a massive barrier and it’s certainly 
something that a lot of our student unions are tackling and supporting students 
with,” says Asquith. She recommends a new app calledEmoodji 
<https://www1.bournemouth.ac.uk/news/2015-10-21/be-first-try-minds-new-emoodji-app>
 from mental health charity Mind, which is targeted at students and aims to 
help with managing stress around exam time. If that’s still not working,take 
this quiz 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/erinchack/take-this-quiz-to-get-your-confidence-up-for-final-exams#.rv8ynpE4o>
 to boost your confidence.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 