
Tasmania is having a moment. Undeniably, the popularity of David Walsh’s 
Museum of Old and New Art has consolidated the state’s reputation as a cultural 
tourism destination. But right now something else is happening too:Tasmania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania> is emerging as a star of 
film and television.

This year saw the debut of eight-part Foxtel/BBC Worldwide thriller The 
Kettering Incident in July, while new ABC comedy Rosehaven premiered in 
October. They are high profile, well-received shows which seem likely to go to 
a second season. Though poles apart genre-wise, both are set in small-town 
Tasmania and riff on notions of otherness and isolation while highlighting the 
dark beauty of the landscape.


The Unconformity: beauty and devastation collide in isolated Tasmanian mining 
town | Josephine Rowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/21/the-unconformity-devastation-and-beauty-collide-in-isolated-tasmanian-mining-town>
This year also marks the premiere of big budget features partly shot in 
Tasmania: Lion starring Dev Patel and Nicole Kidman, and A Light Between Oceans 
starring Michael Fassbender. Meanwhile, Jennifer Kent’s anticipated second 
feature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/30/the-nightingale-not-horror-like-the-babadook-but-a-pretty-horrific-world>
, The Nightingale, will be produced in Tasmania in early 2017.


With the exception of A Light Between Oceans, which depicts a fictional 
Australian island, all of these projects use Tasmania as a central plot 
element. It’s not a case of a new backlot; we’re talking about major 
productions engaging with Tasmania the place, the identity, the idea. This has 
been happening for a while in the realm of the historical docu-drama 
(Tasmanian-made and Irish-made stories of convict life on the island, most 
notably) and there have been occasional feature films. But this new crop of 
productions has the potential to shift the way the world, including the rest of 
Australia, thinks about this island of half a million people.

This is no overnight success story. Screen Tasmania was formed in 1999 to fund 
local production and support development, and there was sporadic activity long 
before that too, most significantly in the days of the Tasmanian Film Unit from 
1945 to 1960 and Tasmanian Film Corporation in the 1970s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fhow-tasmania-became-the-gothic-muse-of-australian-film-and-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06c1bc98a0906016173bb53e66f9f418ec2d5bab%2F0_256_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Tasmania%20became%20the%20gothic%20muse%20of%20Australian%20film%20and%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fhow-tasmania-became-the-gothic-muse-of-australian-film-and-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Tasmania%20became%20the%20gothic%20muse%20of%20Australian%20film%20and%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fhow-tasmania-became-the-gothic-muse-of-australian-film-and-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06c1bc98a0906016173bb53e66f9f418ec2d5bab%2F0_256_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Celia Pacquola, Luke McGregor and a very big dog in the ABC TV show Rosehaven. 
Photograph: ABC 
But until recently, the only thing most international viewers knew about 
Tasmania was the Warner Bros’ creation Taz the Tasmanian devil, irksome to many 
actual Tasmanians. There have been other gems along the way, such as the kooky 
protagonist of Yahoo Serious’ Young Einstein (1988) and, years later, the 
endearingly blunt Fat Amy of the Pitch Perfect movies. In both cases, the 
characters’ origin stories were allusions to eccentricity, although any 
birthplace thought of as “redneck” or odd would have served just as well.

Now that the world’s understanding of Tasmania is evolving beyond simply being 
the birthplace of Errol Flynn – in no small part thanks to the influence of 
MONA – it’s no surprise that Australian filmmakers are eager to jump on the 
bandwagon. But is there really much to say? Aren’t we just talking about the 
equivalent of a small town, and aren’t they are a dime a dozen, all over the 
country?


Well, no. Tasmania is large, about the size of Ireland (no, you won’t be able 
to see it all in a weekend). Its terrain is diverse, in places wild and 
inhospitable, but actually most people live in the cities. Our culture has 
evolved alongside but separate to the rest of the country. We have our own 
slang, our own pop-culture touchstones, and, some say, our own accent. Our 
political scene operates in its own way and the world’s first environmental 
party was formed here.


Dark Mofo: making a strangely beautiful town seem deliciously deranged | Steph 
Harmon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/24/dark-mofo-a-strangely-beautiful-town-becomes-deliciously-deranged>
The light is clearer. I won’t say it’s always spooky but Tasmania does have a 
unique atmosphere, borne of an unusually temperate climate for Australia, 
geographical isolation and memories of a violent past. It’s picturesque, and 
affords many opportunities for a high quality of life surrounded by mountains, 
bushland or coast. At the same time, the state tops the country in illiteracy 
and poverty rates. In many ways, it’s a fragmented society, with lingering 
conflicts over divisions of class and race. Many young Tasmanians feel limited 
by being here, and some of our best and brightest have languished in obscurity, 
sidelined from the national conversation.

The version of Tasmania most visible right now is heavily influenced by 
Tasmanian gothic – an aesthetic that has its origins in colonial literature and 
painting, informed by a European sensibility. There are festivals that 
deliberately engage with the idea of the darkness of this place: the overtly 
macabreDark Mofo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/24/dark-mofo-a-strangely-beautiful-town-becomes-deliciously-deranged>
;the Unconformity arts festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/21/the-unconformity-devastation-and-beauty-collide-in-isolated-tasmanian-mining-town>
 in Queenstown; and my own horror film festival, Stranger With My Face, 
featuring the Tasmanian Gothic Short Script Challenge.

That said, the Tasmanian gothic is not necessarily central to the practice of 
local artists. An artistic tradition that comes from a Tasmanian Aboriginal 
perspective, or from a non-European immigrant perspective, for example, may 
reject the framework entirely. But going beyond labels, there’s an opportunity 
now to reflect on how we got to this point, and where Tasmania on screen is 
going from here.

Arctic Blast (2010) and The Hunter (2011) heralded a new wave of aesthetic 
interest in Tasmania.


An Australian-Canadian co-production, Arctic Blast is a B-grade disaster flick 
that centres around an American protagonist (played by Michael Shanks of 
Stargate fame). While the production employed many locals, the narrative 
treated Hobart as basically an offshore American city. The Hunter, produced by 
Porchlight’s Vincent Sheehan (also producer and co-creator of The Kettering 
Incident), is based on the novel by Sydney-sider Julia Leigh. Its European 
protagonist – played by Willem Dafoe – is a mercenary seeking the elusive 
Tasmanian tiger. Tasmania becomes the backdrop for an existential journey – 
important to the story only in a symbolic sense.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fhow-tasmania-became-the-gothic-muse-of-australian-film-and-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77fe4133175d9bab605573c5a7b911d9fa0dcb75%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Tasmania%20became%20the%20gothic%20muse%20of%20Australian%20film%20and%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fhow-tasmania-became-the-gothic-muse-of-australian-film-and-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Tasmania%20became%20the%20gothic%20muse%20of%20Australian%20film%20and%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fhow-tasmania-became-the-gothic-muse-of-australian-film-and-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77fe4133175d9bab605573c5a7b911d9fa0dcb75%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Gillian and Anna in The Kettering Incident. Photograph: Giovanni Lovisetto 
The key difference this time around is that The Kettering Incident and 
Rosehaven are co-created by Tasmanians (Vicki Madden and Luke McGregor 
respectively).


Yet these stories still talk about Tasmania from the outsider’s perspective, 
through the eyes of a fish-out-of-water character (in both cases an ex-local; 
in the case of The Kettering Incident the protagonist has lived away so long 
that she has British accent). This is a common device when introducing 
mainstream viewers to an “unusual” setting (seeDoc Martin and Cornwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/08/doc-martin-clunes-cornish-idiots-review>
,Northern Exposure and Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/oct/22/northern-exposure-next-box-set>
, Top of the Lake and New Zealand, to name but a few) but it also creates a 
sense of distance, with the local people often treated as specimens or 
curiosities. Then again, the experience of going away, coming back and trying 
to re-assimilate is a quintessentially Tasmanian one. It will be interesting to 
see how these stories evolve if that sense of otherness is allowed to erode.

It’s one thing to talk about Tasmania on-screen in a purely ideological sense, 
but none of this can be separated from the practicalities of production.

David Walsh of Mona: on art, sex and why (gallery) size matters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/09/on-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet>
Considering that large-scale production will probably never happen in Tasmania 
without major external funding, the question of what constitutes an authentic 
Tasmanian vision remains pertinent. There’s a risk of filmmakers playing into 
stereotypes and preconceptions or indulging in pure mainlander wish-fulfilment. 
Such tropes are not necessarily bad, in isolation: it’s about striking the 
right balance, and that means ensuring locally instigated projects don’t lag 
too far behind in-bound production.

Locating these TV shows in Tasmania has been a risk on the part of 
broadcasters: there’s no studio here, no huge pool of highly skilled crew, and 
the weather is unpredictable. It wasn’t a foregone conclusion that everything 
would work out, although earlier projects such as The Hunter were test cases. 
The producers of The Kettering Incident and Rosehaven have embraced shooting on 
location and made the accompanying challenges integral to their aesthetic. To 
their credit, they have also cast many Tasmanian actors, including in lead 
roles.

The experiment, so far at least, has been a resounding success.
 