
A museum app that uses the collections of other museums; a treasure hunt that 
takes you everywhere but our own venue; a mobile guide to a world that no 
longer exists – it's fair to say that Wellcome Collection'sMagic in Modern 
London 
<http://www.wellcomecollection.org/explore/play/magic-in-modern-london.aspx> is 
not your typical museum app.

The app is a geolocated treasure hunt for the amulet collection of the amateur 
Edwardian folkloristEdward Lovett 
<http://www.wellcomecollection.org/whats-on/exhibitions/charmed-life/edward-lovett.aspx>
, who paced London by night, buying curious objects from the city's mudlarks, 
barrow men and sailors, at the same time collecting stories about the 
superstitions to which they were attached (red coral for life and health, 
necklaces of blue beads to ward off bronchitis).

In the app's story, Lovett's amulets have been scattered throughout London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and the player must scour the city, 
phone in hand, searching for the lost charms. Entering "areas of enchantment" 
that relate to the fears of Edwardian Londoners, clues lead towards amulets 
that are added to a virtual collecting case.

Magic in Modern London (also the title of Lovett's treatise on London 
folklore) had its genesis in an exhibition calledCharmed Life 
<http://www.wellcomecollection.org/whats-on/exhibitions/charmed-life.aspx> at 
Wellcome Collection. Artist Felicity Powell worked with a collection of amulets 
formerly belonging to Lovett, and her exhibition arranged them within a 
beautiful horseshoe-shaped installation. We were inspired and intrigued by the 
history of these amulets and what they meant for the Londoners who carried them 
for protection against an uncertain new twentieth-century world.

We also wanted to develop our programme of game commissions. We'd had a huge 
hit with a Flash-based game about smuggling calledHigh Tea 
<http://hightea.wellcomeapps.com/>, but wanted to explore the possibilities of 
mobile phones for gaming.Martha Henson <https://twitter.com/marthasadie> (my 
co-producer at Wellcome Collection) and I met Alex Butterworth ofAmblr 
<http://www.amblr.net/> at one of Frank Boyd's Crossover Labs 
<http://www.xolabs.co.uk/>, which brought together creative practitioners and 
museum curators for a week of intensive idea development. The idea for Magic in 
Modern London wasn't born there and then, but Amblr's pioneering work in 
geolocation-based storyscapes caught our eye and Alex, with his talented team, 
was just the kind of technologist-storyteller with whom we wanted to work.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7RJ77Q-uiKw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7RJ77Q-uiKw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7RJ77Q-uiKw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
As a treasure hunt, the app is played across the whole of London. Areas of 
enchantment are related to local features in London – the site of a former 
chest hospital, for example, might relate to the fear of Tuberculosis. The 
treasure hunt is also dynamic: with many more areas of enchantment than amulets 
to collect, the app assigns amulets to the areas dynamically, meaning that 
different users won't all experience the app in the same way and follow 
different paths through the city.

We also set out to create more than just a treasure hunt. We wanted a 
narrative, an evocation of the Edwardian period, and a sense of character. 
Voice actors Michael Maloney and Emily Woof brought Lovett and the fears of 
Londoners to life. The combination of Alex Hocking's photography (including the 
interior ofEmery Walker's House in Hammersmith <http://emerywalker.org.uk/>) 
and music and soundscapes by Daniel Williams and Chris Wood created immersive 
experiences using only the screen of a phone and a pair of headphones.

We encountered some interesting problems in the build. For navigation, the app 
uses a 1908 street map laid over a standard Google Maps interface, with a 
slider allowing the player to fade between the two. Standards of mapping were 
not then what they are now, however, and there was considerable frustration 
trying to make the two align correctly. In the end, at our designer's 
suggestion, we filled in with a ragged "edge of map" effect, adding atmosphere 
to the game as well as solving the problem.

Inevitably with an app this complex, there were also a few glitches. One user 
got in touch to tell us that an amulet near The Mall was accessible only from 
the roof of a police station.

In many ways, Magic in Modern London still feels ahead of its time for a 
geolocation-based app. As a tool for research into the capabilities of mobile 
as a medium for games – and its ability to reach audiences – the app has been 
invaluable.

Alex and Amblr are currently working on Box of Delights 
<http://www.oxfordaspiremuseums.org/blog/delighting-oxford-box-delights-part-1>
, weaving museum objects into a fantastical citywide fiction. At Wellcome 
Collection, we're using the evidence provided by the app and our other games to 
develop a digital-wide commissioning strategy.

Danny Birchall is digital manager at Wellcome Collection 
<http://www.wellcomecollection.org/> – follow him on Twitter at @dannybirchall 
<https://twitter.com/dannybirchall>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 