
The Library of Birmingham <http://www.libraryofbirmingham.com/> opened in 2013 
to international fanfare. With its dramatic architectural features and 
extensive public spaces, it attracted millions of visitors in its opening year. 
As well as the miles of books on display, one of the star features of the 
library is its “golden box” – a secure, environmentally controlled storage 
facility housing hundreds of thousands of archive, heritage and photography 
items.

But how do you make such a vast collection of manuscripts, books, maps and 
artefacts accessible to a casual visitor? And how do you connect them all to 
the present day? One of the solutions is, of course, digital technology.

The Library of Birmingham worked with our company, Nymbol 
<https://nymbol.co.uk/>, to create an app and a Kinect (gesture-driven) 
interactive screen within the building that serve as fun and visual 
introductions to its vast collections. We needed to find a way of making the 
library’s archive collections, books and exhibitions available to everyone, as 
well as making the most of the vast knowledge, passions and expertise of 
library staff. We worked hard to think about how users might discover content 
and how they could interact with it.

The result, Dozens & Trails <http://dozensandtrails.com/>, takes a selection 
of gems, surprises and curiosities hidden in the library’s collections – such 
as maps, books, manuscripts, images and so on – and groups them in quirky ways 
that people can explore at their leisure.

“Dozens” <http://www.libraryofbirmingham.com/article/elibrary/dozensandtrails> 
are groups of 12 related items representing different aspects of the library, 
pulled together with an interesting common link. For example, we have 12 vivid 
examples of second world war poster propaganda grouped together, while younger 
visitors can find 12 of the best “gross out” children’s books at the library.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdozens-trails-app-library-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415293309836%2Fbee6bf5b-5c59-463a-9df8-c3c35cc6e89d-2060x1133.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20the%20Dozens%20%26%20Trails%20app%20for%20the%20Library%20of%20Birmingham%20%7C%20App%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdozens-trails-app-library-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20the%20Dozens%20%26%20Trails%20app%20for%20the%20Library%20of%20Birmingham%20%7C%20App%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdozens-trails-app-library-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415293309836%2Fbee6bf5b-5c59-463a-9df8-c3c35cc6e89d-2060x1133.jpeg>
 ‘Dozens’ are groups of 12 related items representing different aspects of the 
library. Photograph: Nymbol 
“Trails” <http://www.libraryofbirmingham.com/article/elibrary/dozensandtrails> 
consist of 12 artefacts, photographs or landmarks, each located on a map which 
together form a trail around the city. Users can use the app to view these 
different places as they looked in the early days of photography and see 
archival material to learn about their history.

Current trails include Birmingham’s anti-slavery landmarks, a tour of city 
life living on sixpence a day during the 18th and 19th centuries, and a more 
contemporary side ofBirmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> 
following sculptures around the city.

The app allows people to come across unexpected things usually hidden from 
public view. For example, the Mucker concert hall is Birmingham’s only 
surviving Victorian music hall. Located near the Bullring shopping centre, 
audiences would load up with cheap fruit and veg from the outdoor markets to 
hurl at performers. We have a copy of a programme from 1884 that you can find 
on the app and then discover in the library itself. The Dozens and Trails app 
also allows visitors to purchase prints of historical posters, maps and 
photographs, adding a commercial element to it.

It has been an ambitious project. A major challenge was curating content for a 
mobile audience: short, concise, informative and engaging content that could 
provide a taster of the library’s collections. Also, we wanted to bring 
together the voices of many staff from across the building and celebrate their 
passions, expertise and interests. As such, we had to move away from the usual 
method of content development by one central team, to having many different 
authors.

To tackle this, in collaboration with the digital content and innovation teams 
at the library, we developed style and user guides to allow all members of 
staff to participate. The content management system was developed to allow the 
library to take full ownership of content publishing, so they didn’t have to 
keep coming back to us for specialist technical know-how.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdozens-trails-app-library-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415293825257%2F5b2e4889-d17d-48f5-b0ea-195e119ba7fa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20the%20Dozens%20%26%20Trails%20app%20for%20the%20Library%20of%20Birmingham%20%7C%20App%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdozens-trails-app-library-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20the%20Dozens%20%26%20Trails%20app%20for%20the%20Library%20of%20Birmingham%20%7C%20App%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdozens-trails-app-library-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415293825257%2F5b2e4889-d17d-48f5-b0ea-195e119ba7fa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The £189m Library of Birmingham opened in September 2013. Photograph: RIBA/PA 
Dozens & Trails received 1,500 downloads in its first three months and is 
still growing. It started out just featuring the library’s own collections, but 
now it incorporates content inspired by the library’s partners, soEnglish 
Heritage <http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/>, the Birmingham Museums Trust 
<http://www.bmag.org.uk/about> and the Media Archive for Central England 
<http://www.macearchive.org/> have all provided archival material.

The library is constantly uploading new material to the app and there is a 
special Tolkien trail planned for release next month to coincide with the new 
Hobbit film. This trail will connect places from Tolkien’s home and school life 
as well as places that inspired his books. The author is such a hero of 
Birmingham, it seems apt that he should get his own trail.

App facts

• Length of the project: eight months
• Companies involved: Nymbol <https://nymbol.co.uk/> and the Library of 
Birmingham <http://www.libraryofbirmingham.com/>
• Size of the team: one technical director, two designers, one content 
strategist, one project manager, six digital content and innovation team 
members, plus staff from across the library

More App stories

• How we made the Show and Tell circus app for children with autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/26/show-and-tell-circus-app-autism>
• How we made The War Poetry of Wilfred Owen app for iPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/29/war-poetry-wilfred-owen-app-story>
• How we made Lumo Deliveries Inc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jun/13/how-we-made-lumo-deliveries-inc-game>

Rebecca Bartlett and Mark Steadman are members of the digital team at Nymbol 
<https://nymbol.co.uk/>, which you can follow on Twitter @nymbol 
<https://twitter.com/nymbol>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 