
The Health and Social Care Act 2012 – engineered by the former health 
secretary Andrew Lansley – 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/mar/16/nhs-reforms-andrew-lansley-health>
 was a massive blunder, and even senior Conservative ministers now admit the 
scale of its disastrous repercussions.

The main thrust of the Lansley project was to take the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> down the American healthcare route, 
creating an external market and mandating the compulsory marketisation and 
commercialisation of services.

Michael Gove, now government chief whip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/15/michael-gove-chief-whip-david-cameron-reshuffle-cabinet>
, has claimed that no privatisation of the NHS has taken place but this is 
plainly wrong. A deplorable example was the sale in July 2013of Plasma 
Resources UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/18/bain-capital-plasma-resources-uk>
 which turns plasma into blood products, a particularly sensitive area in 
healthcare, to the US private equity company Bain Capital. Another example: 
when advertising for a new chair for NHS Blood and Transplant it was made clear 
that candidates should have privatisation experience.

Having now established a clear-cut precedent for further privatisation, there 
is every expectation among private contractors that when contract renewals come 
up they will be able to tender proposals for a transfer to private ownership. 
Some of these contracts are massive, such as the10-year contract in 
Staffordshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/02/cancer-care-nhs-outsourcing-ccgs-unison-virgin>
 for vital cancer services and end-of-life care worth £1.2bn.

These acts of privatisation will not, unfortunately, be the last if the 
Conservatives continue in government after the next general election. The 
companies competing for contracts may even hope to invoke the controversial
investor state dispute settlement procedures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/29/why-support-the-tpp-when-it-will-let-foreign-corporations-take-our-democracies-to-court>
 being negotiated as part of the next big EU-US trade agreement, the
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/us-trade-deal-full-frontal-assault-on-democracy>
 (TTIP), which was championed by the present NHS chief executive when in 
America, which could enable them to challenge the law in order to hold on to 
their contracts.

For 68 years, the NHS has provided the level of healthcare that our parliament 
has decided we can afford. The truth is that healthcare, whether public or 
private, in a very real sense is infinite: unlimited sums of private money can 
be – and in many countries are – poured into healthcare by those who can afford 
it. Money for the NHS is determined by public choice, and relative to what we 
choose to spend on education, housing, welfare, defence, all of which are 
legitimate demands on the public purse.

George Osborne is to announce another £2bn for the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/30/george-osborne-billions-extra-nhs-funding>
 on Wednesday, a welcome move, which should be used to create a new NHS 
investment fund with charitable status to centrally handle PFI contracts.

But healthcare, if publicly provided, inevitably has to be constrained. 
Traditionally, that rationing process within the NHS is flexible, professional 
and democratically accountable to parliament. British voters could have chosen 
a different system – they exist in many parts of the world – but no major 
political party has ever felt brave or foolish enough to put such a choice to 
them. Nor was it a choice put to the electorate in 2010 by either of the 
coalition parties.

Yet we know of David Cameron’s close involvement with Lansley before the 
election. Nicholas Timmins – inNever Again? The Story of the Health and Social 
Care Act 2012 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CCMQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.instituteforgovernment.org.uk%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2Fpublications%2FNever%2520again_0.pdf&ei=nzV7VO7iNKriywP20YKADw&usg=AFQjCNF2OKu_sIMfOIPtgdo2S0Ok68dulw&sig2=bazd7Jcjt7DiOjT88WEXaw&bvm=bv.80642063,d.bGQ>
, a study for the Kings Fund – writes: “It is far from the case that the senior 
Conservatives – Cameron, Osborne and Letwin, for example – were ignorant about 
what Lansley was up to … He and Oliver Letwin helped write the green papers.” 
Guilt may be the explanation for Cameron’s current attempt to give the former 
health secretary a job running humanitarian affairs in the UN.

The far more expensive model based on the US is, after just two years, already 
having a deep and damaging impact on behaviour in the NHS and depressing 
standards of care. It is challenging the very nature of the vocational aspect 
of medicine for nurses, doctors and everyone who works in the NHS. It may be 
happening slowly, but the dynamics of this market model over the years will 
carry their own momentum.

Despite much-publicised scandals, such as that which enveloped the Mid 
Staffordshire <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mid-staffordshire-nhs-trust> 
hospital, the NHS remains extraordinarily popular among the public, and the 
only explanation I have is that people know that all demands for ever more 
expensive healthcare cannot be met. They understand that there have to be 
financial disciplines; that we cannot abolish all charging or market elements 
or private contractors in such a large concern.

People do believe, however, that an organisation that carries the brand name 
NHS has to practise under a fair trade description, and that means that the 
preferred provider should be the NHS. They like the NHS because they sense that 
its care choices are broadly fair and they prize its comprehensive cover. Most 
families have their own reasons to bless the NHS. They can complain, they can 
get angry with it and they are demanding, rightly, to be better able to 
influence its rationing process. But what they are rightly fearful of is that, 
once the service is driven by market principles, the rationing will cease to be 
fair and their care will become determined by profit.

Such a grave mistake as Lansley’s reform must be corrected. A reinstated NHS 
would be far better placed to provide a comprehensive, cost-effective 
healthcare service for England, which is similar, although not the same, in all 
parts of the UK. Repealing the 2012 act is not a realistic political option but 
its worst aspects can and must be excised, and the best opportunity to secure a 
commitment to doing that is before the 2015 election.

As individuals we can exercise our democratic rights over the NHS in ways that 
would have been impossible before the internet. Usingwww.nhsbill2015.org 
<http://www.nhsbill2015.org/> we are already opening up old-style political 
campaigning to new means of persuasion. This is not about money. No, what is 
required is a vast commitment, in terms of time taken to convey the 
complexities of the NHS, time taken to lobby MPs and parliamentary candidates, 
and the persistence not to let candidates escape behind generalised party 
political messages and manifestos devised by talking to focus groups. There is 
a new democratic way of exercising the power of the people and we saw its 
beginning during the Scottish referendum.

We must not forget that in September 2014 the Scottish independence referendum 
brought the UKperilously close to splitting apart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2014/sep/18/-sp-scottish-independence-referendum-results-in-full>
. Those elements that we share, that help create a sense of common purpose, 
should become ever more precious as we try to unify our nation.

The end of the NHS as we have known and understood it in England will take 
place before 2020 if the 2012 legislation is not changed. The exact moment of 
its passing may not even be clear, because it will go with a whimper not a 
bang, to borrow from TS Eliot. The NHS is not a “religion”, as has often been 
claimed, nor is it the preserve of one political party, nor one country within 
our United Kingdom. It belongs to all of us and we let something of ourselves 
go if we don’t fight to save it.

• This article was amended on 3 December 2014. An earlier version said Plasma 
Resources UK was sold to Bain and Company. That has been corrected to Bain 
Capital.
 