
For a small charity, venturing into financial investment needn't be daunting 
if good planning is in place to support the process and the investment strategy 
is simple.

Start with the plan


Planning is the most important part of the investment strategy. Before 
trustees make any decisions about their investments they must decide on the 
charity's overall financial plan and objectives and consider how much to 
invest, what to invest in and how the investments fit in with these plans.

Understanding what money is available for investment and what is restricted is 
also important. The less experienced the trustees are, the simpler the plan 
should be.

Another consideration is the time scale of the investment. To determine this, 
questions need to be asked about the aims of the investment: is capital needed 
in the short term or is a longer term investment ok? These facts will shape the 
investment process and determine the appetite for risk.

Check the legalities


Legally, trustees must know and act within their charity's powers to invest; 
they have to exercise care and skills when making investment decisions and 
select suitable investments for their charity. One important point is for them 
to check governing documents, such as the articles of association, to see what 
investments are allowed and whether any restrictions are in place.

Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> will need to take 
advice from someone experienced in investment matters, review their investments 
from time to time and include information about their investment policy in the 
trustees' annual report

Simplicity is the key to success

The investment strategy should be as simple as possible – it will cost less 
and be easier to understand.

Investing in a unit trust investment fund 
<http://www.which.co.uk/money/savings-and-investments/guides/different-types-of-investment/a-guide-to-unit-trusts-and-oeics/>
 can be good option, which will allow a charity to pool its money with 
thousands of people and invest in world stock markets. Unit trusts are invested 
in a broad spread of shares so the risk is reduced.

Another option is the Oeic (open ended investment company) 
<https://www.moneyadviceservice.org.uk/en/articles/unit-trusts-and-open-ended-investment-companies-oeics>
 – a type of company or fund in the UK that is structured to invest in other 
companies with the ability to adjust constantly its investment criteria and 
fund size. The company's shares are listed on the London Stock Exchange and the 
price of the shares is based largely on the underlying assets of the fund.

Charities can invest in unit trusts and Oeics with as little as £25 a month or 
a £500 lump sum – so it can be easy to get a foothold in the stock market. Such 
investments are low-maintenance too: the charity won't have to do anything and 
the fund manager should provide half-yearly reports so the board can check 
progress and the reports can be included into the annual return too.

Identify a fund manager


The Charity Finance's annual Fund Management Survey 
<http://www.civilsociety.co.uk/shop/product/179/charity_finance_yearbook_2014_-_out_now/>
 is a good place for small charities to identify fund managers to approach. It 
will include all the major fund managers and companies with charity expertise.

There are also useful investment comparison sites such as Hargreaves Landsdown 
<http://www.hl.co.uk/> or Best Invest 
<http://www.bestinvest.co.uk/?utm_campaign=SGM-FIRST-BRAND&gclid=COvaxrKcur4CFZShtAod5VgAvg>
, where charities can check which fund managers might suit their criteria. It 
all goes back to the planning, if the charity has decided it doesn't want to 
pay over a certain fee or is looking at income or capital growth, these details 
will narrow the playing field.

What to look for in a fund manager

Charities should look for an adviser who will give advice as part of the fee 
they charge for the investment purchased. If charity approaches an independent 
financial adviser first for advice they will take a fee and the fund manager 
will do the same.

Getting started


Following research, phone around different fund management houses to get an 
understanding of the charges and costs involved and what the service includes. 
Does it include online access to the account, for example, free of charge and 
simple reports that could be inserted into the annual return?

What are the best investment options for small charities?


• A single Oeic – these can be growth or income orientated or cautious and 
aggressive – and the investment options should be tied into the plan. The 
longer the time horizon for the investment, the riskier the investments that 
could be considered.
• A collection of Oeics that meet the charities investment criteria. With this 
option it is very important to check whether there are any investment 
restrictions in the governing documents such as avoiding tobacco stocks.
• A portfolio of direct investment is best avoided for small charities as this 
will cost more and be more harder to administrate.

The best advice for any small charity embarking on financial investment is to 
go for it, but ensure that great planning supports the entire process. It must 
be kept simple and the charity should ensure that it gets some really good 
advice too.

David Rowe is managing director with responsibility for UBS's Charity 
businesses <http://www.charityperformance.com/adviser.php?id=128560> and a 
speaker at Cass Business School's –Introduction to Charity Investment and 
Theory Practice Course 
<http://www.cass.city.ac.uk/research-and-faculty/centres/centre-for-charity-effectiveness/courses/charity-investment-theory-and-practice>
 which is running until October 2014.

The finance hub is funded by CAF. All content is editorially independent 
except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community - it's free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 