
The payments industry is awash with talk of disruption. Paypal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/paypal> may soon seem just a minor 
splash compared with the tidal wave of mobile payment apps and cryptographic 
currencies. Alreadymore money is being transacted around the world each day by 
bitcoin than by Western Union 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/bitcoin-versus-paypal-comparison-2013-12>. 
Cryptocurrencies <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/cryptocurrencies>, and 
specifically the distributed ledgers that maintain them, are a disruptive 
technology, in the classic sense of disruptive technologies that begin by 
appealing to niche markets but have the capacity to scale rapidly and make some 
of the products and services of incumbents less attractive.

The current talk is about disruption, and as such, it's fundamentally 
misguided. We must focus on positive transformation of the relationship between 
banking and the economy. About 97% of money is created byprivate bank lending 
<http://www.neweconomics.org/publications/entry/where-does-money-come-from>, 
which comes with interest. The amount owed to banks (the amount borrowed plus 
the interest) is always more than the amount borrowed, and an increase in 
velocity of the flow of money can't address this fundamental contradiction. The 
world is facing an environmental crisis and a gross inequality crisis, driven 
in part by this monetary system, which demands expanding consumption of the 
environment and a transfer of wealth from poor to rich, to serve interest 
payments. These twin crises present an existential threat to the current 
capitalist system. The answer must include different forms of currency and 
credit that nourish life and community, not exploit them.

More innovators now realise that the current generation of cryptocurrencies 
are flawed not only in their code, but in the way they are designed to act like 
assets. History shows frequently that when the supply of money is tied to a 
commodity, or the supply can be restricted like a commodity, as is the case 
with asset-like cryptos, then by buying up or limiting the supply, the rich will
manipulate the supply of money <http://www.mhpbooks.com/books/debt/> to the 
economy in their own interests. But there is a form of money that's not a 
commodity and not a tool for the rich. These are forms of non-interest bearing 
collaborative credit.

Instead of a central authority issuing units of "money" into circulation 
according to a policy or algorithm, with collaborative credit, peers extend 
credit to each other. This includes systems such as time banks, where members 
of a system lend support among themselves, using a ledger to balance the units 
of credit, measured in hours. There are many other collaborative credit 
projects worldwide, whichwe study in our course on sustainable exchange 
<http://www.cumbria.ac.uk/Courses/Subjects/BusinessComputing/Short/SustainableExchange.aspx>
, likeBanco Palmas in Brazil 
<http://imaginationforpeople.org/en/project/banco-palmas/>, Zumbara in Turkey, 
<https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/socialinnovationeurope/directory/news/time-bank-turkey-zumbara>
 orBanglaPesa in Kenya <http://koru.or.ke/bangla-pesa>, or the Cooperativa 
Integral Catalana <http://cooperativa.cat/en/> in Spain. Online business barter 
(B2B) exchanges such asRecipco 
<http://p2pfoundation.net/Recipco_Capacity_Exchange> help companies trade their 
spare capacity without money changing hands.

These initiatives are collaborative, as both issuance and redemption of the 
currency relies on freely collaborating citizens or firms, and enable economic 
collaboration when there isn't sufficient national money in circulation to 
complete a transaction or reward an activity. Outside agencies cannot limit the 
amount of credit available, as collaborative credit simply requires members of 
a network to trust each other rather than a bank. Collaborative credit isn't 
scarce like conventional currencies, and doesn't come with interest demands. 
The credit is as abundant as the pervasiveness of trust in a community or 
business network, as it is created in the very act of sharing, caring or 
trading.

Two of the most interesting collaborative credit systems are Ripple 
<https://ripple.com/> and Community Exchange Systems 
<https://www.community-exchange.org/>. The former is known to the payment 
innovation field, as it has attracted private investment. The latter is an 
entirely non-profit community affair. Their software developer, Matthew Slater, 
reports they have 50,000 (more or less active) users, in 600 LETS and time bank 
projects worldwide 
<http://cointelegraph.com/news/111833/what_happens_after_the_crypto_revolution>
. Each group has its own currency and manages its own credit limits â€“ which 
means local sovereignty, yet the shared infrastructure means transactions are 
possible between the communities. These initiatives shows how collaborative 
credit systems will increasingly use innovations made famous by 
cryptocurrencies, such as distributed ledgers.

It is time to support and scale innovations in payments, currencies and credit 
systems that are compatible with, and support, a restored environment, thriving 
real economy and social cohesion. We need positive transformation not 
disruption.

Professor Jem Bendell is the author of Healing Capitalism 
<http://www.greenleaf-publishing.com/productdetail.kmod?productid=3799> and 
director of theInstitute for Leadership and Sustainability 
<http://www.cumbria.ac.uk/Courses/SubjectAreas/IFLAS/Home.aspx>. He is speaking 
at this year'sGuardian Activate London Summit on 17 July, 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 