
I bought my first music box because a friend wanted to make a film about one 
and for me to write the score. It was calledTwinklebox 
<http://rjbirkin.co.uk/project/twinklebox/> – a short animation about a broken 
toy stuck in its own world, unable to stop making music. I wrote lots of little 
lullabies using the music box, trying to find one that suited the character.

After Twinklebox, I carried on punching holes in card strips to see what other 
sounds the music box could make.Night Sun 
<http://rjbirkin.co.uk/project/night-sun/>, an innocent but sinister 
interactive audiovisual installation, emerged from one of these experiments.

I was originally commissioned by Nottingham City Council to produce Night Sun 
for Light Night, an event in February where the city at night becomes a 
playground and gallery. Recorded music on its own wouldn’t work; there’s so 
much noise in a city that you switch off, paying little or no attention to the 
sounds around you. So I came upon the idea that a user would have to activate 
the music and interact with it in some way to become involved with the piece.

I knew Arduino <http://www.arduino.cc/> (an open-source electronics platform) 
would be the way to go and worked withAdrian McEwan 
<https://twitter.com/amcewen>, master of Arduino/Pi hacking, on capacitive 
sensing, which means the Arduino senses changes in the capacitance of metal 
wire when someone touches it, and then sends a signal to a computer.

The piece itself is a small, metal toy music box, so we attached the wire to 
that and instructed the Arduino to send a “play” command to a computer when it 
sensed someone touching it. When you turn the handle of the music box, its 
recorded sound plays on the computer.

Once the string quartet was recorded, it really felt like you were playing the 
instrument along with the recording. I also commissioned photographer Dan 
Wheeler to capture hidden parts of Nottingham at night, and writer Emma Lannie 
to author something mysterious inspired by the music and Dan’s photos.

Rather than combine the music, story and photos in video form, I used Jplayer 
<http://jplayer.org/> and HTML to create a book-shaped projection. As the music 
plays in Jplayer, there are triggers at different points in time. These 
triggers correspond to page elements that are made visible when their time 
comes, fading in or appearing suddenly depending on the urgency of the words. 
The photos are set as backgrounds that change with each stanza.

I prefer developing in this way because I can easily change how the 
installation looks depending on the aspect ratio of the projection surface. It 
also means that Night Sun works on the web and as an app.

Releasing music in app (or web app) form is something a lot of people are 
talking about at the moment, from Bjork’sBiophilia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/jul/20/bjork-biophilia-app> 
to Radiohead’sPolyfauna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/mar/07/how-we-made-radiohead-polyfauna-app>
 and all ofBrian Eno’s apps 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OqKGNgF4S7s&list=PL1yYEMwtFZHP5cenVd_C5tG34zKHKGlb6&noredirect=1>
. ForNight Sun Online <http://timetravelopps.co.uk/nightsun/>, it felt like an 
extension of the physical installation, using new tools to put music in places 
you wouldn’t normally find it, presenting it in a different way than people are 
used to. A logical replacement or evolution of the music video perhaps. I don’t 
have the budgets that Bjork and Radiohead do, so simplicity is the key.

What were the challenges? The main problem with Night Sun Online has been 
describing what it is – or more importantly, how you’re supposed to use and 
approach it. When it’s the physical installation, the interaction is clear: you 
turn the handle and something happens. With the online version, you press 
“play” and then what? Yes, you listen. Yes, you read. But there’s a thing I 
would like people to notice, which is their inner voice (subvocalisation) 
bringing the words to life. That’s the thing I need to figure out how to tell 
people.

In terms of what’s next, Night Sun the installation continues to go down a 
storm, while its online counterpart is getting more and more attention as time 
goes on. I’ll release it via app stores this winter.

The aim of Night Sun was to see if people would engage with a piece of 
recorded string quartet music and words in a new kind of way, which it has 
achieved. With Night Sun Online, I wanted to test the water and see if this 
non-movie-movie – this musical animated book – would be appealing. It seems so, 
but I need to work out how to describe it better for my next work, Songs For 
Spoken Words.

Using a grant from Arts Council England/National Lottery, I’m focusing on six 
pieces of instrumental music that were initially written as guitar 
improvisations to accompany a poet when he performed. He doesn’t perform 
anymore, so I’ve expanded the music so that it’s a soundtrack to the poems, 
inspired by his performances.

A developer is iterating on the technology used in Night Sun to make it easier 
to code each piece. I’m animating the words to simulate the performance of the 
pieces, hoping the combination of soundtrack, typography and rhythmical 
phrase-by-phrase delivery of the words will enable people to be the performer. 
Whether out loud or internally.

App facts

• Length of the project: Installation, one month; online app, two weeks
• Companies involved: Time Travel Opps <http://timetravelopps.co.uk/>
• Size of the team: Richard Birkin (composer, producer, developer); Emma J 
Lannie (writer); Dan Wheeler (photographer)

More App stories

• How we made Radiohead’s PolyFauna app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/mar/07/how-we-made-radiohead-polyfauna-app>
• How we made the Live/Revive/Lament opera performance app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jul/25/live-revive-lament-opera-performance-app>
• How we made a circus app for children with autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/26/show-and-tell-circus-app-autism>

Richard Birkin is a composer <http://rjbirkin.co.uk/> – follow him on Twitter 
@rjbirkin <https://twitter.com/rjbirkin>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 