
Many small charities do not have the luxury of having a finance team in place. 
Some are reliant on trustees, volunteers and staff who have a range of other 
responsibilities, as well as handling the finances. It often feels a complex 
area to tackle and may not be top priority. However, there are some simple 
processes that can be put in place and a wealth of free information and 
resources available to help small charities ensure good financial management – 
it is often a case of knowing where to look.

Free resources and information


A good starting point for small charities is The Charity Commission's website, 
which includes aMoney and Accounts section offering guides 
<http://www.charitycommission.gov.uk/detailed-guidance/money-and-accounts/> on 
subjects including charity reporting and accounts, investments, managing assets 
and resources, as well as examples of annual reports that can be downloaded.

The Small Charities Coalition has a  comprehensive resources 
<http://www.smallcharities.org.uk/help-and-advice/> section on its website, 
which includes guides, useful templates for financial management and links to 
useful websites. Charities can also use the site to request additional help, 
support from a mentor or volunteer willing to share their skills free of charge 
or be matched to a trustee with financial experience. Other useful sites areNCVO
 <http://www.ncvo.org.uk/practical-support/financial-management> and the 
Charity Finance Group <http://www.cfg.org.uk/>.

Finance skills more important than charity finance skills


Even the smallest charity needs someone with good financial skills and 
knowledge to ensure good financial management – they could be a trustee, a 
volunteer or staff member. The responsibility for managing finance needn't fall 
on one person's shoulders – the responsibilities can be shared among different 
people with different skills in the organisation.

A common misconception is that finance managers need specific charity 
accounting experience. In reality, it's more helpful for them to have good 
financial knowledge, and the ability to communicate well so they can translate 
and interpret financial information into meaningful information for others and 
ask the right questions.

Training 


There is a great deal of practical support and training available to help 
individuals improve their financial management skills. The Directory of Social 
Change and NCVO offeraffordable guides <http://www.dsc.org.uk/Training/Finance> 
andonline training modules 
<http://www.ncvo.org.uk/practical-support/financial-management,> covering all 
aspects of finance, Cass Business School is running a financial leadership 
course, and organisations including the Charity Finance Group, the Small 
Charities Coalition and accountancy firms offer training.

There are also Community Accounting Services – a national network of 
accountants <http://www.communityaccounting.org> – who provide a range of 
affordable services including training and one-to-one support all geared 
towards small charities.

What essential finance processes are needed?


The foundation of good financial management in small charities is to keep it 
simple. Basic accounting records are a must to keep track of spend. A simple 
spreadsheet could be used to chart income versus expenditure. What's important, 
however, is that these basic records are kept up to date, with bank 
reconciliations taking place at least once a month. A cashflow forecast should 
also be created to predict movements in the bank account in forthcoming months. 
It is also important to have a good filing system or referencing system so any 
document or information needed can be easily retrieved.

Set up good processes and controls and involve others in financial management 
Processes need to be established and documented for managing all aspects of 
finance, including monitoring the use of restricted and unrestricted funds, the 
authorisation of purchases and signing off when something can be paid. The 
Charity Commission guide,CC8 
<http://www.charitycommission.gov.uk/detailed-guidance/money-and-accounts/internal-financial-controls-for-charities-cc8/>
 on internal controls includes guidance and a useful checklist.

In a small organisation, maintaining the books and records will often be sole 
responsibility of one person but this can be a mistake. No one person in a 
charity should be responsible for this and processes must be communicated and 
understood by everyone in the organisation.

Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> need to involve 
others particularly in processes such as bank reconciliations and in the 
production of management accounts. Ensuring there is segregation of duties will 
help to pick up any errors or mistakes and also helps to combat fraud.

Accounts – keep it simple and create a narrative


Even small charities need regular management accounts presented in a clear and 
simple way for senior managers and trustees to understand. One tip is to create 
a simple narrative to go alongside the numbers, so whoever is reading it, from 
the chief executive to the trustees, can answer any questions the numbers throw 
up. Sometimes the inclusion of bar charts or pie charts can make it easier for 
others to understand the accounts.

Annual statutory accounts also need to be produced by the organisation, which 
clearly represents its financial activity and current situation. The finance 
person must plan ahead and know when these are due so the accounts are prepared 
and filed in good time. The advice here is to keep them simple and include a 
good narrative to bring the numbers off the page. Financial performance should 
be linked with the activity to illustrate the impact the charity is having. 
This also ensures the charity complies with the annual statutory reporting 
requirements.

Don't assume it will be easy


Just because a charity is small, managing finance isn't necessarily easy; it 
can be complex. Many organisations stumble into challenges around tax – 
particularly VAT. Many charities can't register for VAT because of the nature 
of their income however; but will end up paying VAT on things they buy. Even if 
they are VAT-registered the likelihood is they won't be charging VAT on all 
their activities so will fall into the category of being partially exempt. It 
can be a complicated area. HMRC's website's has useful information and we have 
also produced a made simple guide on VAT.

Outsourcing 


Some aspects of financial management can be outsourced cost-effectively. One 
of those is payroll. This can be quite an administrative burden and a good 
thing to consider.

There are a lot of considerations for small charities in terms of managing 
finances but the most important thing is to get the basics right and to know 
where to look for help and support because it is out there.

Judith Miller is treasurer of the Small Charities Coalition 
<http://www.smallcharities.org.uk/> and a partner at Sayer Vincent 
<http://www.sayervincent.co.uk/home#.U2jw2fb6oZQ>.

The finance hub is funded by CAF. All content is editorially independent 
except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>

For more how to guides for small charities, join our free network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> and click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/how-to-guides-for-small-charities>
.
 