
Q At the beginning of November I bought an Archos MP3 player for Â£114 from 
Pixmania. This was a present for my partner's birthday. After using it for only 
three days the player broke. We contacted Pixmania who asked us to return the 
faulty item. We sent it by recorded delivery (paid for by us), but it took them 
two weeks to even register that they had received it. We were then informed we 
had to wait up to a further six weeks for them to identify what was wrong with 
it and to either replace or mend the item.

When we finally received a parcel from Pixmania it was the wrong item - a pink 
4GB MP3 player instead of the 20GB model I had bought. The player was scratched 
and had fingerprints all over it, and the correspondence inside was in French. 
We have emailed Pixmania, who have asked us to send back the one we received, 
and they will then act on our refund. Again, we will have to send this back at 
our expense, and two months on from buying something from their website we 
still have no product.

Can I be sure they will refund us the amount for the player plus postage 
costs? I am reluctant to send the item back until I know for sure I am going to 
get a refund. Any help you can give would be appreciated.
LH

A After behaving in such a reasonable way you have been treated very badly, 
with your partner losing the use of the MP3 player for months. With the benefit 
of hindsight it would have been better to insist on your legal right to a 
refund as soon as the fault developed.

If you are worried you will not receive a refund plus postage from the seller, 
you don't have to send back the MP3 player that was sent to you in error. By 
law, you are simply required to keep it safe and inform the seller it is 
available for collection at your convenience. Because of the unacceptable delay 
in repairing or replacing the faulty MP3 player, you are now definitely 
entitled to a refund.

You can also claim for the postage costs together with an amount for 
inconvenience. Refusing to send back the MP3 player you have been sent in error 
may encourage the seller to send you the refund promptly. But if not, you can 
take the seller to the small claims court to ensure you are compensated in full.
 