
Imagine you’re a mother arriving at court, fighting for the right to keep your 
baby who was removed from you just after birth. Your local authority now says 
your child should be adopted. Despite everything your barrister has told you 
about the rigour of adoption law, you will arrive in front of the judge today 
with even less trust than you had before.

And the reason you have lost your last shred of faith is because your council 
is one of 12 in England that have been shown to set targets forthe number of 
children they aim to have adopted 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2016/11/18/councils-setting-numerical-targets-adoption/>
. As a result of several years spent reporting on care and adoption cases, I’m 
now a committee member of theTransparency Project 
<http://www.transparencyproject.org.uk>, a Bristol-based charity dedicated to 
increasing understanding of family law. It was this charity that made the 
freedom of information requests that led to councils confirming that percentage 
or numerical adoption targetswere being operated for children in care 
<http://www.transparencyproject.org.uk/english-councils-confirm-they-set-targets-for-the-number-of-children-to-be-adopted/>
.

Some councils were open about it. South Gloucestershire’s answer, for example, 
stated clearly that its adoption target for 2014-15 was 12 children – up from 
nine the year before. Some denied using targets, but then sent – perhaps 
inadvertently – internal documents that demonstrated that they did. 
Cambridgeshire council, which said it didn’t set targets, emailed over a 
document stating that if its target of 40 adoptions was exceeded, it would need 
to recruit more staff.

The UK is unique in how vigorously it pursues adoption without parental consent

Nottingham said it worked to a variety of benchmarks, and didn’t mention 
numerical targets: however it also sent a progress report submitted to the 
Department for Education that said: “NCC has set an ambitious target of 
ensuring 55 children exit care with anAdoption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/adoption> Order by 31 March 2014.” The 
East Riding of Yorkshire sent documents showing that the government had imposed 
targets during the year 2012-13 by way of an improvement notice.

The ultimate decision to place a child for adoption is always taken by a 
family court judge. But local authorities influence what happens in court, and 
councils having targets for the number of children to be adopted is ethically 
repugnant. The right to a family life – where this is safe – is a human right 
enjoyed by both parents and children. The decision to place a child for 
adoption must be focused solely on what is the right outcome for that child. 
Every professional involved should be driven by this motivation alone. Put 
simply, our laws mean that 100% of children in care being adopted could be the 
right number – or none at all.

This is not a matter of dry legalese: if you believe in human rights, targets 
in adoption are dangerous. One risk is that children are earmarked for adoption 
very young, even when their mothers are pregnant when, if priorities were 
different, alternative solutions might be found. There are also obligations in 
case law for councils to put in place support enabling families to stay 
together. But a number of published judgments have made it increasingly clear 
that those resources are often squeezed reluctantly out of council coffers, 
which are down to their last few pennies due to successive rounds of cuts.

Unlike the days when there was enormous social stigma attached to being an 
unmarried mother, virtually no parents these days voluntarily give up a child 
for adoption. The most recent figures nevertheless show that4,690 children were 
adopted in the year ending 31 March 2016 
<http://corambaaf.org.uk/res/statengland#afc>. While the UK is far from the 
only European country to allow adoption without parental consent, research 
shows that it isunique in pursuing it so vigorously 
<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2016/556940/IPOL_STU(2016)556940_EN.pdf>
. In the Netherlands, for example,the average number of adoptions annually is 28
 <https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/news/nr/adoption-process-speed-children-1.532834>.

9 things I wish I’d known before I adopted a child
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/22/9-things-i-wish-id-known-before-i-adopted-a-child>
When the latest adoption statistics showed a drop, this prompted agonised 
hand-wringing from the government and pro-adoption charities which insist that 
more adoption, done faster,is the right way to go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/02/david-cameron-urges-faster-adoptions-doubling-number-of-early-placements>
. In the context of cuts, combined with a sustained government push for more 
adoption, it is worth remembering that adoption is far cheaper for a council 
than a foster placement, costing around £35,000 per year – because once 
adopted, that child is off the council’s books for good. Adoption is cheaper 
too than providing services that might ensure vulnerable parents can care for 
their children safely within their birth families.

Compounding the ethical problems of numerical targets are indications from 
some of the FOI responses that children’s services departments have on occasion 
been judged by Ofsted inspectors on whether they meet them.

The Catholic church in England and Wales recently apologised for its role in 
removing children from their unmarried mothers for adoptionin the period 
between the 1950s and the 1970s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/03/catholic-church-apologises-for-role-in-forced-adoptions-over-30-year-period>
. Imagine that you, 20 or 30 years from now, found out that your adoption might 
have been the result of a council target. How much trust would you have in the 
quality of the decision-making that changed your life?

Earlier this year I received the following email from a family lawyer: “Many 
in Europe believe that in the future, the UK government will be apologising to 
a generation of children who were swiftly and forcibly adopted through our 
family courts.” The lawyer believes such concerns to be justified. So do I.
 