
People often refer to the idea that we are living in 1984, but to what extent 
is that a valid observation about contemporary society? If Big Brother is 
always watching, how is he watching us now? And to what end? In recent months,
revelations about the NSA's PRISM programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/23/nsa-prism-costs-tech-companies-paid>
 have complicated our love affair with digital technology. Our mobile phones 
have been transformed into the equivalent of Orwell's telescreens, watching us 
as much as we watch them.

Headlong <http://headlong.co.uk/> is a theatre company with a reputation for 
making exhilarating, risk taking and provocative new work – since early 2013, 
we have been talking toKing's Cultural Institute 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/index.aspx> about collaborating on a project that would 
explore the relationship between digital technology and live performance.

The institute specialises in building and supporting partnerships between 
research expertise at King's College London and artists and arts organisations. 
Our ambition was to work together to develop a digital experience that operates 
in a similar way to the theatre that Headlong makes, by offering the user a 
chance to see the world around them in a new way or by driving home a truth 
that they already half know in a visceral sense.

There was also a desire to produce a digital experience that builds a 
relationship between the digital experience and the live event. The best 
digital work in performance (tryConey 
<http://youhavefoundconey.net/newindex.html> and Rimini Protokoll 
<http://www.ciudadesparalelas.com/menu_ingles.html>) is not a reproduction of 
the live experience, but rather is a parallel experience that augments the live 
event or enables the audience to see the performance they have experienced in a 
new light. The digital illuminates the live and vice versa.

With a radical adaptation of 1984 <http://headlong.co.uk/work/1984/> on tour 
this autumn and an increasing sense that we were all being stalked online by 
the furniture that we had looked at but hadn't bought from John Lewis, the 
decision was taken to develop an app that would examine Orwellian ways in which 
digital technology surveys us. And so we set about to make the1984 Digital 
Double app <http:> – it seemed appropriate to use digital technology to 
interrogate the technology itself.

The resources we had at our fingertips were: boundless enthusiasm; a set of 
experts on contemporary politics and digital technology from King's College; 
and the help of a talented design studio,M/A <http://www.ma-work.co.uk/>, who 
would be able to turn our ideas into an actual app. Our budget was modest, in 
comparison to the six-figure sums that are spent on commercial apps, and with 
the show set to open in September 2013, our time was limited.

Dr Btihaj Ajana – whose research deals with the role that digital and 
biometric technology plays in contemporary surveillance and the effect of that 
technology on our psychological understanding of ourselves as individuals – 
introduced the concept of the 'digital double'. This is the online version of 
ourselves that is tracked by organisations whose interests range from marketing 
to national security. This online version of ourselves is not necessarily an 
accurate representation of our real world identity. The first aim of the app 
was to provide the user a summary of their online identity – to show them their 
digital double.

We decided to build the digital double from the personal data that users would 
have willingly placed in the public domain by posting it on social media 
sites.This decisions were grounded in the idea that the main difference between 
the world of 1984 and contemporary surveillance is that whereas Winston is 
spied upon in even his most private moments, we now willingly volunteer private 
information about ourselves online. What need is there for the thought police, 
when we openly broadcast our every thought in real time on Twitter?

In addition to showing the user their digital double, we wanted to provide 
them with some in-depth information about the ways in which they are tracked 
online and to enable them to consider how digital technology might be changing 
the very idea of personal privacy itself. Finally, we wanted to empower the 
user with some practical information about how to remove or better protect 
their online personal data.

The data that is gathered by the app is fed into two live experiences. The 
first occurs around the performances of 1984, while the second will take the 
form of an installation created by the visual artistMichael Takeo Magruder 
<http://www.takeo.org/>, which will be presented next year. These experiences 
offer the user a live equivalent of their online activity. After all, the 
internet is a public space in the same way a town square or a street or a 
theatre foyer is.

The project is still in its early phases. Taking part in the live version for 
the first time at Nottingham Playhouse the other night, I was surprised by how 
quickly the initial discomfort I felt passed. I heard audience members around 
me discussing their use of social media but no-one appeared shocked or alarmed 
by what they were seeing.

Digital technology is becoming a more and more intrinsic part of who we are as 
human beings as it moves from the phones in our hands to theglasses on our faces
 <http://www.google.com/glass/start/>. This process is increasingly challenging 
our sense of what is public and what is private. I found myself asking whether 
a world in which our every thought is public would be such a bad place after 
all?

Sarah Grochala is an associate artist with Headlong <http://headlong.co.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 