
Unlimited Theatre <http://www.unlimited.org.uk/> has often worked with new 
technologies, mainly due to the fact that I've had a geeky interest in things 
ever since I was bought a Dragon 32 home computer when I was 10-years-old. But 
we've also worked with these new, mostly digital technologies because they 
offer us other ways of telling our stories to a potentially much bigger 
audience than we ever could if we only made it for the theatre.

We've always recognised that by choosing to make our work primarily for, with 
and in theatres we're working in a pretty niche environment, especially when 
you consider the type of theatre we're making: far away from the mainstream. 
This isn't a bad thing – small is definitely beautiful – but it's worth noting 
that if we made work for almost any other medium (TV, film, the internet, 
books) the types of stories we could tell would find a much larger audience, 
niche or not.

Uneditions <http://uneditions.com/> is a new platform for publishing play 
scripts on mobile devices, using light and sound design from the live 
production to create a unique and immersive reading experience. It's a sincere 
and rigorous exploration of how we , as theatre makers and as a wider arts 
community, can better transpose (as opposed to broadcast 
<http://beescope.blogspot.co.uk/2010/10/national-teatowel-live-for-dan-baker.html>
) the stories we're telling to other mediums.

I'm massively excited by the potential this app/platform has to allow existing 
audiences to both deepen their understanding of the work we make and, 
importantly, to open both Unlimited and our sector's work up to a much wider 
range of people.

At Unlimited we co-write all our shows. Clare Duffy, Chris Thorpe and I 
<http://www.unlimited.org.uk/about/> have spent the last 16 years working out 
how we create things together, so a collaborative approach to the process of 
(co)designing this new platform was at the heart of this project. I met 
professorJon Rogers <https://twitter.com/ileddigital>, our research partner on 
the project, at a NASA hack event in 2011. I was trying to hack my way into 
space and he was pretty much the only person who didn't think I was "a total 
nut".

Jon is also a passionate advocate for designing products with audiences in the 
(proven) belief that if you do so, the end product will be of much greater use 
and interest to the people actually using it, something that was vital when it 
came to this project.

I've known Matt Locke, director of Storythings <http://storythings.com/>, our 
technology partner, since 2000 when he commissioned us to make an SMS project 
taking the story of one of our earliest shows out of the theatre and into 
people's phones. It's these long-standing, work based friendships that played a 
major part in the success of this project, particularly since we wanted to make 
something that simply hadn't been done before.

We all started from a point of trust and faith in each other's expertise and 
ability that allowed us to just get on with working together. Add to this a 
passionate and committed group of volunteers to work as co-designers and the 
result was a large team of people with hugely varied skills and experience all 
working with a shared passion towards a shared goal.

This is where the process was key. We were always clear that the outcome of 
this project was less important than the process. We did have clear hopes and 
ambitions for what we wanted our "product" to achieve, but we had also agreed 
that we weren't going to make any assumptions about what that product would be.

You can try the prototype for free here <http://uneditions.com/>, where we've 
published a version of our most recent show, The Noise, that also includes 
writer's commentary, production photographs, cast and crew biographies and 
other bonus features that we and the team wanted to include in the app. We hope 
other artists, organisations and venues might be able to use this as a way of 
making digital programmes for their events.

In the next few months we'll be publishing and testing versions of shows by 
Third Angel <http://www.thirdangel.co.uk/> before opening the platform up to 
anyone who wants to use it. By that stage we're hoping to have added a payment 
option with a range of business models (free, fixed price, pay what you choose) 
with any payments received going entirely to the artists. And by making the 
code for the platform freely available on GitHub, if there's a function you 
want to add, you can!

We're pretty excited about the next stage of development and would massively 
value any feedback from anyone trying the prototype, so please get in touch if 
you do. In the meantime, we hope you enjoy.

The Uneditions project is funded by the Digital R&D Fund for the Arts 
<http://artsdigitalrnd.org.uk/>

Jon Spooner is a director, writer, performer, founding member and the artistic 
director ofUnlimited Theatre <http://www.unlimited.org.uk/> – follow Jon on 
Twitter@untheatre <https://twitter.com/untheatre>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 