
The first obvious blow to Greek tourism came when the country suspended 
international rail services 
<http://www.raileurope.co.uk/Home/Corporate/RELBlog/tabid/2290/EntryId/39/Greece-suspends-international-trains.aspx>
 16 months ago. Since then, it's gone right off the rails. Beforelast weekend's 
election 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/jun/18/greek-election-antonis-samaras-coalition>
, nightmare scenarios were painted in the media of food shortages, street 
protests and a withdrawal from the euro. Not exactly images designed to 
encourage Britons to book a holiday. While the focus was on Athens, the Greek 
islands were quietly going about their business – albeit with many empty tables 
and rooms but with a warm welcome to tourists who had travelled there. With the 
latest crisis averted, what does the rest of the summer hold for Greece? Will 
it be bargains all round, empty beaches and retsina on the house?

Is it a Greek tourism tragedy?

Not quite, although numbers are definitely sagging. More than 2.3 million 
Britons visited in 2011 – but bookings are down 11% so far this season. If 
sustained, that equates to 250,000 fewer British visits this year.

George Tsakiris, president of the Hellenic Chamber of Hotels, estimates that 
500,000 summer bookings normally made in early June were lost because of 
uncertainty ahead of the election. Since then, Sunvil Holidays and other UK 
tour operators have reported a surge of bookings for travel during school 
holidays. Barrie Neilson, owner of Sailing Holidays, says: "We have an 
extremely slow July but August and September look reasonably OK."

Who's joining us on the beach?

Reports say  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/05/19/thomas-cook-idUSL5E8GJ21520120519>
that only half the normal number of Germans are visiting this year, with many 
fearing a negative reaction from locals. Such a decline in numbers will 
particularly affect Crete.

Many tourists from the old eastern bloc are now going to Greece but they tend 
to opt for "all inclusive" places and don't get out into local communities like 
the British. According to Neilson: "We're noticing a lot less people about than 
normal. The biggest effect for locals is the disappearance of local Greek 
tourists, who would come to the coast from the hinterland."

What sort of welcome can we expect to receive?

Open arms and bear hugs. Chris Wright, managing director of GIC The Villa 
Collection, says that it's like the Greece of 20 years ago – very friendly and 
very welcoming.

Jo Marsden of Whitchurch, Dorset, returned this week from a holiday on Paxos. 
"The spirit of the proprietors was relaxed and extremely affable. They couldn't 
do enough for the guests, who were mostly British," she says.

"This sense of hospitality extended to all the island's inhabitants. Prices 
were comparatively low from restaurants to boat trips and taxis. Our impression 
was that there was no thought of capitalising on the current Greek crisis."

What are the prices like?

As Marsden observes, prices in hotels and restaurants have come down across 
the board. There has been a de facto devaluation in Greece even though they are 
still in the euro. As the local population is forced to spend less, so prices 
come down. However, Keren Levy, who was in Paros the week before last, said: 
"Hotel and restaurant prices were not noticeably lower. Regular faces, the 
yearly visitors, seemed willing to pay them."

Noel Josephides, owner of Sunvil, has been selling holidays to Greece since 
1970 and says the oversupply of hotels and airline seats also means the price 
of a package holiday is lower this summer: "During the boom years, too many 
hotels were built, and too many villas, too many apartments,, and now the price 
is being paid. Nothing is ever full because there is so much out there – and 
though tour operators have cut back, the no-frills airlines have poured on 
capacity so they, too, are rarely full."

What about the strikes?

With Greece so dependent on tourism, there's even a chance of less disruption 
to travel plans than usual this summer. According to Eftichios Vassilakis, 
vice-chair of Greek carrier Aegean Airlines, there have been no strikes in 
Athens in the past four months, "which is much better than last year".

A spokeswoman for the Association of Independent Tour Operators (Aito) in the 
UK said the same: "There have been fewer strikes this year than is the norm, 
and indeed fewer than in Italy."

What are the Greeks doing to bring us back?

The Greek Tourist Board 
<http://www.greeka.com/greece/greece-tourism-offices.htm> has set up a website 
and is appealing to social-media-savvy volunteer supporters to inspire 
goodwill. The interactive site –TrueGreece.org <http://www.truegreece.org/> – 
is designed to share positive travel experiences and help downplay any 
negativity.
 The Parthenon in Athens. Photograph: Getty Images 
Not everyone is impressed. Josephides said: "In the best of times, no action 
is taken quickly. When the minister (of tourism) came to the UK in February, we 
met and said that Greece had to go on the offensive because there is so much 
bad publicity.

"It is too little, too late – but we have got to help regenerate tourism. We 
are linked to Greece and our fortunes are tied."

He has contributed 20 airline seats to send "ambassadors" to Greece to spread 
the goodwill message. More co-operation from other private sector partners is 
being sought. Expect sightings of several minor celebrities eager to travel and 
help the cause this summer.

One positive start would be for the Greek National Tourist Office in the UK to 
use social media itself: its Twitter account has not updated since 20 October 
last year.

What about the currency?

It is nearly four years since the pound bought you so much in the eurozone. 
It's now around €1.25 to £1 and, on current trend, will appreciate slightly 
more before the school holidays.

Thomas Cook suggests that when changing sterling for euros, you ask for 
smaller denominations: €5, €10 and €20 notes. This is because, should Greece 
pull out of the euro – which seems unlikely in the short term – the interim 
currency will be existing euro notes with a corner clipped, which will be worth 
30-40% less. The thinking is that you will lose more on a transaction with a 
€50 or higher note.

But do pack a credit or debit card – and a prepaid euro debit card, which 
incurs no charge at an ATM and is widely accepted by retailers. For more advice 
visitguardian.co.uk/money 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2012/jun/15/how-to-holiday-euro-less-greece>.

Should I take cash?

Some retail outlets and cafes are already asking for cash rather than 
accepting cards. Sir David Miers, a former British ambassador to Greece, who 
recently returned from a trip to Corfu, said: "There is a fear among Corfiots 
of what will happen if Greece has to revert to the drachma. ATMs might cease to 
operate while there is uncertainty about the currency. The tendency for people 
to want settlement in cash rather than by credit card might increase. But for 
tourists who have plenty of hard currency in their wallets, that should not be 
a problem."

Dana Facaros, author of the Cadogan Guide to the Greek Islands, warned: "It is 
not a problem (yet) on the big islands such as Corfu, but I can imagine you 
might get caught out on a small island, especially one with only one or two 
ATMs. Greece isn't having a bank run, more of a slow motion bank walk."

Journalist Sean O'Hagan, who was in the region last week, said: "We found ATMs 
that didn't have any money, and other holidaymakers told us of restaurants and 
cafes that were just accepting cash."

What sort of holiday should I book to be helpful?

Greece needs you this summer: one in five of the working population is 
employed in tourism, and the money the industry brings in accounts for 17% of 
GDP. There are two ways to look at this: book your own hotel or B&B direct and 
the money stays in Greece. But you still have to buy your flight and that money 
doesn't, unless you choose to fly Olympic or Aegean Airways.

Or you can buy a package. They are undeniably cheap. Olympic Holidays has just 
cut prices, by 25%, for the first half of July. Buy from an international 
operator such as Tui, which sells into its own hotels, and little money will 
stay in Greece.

If you buy from a tour firm that specialises in Greece, a lot more will go 
into the local economy, as has happened for years. Sailing Holidays has been 
operating for 25 years and runs 178 boats around the Greek islands; Sunvil has 
been supporting Greek holidays since 1970. Both they and other specialists, 
such as Ionian Island Holidays, will always continue to support hoteliers – 
it's their business, but also a lifelong passion.

Barrie Neilson of Sailing Holidays said: "I've had hoteliers saying we're 
saving their homes this year. We support the little guys."

These firms are also Atol-bonded, and will guarantee your holiday should 
things go awry with the euro, with either a refund or an alternative holiday. 
If you travel independently, the risk is yours.

Personally? I'd go for a flight to Athens (currently around £200 on easyJet) 
and a ferry from Piraeus. Then, in an old-fashioned way, book a room from the 
gaggle of apartment owners who will meet the boat in the harbour. There are 
lots of stories this summer of rooms for under £40 a night. If that's a bit too 
risky for you, book independent accommodation before you go (see below).

Which areas would benefit the most from tourism?

There is an argument that northern Greece will benefit most. In February 2011, 
international rail services to Greece were halted to save money, cutting off 
routes from Turkey, Bulgaria and Serbia. It means the second city of Salonika 
and the region around Mount Olympus are cut off from tourism as few head north 
of Athens.

Greek travel blogger John Malathronas says: "Those islands with airports such 
as Corfu, Crete or Mykonos will always be fine: they will always have tourists. 
But the north and the smaller islands will suffer this summer."

Some islands are being boosted by an influx of Russians and Ukranians, while 
Santorini and Corfu – traditional high-value holiday spots for Britons – are 
also still selling well, particularly pricey luxurious villas. Added 
Malathronas: "A friend in Santorini tells me the island is busy – and this year 
is also seeing a lot of Chinese visitors coming in off the cruise ships."

So go for smaller, barely known islands which are more likely to be struggling.
 Chora, capital of little visited Amorgos, in the Cyclades. Photograph: Look 
Die Bildagentur Der Fotogra/Alamy 
Greek Sun Holidays (01732 740317, greeksun.co.uk <http://www.greeksun.co.uk/>) 
has been going since the 1960s, and provides a broad range of tailormade trips 
and island-hopping holidays to lesser-known islands (Amorgos, Schinoussa, 
Folegandros, Lipsi, Fourni, and more).

For holidays to family-run properties, try Hidden Greece (020-8758 4707, 
hidden-greece.co.uk <http://www.hidden-greece.co.uk/HiddenGreece_Concept.html>
), which offers a large range of islands, including newly launched Astypalea 
and Pserimos in the Dodecanese, sandy with a population outnumbered by goats – 
the company was once told by the Greek Tourist Office that they had never heard 
of some of the isalnds they offered, including this one! .

If you can't be bothered with the hassle of arranging it yourself, Island 
Wandering (islandwandering.com/ <http://www.islandwandering.com/>) specialises 
in island-hopping holidays for adventurous independent travellers, covering 68 
islands.

How should I travel independently? 


To book directly with owners, try the websites below. (Many properties had 
hardly any bookings all summer, indeed all year, so you could negotiate a 
discount, if your conscience allows.)

Holiday-rentals.co.uk <http://www.holiday-rentals.co.uk/Greece/r33.htm> has 
thousands of places to stay in Greece, lots of apartments and bargain 
properties. It currently has apartments sleeping four for around £550 a week in 
Crete, ahouse sleeping 10 <http://www.holiday-rentals.co.uk/p1006198#rates> in 
Anavissos, and a beach resort near Athens for €1,050 a week available all of 
July and August, and a self-contained villa with pool inAlmirida 
<http://www.holiday-rentals.co.uk/Greece/Crete/Chania-area/holiday-villa-Almirida/p74843.htm#map>
, near Chania, west Crete with mountain and sea views at , available all summer 
and autumn from £880-1,330 per week sleeping nine.

Holidaylettings.co.uk had 179 places sleeping between four and six available 
for the week 3-10 August, such as ahouse on Lefkas 
<http://www.holidaylettings.co.uk/rentals/lefkas/219369> with a pool sleeping 
six, available all year, from £1,217 a week.

You could also try villarenters.com <http://www.villarenters.com/>, which has 
a late-deals section including a stone house on Samos (ref77128 
<http://www.villarenters.com/rent-villas/Greece/Aegean+Islands/Samos+1880-77128?date=230612&dur=7>
) for £330 sleeping five departing 30 June; anddreamvillarentals.com 
<http://www.dreamvillarentals.com/> which has slightly smarter places. The 
Spirit of Greece (01372 749579, spiritofgreece.co.uk) has a special offers page 
with last-minute availability, including its "most popular" villa,Villa Danai 
<http://www.spiritofgreece.co.uk/danai.html> on Paxos, with three bedrooms, sea 
views and a pool for £750 for a week from 2 July.

Houses of Pelion (pelion.co.uk <http://www.pelion.co.uk/html/index.php>) has 
charming places to stay on the unspoilt mainland Pelion peninsula, from around 
£200-400pp in summer.

For a deal with flights included, Meon Villas focuses on popular destinations 
such as Corfu, Lefkas, Crete and Cephalonia. Its late-deals section
meonvillas.co.uk/offers/promo1 <http://www.meonvillas.co.uk/offers/promo1> 
includes Stefanos, a villa with pool in Aghios Stefanos, Corfu, sleeping six 
for £393pp departing 16 July, or £654pp including flights, including flights 
from Gatwick.

To cut straight to the most gorgeous accommodation visit i-escape.com 
<http://www.i-escape.com/greece/boutique-hotels>. It has 67 places in Greece, 
from boutique hotels to stylish self-catering villas.

To find a cheap and cheerful B&B, try bedandbreakfast.com/greece 
<http://www.bedandbreakfast.com/greece.html>, which maps several in popular 
areas, from around £20 a night.
 Kerasia Beach, Corfu. Photograph: Alamy 
You're less likely to find deals on flights: July and August are expensive as 
usual. As an example, easyJet flights from Luton to Corfu cost around £260 
return, flying weekend to weekend at the end of July; in July and August the 
lowest return fares were around £150pp. For the same dates Luton to Crete it 
was around £300, or cheapest returns £170-180 in July and August. From 
Manchester to Crete it was about the same, or from around £140 in July, for 
flexible departure days.

Cheapflights.com <http://www.cheapflights.co.uk/?source=intl-CFUS-flag-GB> 
said it had seen a rise in searches for flights to Athens this week , 16% up on 
the previous week, and has summer flights from around £158 return from the UK.

What if I want to book a package or find a deal?

Going with a specialist tour operator who has worked with local Greek 
businesses for years is a more ethical option than a major operator who is more 
profit-driven and possibly exploitative of people desperate to fill rooms. Plus 
many have access to airfares and room rates not available to individual 
travellers, and you get the peace of mind of financial protection.

Start at aito.com <http://www.aito.co.uk/>, which includes 40 Greek holiday 
specialists as well as accommodation including villas with pool to B&Bs, 
apartments and rooms above tavernas. Also look atSunvil Holidays (020-8568 4499,
sunvil.co.uk <http://www.sunvil.co.uk/>); GIC The Villa Collection (020-8232 
9780,gicthevillacollection.com <http://www.gicthevillacollection.com/>); and 
Sailing Holidays (020-8459 8787, sailingholidays.com). Ionian and Aegean Island 
Holidays (020-8459 0777, ionianislandholidays.com 
<http://www.ionianislandholidays.com/offers_special_offers.php>) is pushing 
late deals, with up to 40% off self-catering holidays. Departing on 6 July, 
seven nights on Skopelos at Metochi Villa with private pool, three bedrooms, 
flights from Gatwick or Manchester, transfers, car hire and welcome hamper 
costs £587pp (£392pp off).

I've booked but I'm not sure. Can I cancel?

No. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) has no warnings on its website 
about travel, so if you've booked, there is no legal reason for an operator to 
give you a refund. If worried, book through an Atol-backed tour operator so 
that if trouble breaks out, you will be evacuated. If trouble breaks out before 
travel and the FCO changes its travel advice, then you will be offered a refund 
or alternative holiday.

How can I travel there more ethically?

Eat out nightly, make sure any produce you buy is grown in Greece, not 
imported, enjoy a drink or two, explore the shops and buy local crafts. Travel 
around and try different places to spread your money.

A new website, launched last month, encourages visitors to explore Athens with 
a local.Dopios.com <http://www.dopios.com/>, which means local in Greek, lists 
47 residents of Athens who will guide you around, from eating to walks to 
nightlife – even on the back of a motorbike. The residents charge for the tour. 
For example, Lila Tzamousi offers an all-day guided group trip to the island of 
Aegina for £40 a head: after the cost of the boat and food, she makes around 
£7. Tzamousi said: "Despite the situation, we never lose the fun and our sense 
of hospitality."

How do I learn about the Greek economic crisis first hand?

If you don't want to just lie on the beach pretending everything's OK and 
would rather get to the bottom of what's up with Greece, turn toPolitical Tours 
(0843 289 2349,politicaltours.com/tours/greece-the-euro 
<http://www.politicaltours.com/tours/greece-the-euro>), which offers trips that 
allow travellers to experience current affairs first-hand.

Among its programme, which also includes expert-led trips to North Korea, 
Libya, Northern Ireland, Kosovo and London's own City, is a one-off trip in 
August, which examines the Greek sovereign debt crisis and asks what next for 
the eurozone, through talks by leading analysts, NGOs, local leaders and 
ordinary people, on the island of Samos and in Athens. Visits include Syntagma 
Square, where demonstrators massed, Ermou Street where it was once impossible 
to find a shop to rent but now many stand vacant, Perama shipyard, once a vital 
engine of the Greek economy and Corinth, a farming area, as in the past two 
years tens of thousands of Greeks have chosen to become farmers. The trip runs 
25 August–2 September and costs £2,750 (single supplement £250), excluding 
flights.

How can I keep up to date with what's happening?

Before travelling, catch up on a number of websites that host live blogging 
from Greece. See

travelblog.org/Europe/Greece <http://www.travelblog.org/Europe/Greece/>

lonelyplanet.com/greece/travelblogs 
<http://www.lonelyplanet.com/greece/travelblogs>

travellerspoint.com/blogs/Greece/ 
<http://www.travellerspoint.com/blogs/Greece/>
 