
The Guardian exclusively revealed last week that Britain's biggest spying 
agency, GCHQ,has a long list of clubs for staff to join, including a sailing 
club, a six-a-side football team, sports day and a ghost-hunting group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/aug/01/gchq-spy-agency-nsa-edward-snowden>
.

This indicates how important hobbies and interests are for employers. In an 
increasingly competitive job market, having hobbies that help you stand out can 
be the difference between your CV ending up in the bin and being offered an 
interview.

So whether you're an avid mountain climber or a member of your local chess 
club, including it on your application can give prospective employers an 
insight into your personality, entertain recruiters as they flick through the 
massive pile of applications and even act as a conversation starter at 
interview.

Hobbies can also show you have essential skills that employers are looking 
for. Captaining your university's netball team or volunteering during a gap 
year, for example, can show leadership and initiative, among many other 
essential attributes.

Of course, there's a limit. Not all memorable pastimes should be included; 
Quentin Schultze, author of Resume 101,warns against adding "an odd obsession" 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/atwork/2012/07/26/jobseeking-101-you-have-outside-interests-so-what/>
. He once interviewed a candidate whose passion was to convince Americans to 
eat dog meat. This candidate certainly stuck in his mind, but for the wrong 
reasons.

So if you're wondering how hobbies and interests could inform your career 
choice — or how to present them to potential employers — join our live chat on
Thursday 15 August from 1pm to 3pm. We'll be discussing:

• What hobbies you should include on your CV

• How hobbies can inform your career decisions

• How to present and tailor them to employers

• What types of hobbies impress employers the most

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever: you can create a free Guardian account, or log in using your 
Twitter or Facebook profiles and comment. Alternatively, you can tweet us
@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions 
toKate Hodge <mailto:kate.hodge@theguardian.com> who can post them on the Q&A.

Our panel

Hannah Morton-Hedges has 10 years' experience as a careers adviser and now runs
Momentum Careers Advice <http://www.momentumcareersadvice.com/>. Previously, 
she was an in-house recruiter for major blue-chip companies, recruiting from 
graduate to senior executive level.

Clare Whitmell is a Guardian contributor and a qualified business 
communication trainer. Clare specialises in writing and presentation skills 
coaching. She also blogs about CV writing and job-hunting tips on
JobMarketSuccess.com <http://www.jobmarketsuccess.com/>.

Simon North is a career expert and founder of Position Ignition 
<http://www.positionignition.com>, a leading career support specialist. Simon 
writes regularly for the FT, Forbes and Management Today, and presents 
regularly on a range of career topics. Simon also launched theCareer Ignition 
Club <http://www.careerignitionclub.com> - an online career development and 
support resource for career conscious professionals.

Mike Higgins is a career coach specialising in mid-career transitions, often 
as a result of redundancy. He is author ofPit Stop: A Career Workbook for Busy 
People 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780957277304>
 and director ofThis Is My Path <http://www.thisismypath.co.uk>.

Elizabeth Bacchus is a career coach, change management consultant and founder 
ofThe Successful CV Company <http://www.thesuccessfulcv.com/> — a CV and cover 
letters provider.

Dr Tracy Johnson is a careers adviser at the University of Bristol, where she 
has been teaching professional development since 2001. She also runs a private 
practice,Brainbox Coaching <http://www.brainboxcoaching.co.uk/>, offering 
careers guidance as well life and confidence coaching to individuals and 
businesses.

Lizzie Usher is programme and quality manager at youth development charity The 
Duke of Edinburgh's Award <http://http://www.dofe.org/>. This gives all young 
people the chance to develop skills for work and life by taking part in a 
unique and personal programme of development, resulting in an achievement award 
which is recognised by employers across the globe.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Careers 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/> in association with the RAF 
<http://www.raf.mod.uk/careers/>. Produced by Guardian Professional to a brief 
agreed with the RAF. Paid for by the RAF. All editorial controlled and overseen 
by the Guardian.
 