
DeviantArt <http://www.deviantart.com/> (DA), the online art gallery and 
community, developed its first official mobile app as part of a journey that 
began with a rebrand to reflect how our community of 33.8 million registered 
members has changed and evolved over our 14-year lifespan. Our 65 million 
unique monthly visitors generate 2.5bn monthly views to more than 300m original 
artworks. With more than 2,500 self-defined art categories and such a broad 
variety of use cases among those accessing the website, creating an app that 
packed all of that into one easy-to-use and navigate app was no easy task.

Successful image-based apps are easy to use and have a clear and mostly 
singular function, such asSnapchat <https://www.snapchat.com/>, Instagram 
<http://instagram.com/> or Vine <https://vine.co/>. The presentation of art, 
however, requires a less “instant” approach. An artwork is a considered 
offering that reflects the personhood of the artist. In a special sense, the 
artwork also belongs to the public for display and not just as a fleeting 
communication.

During the rebrand process, we were fortunate to create a formal 
identification of a number of “persona” who use and rely on DA. They became the 
purpose of the app design: to produce a valuable user experience for each of 
them.

Initial user testing found that traditional content feeds on mobile often 
forced users to move too quickly and imposed image grids that were too uniform. 
The art on DA varies by subject, style, medium, size, aspect ratio, colour and 
encompasses works as tiny as an emoticon to those that have no visual prompt, 
such as literature. Our solution was a fresh design we called “torpedo grid”, 
which allows for minimal cropping of the art. This design would cause the 
variety of image sizes to natively align (ie they “fit” together seamlessly). 
It also had the effect of slowing down the speed of users as they swipe through 
the grid, which gives the app a sense of moving through a designed space, like 
a series of real-life galleries.

We think of the way users engage with the app as experience layers. The first 
layer is a simple browse experience, for users who want to make quick and 
frequent visits to find new art and artists. The entire collection on DA is 
made available and each image provides details about the artist and the work. 
The next layer is collections and editorial content about the artists and works 
on DA, made accessible through a curated “today” page, complete with categories 
and themes. The app also contains a hold function, which means users can pause 
over any image, and the app will show them “more like this” – an algorithmic 
selection of similar works based on the combined aesthetic intelligence of the 
collections made by members.

For frequent users, the app lets you drill down into the artist profile pages 
and to an artist’s full portfolio of galleries. This capability was also 
critical to artist members of the site, who intend to use the app as a 
presentation tool on mobile devices. Artists told us in testing that they 
needed the ability to really look at the works – to appreciate the technique, 
even if it was on a small mobile screen, so we added an enhanced zoom 
capability and higher resolution images.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-deviantart-mobile-app%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422012982002%2F5f8b794b-2f66-4618-a8de-99b86dc531c7-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20the%20DeviantArt%20Mobile%20App%20%7C%20App%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-deviantart-mobile-app%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20the%20DeviantArt%20Mobile%20App%20%7C%20App%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-deviantart-mobile-app%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422012982002%2F5f8b794b-2f66-4618-a8de-99b86dc531c7-680x1020.jpeg>
 The DeviantArt Mobile App Photograph: DeviantArt 
Members of the website can use the mobile device camera and submit directly to 
their accounts and the image immediately enters the DA ecosystem. This required 
designing a more efficient submission process with touch-screen capabilities. 
We also added hashtags at submission so that the search function can deliver 
groupings based on topics, events, competitions and general subjects.

Again for members, the app offers the ability to send status updates with or 
without camera phone images – to report “found” objects, works-in-progress or 
to display other artworks the user might just be standing in front of. This 
feature is completely new to DA and may transform the level of communication 
possible among members. But at this layer we also learned, from testing, that 
members didn’t think it was that important to geolocate to each other or to 
objects, so we left it out (for now).

We also streamlined membership through the app. The core of DA involves 
commenting on works and collecting favourites – functions that are on the app 
for which a free membership is required. Commenting is how artists express 
solidarity, provide support and offer learning. It’s also how viewers reward 
the effort and give the kind of open feedback that aids the creative process.

The app received more than 400,000 downloads in the first two weeks, with 
largely positive comments from users.

We have already ported some of the mobile functions, such as status updates, 
watch feeds and hashtags over to the website. The real fascination will be 
observing how the ecosystem changes with mobile participation, now that art can 
be sent in, shared and experienced from any location. Our company’s mission is 
to “Bleed and Breed Art” and we hope to continue to develop the DeviantArt 
Mobile App to do just that.

App facts

Length of the project: seven months
Companies involved: DeviantArt’s in-house team and Moving Brands 
<http://www.movingbrands.com/> (agency)
Size of the team: eight app and back-end developers, four user experience 
designers, two product managers, two product marketers, one editorial designer 
and one content strategist.

More App stories

• How we made the Hidden Newcastle app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jan/09/hidden-newcastle-app-culture-heritage>
• How we made a circus app for children with autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/26/show-and-tell-circus-app-autism>
• How we made the Dozens & Trails library app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/07/dozens-trails-app-library-birmingham>

Ian Campbell is vice-president of user experience at DeviantArt 
<http://www.deviantart.com/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 