
HaikuJAM <http://www.haikujam.com/> is a mobile app through which three people 
can connect to create poetic expressions together. With words and photos, folks 
can “jam” with friends or strangers, anywhere in the world. The framework is 
inspired by the ancient Japanese art of haiku, a very short form of poetry.


The collaborative process involves three “jammers” and each contributes a line 
or photograph, turn-by-turn-by-turn. Jammers can then share the created content 
through social media and also earn “karma” points for doing good in the app 
community. These deeds include loving jams or writing positive comments. Each 
day our team handpicks a number of inspiring collaborations, which are then 
featured on the app’s home screen.


The design of HaikuJAM is often described as “zen” and “elegant” – which makes 
sense as I practice meditation daily and I’m very much inspired by the concepts 
of stillness and channeling energy around the body. Such ideas have definitely 
played a role in the evolution of HaikuJAM’s aesthetic and user experience: the 
process of consuming content on the app is very “still” and deeply immersive, 
with beautiful full-screen photographs and crisp typography.

Before officially launching the app in March 2015, our hypothesis was that 
HaikuJAM would be a space for time-poor, creatively inclined people to engage 
in creative activities. Since launch, however, fascinating uses have emerged: a 
few people shared with us in confidence that they were suffering from clinical 
depression. For them, HaikuJAM was a place for self-expression and they saw the 
community as a support network, not just a group of content creators and 
consumers.

Some jammers have been using the app to improve their written English and 
vocabulary, and a significant number of our working professional users, from 
investment bankers to doctors, view the app as a tool for stress relief, 
escapism and reflection.

Each day, the average active user opens the app 15 times and spends between 30 
and 35 minutes in the app overall. Close to 50% of our active users are also 
creating content. This year we graduated from theOxygen Accelerator 
<http://www.oxygenaccelerator.com/> programme at Google Campus London and 
raised seed funding from the lead investors ofJustGiving 
<https://home.justgiving.com/>. My co-founder, Neer Sharma, and I are currently 
in San Francisco meeting product mentors, investors and other incredible people 
working in technology.

We’re off to a good start, but the road ahead is long and we have a lot to 
learn. For instance, a few weeks ago, in the process of ramping up our servers, 
we accidentally erased a portion of the database. We lost 14-days worth of 
content created in the app. This was a disaster. Determined to make the best 
out of an otherwise sad situation, with the support of the wonderful HaikuJAM 
community, we recovered some of the lost jams from the period and curated afree 
eBook 
<https://www.dropbox.com/sh/zz4pl2txdt9i8lf/AADahU_VsApJhgn8wQkX8j4Na?dl=0>, 
The Lost Weeks <https://medium.com/@dkarwa/the-lost-weeks-92137ce09686>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F113214410&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F113214410>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F113214410&media=>
 HaikuJAM is a free app through which three people connect and create artistic 
expressions together. 
Other than the typical startup struggles around things such as fundraising, 
one of our biggest challenges is how we focus the value proposition considering 
such various uses. Can they simply coexist without detracting from the 
product’s core appeal? Reading Nick Bilton’sHatching Twitter 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/index.php/hatching-twitter.html>, it seemed 
that Twitter’s founders also struggled with this (albeit on a much grander 
scale) as the social network became a proverbial wild west with curiously 
nebulous sets of people and activities. The manner in which we leverage data, 
coupled with our own decision-making, will ultimately determine the future of 
HaikuJAM as a platform.

This year we’re going to further contextualise the creative experience through 
campaigns for brands, charities and around trending news events. We also want 
to curate the app’s fantastic creative content in the form of monthly book 
subscriptions and artistic merchandise. We also aim to introduce new mediums 
into the app, such as sound and video.


Our vision is deeply rooted in collaborative creativity, ie the “jam” in 
HaikuJAM. We care deeply about connecting humans to make beauty happen.

App facts

Length of the project: six months development on HaikuJAM Version 2.0
Companies involved: app studio Rosberry <http://rosberry.com/> and other 
freelancers
Size of the team: five developers, one user interface designer and one product 
manager

Dhrupad Karwa is co-founder and CEO of HaikuJAM <http://www.haikujam.com/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 