
When American vlogger Casey Neistat <https://www.youtube.com/user/caseyneistat>
 took home theShorty award <http://shortyawards.com/> for YouTuber of the Year 
last week, he and his fellow nominees all had something in common: their 
channels were all based in either Europe or North America and broadcast in the 
English language.

With the world’s tech pulse fixated firmly on the English-speaking world (and 
with Silicon Valley serving as the hub), it’s easy to forget that social media 
is a decidedly global phenomenon. So while the likes of Casey,Pewdiepie 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/PewDiePie?hl=en-GB&gl=GB> and Zoella 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/zoella280390> may seemingly dominate a platform 
such as YouTube, regional users of various platforms can take on unique 
cultural dimensions and patterns.

Nowhere is that more true than in Japan and on video platforms such as YouTube 
and its homegrown iteration,Niconico <http://www.nicovideo.jp/>. 

The world’s third largest economy 
<http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/022415/worlds-top-10-economies.asp>
 by GDP, Japan is also home to the world’s fourth-largest internet population. 
According to ComScore’s2015 report  
<http://www.comscore.com/Insights/Presentations-and-Whitepapers/2015/2015-Japan-Digital-Audience-Report>
on the country, Japanese internet users spend more time on multimedia video 
sites such as YouTube and Niconico than they do on social media platforms, a 
usage pattern that runs counter to global trends. YouTube’s own data places 
Japan in the top 10 countries globally in terms of watch time, while Niconico – 
which was founded in 2006 (just one year after YouTube launched in Japan) – had 
more than 4 million paying subscribers in January of this year,according to its 
parent company, <http://dwango.co.jp/pi/ns/2016/0114/> Dwango. 

'You can WhatsApp the prime minister' – what tech means to Trinidad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/mar/29/digital-trinidad-society-community-technology>
There are several reasons why video platforms do extremely well in Japan, said 
Ken Charles, a consultant at the Tokyo-based firm Apex, which helps western 
companies enter the Japanese market with a focus on IT, gaming, social media 
and startups. The first is that unlike other western social media companies, 
such as LinkedIn andFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, 
YouTube has largely allowed Japanese users to mould the platform to their own 
cultural norms and riff-off homegrown formats.

Charles contrasts that to other, more rigid platforms such as Facebook, where 
the culture of touting one’s own achievements and the requirement to use your 
real name are uncomfortable to many Japanese people. Similarly LinkedIn, which 
has repeatedly stumbled to adapt its communication norms to Japan’s highly 
honorific business culture, has failed to attract mass usership.

“Nobody can touch the reach that YouTube has [in Japan] in terms of views and 
impressions right now,” Charles said. “But when Niconico started, it had its 
own culture, its own terminology, its own mascots – and a lot of it has spilled 
over into places like YouTube. SoYouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> is a platform that can support 
all these different [styles and formats] that Japanese users were already 
comfortable with.”

In addition, major streaming services such as Spotify and Apple Music have yet 
to make headway in Japan. An anomaly globally, the market for physical CDs 
still thrives in Japan for avariety of reasons 
<http://www.inc.com/ilan-mochari/streaming-music-japan.html>, including myriad 
independent labels with which to negotiate rights, and the marketing lure of CD 
purchase promotions. Charles said that this, alongside a lack of streaming 
competitors, has been a boon to YouTube’s growth. YouTube reports that its 
watch time in Japan has grown 50% year-on-year.

“People aren’t buying [a CD] in Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>
 to listen to music necessarily – they’re buying it because they’re collectors 
and want the special edition or to win a giveaway or concert ticket,” Charles 
said. “So YouTube is a really natural platform for getting people excited about 
new music, so they can run to the store and still buy the CD. But that’s 
certainly going to change as more streaming services gain traction.”

But perhaps the biggest reason why Japanese internet users choose to spend so 
much of their online time on YouTube is the panoply of extremely niche, special 
interest and passionate online communities that thrive there.

Whether it’s anime, manga, idol groups, gaming, product reviews of snack 
foods, or tutorials on how to make micro-bento boxes out of candy, Japan’s fan 
culture evokes a near-obsessive dedication and YouTube provides the perfect 
platform to both feed and amplify it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMbplpcAGSZ8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMbplpcAGSZ8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMbplpcAGSZ8&media=>
 Hikakin has collaborated with the likes of Ariana Grande. 
According to the network, some of YouTube Japan’s most successful and 
stand-out talents includeKumamiki <https://www.youtube.com/user/kumamikicraft>, 
a Harajuku DIY-er who turned her hobby into a full-time business, andMax Murai 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNtsZbOtbeCvcwRrp0jxRSQ>, who blogs about 
gaming and has turned his channel, which has 1.4 million subscribers, into his 
own game-making business. Hikakin, who dominates the top five of YouTube’s
most-subscribed list 
<http://socialblade.com/youtube/top/country/jp/mostsubscribed>, started by 
beatboxing anime theme songs and since since collaborated with the likes of 
Aerosmith andAriana Grande <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MbplpcAGSZ8>.

Alan Swarts is the Japanese-American founder of Breaker 
<http://www.brkr.jp/about/index.html>, based in Tokyo, and a former MTV VJ 
(video jockey). His company exists to “create and nurture the next-generation 
storytellers” in Japan, but he points out that he wants his artists to thrive 
both on YouTube and to “grow them into brands and businesses that go beyond 
digital”.

“There’s a lot of brand loyalty in Japan, whether it’s artists, products, even 
jobs,” Swarts said. “On YouTube, once you can establish your voice as an 
engaging storyteller, become a social brand, then you have a good chance of 
creating a long-term relationship with fans.”

One of Breaker’s stand-out creators are the expat Canadians Simon and Martina 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/simonandmartina>, who recently moved their 
extremely popular Korea-based channel Eat Your Kimchi (which ran for eight 
years), to Japan, where they naturally renamed it Eat Your Sushi. After moving 
to Tokyo three months ago, their channel experienced its highest monthly views 
ever in February.

“In Japan, we’re finding you have more of an audience of people who understand 
the urge to have an extreme hobby,” Martina said. “For example, I went to a 
Sailor Moon convention at the weekend wearing a Sailor Moon wig and a leather 
jacket on the bus and nobody blinked at me.”


Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDuZQXSFZkPY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDuZQXSFZkPY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDuZQXSFZkPY&media=>
 Simon and Martina on their favourite Izakaya (Japanese bar). 
Swarts points out that statistically, they have the biggest international fan 
engagement (likes, comments, shares) than any other channel in Japan. But it 
turns out they are are part of a content category that Dave Powell, director of 
online partnerships and development for YouTube in Asia Pacific, said does very 
well in Japan.

“Simon and Martina are sort of translating things that they’re experiencing 
and making it easier to understand,” Powell said. “The world is fascinated with 
Japan, so that style of creator is something that’s a little more unique to 
Japan and other prominent YouTubers such asRachel and Jun 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/MyHusbandisJapanese>, Sharla in Japan 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/JyuusanKaidan>, Abroad in Japan 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/cmbroad44> do something similar.”

As these English-language creators drive more intentional interest to Japan, 
Powell said YouTube encourages Japanese-language creators to capitalise by 
translating their channels to English, using either paid-for translation 
services or a new feature which allows fans to create subtitles for videos.

At Breaker, Swarts said his team supports a mix of Japanese-born and 
foreign-born creators based in Japan with hope of incubating “what we think is 
the first Japan-to-the-world success story”. In other words, he wants a 
Japanese creator to be in the lineup for next year’s Shorty Awards.



To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

• This article was amended on 21 April 2016 to correct the lead image caption. 
The woman in the picture is Ochikeron, not Kumamiki as previously stated
 