
There is no better place than the UK to reinvent local media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/digital-content>. The country has 
thousands of quality local titles, each with hundreds of years of experience 
covering their communities. The business I joined earlier this year, Johnston 
Press, owns 250 newspaper brands, reaches 25 million readers every month and is 
perfectly set for reinvention.

The legacy of local media, as we all know, has been under attack from all 
sides – declining readership in print, new digital competitors and a battle for 
screen time from gaming and social media.

As reported earlier this year, there could be better collaboration between the 
BBC and the local press 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/debate/columnists/ashley-highfield-time-to-look-afresh-at-the-role-of-the-bbc-1-6621545>
.

Elsewhere in the industry, we've seen bold print-expansion experiments go 
horribly wrong, as seen at theOrange County Register in California 
<http://www.shirky.com/weblog/2014/06/nostalgia-and-newspapering/>.

And we've seen products like AOL's Patch sold off and scaled back because of 
the huge investment in resources needed to make local work profitably.

Given this perfect storm of competition, changes in reader behaviour and new 
technologies, how do we keep local media vital and relevant?

Platform differentiation
The platforms available to local publishers need differentiation. The mobile 
experience is live, short and geographically aware. On a tablet, the experience 
is image-rich and takes advantage of the fact video is more widely consumed as 
users lean back with their device in the evenings.

This responsive-content approach requires community newspapers to think 
broadly and create the best content for each medium and the technology to help 
deliver it.

By bringing non-print developers, designers, and creatives into the newsroom, 
digital products will be flexible, lean and specifically tailored for the 
reader and his or her device of choice.

Ecosystem of contributors
The industry needs to continue to rebalance resources to support quality, 
local, investigative journalism but also to incorporate voices and 
contributions from around the web and social media.

We have our own experiments, such as the Pocklington Post 
<http://www.pocklingtonpost.co.uk/>, where a board of community members shape 
content. The result has been a vibrant news product, comprising 75% 
user-generated content, which creates an even deeper connection to the 
community.

Initiatives like this do not mark the end of quality journalism. It is a 21st 
century approach that incorporates broader content to allow reporters time to 
dig deeper on the community's big stories and gives them increased resources to 
tell the need-to-know news.

Vertical focus
We can't completely forsake the brands that brought us here, but we can't 
over-rely on them either. A newspaper printing since 1609 may not have the same 
brand equity with a 19-year-old who usesInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> and Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> to find out what's going on.

Local media must invent new multi-platform products bespoke for the audience. 
If Patch proved anything, it was that good local content, irrespective of the 
brand, will attract local readers. Other products from local publishers like
Usvsth3m <http://usvsth3m.com/>, Wow247 <http://www.wow247.co.uk> and Scotland 
Now <http://www.scotlandnow.dailyrecord.co.uk/> have immersive environments 
that focus on a single topic or demographic.

Being a local agency
Local newspapers and their affiliated products engage local audiences in a web 
environment that businesses want to be associated with. Too much web 
advertising has gone to nameless, faceless pieces of inventory traded by 
algorithms and machines without regard for the quality of the environment they 
are being served. This trend is reversing, and will continue as marketers 
realise that advertising context and quality do matter, as evidenced by the 
decision of alarge agency, GroupM, to stop buying from open networks and 
instead buy directly from publishers 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/cmo/2014/06/12/groupm-plans-to-ditch-open-ad-exchanges/>.

Local audiences, combined with best-of-breed marketing solutions like search, 
social and web site management present a unique offering to a local small 
business owner who is looking to expand a customer base and needs help sifting 
through the digital details.

A platform-agnostic strategy, content curation and local knowledge will 
catapult local media businesses beyond the legacy of print, and into a vibrant 
UK local press, whatever the medium.

This "mass localisation" across hundreds of communities offers a way forward 
for our local press to be even more powerful and important in a digital age.

Jeff Moriarty is the chief digital and product officer for Johnston Press 
<http://www.johnstonpress.co.uk/>

Read more stories like this:

• The New York Times shouldn't get distracted by its innovation report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/may/29/new-york-times-innovation-report>
• It's time to be entrepreneurial in digital news and break the shackles of 
print 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/may/22/digital-news-print>
• Why robots would make useful reporters but rubbish journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/may/08/robots-reporters-journalists-jobs-drones>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 