
Harvey Fierstein, playwright

As soon as I started writing, other writers stopped wanting me acting in their 
shows – maybe they thought I was going to rewrite them. So I wrote the first 
play in Torch Song Trilogy for myself, and the next two to continue the life of 
those characters. The first play is a very naked examination of falling in love 
for the first time. The second features two couples, one gay, one straight; 
it's a statement that gay and straight relationships are exactly the same. The 
third play has characters who have evolved not because they wanted to, but 
because the outside world has crashed in.

They were not written for a straight audience: they are about people 
struggling with their sexuality, and heterosexuality is not struggled with. And 
yet it was the gay critics and gay culture that rejected the plays, while 
heterosexual audiences accepted them. It took me years to find someone to 
produce them. At first, we couldn't give tickets away; no one wanted to sit 
through a four-hour gay play. We were getting ready to close, and then two 
critics came:Rex Reed <http://www.nyfcc.com/membership/rex-reed/> of the Daily 
News andMel Gussow <http://www.nytimes.com/2005/05/01/arts/01gussow.html> of 
the New York Times. They both published raves and all of a sudden we were a 
hit. We moved from the fringe to off-Broadway, where tickets were sold as fast 
as we could print them. I accepted an offer to move it to Broadway, but only 
because I didn't think it could exist on Broadway and I was ready to leave. I 
had my next play ready, and I was writing La Cage aux Folles. But the show 
lasted there another four years.

I chose to absent myself from the London rehearsals to see what the director, 
Robert Ackerman <http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G2-3055500007.html>, would 
come up with. His production was very like the original, except that New York 
and West End actors are very different. An English actor has no problem cutting 
somebody's bowels out with a sword, but has a lot of trouble yelling at their 
mother. Antony Sher was gorgeous in the show, but one of the notes I gave was 
about the confrontation scene in the third play. The mother is saying to her 
son: "If I knew you were going to be queer I wouldn't have bothered giving 
birth to you." Isn't that the most horrible thing? But Tony andMiriam Karlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/03/miriam-karlin-obituary> were 
holding hands. I said: "Are you fucking kidding me? They should be holding 
knives to each other's throats." When I took over playing the role, I was 
awful: I didn't blend with the rest of the company – I was overdoing it. I'd 
been doing it so many years. I didn't want to do it any more.

Antony Sher, actor

I knew the play had been a hit in New York, but thankfully I didn't see that 
production. As soon as I read it, I fell in love with it.It's a remarkable 
piece of work: Fierstein takes the most exotic of creatures, a New York drag 
queen, and turns him into Everyman. It begins as a very gay play, but then the 
second act talks about straight relationships, and the third talks about 
parent-child relationships, so that by the end, the play has wrapped its arms 
around every single person in the audience.

The material was moving and fun, and the cast were a very happy group; I met 
Miriam Karlin, who was playing my mother, for the first time, and that became 
one of the great friendships of my life. My character, Arnold, and Miriam's 
have a fight about his gayness and his desire to adopt. Fierstein gives her 
very persuasive and passionate homophobic arguments, so the audience really go 
back and forth between each character. and I ended up being very proud of the 
kind of acting that I was doing. I'm not sure he greatly liked my performance. 
He took over when I left the London run: his was a real Broadway-sized, 
scenery-eating, audience-eating, giant performance – I can understand that he 
might have found mine a bit restrained.

My only regret is that I wasn't out at the time, so I was in the ridiculous 
situation of not being able to say why this play was so important to me. That 
year I won the Olivier award for best actor, for Torch Song and forRichard III 
<http://shakespearestaging.berkeley.edu/index.php?option=com_g2bridge&view=gallery&Itemid=256&g2_itemId=18731>
, which allowed me to say in my acceptance speech: "I'm very happy to be the 
first actor to win an award for playing both a king and a queen." That line was 
handed to me on a plate.
 