
What’s the difference between writing a script and writing a book? That was 
the question we were nervously asking ourselves when, after 16 years of 
scriptwriting for a living, we decided to embark on our first novel.

It couldn’t be THAT different, could it? Well, yes and no. We’d been lucky 
enough to be on the writing teams of some fantastic children’s TV shows, 
including Danger Mouse, Thunderbirds are Go and Shaun the Sheep. Those are some 
pretty fun sandboxes to be allowed to play in, so why the sudden desire to 
strike out into unknown territory? We’ve always believed that an idea will tell 
you what it wants to be.


Sometimes it’s TV, sometimes radio or even a movie – and we’d written all of 
those. But when we came up withDefender of the Realm 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376485/> – a 
reluctant young heir to the throne discovers that he is also a secret superhero 
charged with protecting the U.K. from a host of monsters and super-villains – 
it kept “telling us” it wanted to be a book. That way, we figured, we’d have 
the room to establish the world of our alternative Britain, the origin of our 
unique superhero’s powers, and an adventure with epic scope and endless 
possibilities. The only question was could we do it?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnovel-scriptwriting-danger-mouse-mark-huckerby-nick-ostler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99ded349a8e3f0f23e2833dd61ec21e84e5fe104%2F0_275_5279_3165%2F5279.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20writing%20a%20novel%20is%20different%20from%20writing%20Danger%20Mouse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnovel-scriptwriting-danger-mouse-mark-huckerby-nick-ostler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20writing%20a%20novel%20is%20different%20from%20writing%20Danger%20Mouse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnovel-scriptwriting-danger-mouse-mark-huckerby-nick-ostler%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99ded349a8e3f0f23e2833dd61ec21e84e5fe104%2F0_275_5279_3165%2F5279.jpg>
 Mark Huckerby and Nick Ostler, authors of Defender of the Realm. Photograph: 
Sarah Weal 
Writing scripts is a little like writing poetry. It’s all about economy of 
style – saying as much as you can with as few words as possible. Now, as we 
started writing our book, it felt like we had an ocean of words at our 
disposal. That was exciting and scary. Plus, there were TWO of us. Did writing 
partners even do books? Fortunately we had already been writing prose for years 
without realising it. Before a producer gives you the green light to start a 
script, you have to write something called a “treatment” – a few pages 
“selling” your story. We’d learned early on that a treatment had to be an 
entertaining read in its own right. Somewhere along the way we must have 
developed a joint “voice”, because our first Defender pages were coming out 
sounding surprisingly similar.

Tom Ellen and Lucy Ivison: how we went from being teenage sweethearts to 
writing partners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/04/tom-ellen-lucy-ivison-never-evers-interview>
There were other novelties to get used to. Writing in the past tense! Scripts 
are written in the present – what’s happening before your eyes in the here and 
now. We had to retrain ourselves. Hearing what your characters are thinking! 
Wow, that felt like a real luxury. There is no faster way to get a red line 
through a script than writing “She thought to herself…” And voiceover narration 
is considered a cheap trick (unless you’re writing Danger Mouse and can use it 
for gags!). In fact, being able to peer inside our characters’ heads was such a 
novelty we had to be careful not to overdo it. But the best difference of all 
was not having to worry about a budget. Filming anything is expensive. But 
within the pages of a book you can go anywhere and do anything. Secret 
underground base beneath the Tower of London? Sure. Epic superhero battle 
destroys Stonehenge? Why not? Giant whirlpool swallows the Boat Race? Go for 
it. While you’re at it, why not have a volcanic eruption in the centre of 
Edinburgh? Not that we didn’t have a great editor, nudging us to cut, redraft 
and improve. But what we couldn’t believe was that there weren’t more people 
giving us notes. The high budgets in TV and film mean that a bunch of people 
have a say on your script. With the book we always felt like we were in the 
driving seat. We’d never had so much fun.

Top 10 writing duos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/dec/11/top-10-writing-duos-neil-gaiman-terry-pratchett>
Even better, we discovered that many of the skills we’d picked up 
scriptwriting were very useful when it came to book writing. Hit the ground 
running, don’t let the writing get in the way of telling the story, never leave 
it too long till the next twist, think visually – all these turned out to be 
great rules of thumb for writing a middle grade adventure novel too.

The downside to all this creative freedom of course is that as an author you 
are much more in the spotlight than you are as a screenwriter. A book is still 
a collaboration – with your editor and every department of your publisher – but 
in the end it is YOUR name on the cover. There is no hiding amidst the 
scrolling credits at the end of the show if it isn’t a hit. The unexpected 
upside of being an author is that once your book is published you have the 
opportunity to go out and meet your audience one to one – at school visits, 
signings and book festivals. And there is nothing better than hearing a 
10-year-old say they loved the world you created and asking when the sequel is 
out. Or having a parent tell you they found their child reading your book by 
torchlight under the duvet an hour after lights out!Just one more chapter…

Mark Huckerby & Nick Ostler’s Defender of the Realm is available from the 
Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376485/>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnovel-scriptwriting-danger-mouse-mark-huckerby-nick-ostler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dccaeb2a430a766c69e0bf74720aa166aad6a10%2F0_0_1541_2301%2F1541.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20writing%20a%20novel%20is%20different%20from%20writing%20Danger%20Mouse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnovel-scriptwriting-danger-mouse-mark-huckerby-nick-ostler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20writing%20a%20novel%20is%20different%20from%20writing%20Danger%20Mouse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnovel-scriptwriting-danger-mouse-mark-huckerby-nick-ostler%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dccaeb2a430a766c69e0bf74720aa166aad6a10%2F0_0_1541_2301%2F1541.jpg> 