
Q My partner has been renting his house up north for around four years, but 
for the past three years, following difficulties with the letting agents 
failing to arrange maintenance etc, he has been dealing directly with the 
tenant rather than using an agency. However, as he knew the tenant he never 
drew up a formal agreement, only a verbal one. We are getting married this year 
and, as we are currently renting, have decided we would like to buy a house. We 
need to sell his house in order to do this. We gave the tenant notice that we 
would be looking to sell at the end of this year. However, she said there is 
"no way" she will move out. She said she would like to buy the property, but 
she is on benefits and cannot afford to do so, and there is nowhere else that 
suits her. My partner has decided to wait, hoping she will change her mind. I 
feel slightly guilty pushing him as it is not my house. However, she is not 
being very reasonable and I am concerned that we should begin to follow some 
form of proper process and paper trail. Can you advise us?
JH

A Your right to gain possession of your property depends on the type of 
agreement you have with your tenant. All lettings are either assured tenancies 
or assured shorthold tenancies. However, assured tenancies are rare, with 95% 
of agreements arranged by a letting agent being assured shorthold tenancies - 
new tenants automatically get the less secure assured shorthold tenancy unless 
the landlord states in writing that they have an assured tenancy.

As you did not enter into a written agreement, but previously used a letting 
agent, it seems likely your tenant has an assured shorthold tenancy. If so, you 
can get your property back as long as you give two months' notice. And with an 
assured shorthold tenancy you do not need to have a reason for asking your 
tenant to leave.
 