
I experienced my first evacuation on Sunday 27 September 2015.

The day before, deadly clashes had erupted in Bangui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/27/central-african-republic-violent-sectarian-clashes-erupt-in-bangui>
, the capital of the Central African Republic (CAR). In only a few hours, the 
city transformed into a cauldron of violence. I remember going to bed that 
night, with the sound of gunfire resonating in my ears. By then I knew that my 
worst fears prior to arriving in CAR were about to come true.

I woke up shortly after sunrise and met my colleagues from World Vision in the 
lobby. My phone rang unusually early. It was our operations manager, telling us 
to prepare to evacuate.

Aid in South Sudan: 'My heart would skip a beat with every gunshot'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/19/aid-south-sudan-conflict-aid-worker>
We were the first agency to have their international staff cross the river 
from Bangui to the Democratic Republic of Congo after the airport in CAR was 
closed. No evacuation is likely to happen without a few complications, and we 
had our fair share of those over the next few days.

As the 15 of us stood by the river, anxiously waiting to get on the boat, a 
crowd of people gradually started to surround us. At first there were just a 
few, but they grew in number as time passed, with anger burning fiercely in 
their eyes. I wondered what we had done to make them angry but I remained 
silent, my head bowed, and my heart beating. I understood what it feels like to 
be completely powerless.

Eventually we all managed to cross the border and reached DRC, itself a 
country carrying the scars of war but the land of safety for us.

Looking back, I vividly remember the fear, anxiety, and shock I experienced at 
that border crossing. Most importantly, I learned that by applying a few basic, 
low -cost recommendations, every NGO can improve their duty of care towards 
their staff and help them feel safer, even in the middle of such an ordeal.

Aid workers and post-traumatic stress disorder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/mar/03/post-traumantic-stress-disorder-aid-workers>
1 | Regular provision of information

The time preceding the evacuation seemed incredibly long, particularly because 
we had to wait for everything to be in place before we headed to the boat. 
Waiting without receiving information on what the next steps are, gives birth 
to fear and nurtures anxieties. It is crucial that we regularly communicate 
updates to our staff to minimise their worry.

2 | Try to relax during waiting time 

Plans don’t often go as planned in an evacuation. Things are bound to keep 
changing and as such, waiting is unavoidable. However, there are many things we 
can rely on to use our time sensibly. When we gathered in the apartment hours 
before, one of our colleagues started playing the guitar. Almost instantly, we 
all felt better. Another colleague poured himself a glass of wine. I suggest 
you attempt to eliminate potential sources of stress – I remember switching off 
the TV when a horror movie began.

3 | Effective and efficient security systems

Having solid security policies in place is not enough. Qualified people are 
needed to implement them. One of the most startling things I remember is how 
safe I felt in the presence of our World Vision security manager. He was 
communicating the right things at the right time, and maintained a very calm 
attitude throughout the process. Remember to have in place the three Ps: solid 
plans, adequate procedures, and competent people.


Coping with stress: can mindfulness help?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/mar/06/mindfulness-prevent-stress-burnout>
4 | Debriefing 

The need to share our thoughts and feelings was evident as soon as we reached 
DRC. Without doubt, letting our emotions out of our system helped us feel much 
better. But different people have different coping mechanisms. Not everyone 
will express themselves openly and easily. Some people will resort to silence 
and isolation. Keep an eye on them, as they might be the ones who need help the 
most.


5 | Quick run bag (QRB) 

Staff should make sure their bag is equipped with the basic minimum items as 
this too, can contribute to minimising their anxieties. The items I carried 
included food (such as energy bars), water, mobile phone, satellite phone, 
chargers, torch, ID documents with copies, cash, medication, tissues, mosquito 
repellent, and hand sanitiser. I also carried a first aid kit, a whistle, and a 
mosquito net.


Evacuations can be very intense. They happen abruptly, and often leave no time 
for one to assess and evaluate the systems in place as well as the staff’s 
wellbeing. Staff need their management to be supportive, not just during the 
evacuation but also and especially afterwards.

It’s important to give staff the opportunity to take a step back, and make 
sense of the chaos they were part of. Two ways to do that are ensuring they get 
some time off and providing them with access to psychological care.

Lara Ghaoui is an emergency programme officer at World Vision UK 
<http://www.worldvision.org.uk/>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 