
Five years ago I was going through the “Why can’t I get my child reading?” 
conundrum with my daughter, Helen, who had many better things to do at the 
time, such as sploshing paint about, dressing up and persecuting the cat.

While having friends around for dinner, Helen joined the adult conversation 
after hearing the older children talk about school essays. She proclaimed that 
she needed one, so, seeing this as a great opportunity to get my five-year-old 
daughter engaged in literacy, I got to work and created a personalised story.


The story was a silly Arthurian quest for pink frilly dresses with knights and 
damsels in distress, and a wolf who turned out to be an enchanted fashion 
designer called Alexander (luckily, Merlin was able to sort out the wolf 
problem and then it was fabulous clothes all round). Helen ran around the house 
clutching the story to her chest. She was enormously excited because it was hers
. It was at this point that we really started making headway with her reading 
skills.

This was the lightbulb moment for our reading app, Mr Glue Stories 
<https://mrgluestories.com/>. Wouldn’t it be great, co-founder Carrie 
Gregory-Hood and I thought, if we could create a product that allowed children 
to create their own personalised stories.

For some children it’s quite a business getting into reading. It’s not 
necessarily that they’re not able to, they’re just not interested, which can 
hold them back in school and later on in life. Save the Children’sRead on. Get 
on 
<http://www.readongeton.org.uk/?utm_campaign=ukreading&utm_medium=video&utm_source=ytukfilm201409>
 campaign, launched earlier this year, recognises this is a major issue in the 
UK.

First, we looked at what was out there already. There were quite a lot of 
personalised story tools and apps, but most of them were along the lines of: 
put your child’s name into this classic. In other words, something given to a 
child by an adult.

We wanted the opposite of that: to involve the child in the process and put 
them into the driving seat of the story. We wanted them to be not just the main 
character and choose details as they read, but the illustrator and the 
voiceover artist as well, all at the same time.

An app was the only way that was going to happen, so we mapped out the 
features of the app, raised some finance from friends and family, set up a 
limited company and set about writing the first series of stories.

We then went on a two-woman mission to attract the top talent as contributors 
to our product. Mr Glue Stories needed the best so, through our contacts, we 
got to work in sourcing an amazing illustrator and a tech development company, 
as well as connecting with a local school who kindly offered their voices for 
our story app. Our business was born.

Mr Glue Stories is, we like to think, the next-generation in personalised 
storytelling. The book is designed to be personalised on an iPad by the child 
themselves, rather than done as a series of data points by parents and 
presented as a finished book to the child. It’s an engaging and immersive 
reading experience because not only do the children choose characters and 
elements to go into the story, they can also colour in and draw on every page, 
as well as record themselves reading and add music and sound effects as they 
progress. The app allows them to make their very own custom book and in the 
case of some children, it takes away the fear of the published page.

An app such as this is not without its challenges. The biggest for us by far 
was actually sourcing tech developers: finding ones that were on the same 
wavelength and who understood the vision, were reliable, knew their stuff and 
didn’t want to steal our IP. We lost nine months at the start dealing with a 
number of tech developers that fell down on at least one of these.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdJ0GbBrHxm0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdJ0GbBrHxm0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdJ0GbBrHxm0&media=>
 Mr Glue Stories 
Another huge challenge for us was developing a user experience (UX) that 
worked for children globally, as was creating a whole new rendering engine that 
compresses enormous files that could be pulled out on demand. We had to make 
sure the app didn’t use up all the iPad’s memory resources

Without any marketing, we achieved more than 11,000 app downloads within the 
first six months of launching on the App Store. We’ve been awestruck by the 
positive reaction from parents and teachers, who see children enjoying reading 
experience.

What next? The future for Mr Glue Stories will be linking up our content 
management system – where new stories have been created – to the app, which 
will give children the opportunity to access new stories (topics/themes), add 
new characters and build up a personalised collection of storybooks. While 
we’ll always ensure a selection of these stories remain free, additional ones 
will be available as an in-app purchase. We also want to reach out to more 
parents and teachers than any other app or personalised storybook in the UK.

App facts

Length of the project: nine months internal planning; one year development; 
three months development for printing
Companies involved: Leto <http://weareleto.com/>
Size of the team: five developers, one art director and a team of project 
managers

Amelia Thorne is co-founder of Mr Glue Stories with Carrie Gregory-Hood

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 