
As London rightly celebrates another year of outstanding A-level results - the 
best in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/18/pupils-english-physics-a-levels-highest-grades-fall>
, except for the south-east - it’s worth noting that some young talents in the 
capital, as no doubt elsewhere, may still not be fully recognised by the school 
examinations system.

Next month will see the opening 
<http://www.haringey.gov.uk/news/new-digital-skills-college-open-tottenham> of 
theAda National College for Digital Skills <http://www.adacollege.org.uk/>, to 
be based at Tottenham Hale within the area’sredevelopment zone 
<http://www.haringey.gov.uk/news/agreement-reached-major-programme-transform-tottenham-hale>
. Ada’s first sixth form intake will comprise up to 100 16-year-olds plus 50 
apprentices aged 19 and above. Of these 150 students, 60% will live within a 
five-mile radius of the college and 40% within the borough of Haringey. There 
will be no fees and no qualifications required. Entry is by interview and 
aptitude with a logical problem-solving app.

This is specialist further education, tailored not only to help fill the 
country’sdigital skills gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/sep/25/training-deficit-uk-faces-digital-skills-gap>
 but also to advance what Ada chief executive and co-founder Mark Smith calls a 
social mission in a part of town containing many disadvantaged young people and 
rebuilding after the damage done by the 2011 riots.

“Our idea is to support low-income people into high tech jobs,” he says, 
stressing that Ada students need not have done especially well at school in 
general to have the abilities the college will seek to nurture. There can be 
several reasons for that lack, including poor English language skills. Smith’s 
reasoning is simple: “They might have struggled in some areas, but they could 
be great at maths and have a passion for digital knowledge. It’s all about 
untapped potential”.

Smith is determined to encourage more girls and young women into the digital 
field. The college is named afterAda Lovelace 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ada_Lovelace>, the early 19th century 
mathematician (and daughter of Lord Byron), who wrote what some regard as the 
first computer programme. He says that up to 18% of the college’s first intake 
will be female – a significant minority, given that the technology industry 
average for women has been put at just 13%.

Ada has come about thanks to Smith pulling together a range of supporters to 
back his social enterprise. The project really got off the ground just before 
Christmas 2013 when the online gaming companyGamesys 
<http://www.gamesyscorporate.com/> gave him £100,000, topped up with 
contributions of £12,000 from each of its two founders.

It helps that Smith has an education background: he assisted Andrew Adonis 
with writing his bookEducation, Education, Education 
<https://www.bitebackpublishing.com/books/education-education-education> and 
both he and Ada co-founder Tom Fogden have been through theTeach First 
<https://www.teachfirst.org.uk/about> programme, which aims to get talented 
teachers into classrooms in low income areas. It is the only brand new college 
of thefive across England 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-confirms-80-million-for-national-colleges-to-deliver-the-workforce-of-tomorrow>
 national government is backing, and Gamesys has been joined by four more
commercial partners <http://www.adacollege.org.uk/our-partners>: Bank of 
America Merrill Lynch <https://www.bankofamerica.com/>, Deloitte 
<http://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en.html>, IBM 
<http://www.ibm.com/cognitive/uk-en/outthink/?S_PKG=AW&S_TACT=EUCACOGUKS1&campaign=BR|SEARCH|OUTTHINK|UK|UK|EN|CA|AW|T1|IBM%20MAIN%20BRAND_E&group=BR|SEARCH|OUTTHINK|UK|UK|EN|CA|AW|T1|IBM%20MAIN%20BRAND_E|E&mkwid=057cd016-6cc6-4177-a2b0-8cc1fdd41514|531|12220821&ct=EUCACOGUKS1&iio=BSWG&cmp=EUCAC&ck=ibm&cs=e&ccy=UK&cr=google&cm=k&cn=BR|SEARCH|OUTTHINK|UK|UK|EN|CA|AW|T1|IBM%20MAIN%20BRAND_E|E>
 andKing <https://king.com/>, the creators of Candy Crush Saga. There’s also an 
education partner, theAldridge Foundation <http://www.aldridgefoundation.com/> 
charity.

Haringey Council too has been important. Smith cites encouragement from 
councillor Joe Goldberg 
<http://www.minutes.haringey.gov.uk/mgUserInfo.aspx?UID=1299>, who is the 
borough’s cabinet member for economic development, social inclusion and 
sustainability, and from its deputy chief executiveZina Etheridge 
<http://www.haringey.gov.uk/local-democracy/about-council/chief-executive-and-senior-leadership-team>
, with whom he had a pivotal cup of coffee in a cafe on Tottenham High Road.
Council leader Claire Kober 
<http://www.haringey.gov.uk/local-democracy/councillors-and-mps/councillor-claire-kober>
, who has lately also become the chair of the influential local authority body
London Councils <http://www.londoncouncils.gov.uk/who-we-are>, regards Ada as 
an example of how boroughs can facilitate endeavours like Smith’s by convening 
interested parties and providing practical help.

After a two-week temporary stay in Here East <http://hereeast.com/> on the 
Olympic Park, Ada will move into its permanent first home, a former Job Centre 
a five-minute walk from Tottenham Hale station which is being converted thanks 
to funding from theGreater London Authority <https://www.london.gov.uk/> and 
the government. It will expand over the next two years into a second premises 
in Whitechapel (yet to be chosen), and Smith says that in seven years’ time it 
will teach some 2,500 students. You can follow Ada’s progress onTwitter 
<https://twitter.com/adacollege?lang=en-gb>.

The Ada initiative is an important part of the larger story of Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/tottenham> in the post-riots period. I was 
introduced to other elements of it during my visit to the area and will report 
on those too in the coming months.
 