
“I think it’s a crazy idea. When they told me, I didn’t really believe it.” I 
am standing with Goro Miyazaki in a recording studio in Akasaka, and have just 
asked what he thinks about me becoming a cartoon character. It wasn’t the 
answer I expected, but when you are the son of arguably the greatest figure in 
Japanese animation history –Hayao Miyazaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hayaomiyazaki>, the Oscar-winning director of 
classic animations likeSpirited Away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spirited-away> and My Neighbour Totoro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/23/my-neighbour-totoro-review> – and 
a respected director in your own right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/aug/03/family.sciencefictionandfantasy>, 
I suppose you are granted a certain licence to tell it how you see it.

And yet, it is true: the Japanese national broadcaster, NHK 
<http://www3.nhk.or.jp/nhkworld/>, is turning Sushi and Beyond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/jul/24/beyond-sushi-book-review-japan>
, a book I wrote several years ago – about a food-themed journey my family and 
I took through Japan – intoa 24-part animated TV series 
<http://www3.nhk.or.jp/nhkworld/english/tv/sushi/>. I never intended for the 
book even to be read by Japanese people but, coincidentally, the translation is 
also being turned into amanga <https://www.theguardian.com/books/manga>. 
Suddenly, I find myself as a tiny footnote in the history of the two greatest 
Japanese art forms of the 20th century.

It is all very exciting, of course, but I also feel a little like the victim 
of an elaborate practical joke, so I decide to go toJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, not just to see what I look like as 
a cartoon, but also to learn more about manga and Japanese animation, or anime, 
and their intertwined histories.

My first stop is Kyoto’s Manga Museum <http://www.kyotomm.jp/english/>. Kyoto 
was the crucible for the tea ceremony, lacquerware, ikebana (flower arranging), 
all the stuff your aunt likes, and there were many who thought this brash, 
lowbrow artform had no place in that pantheon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429884732309%2Ff4b4f188-4cf2-4fd4-b987-e3ee0bc8085e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20I%20became%20a%20manga%20hero!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20I%20became%20a%20manga%20hero%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429884732309%2Ff4b4f188-4cf2-4fd4-b987-e3ee0bc8085e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Michael Booth and family enjoy a meal in Okinawa 
“Manga was just a subculture until a few years ago,” says Yu Ito, a researcher 
at the museum. “These days the government supports manga like other artforms, 
but that all really started around the year 2000, when foreigners began to read 
manga.” Today, the US and France are the second and third largest manga markets.

Ito-san took me on a tour of some of the 250,000 mangas in the collection, 
housed in a creaky-floored converted secondary school in the centre of the 
city. We were talking about definitions of the form: were prehistoric cave 
paintings manga, I asked. He thought not. One of his definitions was that lots 
of people needed to see it.Weekly Shonen Jump <http://shonenjump.viz.com/>, the 
most popular manga magazine, sells almost 3m copies a week in Japan (the next 
bestselling magazine, a TV guide, sells 1m a month), while the most popular 
manga series,One Piece <http://shonenjump.viz.com/blog/tagged/19/one-piece>, 
has sold 345m copies – comparable to the combined global sales of all the Harry 
Potter books.

Rory MacLean reviews Sushi and Beyond by Michael Booth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/jul/24/beyond-sushi-book-review-japan> 
Manga’s roots and influences more likely go back to the 18th-century Kibyoshi 
illustrated books, and to Kamishibai, a form of entertainment akin to a Punch 
and Judy show, where performers, often monks, told stories with drawings (there 
were once 50,000 kamishibai performers in Japan until TV killed off the form in 
the 1960s). But manga as we know it today emerged as a result of the post-war 
influence of Disney and US comic strips. “Mangas grew popular because they were 
cheap and quick to read,” says Ito-san. You could digest an entire volume in a 
30 minute commute.

What makes a great manga? “A story that matches the drawing. It doesn’t have 
to be great drawing, or great story; it’s more important that the style matches 
the content. But the most important thing is good characters – characters that, 
when you look at them, you can tell what kind of personality they are. And if 
the kids start to draw you, then you know you’ve become popular.” I start to 
imagine Japanese children drawing me. Then I start to imagine the merchandising 
possibilities, the endorsements, the free dinners. Goodbye Kitty, Hello Portly 
Middle-Aged Man!

Many mangaka, or manga artists, progress to work in the anime industry and 
many manga have been adapted for the screen, and thus the postwar histories of 
both are intertwined. To try to unravel this, I arrange to meet anime historian 
Ryusuke Hikawa in Tokyo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429884930607%2Fa3911f5d-db90-4b61-8f63-f22573c2b236-688x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20I%20became%20a%20manga%20hero!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20I%20became%20a%20manga%20hero%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429884930607%2Fa3911f5d-db90-4b61-8f63-f22573c2b236-688x1020.jpeg>
 A copy of Weekly Shonen Jump, the bestselling manga 
Japan’s first feature-length animation was The Legend of the White Serpent 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Legend_of_the_White_Serpent_(1956_film)>, 
made in 1958. That was heavily influenced by Disney but, according to 
Hikawa-san, the distinctively Japanese style of animation was born with the 
1963 TV series The Mighty Atom (akaAstro Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/dec/02/my-inspiration-satoshi-kitamura-osamu-tezukas-astro-boy-manga>
, as it was known in the US). For reasons of economy, Osamu Tezuka’s screen 
adaptation of his own manga used eight frames per second compared with Disney’s 
24, hence his legendary pronouncement to his staff: “This is not animation, 
this is anime.”

Tezuka was also influenced by American cartoons, not least Betty Boop, whose 
oversized eyes he mimicked in his characters. “But many of the expressions we 
associate with anime go further back, tokabuki theatre 
<http://www.japan-guide.com/e/e2090.html>,” says Hikawa-san. “For instance, in 
kabuki, they might use a red cloth instead of blood from the nose.” Ah, the 
infamous anime nose bleed, which I had heard symbolises sexual arousal in male 
characters. “Yes, and there is also the exaggerated sweating, or the lines on 
the forehead if someone is stressed. Now I see Chinese and American animations 
using the same symbols. Look at the large eyes inFrozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/frozen>, for example – that is very anime.”

The Mighty Atom came at the dawn of Japan’s unprecedented economic explosion, 
when everything, be it trains, TVs or transistor radios, had to be quicker, 
better and often smaller too. Japanese children loved the idea that they could 
now see a new cartoon every week instead of waiting a year for a cinema 
release, and when a confectioner started giving away Astro Boy transfers with 
its chocolates, the merchandising model on which so much anime was subsequently 
based, was born (not least the unending, baffling hell that isPokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon>).

As the anime audience matured, so too did the content and style of their 
cartoons:Thunderbirds <http://www.bbc.co.uk/cult/anderson/thunderbirds/> was a 
major influence, Hikawa-san told me, heralding a slew of space ship and robot 
anime in the 1970s. Hayao Miyazaki and other more “artistic” anime producers 
brought greater visual complexity and more adult themes to the genre in the 
1980s, a decade which also heralded the arrival of the VHS and the otaku – the 
nerds whose twin obsessions: cute girls and robots, anime catered to with great 
efficiency. Genres that had long existed in manga – erotic or “hentai” manga; 
sports manga; food manga – now transferred to the screen, a process of 
diversification accelerated by social media, the arrival of broadband, and with 
it YouTube, in 2006. These days one of the most popular forums for watching 
anime isNiconico <>, a video sharing site where members can leave on-screen 
text comments during their favourite films.

I was curious to know how many anime were non-fiction, like the NHK series of 
my book. “That is very unique, even in Japan,” said Hikawa-san. “Especially 
non-fiction documentary. You might find some that are based on historical 
content, but few. I do see some aspects of the anime of your book in the 
Edo-era woodcut tradition where artists would create prints based on incidents 
in the real world. Maybe that’s why they chose to make your book into an anime.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429885162383%2F5fee33d6-d3eb-4bc4-b5f7-717e7925ce74-1414x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20I%20became%20a%20manga%20hero!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20I%20became%20a%20manga%20hero%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429885162383%2F5fee33d6-d3eb-4bc4-b5f7-717e7925ce74-1414x2040.jpeg>
 Astro Boy, star of the first anime TV series in 1963. Photograph: Alamy 
I am rather pleased that a historian of anime sees this faint echo of 18th 
century artists likeHokusai <http://www.katsushikahokusai.org> (another 
possible inventor of the manga, according to some), but now I am about to 
confront the 21st-century reality and see “my” anime for the first time. I am 
in the back of a cab with Keisuke Tsuchihashi, the executive producer of the 
NHK series. We are on our way to the Fanworks animation studio where I will 
meet the man responsible for turning me into a cartoon. He goes by the 
nom-de-plume of “Rarecho <http://web-japan.org/trends/arts/art061027.html>”.

In the cab Tsuchihashi takes the opportunity to run some potential voice 
artists by me on his laptop. The series is to be produced in Japanese for the 
main NHK channel and dubbed into English for NHK World, their global 
English-language channel, but all the English-language voices are to be 
recorded in Los Angeles (the hub of the anime English dubbing industry). I am 
anxious that my family and I will end up with American accents, but it is worse 
than that.

“That’s an Australian man trying to do an English accent!”

“Oh, really?” says Tsuchihashi. “You can hear that?”

Another is clearly an American channelling Dick Van Dyke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k_mpaF5-SlU>. It is a little awkward, but 
luckily he has other options, one of which is perfect, and we settle on that. I 
also learn that my sons are to be voiced by women, which is unlikely to go down 
well back home but is standard animation industry practice, apparently.

At the Fanworks offices on one floor of a small office block in a quiet side 
street of Shibuya, artists sit in cubicles hand-drawing backdrops for another 
series. I am shown to a small conference room where Rarecho, a shy man in his 
early 40s but dressed like a teenager in striped beanie and puffa jacket, 
awaits. Rarecho is one of the post-broadband generation of “armchair 
animators”, liberated by new software. He became famous in Japan for a 
home-made Flash animation calledThe Legend of the Yawaraka Tank 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fPN3Tnn2AaY>, which went viral.

“Ah, I was expecting someone really fat, like Michael Moore,” he tells me, 
shaking my hand. (I get this a lot in Japan: in the beginning of my book, I 
describe how I have put on weight after cooking and eating in Paris for some 
years, so many seem to expect Fatty Arbuckle to waddle in).

We sit down to watch a rough edit of the first two episodes. I am nervous. 
What if I hate it? Around the table are various producers, a translator and, 
not least, Fanworks’ CEO (all of whom, I learn during a bibulous dinner in a 
Shinjuku restaurant later that night, were as nervous about my reaction as I 
was).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429885377972%2Fd14ae959-8635-4891-b264-e30522c4571e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20I%20became%20a%20manga%20hero!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20I%20became%20a%20manga%20hero%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fmanga-hero-japan-tour-anime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429885377972%2Fd14ae959-8635-4891-b264-e30522c4571e-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Booths in action in the Sushi and Beyond anime. 
The programme begins with a montage of my family’s arrival in Tokyo, set 
against a gorgeous sunset cityscape. Though the Flash animation is rudimentary, 
in the South Park manner, the colouring is spectacular and surprisingly 
sophisticated, and the characters are hilarious. I love it. My avatar is 
perhaps a little thicker round the waist than I am these days, but he is more 
handsome. It’s a tradeoff I am happy to accept. My wife is channelling Daphne 
from Scooby Doo, while my children are cute but fairly generic anime.

I am already rather proud of the animated version of my book. I am especially 
delighted that Rarecho has taken my story – a work of creative non-fiction, 
based on real events but shaped and filtered into a narrative – and ramped up 
the fantasy aspect. Thus, while in reality we might have received directions 
from an elderly lady, in Rarecho’s version of events we are guided by a 
Godzilla-sizedGothic Lolita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/jan/25/tokyo-fashion-tribes-guide>. 
When we arrive for the first time in Tokyo and find ourselves standing in 
Shinjuku at night, a sofa appears and we sit, Simpsons-style, to reflect on the 
story so far.

I tell Rarecho that I love these fantasy elements. “That’s just my style,” he 
shrugs. “It isn’t even intentional, that’s just how it turns out.” He is hungry 
for more details about my family. I ask him whether it is important that the 
animation is a true representation of us. The question gets lost in 
translation, but the answer is still interesting: “From an animation point of 
view it is important that one of your sons is a speaking character, he is 
logical and expresses his dissatisfaction, and the other is more quiet, an 
observer, who takes action.”

“Like Hong Kong Phooey’s cat!” I exclaim. There are puzzled frowns around the 
table. A quick internet search brings up an episode. I point out how, in the 
title sequence, Penry-the-mild-mannered-janitor’s catsaves the day with a 
casual thump on a stuck drawer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Va_Rmpd3PZI>. 
That’s how I see the character of my younger son, I explain, thinking: here I 
am, on the other side of the world, talking about Hong Kong Phooey with a 
roomful of strangers.

I ask Rarecho if he has ever animated a non-fiction story before. He hasn’t, 
and it is not without its challenges. Some chapters in my book don’t work as 
animation: a section about filleting fugu is too gory, for instance.

From there, Tsuchihashi-san and I head off across the city centre in a taxi 
for the final appointment of the day: a press conference to promote the series. 
Around 30 Japanese journalists have gathered at NHK’s HQ overlooking Yoyogi 
park. They ask me how I feel about becoming a cartoon character (the idea is 
definitely growing on me), what my favourite Japanese foods are (yuba!), and 
how Japanese cuisine is thought of in the UK (I tell them that awareness and 
appreciation is growing, but there’s a way to go. No yuba yet, for instance).

One journalist raises her hand but it turns out she doesn’t have so much a 
question as a sense of disappointment she wants to share with the group: “I 
imagined you would be much fatter,” she says.

Michael Booth’s trip to Japan was organised by Japan’s National Tourist 
Organization. For more information, go towww.seejapan.co.uk 
<http://www.seejapan.co.uk/>

• Sushi and Beyond by Michael Booth is published by Vintage, price £9.99. To 
order a copy for £7.99 with free UK p&p go totheguardian.com/bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/sushi-and-beyond.html> or call 0330 333 6846
 