
We at music tech company Tonara <http://tonara.com/> are a relatively small 
setup – 15 people to be precise. But together we have more than 250 years of 
music playing, composing and teaching between us. We’re all equally passionate 
about both music and innovation, and we have a chief music officer instead of a 
chief marketing officer. So it should come as no surprise that every product 
we’ve developed uses the massive potential of technology to connect more people 
to the wonder and beauty of classical music, and the value of music education.

How we made Artory, the what’s on app for Plymouth | App story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/feb/06/artory-culture-plymouth-app-story>
Our music education app, Wolfie <http://www.wolfiepiano.com/> – (nick)named 
after prolific composer Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart – grew out of an understanding 
that the process of studying music could be lonely and unappealing for today’s 
generation of children.

Classical music education might be alive and well in China, but in the US and 
to a lesser extent Europe, the field of study is declining. Perhaps this isn’t 
surprising. For a generation of children who are tablet native, the idea of 
sitting down with an analogue object can seem boring when compared to an hour 
on a device that gives you access to worlds of information and entertainment.

Instead of fighting the rising dominance of apps and tablets, our response was 
to use precisely those tools to bring kids back to music study. We believe that 
studying to play an instrument is a valuable, enjoyable and rewarding 
experience, so we wanted to create a technological bridge to help a younger 
generation access that. Wolfie was designed as a music education tool that 
would speak the language of today’s generation of children: technology.

Our first step in doing this was to find a way to help younger students focus 
and concentrate – a tall order when, according to the National Centre for 
Biotechnology Information, the average human attention span is shorter than 
that of a goldfish.
 A screenshot from the app. 
After an hour’s lesson with a teacher, finding the self-motivation to practise 
alone can be hard. That’s why our first and most important feature of Wolfie 
was the patentedMagic Cursor <http://www.wolfiepiano.com/#!magic-cursor/c32n>, 
which follows music being played by students in real-time on the score itself. 
This helps students focus their attention on the music, learn notes more 
effectively and improve their rhythm.

It works for any instrumentation, any style and any level of complexity, 
demonstrating a level of technological innovation that was previously unheard 
of. With the Magic Cursor we’ve created a digital technology that is able to 
really “hear” music.

Once we had built the first version of the app, we needed to test it in the 
real world. We initially trialled Wolfie at theSpecial Music School 
<http://www.kaufmanmusiccenter.org/sms/> (SMS) in New York. As part of the 
pilot, we worked closely with teachers and students to make changes to the 
platform based on their feedback.

This process was instrumental in helping us refine our offering and the SMS 
has continued to use the app even after the pilot programme ended. This told us 
we were on the right track with giving teachers and students what they need to 
teach and learn more effectively.

One of our biggest ongoing challenges is ensuring Wolfie has an extensive 
catalogue of scores to keep up with the needs of any music teacher or student. 
Our mandate is to make it as easy as possible for young people to get excited 
about learning to play music, so we can’t afford not to have a score that a 
student might want to learn to play. In order to do that we had to partner with 
different music publishers to build a score catalogue for music students at 
every level. We’ve been lucky so far in partnering with major music publishers 
like Schott, but this is an ongoing process and we’re constantly adding new 
scores.

So far we’ve managed to make the process of studying music approximate other 
digital experiences young students today are having. Wolfie is getting kids to 
sitat the piano with the same technology that was pulling them away from it. 
Our next steps will be to continue improving the product – we’ve got a major 
update coming soon – and increasing our exposure with music teachers, who are 
the gatekeepers to the music teaching experience.

App facts

Length of the project: 12 months from start to finish
Companies involved: Tonara <http://tonara.com/>
Size of the team: one algorithm developer, three software developers, three 
musicians and one designer/product manager

More App stories

• How we made the DeviantArt Mobile App 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jan/23/how-we-made-deviantart-mobile-app>
• How we made Artory, the what’s on app for Plymouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/feb/06/artory-culture-plymouth-app-story>
• How we made the Hidden Newcastle app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jan/09/hidden-newcastle-app-culture-heritage>

Guy Bauman is CEO of Tonara <http://tonara.com/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 