
Q I need to buy some new trousers. Magazines suggest every shape under the sun 
is in fashion this year. What do you think is the best style to buy? I want to 
get lots of wear out of them, so I don't mind spending a bit of money.
Katharine

A Buy cheap, buy twice is unfortunately true. If you want something to last 
all season, you have to invest. My vote for winter trousers is the wide-legged, 
high-waisted tailored style. I'd advise against high-street shopping for this 
sort of garment, as it's unlikely you'll find the cut and attention to darting 
and tailoring in the mass-produced market. Even in the designer sector, shop 
around to find a style that works for your shape. Try Margaret Howell if you 
want a masculine cut for a boyish figure. Givenchy's styles are more sharp and 
feminine - the collection includes some impeccably tailored wool trousers which 
make your legs look like stilts. Or if you fancy some colour, try APC.

Q I would like to get a jumper dress. Where can I go?
Claire

A The secret to a great jumper dress is the quality of the wool. The thickness 
of the yarn and the fabric mix give it stretch and help the garment keep its 
shape. There's nothing worse than a bagging bum and saggy, overstretched arms 
on any woollen clothing. It always reminds me of my impoverished student days 
when I lived in baggy jumpers to save on heating bills. Depending on your 
shape, wear your dress loose, or, to create a good silhouette, add a belt. And 
keep it relaxed but sexy by teaming it with flat pumps or a platform ankle 
boot. My top dresses are Unique by Topshop's petrol-blue mid-thigh-length worn 
with a cinch disc belt. For a longer version, Laura Ashley's amethyst-coloured 
knitted dress with three-quarter-length sleeves is very ladylike. On the 
designer end, I love Versace's cherry-red fine knit - we all need a splash of 
bold colour in our wardrobe for autumn - or Celine's tan camel-hair fine knit 
with ribbed waistband. It's the perfect dress for this season's body-conscious 
trend.

Â· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
 