
A few days ago, one of my post-doc students asked to speak to me about a 
scientific workshop she had just attended, and the conference dinner in 
particular. It was clear that she had more to share than the usual mix of 
heroic discoveries-in-the-making, rumours of poor scientific conduct, and the 
latest lab hook-ups.

Yes, let's discuss lad culture – but don't let university leaders off the hook
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/dec/05/lad-culture-sexism-university-leaders>
She wanted to talk about the conference organiser, a man in his late 50s, who 
had sat next to her at the dinner, leaned over, grazed her back and whispered 
that she was the most beautiful woman at the conference.

She didn’t seem particularly indignant about this incident. Her first question 
was how she should handle such advances from senior academics, and the second 
was whether there was something about her conduct which singled her out as a 
flirt.


My intuitive response was to go along with analysing her behaviour, making 
inquiries about how the situation arose. Was there anything about her dress 
(grey trouser suit), behaviour (sitting at the dinner table), or prior contact 
(email about programme and venue, and a brief “hello” over lunch) that would 
have given this married man the impression that this behaviour was acceptable? 
Quite obviously, these were the wrong questions to ask.


The right question is: why does a public figure of authority and reference – a 
professor and the organiser of an event for dozens of young scientists – feel 
like he can make overt advances towards the participants? Another key concern 
is why I intuitively questioned the victim about her actions, but let the 
conduct of a powerful senior figure slip as something that is “to be expected”.

The sad reality is that my student took this kind of chat-up as common 
practice, too. She had spoken to her mother, who is also a scientist, but had 
no solution for deflecting unwanted male attention. As an employer and member 
of the scientific community in the 21st century, I wondered: was this it? Was 
this the moment when I should put my money where my mouth is and do something?

I was conflicted, especially since that man is the co-author on a grant 
proposal. I had entertained the idea of involving this post-doc on the project 
if it got funding, but maybe I would have to reconsider.

Forget equality and diversity, my university only cares about appearances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/29/forget-equality-and-diversity-my-university-only-cares-about-appearances>
But what are the options? Isn’t it true that there were no witnesses? Isn’t it 
also true that my student gave silent acquiescence by trying to ignore this 
clumsy advance? Is this enough evidence to act upon?

This man is a colleague, after all – one whom I might be working with soon. 
Can I trust him to take criticism well? If not, can I trust him to interact 
sensibly with my staff on future projects?

These aren’t the right questions to be asking, either. Those of us who want to 
do something about sexism in academia – and there are many of us – need to stop 
waiting for the smoking gun.


Gender inequality in universities isn’t about rape on the pulpit in the 
lecture hall – thank heavens. It is about the banality of sexism in everyday 
conduct. It is about the fact that in the UK we go frommore than 50% of women 
in Stem at undergraduate level to less than 15% at professorial level 
<http://chemicalimbalance.co.uk/>.


It is about an accomplished scientist who hates to see her daughter being 
subjected to the same objectification she endured decades ago. It is about the 
odd whiskey the ol’ boys are having together, but no women-folk, please, it 
might get rowdy. It is these meetings, private jokes and implied truths that 
breed the next generation of sexism in academia.


Professorial staff have a particular responsibility to be minutely aware of 
which jokes they laugh at, which people they surround themselves with, which 
modes of interaction with students and peers they deem acceptable. These cues 
are taken up by bystanders at conferences, meetings, and in the lab and extend 
to class, gender and ethnicity.

As western societies have finally – although sometimes late and with some 
reluctance – come to expect safe spaces for women and correct conduct in the 
public sphere, these rules have to seep into all levels of academia, too.

Let's shine a light on the dark art of micropolitics in universities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/15/lets-shine-a-light-on-the-dark-art-of-micropolitics-in-universities>
The scientific community defines what is acceptable not only in the things 
that we do and say, but in the things that we chose not to do anything about, 
that provoke nothing more than a shrug.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 