
Humanitarians provide a glimpse of the best of humanity in an often violent 
and distorted world. Yet despite their strength,studies suggest 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22180469> they experience more mental 
health issues than the average individual. So what accounts for this disparity? 
And what can be done about it?

The difficulty and risk faced by aid workers in the field are now well-known 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/aid-workers-stories-mental-health>
 and many are simply experiencing normal reactions to these abnormal 
situations. Neuroscience research has helped us understand the consequences of 
continued exposure to toxic stress. Stress becomes toxic in situations that are 
novel and unexpected, where we have little control, where available internal 
and external resources are limited, and where we experience harmful intent.

Aid workers speak out about mental health: 'I was afraid they would think I 
couldn't handle it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/aid-workers-stories-mental-health>
These circumstances, especially if they become chronic, cause a breakdown of 
both physical and mental processes. So how do we recognise the signs that the 
stress of aid work is becoming an issue in ourselves or our colleagues?


Here are a few well-known signs:


 * Emotional agitation: short temper, anxiety, depression. 
 * Being prone to conflict or withdrawing from social situations. 
 * A feeling that there is no room inside to deal with shock and that 
everything affects us. 
 * Being unable to think clearly: everything is important and nothing is 
important. 
 * Self-medicating with alcohol, tobacco, drugs or sex. 
 * Being prone to flashbacks and intrusive thoughts. 
 * Feeling mistrustful and paranoid. 
 * Memory problems or visual spatial confusion. 
 * A growing sense of futility. 
 * A lack of interest or engagement in our usual activities. 
This partial list of typical indications that our mental “knees” are beginning 
to buckle under toxic stress should not be ignored. Given the “can-do” attitude 
of many aid workers, the tendency is to toughen up and push ourselves through 
these symptoms. This often results in making the problem worse and exacerbating 
symptoms.

Stigma, guilt and gaps in the system: it's time for NGOs to step up on staff 
mental health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/25/mental-health-support-for-frontline-aid-workers-ngos>
A better approach is to honestly acknowledge the symptoms and begin to make 
changes in our situation and behaviour that will help bring the toxic stress 
under more control. While this will look different for each individual, there 
are some common recommended resilience practices developed out of the 
neuroscience research that should be implemented by allhumanitarians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/humanitarianshumanitarians>
.


Advice on staying healthy 

Actively promote more social connection during and off deployment. This may 
look a bit different if one is introverted or extroverted, but it is essential 
for wellbeing. While always a challenge for humanitarians to stay connected to 
friends and family at home, it is worth the effort to keep in regular contact. 
With today’s technology this is increasingly possible even in remote areas.

Remind yourself of the reasons you do this work. Having a sense of purpose, 
whether religious or humanistic,has been shown 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/acps.12095/abstract> to confer 
mental protection against some of the demoralising and traumatic experiences 
encountered in aid work.

Continue to develop your technical skills and expertise. Having a sense of 
confidence in your abilities increases your self-efficacy and reduces feeling 
out of control.

Learn to manage your emotional responses in more healthy ways. Train yourself 
to recognise your emotions as helpful information and communicate them to 
others involved in a way they can hear. Yelling at someone disengages their 
thinking brain and yours – never really useful.

Get enough sleep. Adult brains require 7 to 8.5 hours of sleep a night to 
function. The research is becoming clear on this and the consequences both in 
performance and health are quite sobering.

Get physical exercise. While difficult to do in higher risk environments, 
physical exercise actually grows new brain cells in a critical area of the 
brain necessary to process stress. This same area is damaged by toxic stress. 
20 minutes a day, 4 to 5 times a week is a good regimen to follow. If it is too 
dangerous to jog or there is no local gym, do exercises in the office or team 
house. Any and all exercise counts as long as you sweat.

The pain of leaving communities you love burns a hole in your heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/24/the-pain-of-leaving-communities-you-have-come-to-love-burns-a-hole-in-your-heart>
Finally, if you find that you have checked off many or most of the signs of 
the impact of toxic stress, reach out and get help. The field of psychology and 
psychiatry has advanced significantly in being able to help individuals with 
PTSD and other mental issues, but it is always easier to help when the early 
signs appear. Like any physical or mental symptom, the sooner we address the 
issue, the more likely we can successfully move beyond it.

Donald is a psychologist and has focused almost exclusively on humanitarian 
aid workers experiencing mental health issues for the past decade.

You can explore more coverage on the issue of mental health and wellbeing in 
the aid sectorhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/aid-worker-wellbeing>
.Get in touch on globaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> if you would like to comment on the 
topic.


 * If you have been affected by the stories in this article, the Samaritans can
be contacted on 116 123 in the UK 
<http://www.samaritans.org/how-we-can-help-you/contact-us>. If you live outside 
the UK, a list of organisations providing support internationally can be found
here 
<http://in2mentalhealth.com/2011/06/23/50-mental-health-ngosuser-organizations-around-the-world/>
.The Headington Institute  <http://www.headington-institute.org/>provides 
online resources as well as information about counselling, training consulting 
and referrals. Additional peer to peer resources may be found on sites such as
Globalaidworker.org <http://globalaidworker.org/> 
Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 