
For PolyFauna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/11/radiohead-polyfauna-app-iphone-ipad-android>
, we were approached by Radiohead's Thom Yorke and Stanley Donwood, the band's 
long-time visual collaborator, after they had seen ourSuper-Computer-Romantics 
<http://vimeo.com/25228337> show at La Gaite Lyrique in Paris, and our website 
and sleeve work for Warp Records.

They had a very clear but open idea of what they wanted: to go beyond a linear 
music video and build an app that is an immersive, ever-changing world. The app 
would be made by exploring the music from studio sessions of Radiohead's last 
album,King of Limbs <http://www.thekingoflimbs.com/Store/DisplayItems.html>, 
and Stanley's organic pen and ink drawings.

The idea was to create a world to experience Radiohead's music in a totally 
different way – something beyond a remix or a download that would push the 
boundaries of what music and digital can do when brought together fully. We 
hoped the experience of PolyFauna would be unique to each individual person, 
rather than everybody having the same record or app with the same sounds and 
images. We also wanted to open up the possibilities of what music can mean in 
the digital age, beyond tiny thumbnail artwork and YouTube.

The process of development was similar to that of an art school: open and full 
of collaboration. Thom and Stanley shared our desire to challenge technology 
and invent a unique and special experience, so we began by sharing our 
inspirations, such as Karl Sims'Evolving Virtual Creatures 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JBgG_VSP7f8> video, which sparked the idea to 
create a living world inside the app.

Over the course of nine months, PolyFauna gradually took shape as we went back 
and forth between the band's studio in Oxford and ours in Sheffield – we shared 
drawings, music and prototypes over many creative discussions around non-linear 
musical structures. It was a real exploration of analogue audio-visual 
creativity and the opportunities that digital offers to create new experiences.

We've been surprised by the app in a few ways. First, how quickly people were 
able to figure out how it worked. Many apps and games begin with tutorials, but 
we intentionally omitted any explanation and kept the instructions to a 
minimum. This added to the app's sense of discovery, giving the user a feeling 
of satisfaction that you wouldn't get from just following commands on-screen.

All of the interactions – drawing on the screen, moving your body, following 
the red dot – have rewarding effects. We expected this discovery phase to take 
place over a few weeks, but many users were able to fully traverse the app 
within the first day.

PolyFauna is a standalone work, not tied into any new release, tour or PR 
event – this allowed us to craft the work and explore different avenues more 
easily than if there was a fixed point. In our first group meeting, all eight 
of us involved brought some amazing ideas to the table. The difficult part was 
to whittle those down into a coherent experience. To other app and game 
designers, I would stress this editing process before getting too far into 
production: prototype a few ideas, feel out what works, but be sure to cut the 
rest.

I have to admit, we were a little nervous about the app going live. Radiohead 
has a very keen and invested fan base – the kind who look for cryptic clues, 
hidden messages and conspiracies in their music and art. We were unsure whether 
they would think we had "ruined" the track, made an obscure piece of art or 
that they would simply go with us and Radiohead into the world of PolyFauna. 
OnceThom Yorke <https://www.theguardian.com/music/thom-yorke> had quietly 
announced it on the band's website, the response was huge – we received over 
100,000 downloads in the first hour alone.

App facts

Length of the project: three months full-time, spread out to fit schedules
Companies involved: Universal Everything, Radiohead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/radiohead>, Stanley Donwood, Nigel Godrich 
Size of the team: full-time, one developer; part-time, creative direction from 
all parties; sound from three contributors
Type of finance: Direct commission

Matt Pyke is founder of Universal Everything 
<http://www.universaleverything.com/> – follow Matt on Twitter @mattpyke 
<https://twitter.com/mattpyke>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 