
It easy to forget how much the buildings around us affect our mood. But think 
about it – would you feel happier against a skyline of bleak, grey blocks or 
somewhere like Barcelona, where the architectural imagination ofAntoni Gaudí 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/320/gallery/> created a city that feels like a 
dream? His birthday this year falls on Saturday 25 June 2016, and offers an 
opportunity to look at his work and the importance of architecture worldwide. 
So how can you explore the topic with your students?

Primary

Start by getting your class excited about the awe-inspiring possibilities of 
buildings withthis collection of colourful display posters 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22994/Buildings-of-the-World-posters>
 fromTwinkl <http://www.twinkl.co.uk/>. It includes such architectural wonders 
as the Taj Mahal, Notre Dame and the Shard – for an extra challenge, see if 
your pupils can tell you where each building is.

For a more local look at the built environment, try this checklist 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22993/Buildings-in-my-Town-worksheet>
. It introduces several different types of buildings – including hotels, 
mosques and thatched cottages – and asks pupils to tick off how many they can 
spot in the local area. Then your explorers canuse their findings in this lesson
 <https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/2203/Our-local-area>, 
which introduces key geographical terms and asks them to create an interactive 
map of the neighbourhood.

You can take an architectural trip through time with this indepth resource on 
historic buildings 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/5116/How-to-teacharchaeology-Investigating-historic-buildings>
. It details key points for comparison – such as windows, lintels, doors and 
the materials used for construction – and helps pupils work out how to date 
buildings by analysing these features.

How to teach … habitats
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jun/15/how-to-teach-habitats-outdoor-learning>
There is more historical insight on offer in this lesson on Roman architecture 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/18302/Roman-Architecture-----Buildings-and-Engineering-----Session-1>
 from theHamilton Trust <https://www.hamilton-trust.org.uk/>. It features 
creative, hands-on activities using everyday items (tins, cardboard tubes from 
kitchen roll and so on) to help children understand key features of Roman 
buildings and their construction techniques.

You can explore less successful approaches to building an abode with the 
cautionary tale of the Three Little Pigs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QLR2pLUsl-Y>. This lesson plan uses the story 
to introduce thecharacteristics of different building materials 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/17975/Three-Little-Pigs-----Everyday-Materials-Year-1-----Session-D>
, while this fun activity fromTeachit Primary <http://www.teachitprimary.co.uk/>
 tasks pupils withbuilding their own home 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22995/Build-the-Three-Little-Pigs-House>
 for the porcine trio and seeing if they can blow the roof off.

Your pupils can flex their architectural prowess and imaginations with this 
lesson plan on fantasy buildings 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/20058/Fantasy-buildings-----London-of-1666-----Session-01>
. The task asks them to design their dream buildings, show their understanding 
of the building process and justify their choices.

Secondary

Architecture, both good and bad, is never far from the news, as demonstrated 
by thiscollection of articles 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22992/News-articles-for-teaching-Architecture>
 and related activities fromThe Day <http://theday.co.uk/>. Topics covered 
include how the historic buildings of UK parliament could be abandoned as they 
become unfit for purpose; how the popularity of skyscrapers can affect the 
inhabitants of a city; and how future generations could find themselves living 
in cities under the sea.

There are more examples of futuristic cities in these fact sheets from the 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation <https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/>. The 
first explores the plannedMasdar City 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/11524/System-Reset-----Activity-1-Case-Study-Masdar-City>
 project in the United Arab Emirates, which will run on renewable energy and 
feature roofs designed to encourage air flow in the desert heat. The second 
looks at the plans forLiuzhou City in China 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/11523/System-Reset-----Activity-1-Case-Study-Liuzhou-City>
, in which vast green spaces were designed before the buildings to prioritise 
sustainability.

How to teach ... sinkholes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/nov/23/how-to-teach-sinkholes>
Meanwhile, this eye-catching animation looks at the science of what makes an 
attractive city <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hy4QjmKzF1c>. It examines six 
key features that make for a pleasant metropolis, including a balance between 
chaos and order; creating monuments that aren’t too tall; and ensuring there 
are visible signs of activity on the streets.

Get your students to unleash their architectural creativity by designing their 
ideal school. This activity asks them tothink about the big questions first 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22996/Design-your-ideal-school>
 – does the school system work effectively? How could it be improved? – and 
create innovative buildings and schedules to meet the needs they identify. The 
final task is a role-play in which your class can explore how different groups 
(such as parents, teachers and students) would respond to the plans.

Finally, why not use architecture to bring out the poet in your students? This 
activity pack 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/6754/Poet-in-the-past> from 
theScottish Poetry Library <http://www.scottishpoetrylibrary.org.uk/> 
encourages them to take a stroll and look at historic buildings, using their 
observations about the changing face of the local area to create poems, chants 
and ballads.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 