
She’s the English secret agent who had a special relationship with Captain 
America. She has no superpowers – unless you count a heightened fashion sense 
and being handy with a pump-action shotgun – but is capable of foiling 
diabolical plots. She’s a woman operating in a man’s world, but while her 
sexist colleagues in the Strategic Scientific Reserve have the suits, hats and 
tommy guns, she’s the one who seems untouchable.

There are lots of reasons to love Peggy Carter, not least because Hayley 
Atwell’s plucky performance is so appealing. But perhaps one of the most 
obvious is that, for someone who is part of the ballooningMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> screen universe, Peggy doesn’t 
seem weighed down by too much baggage.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQeea6Xr6W2g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQeea6Xr6W2g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQeea6Xr6W2g&media=>
 Watch a trailer for Agent Carter season two 
In a rushing torrent of Marvel continuity, Agent Carter, who returned to our 
screens for season two last night, tries to paddle her own canoe. After being 
introduced in the 1940s-setCaptain America: The First Avenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/28/captain-america-film-review>, the 
character was left behind by subsequent Marvel movies (although Atwell has 
still racked up some film credits – thanks to flashbacks and dream sequences, 
she cameoed in bothAvengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/21/avengers-age-of-ultron-review-film-joss-whedon-exhilarating>
 andAnt-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/16/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-marvel> 
last year). Her superhero sweetheart Steve Rogers was frozen in ice for decades 
before waking up in the present day, a confusing place where more than a dozen 
Marvel movies are mapped out for the next five years. Peggy is still operating 
in the late-1940s, insulated from most of the machinations required to pave the 
way to 2018’s gigantic movie crossover Avengers: Infinity War, a two-part 
blowout that,according to one of its directors 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/avengers-infinity-war-will-only-feature-67-charact-230557>
, will involve at least 67 notable Marvel heroes and villains. Sixty-seven! 
That’s not a cast list, that’s a Spandex LinkedIn network.

Jessica Jones: shattering exploration of rape, addiction and control
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/27/jessica-jones-shattering-exploration-addiction-control>
Marvel’s USP is interconnectedness, but the scale of its success and the 
velocity of its planning can make it seem like it is trying to monetise FOMO. 
The endless stacking of characters and storylines means that even casual fans 
might feel obliged to check out standalone movies such asDoctor Strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/29/first-look-at-benedict-cumberbatch-as-marvels-doctor-strange>
 andBlack Panther 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/29/marvel-black-panther-black-superhero-chadwick-boseman>
 before the first part of Infinity War debuts. Diehard acolytes will also stick 
with TV offshoot Agents of SHIELD, currently midway through a fairly decent 
third season, just to keep tabs on mutated beings the Inhumans, who have their 
own movie scheduled for 2020.

Even Netflix’s discrete clutch of Marvel anti-heroes, nominally ringfenced 
from the wider universe because of darker, racier content, is blowing up faster 
than expected. When Netflix first announced its plan to make four standalone 
series showcasing street-level characters before teaming them up for a combined 
mini-series called The Defenders, it seemed wildly ambitious. Now, with second 
seasons ofDaredevil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/10/daredevil-tv-emo-superhero>
 andJessica Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jessica-jones> 
already confirmed, and more spin-offs mooted, Netflix’s original blueprint 
seems almost conservative.

Against this backdrop of caffeinated worldbuilding and the frantic laying down 
of narrative track for future projects, Agent Carter feels like Marvel for the 
time-poor. The breezyfirst season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/10/agent-carter-declassified-the-key-facts-about-marvels-1940s-spy-caper>
 was only eight episodes long, a third of the length of your average season of 
Agents of SHIELD. Season two is a trim 10 episodes, easily limboing under the 
time required to keep up with Jessica Jones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fagent-carter-netflix-marvel-universe-hayley-atwell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45bad4ada94a06f459c0a4ffd1cd91bd9fe95ef7%2F0_300_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Agent%20Carter%20escaped%20the%20bloated%20Marvel%20universe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fagent-carter-netflix-marvel-universe-hayley-atwell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Agent%20Carter%20escaped%20the%20bloated%20Marvel%20universe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fagent-carter-netflix-marvel-universe-hayley-atwell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45bad4ada94a06f459c0a4ffd1cd91bd9fe95ef7%2F0_300_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Battling evil, and sexism: Agent Carter alongside her Strategic Scientific 
Reserve colleagues. Photograph: Marvel/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Instead of darkness and grit, Agent Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agent-carter> has a lightness of 
touch, embodied by the fizzy repartee between Peggy and Edwin Jarvis, her 
platonic partner in crimefighting. In the grand overarching Marvel design, they 
are both technically supporting characters – an Avenger’s historic love 
interest, and the oft-exasperated, slightly prissy butler of Iron Man’s playboy 
dad. Yet, thanks to the appetite for Marvel content, here they are headlining 
their own series. Perhaps corporate synergy isn’t all bad.

In season two, Peggy relocates from New York to LA, investigating suspicious 
science phenomena against a backdrop of late-40s Hollywood. There are atomic 
conspiracies, femme fatales and a particularly obstinate flamingo. Peggy even 
seems ready to move past losing the love of her life.

For all her gumption, Agent Carter will never be able to operate entirely 
independently – one of the major MacGuffins in season two will apparently 
dovetail with Doctor Strange, the Benedict Cumberbatch-starring mystic 
blockbuster that is due in November – but hopefully any connecting threads to 
Marvel’s ongoing plans for world domination will create texture rather than 
bondage. Never mind how she fits into the universe – most of us are more 
invested in Peggy finding her own place in the world.

• Agent Carter airs on Thursdays at 9pm, on Fox
 