
My son loves reading comics. How do you bridge the gap between reading comics 
and reading longer fiction?
 James, father of 10-year-old boy



Before trying to bridge the gap, I'd stop and think why you are so concerned 
to do so? From your question, I get the feeling that you think reading comics 
is not real reading but reading fiction is. I'd start from a different point of 
view: isn't it terrific that your son loves reading? For a more expert opinion 
on the subject, seeMichael Rosen's blog on the subject 
<http://michaelrosenblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/07/great-blog-on-comics-in-classroom.html>
.

In general, the British attitude to comics is to think they are a lesser kind 
of "reading". Not so in Europe where the phenomenal success of Ren√© Goscinny 
and Albert Uderzo'sAsterix <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> and 
Herge's The Adventures of Tintin (and the many sequels each of the original 
titles runs to) reflects the universal appeal of these very different but 
equally hilarious and original adventures.

The sophisticated way in which stories can be told in words and pictures 
delights readers of all ages and is equally powerful when dealing with serious 
subjects. In graphic novels such as Art Spiegelman's Maus or Joe Sacco's 
Palestine, the brilliant combination of words and pictures helps 10-year-olds 
to understand stories of utmost importance about the Holocaust and the 
occupation of Palestine respectively. They will be certainly be reading words 
even if those words are presented in speech bubbles.

To satisfy your inclination that your son should be reading more words but to 
keep him happy with a story that is also told in pictures, Brian Selznick's 
fanciful and adventurousThe Invention of Hugo Cabret 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781407103488>
 andWonderstruck 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780545027892>
 would be a good choices. For something more philosophical, David Almond's 
latest titleMouse Bird Snake Wolf 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781406322897>
, with illustrations by Dave McKean, takes a very serious look at the puzzling 
question of creation as three children decide to fill in some of the missing 
bits in a world that is unfinished. This will provide a thought-provoking 
challenge for those who think books with a lot of pictures are suitable only 
for those who can't read the words!
 