
At Circus Starr <http://www.circus-starr.org.uk/>, our mission is to create 
accessible community circus events throughout the UK that positively engage 
with children with physical disabilities, learning difficulties and families 
from disadvantaged backgrounds. One strand of what we do is to work with 
children with autism.

Since we first launched in 1987, time and again parents would tell us how 
their autistic child, who could not usually cope with unknown situations, had 
sat through our entire show mesmerised, or how their child who could get very 
distressed in crowds had been dancing ringside with their light-up windmill 
shouting: “come and boogie everyone!”

Even though from the outside we appeared to break all the rules (loud music, 
lots of people, bangs, surprises) for some reason we were naturally 
“autism-friendly” and children felt relaxed in our big top. However, because 
new experiences and environments can provoke anxiety in children on the 
autistic spectrum, we also had to find a way to prepare those who were too 
anxious to make it that far.

We wanted to produce an app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/circus-starr-show-and-tell/id906662040?mt=8> 
that could somehow capture and convey the essence, magic and unpredictability 
of circus for a very literal audience. We needed to prepare a child who didn’t 
like surprises for a show full of surprises … without ruining the surprise.

With funding from the Digital R&D Fund for the Arts 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/project/digital-rd-fund-arts> and inspired by the 
concept of theSocial Stories <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_Stories> – 
where visual stories are used to create positive visualisations that reduce 
stress and enable the development of coping strategies – we set out to create 
an interactive storybook where children could make their own circus story from 
a “bank” of related images. They could then personalise these stories by 
uploading their own images, captions and footage: a virtual, ring-side circus 
experience without ever leaving the house.

When you’ve met one person with autism, you’ve met one person with autism.

We first heard those words from Mark Lever, chief executive of the National 
Autistic Society <http://www.autism.org.uk/>, and with them ringing in our 
ears, we knew we had to create a universal “circus experience” template that 
could be adapted to suit the different needs of the 700,000 people with autism 
in the UK. This also meant that many elements from our original scope ended up 
on the cutting room floor as what seemed like a good idea at the outset turned 
out to be “un” autism-friendly in practice.

Take the Clap-o-meter. The idea was that children would tap the screen to 
express how much they were enjoying themselves at the show, which seemed great 
until we realised that tapping could also be a sign of anxiety, the very thing 
we were trying to quell.

The interval activities were another conundrum for us. We were aware that 
intervals can be a cause of anxiety for children with autism as this is an 
unstructured part of the experience. We spent days, weeks and months discussing 
what we were going to put in our app to help keep children distracted during 
the interval: games? Puzzles? Word-searches?

You are not Candy Crush.

Our learning partner Nesta offered this advice. We realised that if we did our 
job in creating a fit-for-purpose app, we wouldn’t need any interval activities 
to “escape” to as the child would already be relaxed, engrossed in the 
performance and fully prepared for the 15-minute interval.

Preparation, sign-posting and showing and telling our audience what to expect 
was the key, so we introduced a series of graphic slides that explained waiting 
times, tickets, show times and intervals. Every potential source of anxiety was 
chronologically recorded in our visual story.

Unfortunately, when we tested the app on our focus group, the children 
unanimously chose to hide or delete our helpful graphic slides from their 
stories; they were condemned as “too boring”. So, while not Candy Crush, nor 
were we aiming to produce an educational tool: this was the circus after all 
and needed to be fun.

We went back to the drawing board and filmed the ringmaster giving all the 
instructions in true visual story style and filmed 20 seconds of lowlights from 
each act (without giving away the surprises). Early feedback from the parents 
and children using the app for the shows on our current tour is telling us we 
did get it right.

What’s next for us? In addition to the app supporting access to the arts more 
broadly (theatre visits, museums, galleries) many parents and teachers have 
commented on the app’s potential for supporting transition into reception and 
year 7 – or even helping prepare for things like the Christmas play.

Show and Tell 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/circus-starr-show-and-tell/id906662040?mt=8> 
is currently available only on iPad and iPhone so as a priority we need to 
secure further funding to include a version for Android users. We’re also 
hoping the research side of things will help identify the best parts of the app 
so we can take them forward into new developments in the future.

App facts

Length of the project: One year
Companies involved: Circus Starr <http://www.circus-starr.org.uk/>, Glyndwr 
University <http://www.glyndwr.ac.uk/>, Therapy Box 
<http://www.therapy-box.co.uk/>, the National Autistic Society 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/>, Briscoe Photography 
<http://www.briscoephotography.co.uk/> and CineRobota 
<http://www.cinerobota.com/>
Type of finance: Supported by the Digital R&D Fund for the Arts 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/project/digital-rd-fund-arts> (Nesta, Arts Council 
England and the Arts and Humanities Research Council)


More App stories

• How we made White, the theatre app for children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/mar/21/white-theatre-app-children-stage>
• How we made The War Poetry of Wilfred Owen app for iPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/29/war-poetry-wilfred-owen-app-story>
• How we made the Uneditions web app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jan/24/uneditions-web-app-unlimited-theatre>

Cath Logan is community engagement manager at Circus Starr 
<http://www.circus-starr.org.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 