
The news that LG is considering quitting the traditional Windows PC business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/03/lg-exit-pc-market-declining-sales-profit-tablets>
 isn't surprising. LG has always been a bit player in the PC market, with 
shipments of at best a few million PCs per year - in a market where the largest 
companies would expect to shift 10 times more.

As one unnamed LG employee told the Korean Times, exiting the PC business 
makes sense: "it doesn't make sense to put more resources into the money-losing 
business."

It's not just LG that's hurting. The PC business is in a slump which has seen 
year-on-year shipments (and so sales) ofWindows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> PCs fall for five (imminently, 
six) quarters in a row, after seven quarters where they barely grew by more 
than 2%.

The situation is a long way from the boom times of the late 1990s, which saw 
20%-plus quarterly growth.

And it's not only growth that's fallen. Analysis by the Guardian suggests that 
as well as falling sales, the biggest PC manufacturers now have to contend with 
falling prices and dwindling margins on the equipment they sell.

Price and profit falls
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389285047470%2F57485104-0707-4bc4-95b1-afec3f940e76-1020x612.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20'value%20trap'%20squeezes%20Windows%20PC%20makers'%20revenues%20and%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20%27value%20trap%27%20squeezes%20Windows%20PC%20makers%27%20revenues%20and%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389285047470%2F57485104-0707-4bc4-95b1-afec3f940e76-1020x612.png>
 PC market global shipments, 3Q 1998 - 3Q 2013. Source: IDC. Photograph: /IDC/PR
My research took published data from the quarterly financial figures for HP, 
Dell,Lenovo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lenovo>, Acer and Asus, 
which together make more than 60% of the world's Windows PC shipments.

By comparing revenues, operating profits (which excludes one-off windfalls 
from investments) and the proportion of revenues derived from business 
segments, it's straightforward to figure out how much each PC costs to make, 
and how much profit it generates for the big companies. (ForAcer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> and Asus, which operate in 
Taiwan, I used the prevailing exchange rate at each quarter's end to give US 
dollar revenues. Lenovo reports its figures in US dollars.)

This yields the "weighted average selling price" (ASP) of PCs from those 
companies. It's weighted because HP sells more PCs than Acer; and the ASP is 
the price at which the manufacturers sell machines to wholesalers, not the 
end-user price.

Bitten by ASPs
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389285185264%2Fc443c666-e48b-483f-8b4c-f4daedb6fc0f-1020x612.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20'value%20trap'%20squeezes%20Windows%20PC%20makers'%20revenues%20and%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20%27value%20trap%27%20squeezes%20Windows%20PC%20makers%27%20revenues%20and%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389285185264%2Fc443c666-e48b-483f-8b4c-f4daedb6fc0f-1020x612.png>
 Average per-PC revenues for various PC manufacturers over time, by quarter. 
Lines show overall price trend. Based on reported revenues and shipments 
figures from accounts (Apple) or IDC (others). Photograph: /IDC/PR 
The data shows that the weighted average selling price (ASP) of a PC has 
fallen from $614.60 in the first quarter of 2010 to just $544.30 in the third 
quarter of 2013, the most recent date for which data is available.

Even worse is the profitability. From the financial data and shipment data, 
it's easy enough to calculate the per-PC profitability of each company, though 
it creates a confusing picture. (TheMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> figure is calculated from 
figures given for its Windows division; however, they vary greatly because much 
of that division's revenue comes from corporate sales to its existing installed 
base of PCs, rather than directly from shipments.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389285653414%2F03969f79-b507-426c-b3f1-cf4368c73d75-1020x501.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20'value%20trap'%20squeezes%20Windows%20PC%20makers'%20revenues%20and%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20%27value%20trap%27%20squeezes%20Windows%20PC%20makers%27%20revenues%20and%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389285653414%2F03969f79-b507-426c-b3f1-cf4368c73d75-1020x501.png>
 Average per-PC profit for major PC manufacturers, by quarter. Calculated from 
published financial data and IDC shipment figures. Photograph: /Guardian 
It's hard to see what's happening immediately. But we can calculate a 
"weighted average profit per PC" by looking at the profitability of each 
company, and weighting that by the number of PCs shipped. This gives a far 
clearer picture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389286015866%2F3e690f4c-6de1-48f2-a005-cf6599e6a874-1020x498.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20'value%20trap'%20squeezes%20Windows%20PC%20makers'%20revenues%20and%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20%27value%20trap%27%20squeezes%20Windows%20PC%20makers%27%20revenues%20and%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389286015866%2F3e690f4c-6de1-48f2-a005-cf6599e6a874-1020x498.png>
 Average per-PC profit for the five largest PC manufacturers, with trend line. 
Note: doesn't include Asus data before 2Q 2010 as PC shipment data isn't 
available. Photograph: /Guardian 
In the first quarter of 2010, the weighted average profit per PC was $15.71 - 
a 2.55% margin. (So the overall per-PC cost of manufacture, sales and marketing 
was just under $599.)

But since then, the rise of smartphones (which began outselling PCs at the end 
of 2010) and the arrival of the iPad and other tablets have eaten into the 
fortunes of PC makers.

So much so that by the third quarter of 2013, the weighted average profit had 
fallen to $14.87.

That actually marks an improvement in margin, to 2.73% - but the absolute fall 
both in profits and numbers shipped means that companies are struggling. (The 
per-PC manufacturing/marketing/sales cost fell to $529. It's getting cheaper to 
produce PCs - but the price they're being sold for is falling too.)

For the Taiwanese company Acer, it has meant a brutal boardroom shakeout that 
saw its chief executive forced out after two successive quarters of losses.

That contrasts with the comments made in January 2010, when its founder Stan 
Shihremarked 
<http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5iZVGfFmnYTrWvroB5c3byx_lpBmg>
 that US-based PC manufacturers would die out over the next 20 years because 
they couldn't make the low-priced netbook computers that consumers were 
demanding.

"The trend for low-priced computers will last for the coming years," said Shih 
confidently.

The problem is that his prediction is coming true. PCs are getting cheaper. 
But they're not making much money for their makers. Welcome to the value trap.

The value trap

The problem for Windows PC makers is that they are caught in the "value trap". 
Even as prices are being forced down by commoditisation and slumping demand, 
they have no obvious way to capture any of the money that a consumer who buys 
one of their products subsequently spends with it.

While HP and Dell (and to a lesser extent Lenovo) use PC sales to corporations 
as the Trojan horse for more profitable services contracts, any PC sale to a 
consumer is effectively the end of the financial relationship. The OEMs can't 
extract any more value from them. That's why many tried (and still try) to 
extract as much as possible at the point of sale. Chrystalla Labesque, PC 
analyst at research company IDC, points toDell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/dell> as a classic example: "It was the 
leader in pushing costs down, and adding additional services as a way to 
improve their hardware margin - so when selling notebooks to consumers, they 
would offer antivirus and notebook accessories. Those could double their per-PC 
profit."

When you think how thin that profit could be, you understand the purpose of 
"crapware" preinstalled on so many Windows PCs: to escape from the value trap. 
As Jack Schofield noted inrecommending a Dell purchase last May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2013/may/23/desktop-pc-dell>, 
"Dell's Vostro range is aimed at boring business buyers rather than consumers, 
so they tend to be well made and they don't include a lot of bundled crapware 
to mess things up."

For Asus <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/asus> and Acer, which don't 
have substantial sales to business, the attempted solution has been to offer 
"cloud" services, though with little result. The idea is sound - retain 
consumers by tying them to the brand, and so to future sales - but set against 
the might of Google or Microsoft, it's an uphill struggle.

The value trap is deep, though. Because Windows and its apps are easily moved 
from one PC to another (which is a huge benefit to the consumer), it's almost 
impossible for hardware makers to differentiate themselves from rivals. In the 
past, their best hope has been to encourage repeat buying through having extra 
hardware features; that's what some are trying to do with touchscreen laptops 
and desktops now. But there's little sign that buyers are enthusiastic about 
those, preferring instead to buy offerings that are just a little cheaper.

That means there is always downward pressure on both prices and margins, while 
the only way to make useful profits is to be able to build at scale.

The alternative is, like HP and Dell, to use PCs as a Trojan horse to sell 
much more profitable services to businesses.

The value trap is the reason why Léo Apotheker suggested that HP should sell 
off its PC-selling Personal Systems Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/aug/31/hp-spin-off-pc-division>
 (PSG) when he was head of the company in 2011. PSG is HP's biggest division in 
revenue terms - but its worst-performing in profit margin, at less than 5% 
compared to Imaging (15%), Software (20% or more), Storage/Networking (15%), 
and until recently Services (which have dipped from 15% to 4%).

Apotheker reasoned that if PSG could be spun off without hurting the rest of 
HP, overall margins would lift, and so would the stock. The rest of the board 
decided though that that wasn't possible - and spun Apotheker off instead.

Dell, similarly, has struggled ever to make money selling its PCs to 
consumers: its "global consumer" division had profit margins which averaged 1% 
between February 2007 and January 2013. The rest of its business was much more 
profitable, but it's clear that selling PCs to the average person at home just 
wasn't a good business for it. (Dell's per-PC profits are calculated from its 
total PC revenues and its consumer segment profits.)

"Dell isn't really present in the consumer market," says Labesque.

Lenovo, which completed its acquisition of IBM's PC business in the second 
quarter of 2005, has also struggled with profitability - but since it increased 
its reach by moving beyond China in the past couple of years, it has become 
more and more dominant, and profitable. It's managing to do this even while 
competes in smartphones - something that HP, its rival for the PC crown, has 
signally failed to do. "With Lenovo, what isn't reflected is that they have a 
strong position in China, which means that they have efficiencies which other 
vendors can't leverage," explains Labesque.

Asus and Acer, meanwhile, are clearly troubled by the disappearance of 
netbooks, even though those pulled down the ASP of PCs, because it has forced 
them into the potentially unprofitable field of tablets. Acer's financial 
results suggest that it has made a loss on almost every PC it has sold since 
the second quarter of 2011. Its best performance in that space was in the 
second quarter of 2012 - when for every PC it sold, it made an average profit 
of just $1.13.

Asus's plans for the future - as set out in its Q3 2013 presentation 
<http://www.mzcan.com/taiwan/2357/events/65/EN/IR_3Q2013_TSE_3HMycH1CJhug.pdf>
 (PDF) - focus on tablets, and particularly in trying to find extra profits 
there.

But even with tablets, it's not easy. Asus estimates the TAM - total 
addressable market - as 202m, or 230m if you include "white box" makers in 
China making super-cheap devices. The competition there is ferocious, with the 
same downward pressure on price that is seen in PCs; and Apple always lurks at 
the high end with the iPad.

In the personal computer market, Apple wins both ways: its ASPs are much 
higher than those of rival computer manufacturers, and it used to be able to 
sell OS upgrades, as well as upgrades to its iLife media and iWork office 
suites, providing a small but reliable income.

This year, it has decided to stop charging for any of those upgrades - but it 
still takes a 30% commission on software bought through its Mac App Store 
(though users can still download and buy desktop apps from the web). With a
claimed installed base worldwide of 72m 
<http://www.macstories.net/news/the-numbers-from-apples-wwdc-2013-keynote/> as 
of summer 2013 (up from66m in summer 2012 
<http://aaplinvestors.net/stats/mac-installed-base/>), it's a tidy revenue 
stream - especially compared to the pit that PC manufacturers find themselves 
in.

Apple: squeezed, but less so
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389286486118%2F72fb671c-076b-4a77-aeb3-b0b54b8abeb2-1020x368.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20'value%20trap'%20squeezes%20Windows%20PC%20makers'%20revenues%20and%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20%27value%20trap%27%20squeezes%20Windows%20PC%20makers%27%20revenues%20and%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Fpc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-asus-acer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389286486118%2F72fb671c-076b-4a77-aeb3-b0b54b8abeb2-1020x368.png>
 Apple average PC selling price v "weighted" average PC selling price for five 
main manufacturers. Photograph: /Guardian 
Apple isn't immune from the downward pressure on pricing, though they've only 
been mildly eroded, as shown in the graph. Its ASPs have eroded only mildly 
since 1Q 2010, from $1,277.61 to $1,229.56 (a 4% drop).

And how profitable are Macs on their own, even without that revenue stream? 
Apple doesn't break out the figure for Mac profitability. But Horace Dediu of 
the Asymco consultancy reckons there's a good-enough rule of thumb: assume that 
Macs have an 18.9% profit margin, which fits well enough with its historical 
operating margins.

That metric gives a hardware per-PC profit which has dropped from $241 to $232 
- an erosion, certainly, but a margin that Windows PC makers would kill for: 
it's more than 10 times greater than their per-PC profit.

Labesque at IDC says: "Apple's cost to produce machines might be higher, but 
it isn't fundamentally different from other PC manufacturers. They used to have 
the best hardware margin - double-digit [ie over 10%] - while Acer, for 
instance, has been losing money."

She notes that once you go outside the top-tier manufacturers, "then there's 
Apple, and Samsung, and Sony, which are more consumer and lifestyle brands, 
where they can ask for a premium price." Doing that, of course, generally 
points to better margins. Samsung shipped around 11m PCs in 2013, and Sony 
slightly fewer than 5m, according to IDC. Apple sells around 16m PCs per year.

Winners - and losers?

So who wins? The most obvious beneficiary of every Windows PC sale is 
Microsoft. It gets revenue from the sale of the Windows licence - but it then 
captures extra value through the high likelihood that even consumer buyers of 
PCs will buy its Office suite, and probably buy another version of Windows at 
some point in that computer's life. It's the reason why Microsoft is so 
fabulously profitable, while PC manufacturers are struggling.

Into this, the arrival of Chromebooks - running Google's Chrome OS - could be 
the early signs of a disruption. Although sales are tiny compared to the 
overall PC market, at a few million in 2013, they have the potential to 
undermine many of Microsoft's most lucrative markets. Chromebooks don't run 
Windows; they don't run Office. But they do pretty much everything that the 
average user needs (apart perhaps from running Skype; Microsoft's never going 
to go there). Google has been pushing Chromebooks into education and 
enterprises,with some success - as noted by NPD 
<https://www.npd.com/wps/portal/npd/us/news/press-releases/u-s-commercial-channel-computing-device-sales-set-to-end-2013-with-double-digit-growth-according-to-npd/>
 (in data that was badly misunderstood by many, who thought it was referring to 
consumer sales).

In July, Stephen Baker of NPD told Bloomberg: “While we were sceptical 
initially, I think Chromebooks definitely have found a niche in the 
marketplace… The entire computing ecosystem is undergoing some radical change, 
and I think Google has its part in that change.”

At the research group Gartner, where research director Annette Jump agrees 
that "the profit squeeze on PCs is very real", the expectation is that 
Chromebooks will make slow - but real - inroads. For 2013, it reckons that 
Chromebooks would have been about 0.5% of total shipments - compared to 92% for 
Windows, 6% for Apple and 1% for Linux.

By 2017, the expectation is that the overall market will be about the same 
size, or slightly smaller. Windows will have fallen to just 83%; Apple will 
make up 11% (which, if even vaguely correct, would be its largest share in 
decades), whileChrome <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/chrome> will be 
about 4.5%.

That might not be a lot of Chromebooks, though it's likely they could be going 
to some key customers: the ones who used to reliably buy Windows and then 
subsequently Office.

For Microsoft, that is a threat - and one which may be behind its curious 
decision to make anadvert dissing Chromebooks 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=7DUXMFibDi8>. Consumers 
probably won't care that they don't run Office; the advert's "dog whistle" 
message may have been to people in businesses considering them.

Meanwhile for PC manufacturers, seeing sales slump and profits weaken, 
something certainly does have to change. So maybe we should take it as a 
portent that although LG did announcea couple of hybrid Windows 8 machines 
<http://www.lgnewsroom.com/newsroom/contents/64076> at the International 
Consumer Electronics Show (CES) this week, the only computer is showed off in 
its stage presentation was an all-in-one (AIO) desktop computer.

And its software? ChromeOS.
 