
In this year of the first world war commemoration, galleries and museums up 
and down the country are stagingspecial exhibitions and projects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jul/17/first-world-war-imperial-war-museum>
, telling the stories of people who lived through war. Greater Manchester 
wanted this, but more. It wanted to offer up its archives of stories and 
artefacts to a new generation using digital technology, available regardless of 
whether they live in Rusholme or Ruislip.

Led by Imperial War Museum North <http://www.iwm.org.uk/visits/iwm-north>, the 
Greater Manchester Centenary Partnership brings together 26 galleries, 
libraries, archives and museums across the city, includingManchester Art Gallery
 <http://www.manchestergalleries.org/>, Whitworth Art Gallery 
<http://www.whitworth.manchester.ac.uk/>, the National Football Museum 
<http://www.nationalfootballmuseum.com/>, the Salford Museum and Art Gallery 
<http://www.salfordcommunityleisure.co.uk/culture/salford-museum-and-art-gallery>
,Greater Manchester Archives 
<http://www.manchester.gov.uk/info/448/archives_and_local_history> and The Lowry
 <http://www.thelowry.com/>.

Our company, Nymbol <http://hello.nymbol.co.uk/>, was granted the remarkable 
opportunity of turning this dream into a reality. Working together we 
established what we think is the biggest project of its kind in the UK: a 
single app, telling Greater Manchester's story of the first world war, using 
material from organisations across the region.

I remember the first time our teams met and we told ourselves the plan was 
"brave but achievable" – but how do you gather content from so many archives 
and turn it into a single digital platform? Suddenly it felt like a massive 
mountain to climb.

The result is Centenary Connections <http://centenaryconnections.org/>, a 
website and app that enables users to journey (digitally) across Greater 
Manchester, using objects and landmarks connected to the events of 100 years 
ago to tell the region's war story.

The app "curates" its content into themed sections. So if you're interested 
in, say, feeding the frontline, you can find several objects from different 
collections related to that theme. Working in this way has allowed new 
connections to be made. For example, both the Local Studies and Archivesin 
Oldham <http://www.oldham.gov.uk/info/200276/local_studies_and_archives> and 
Greater Manchester County Record Office had great pictures of the"tank bank" 
<http://centenaryconnections.org/objects/5942/> – quite literally, a bank held 
within a tank to persuade people to help the war effort financially. These 
images can now be seen together online for the first time.

We were also able to work with some incredible first-hand accounts, such as 
Annie Droege's diary <http://centenaryconnections.org/objects/5803/>, which 
records the day-to-day goings on of a small garrison town in Germany. 
Originally from Stockport, Annie moved to Germany in 1910 with her husband, 
Arthur, and offered a unique insight into a country at war.

The app provides a point of exploration for people with many different levels 
of interest. The casually interested can simply browse through different 
"journeys" but there's also the ability to share with friends via social media 
or take a real life tour throughManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> with the app as a guide. So at the 
same time as offering new insights into history we're moulding new methods of 
engagement and learning.

We were conscious of the need to have great zoomable images of all the archive 
content for it to be viewed in detail. So as well as offering low-resolution 
thumbnails for ease of search, there's an enhanced viewing facility that is 
essential for old photos and intricately detailed documents and objects.

There are challenges to this kind of project. Each organisation involved needs 
to be an administrator of the app, with the ability to update and upload new 
content as it emerges. We built the content management system (CMS) so that 
it's intuitive, straightforward and, hopefully, unbreakable but with so many 
users issues inevitably arise.

A major one has been tone of voice. Some organisations are formal, some 
informal, some writing in first person and others in third. So halfway through 
the development we created a style guide to ensure there is consistency in 
writing and presentation styles.

Of course, there are always challenges with technology. We wanted a map view 
of the city, with location points for venues, archival objects and landmarks 
relating to the archives, but it proved particularly difficult to get right. It 
took many discarded versions until we found a solution that worked well for the 
user.

Centenary Connections launched in July 2014 so it's still early days to gauge 
its impact. We're watching keenly to see how people engage and use the app but 
the organisations have definitely taken it to heart; Imperial War Museum North 
has already added new content for release.

App facts

Length of the project: six months, with two months' design, three months' 
development and one month of testing
Companies involved: one development company, Nymbol, with 26 partners led by 
Imperial War Museum North
Size of the team: one full-time iOS engineer, two part-time designers and one 
content developer/project manager

More App stories

• How we made the Live/Revive/Lament opera performance app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jul/25/live-revive-lament-opera-performance-app>
• How we made the Curiator iPhone app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/may/30/how-we-made-curiator-iphone-app>
• How we made the London: A City Through Time app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/dec/13/london-city-through-time-app>
• How we made the Beethoven's 9th Symphony app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/sep/06/how-we-made-beethoven-ninth-app>

Rebecca Bartlett is digital content specialist at Nymbol 
<http://hello.nymbol.co.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 