
You want to build an app. To reach a digital audience. And promote your 
exhibition. So far so normal. "Gimme an app" has been a common reaction to the
memo-from-on-high demanding digital innovation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/jun/07/mobile-museums-audience-experience-technology>
. But the marketplace is crowded – it's noisy and I find myself asking: has the 
app had its day?

In June 2013 the National Portrait Gallery <http://www.npg.org.uk/> invited us 
to talk, following a recommendation from Jane Burton, who commissioned theMagic 
Tate Ball app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2012/jul/16/mobile-culture-magic-tate-ball-app>
. With a modest budget, their brief was to promote the upcoming exhibition, 
Elizabeth I & Her People.

Scott Morris, digital communications officer at the gallery, explains: "It's 
about society as it was 400 years ago. For the first time, people outside 
royalty and the nobility – the so-called 'middling classes' - were having their 
portraits painted: from bankers and merchants to butchers and poets. We wanted 
people to think about where they might fit in that society."

This sentiment was the inspiration behind the digital concept, Who do you 
think you were? 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/assets/microsites/elizabethI/app/index.html> Audiences 
are met with a number of fun yet historically accurate lifestyle questions from 
the period. Based on their answers, they are assigned an Elizabethan alter ego: 
perhaps Bess of Hardwick, the landowner, or maybe Sir Francis Drake, the 
celebrity.

Our major concern was whether a mobile app about 16th century portraiture 
would be heard in a very busy marketplace. There arecountless incredible apps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/series/app-story> 
responding to some very specific needs. Our concept had to abide by two 
principles to have any chance of success.

Firstly, make it as simple as possible for engagement to occur. This means 
smartphones, tablets,phablets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/22/nokia-lumia-1520-phablet-windows-phone>
, laptops and even desktop computers. Scott and the team were quick to support 
our plan to create a responsive web app and connect through the browser: "We 
always imagined this would be a downloadable app … but the most important thing 
was ease of access and the ability to share outcomes."
 Who do you think you were? 
Secondly, we must reward our audience with content that has as much integrity 
and humour as possible. Choosing 12 alter egos wasn't easy; beyond the obvious 
fair representation of sexes and professions, we worked with the curators to 
choose 'sitters' (portraits) with interesting stories and points of reference.

The reveal screen is where the conversion occurs – a social media share, an 
exit to buy tickets, or preferably both. The layout and copy-length are so 
important in guiding the user through that journey: make it easy to engage and 
reward that engagement with sharable content.

Developing the look and feel was an interesting challenge. The aim was to 
combine a traditional Elizabethan aesthetic with something familiar, modern and 
digital-friendly. Working in Photoshop first, our team went through numerous 
design rounds to perfect the decorative details. The gallery provided hundreds 
of 16th century visual references, from fabric samples to book covers and 
posters. Our designs went on to be used in the online advertising campaign.

The trickiest bit of the design was going responsive. Every graphical element 
had to be produced in a range of sizes to account for different screen 
resolutions. Multi-platform also means users can interact a mouse, a trackpad 
and of course their finger on touchscreen devices. The range of design 
challenges this presented forced us to be strict in other areas, something the 
gallery fully supported and should receive full credit for (they even came up 
with the concept title before production started).

It was a truly collaborative working relationship and every organisation 
should aspire to this when hiring a digital agency. It would be an 
over-simplification to say the gallery was a pleasure to work with because they 
took our advice without kicking up a fuss. In fact their team pushed back on a 
number of points, in particular the design, but they always had suggestions. 
Passing things from one side of the fence to the other, without discussion or 
understanding, simply doesn't work.

In the first fortnight after launching, on 9 October, the web app received 
nearly 10,000 unique engagements with an average dwell time of four-and-a-half 
minutes. The most pleasing figure of all is a share ratio of 11%, meaning 
roughly 1,000 tweets were generated.

The figures don't tell the whole story, but we could argue that by going 
responsive we doubled our reach. More than half the visits were made on 
standard computers, with Windows PCs at a huge 45% and Apple Macs around half 
that. Combined mobile visits totalled under 40%, with iOS at 25% and Android at 
11%. Blackberry and Windows Phone constituted a little over 1%.

I'm in no rush to add fuel to the hype-fire surrounding HTML5. In many ways 
it's a horrible technology to work with. But – and I hate myself for saying 
this – it was exactly the right medium to maximise the reach of a small budget. 
This is apparent in the sheer range of platforms people used to engage. It 
seems that with a straightforward concept, a supportive client and a bit of 
discipline,HTML5 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/html5> web apps can 
punch above their weight.

Ben Templeton is the co-founder and creative director of Thought Den 
<http://www.thoughtden.co.uk/> – follow them on Twitter @thoughtden 
<https://twitter.com/thoughtden>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/culture-professionals/start.php>.
 