
There is a point in the lives of most European schoolchildren when they come 
to understand the continent's geo-political history in terms of the Eurovision 
Song Contest. What better way to comprehend the situation in Cyprus, for 
example, than through the lens of why Greece never votes for Turkey at 
Eurovision, even when the Turkish entry isthis good 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j60B2FFnbqc>? (Turkey withdrew from the 
competition in 2013, citing the unfairness of politicized voting blocs).

I used to hate Eurovision. Growing up, it struck me as too much of a good 
thing, like putting sugar on your ice cream, combining all the best bits of 
figure skating (the costumes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2014/may/08/eurovision-song-contest-eye-catching-outfits-in-pictures>
), children's television (the earnestness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/07/eurovision-europe-competition-guide-songs-countries>
), amateur singing contests (the public humiliation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/may/26/bbc.arts>) and, for British 
audiences at least,the magnetism of the host 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/7418940.stm>, one of the few titans of BBC light 
entertainment who hasn't been hauled up on child molestation charges and who 
managed to have the same chuckly bonhomie that always made you slightly wonder.

It was always simply too much to bear. And so as the annual event that 
continues tomystify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/07/eurovision-europe-competition-guide-songs-countries>
 the rest of the world rolled into Saturday's final, I sucked my teeth as usual 
and decided not to go to any of the Eurovision parties thrown by British expats 
in New York. Like bad drag, I thought, Eurovision is just so much screaming and 
glitter.

And then I saw this:

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh0D1Ya3NBQs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh0D1Ya3NBQs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh0D1Ya3NBQs&media=>
Latvia's entry into the 2014 competition in Copenhagen is called Cake to Bake 
and in case you can't make out the lyrics in the video, the chorus goes as 
follows:

I've got a cake to bake – I've got no clue at all (cep, cep, cep, cep, cep 
kuuku)

I've got a cake to bake – and haven't done that before (cep, cep, cep, cep, 
cep kuuku)

Don't be proud, mate please don't bother,

Go, come on and ask your mother,

How to bake, how to bake, bake that cake ...

The song is sung by a 28-year-old German named Jöran Steinhauer, who fell in 
love with Latvia while on an exchange trip to the town of Talsi in 2005, and 
later wrote a tribute to the defunct Latvian currency, the Lat, which became,as 
one Steinhauer fan put it 
<http://sparklyprettybriiiight.com/road-to-eurovision-2014-week-4-latvia-lithuania-malta-moldova-montenegro-the-netherlands/>
, "an unofficial soundtrack to the country's entry into the Eurozone". Hard to 
believe it didn't spawn an entire sub-category of anthems to monetary union, 
but Paldies Latiņam! was at any rate a huge hit in Latvia. The title means 
Thank You, Lat.


As if this wasn't enough, the group Steinhauer formed for Eurovision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eurovision> embodies the spirit of 
the competition in a way that effortlessly combines its official mandate – to 
unite us – with its unofficial raison d'etre, the opportunity to laugh at 
foreigners. According to the publicity material, the band's name, Aarzemnieki, 
actually meansforeigner in Latvian, which is either a brilliant postmodern 
absorption of the xenophobic critique, or isn't. Either way, Steinhauer and his 
Latvian band members – Katrina Dimanta, Raitis Vilumovs and Guntis Veilands, 
who wrote Cake to Bake – pull off the kind of cross-cultural collaboration 
other competitors can only dream about.


Even if you find it difficult to actually watch Eurovision, it's easier than 
you think to be reminded, suddenly, of why it is so great. In contrast to 
American Idol and its ilk, the mockery built into this contest is just so damn 
good natured – indeed, everyone is in on the joke, laughing at everyone else 
without pause for the entire competition. No one is on the outside sneering in.


And while the contestants might take their contributions seriously, everybody 
knows at heart that the contest is deeply uncool. How could they not, when the 
most successful Eurovision winners of all time once walked down the street
dressed like this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/16/abba-outfits-tax-deduction-bjorn-ulvaeus>
?

 Photograph: Bengt H. Malmqvist / Premium Rockshot 
Abba's success is the exception to the rule for winners of Eurovision. Most 
will sink without a trace mere days after the contest ends, and so are 
disinclined, perhaps, to assume the monstrous self-importance of participants 
and judges in newer TV singing competitions. You can't, really, when you're 
singing lyrics such as the opening verse of Cake To Bake:


I melted the ice of the polar caps,

Found the raiders of the lost ark,

Solved a case for the genius from Baker Street,

Helped to clean the Central Park.

I created the plan for the Chinese wall,

Went to desert, made it rain,

Swam through a shark tank bloodily,

Found Atlantis, by the way.

These are dark days in Europe. You take solace where you can, be it the misuse 
of the definite article in Copenhagen, ora singing nun 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/07/world/europe/a-singing-nun-for-a-reality-tv-world.html?_r=0>
 on The Voice in Italy, or this headline in an online newspaper called the 
Baltic Review:German Cake Song Goes Down Well with Latvians 
<http://baltic-review.com/2014/03/joran-steinhauer-the-son-of-a-parish-priest-from-the-germany-is-latvias-contender-in-the-european-song-contest-2014/>
 - we need more news like that.


The Russian contestants might get booed by the Ukrainians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/09/eurovision-song-contest-ukraine-chances>
. The Turks might have flounced out. But perhaps we can all rally around 
Jöran's dream of peace through unified pastry-making.

We've got a cake to bake – and got no clue at all

We've got a cake to bake – and haven't done that before

Don't be proud, mate please don't bother,

Go, come on and ask your mother,

How to bake, how to bake, bake that cake – piece of cake.
 