
One day in 1733, a crowd of spectators gathered at Newcastle’s Castle Keep to 
see a showman, who said he would fly from the roof of the keep with some 
homemade wings. On realising that perhaps he had gone too far with this 
particular money-making scheme – and seeing the 100-foot drop from above – he 
decided to strap the wings to a donkey for a rudimentary test flight. The 
animal fell like a stone, but miraculously survived the ordeal, helped in no 
small part by its descent being broken by landing on an onlooker.

The Castle Keep today is one of the country’s best surviving examples of a 
Norman keep and still attracts crowds of visitors who explore its rooms and 
corridors, and take in the views of the city and river Tyne from its roof. But 
how many of them know the story about the showman and his flying donkey? And 
how many more people could be lured to see the various sites aroundNewcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> where this and other weird and 
wonderful happenings took place?

This was the thinking behind Hidden Newcastle <http://www.hiddennewcastle.org/>
, a free app based on real-life stories of Newcastle and its residents that 
have taken place over the past 800 years. The stories have been uncovered 
through research into records and documents held byTyne & Wear Archives & 
Museums <http://www.twmuseums.org.uk/home.html> (TWAM) and are accompanied by 
historical photographs and newspapers from Newcastle city libraries.

The first version of the Hidden Newcastle app was launched in 2012 and 
achieved more than 7,000 downloads. In 2014, TWAM formed a partnership with
Newcastle NE1 <http://www.newcastlene1ltd.com/>, the city’s business 
improvement district company, to develop an extended version of the app to 
encourage more people to explore the city centre. The development of the new 
app was funded by NE1, with TWAM coordinating any technical aspects and content 
development.
 A screen grab from the Hidden Newcastle app 
With the central aim in mind, one of the key challenges for the app’s team was 
getting people who wouldn’t usually visit the city’s museums, castle and other 
historic landmarks interested in stories that are essentially about history. We 
were making an app about the stories that are held in museums and archives, but 
taking it outside the museum walls. Our approach was to focus on stories and 
people rather than focusing on museum objects.

The first step in the development of both versions of the app was to meet and 
explore concepts withIdeonic <http://www.ideonic.com/>, a digital agency based 
in Newcastle known for their educational games work with Tate. A group of 
experts – heritage researchers, curators and archivists – were also tasked with 
researching the archive and museum collections to uncover the stories that 
would form the backbone of Hidden Newcastle. Copywriters and an audio and film 
producer shaped the stories into what users read, hear and see in the final 
app. Some of the stories take the form of text and images while others have 
soundtracks or visuals that make the experience more immersive.

The stories we chose to include are deliberately off-beat; they’re not related 
to the typical historical themes people usually associate with the city, such 
as coal mining or shipbuilding. Instead, we wanted to choose things that have 
been forgotten and capture people’s imaginations, like the flying donkey story. 
Hidden Newcastle isn’t about teaching important histories; it’s about provoking 
intrigue.

A prime example is the story of the day in 1814 when the Tyne froze over and 
became home to an impromptu funfair, with ice-skating races and football 
matches on the ice. We also focus on characters who have lived here, such as 
Skipper “The Gourmandiser” Clarke, famed for his feats of appetite, winning a 
pub bet by polishing off 4.5kg of mutton, a large loaf and six pints of ale. 
There are also some darker stories of death, disaster and ghostly happenings.

Even though the app has a map and alerts people when they’re standing in the 
site where a story took place, we knew from our experience with the first app 
that most people don’t access content in this way. We decided to remove the 
“locked content” aspect of the previous iteration, which only served as an 
incentive for those willing to physically explore – and a frustration to those 
who couldn’t. Only 7% of people actually used this feature.

The new version of Hidden Newcastle launched on iOS and will be available for 
Android later this month. It has been downloaded 4,000 times. The app’s content 
management system allows for more content to be added over time so plans are 
afoot to unearth more mysterious and forgotten tales to keep people exploring 
the hidden side of Newcastle.

App facts

• Length of the project: planning started in June 2014; the app was launched 
in November
• Companies involved: Tyne & Wear Archives & Museums 
<http://www.twmuseums.org.uk/home.html>, Newcastle NE1 
<http://www.newcastlene1ltd.com/>, Ideonic <http://www.ideonic.com/> and the 
city’s libraries
• Size of the team: three project managers, three developers, two researchers, 
one multimedia producer, two copywriters and two marketing officers

More App stories

• How we made the cultural data app, I’m@app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/dec/12/how-we-made-im-at-app-liverpool-culture>
• How we made the Show and Tell circus app for children with autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/07/dozens-trails-app-library-birmingham>
• How we made the Dozens & Trails library app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/07/dozens-trails-app-library-birmingham>

Emma Pybus is corporate comms officer at Tyne & Wear Archives & Museums 
<http://www.twmuseums.org.uk/home.html>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 