
Ever found that someone else's pics don't give you the full picture? 
Disappointed that it's all chat and no hookup? In a world of infinite profiles 
and stress-free blocking, what if "the one" is just outside your app's radius?

Pink Fringe <http://www.pinkfringe.org.uk/> is a producer of queer and 
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) cultural events based in 
Brighton, and we have a lot of personal experience of the thrills and 
disappointments of dating apps. Last year we received funding from Arts Council 
England to carry out a series of projects exploring the concept of 
"connectivity" in relation to queer and LGBT culture.

We were interested in the subject because of the history of covert ways that 
queer and LGBT people have connected with each other. From hanky code – a 
traditional form of signalling to others what your sexual preferences and 
interests are – to polari, a form of language commonly associated with gay men, 
we wanted to trace the legacy in contemporary culture.

Grindr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/02/grindr-sex-relationship-intimacy>
 and the many other apps of "hookup culture" at first seem like new ways of 
encouraging connection. However, they also allow individuals to be more 
discriminating and less social – you only have to see the recentdemise of 
traditional real-world gay venues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/oct/11/gay-club-scene> to see 
evidence of this.

Working with artist Brian Lobel, we were inspired to make a new digital 
experience for audiences, one that played with the exciting, sexy, traumatising 
and often complicated digital playground that is the dating app. It seemed to 
be a perfect backdrop to showcase some great new art that probes some of the 
related issues and also investigates new ways in which artists can connect with 
audiences.

Working with Brighton-based app builder Surface Impression 
<http://www.surfaceimpression.com/>, which specialises in collaborations with 
cultural and heritage organisations, we developedPerformr 
<http://www.pinkfringe.org.uk/2013/09/performr/>. The app gives you the 
opportunity to "hook up" with an artist to experience a specially made 
performance digitally or, play your cards right, in the flesh.

We built the app to emulate the structure and functionality of other dating 
apps on the market to make the experience as close to the truth as possible. It 
employs geocaching, text and photo chat and the all-important "block" function 
for unwanted advances. It's playful, but we also want to develop something that 
offers a slick experience and reflects the way that we as users seamlessly move 
between apps, so a conversation on Performr could then move toFaceTime 
<https://www.apple.com/uk/mac/facetime/>, Snapchat <http://www.snapchat.com/> 
or a link to aSpotify <https://www.spotify.com/uk/> playlist.

We're only in the pilot phase of the project at the moment, but we have 
commissioned ideas from some of the UK's most exciting performers and artists, 
includingScottee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/feb/03/uk-arts-reasons-not-involved>
 andStacy Makishi <http://www.stacymakishi.com/>. Some performances will be 
playful, others more sexual; some may result in an in-person meet-up between 
artist and audience, while others remain exclusively as an exchange over the 
phone. For example, an audience exchange with an artist could result in a video 
chat to America or an invite to a church for a mysterious sensual performance.

The diversity of the app's commissions echoes the wide range of experiences 
with dating app culture, from idly wasting time flicking between profiles to an 
active effort in finding true love. We're launching the app at theBrighton 
fringe <http://www.brightonfringe.org/> and we're really excited to see how the 
audience responds; we also hope to commission more artists to make pieces in 
the future.

We think Performr could work well in other art festival contexts where you 
have a localised audience. As well as being a platform where people can 
experience specially made art, it acts as a forum where they can chat to each 
other about things they are seeing and doing – who knows what new connections 
might blossom between fans and followers of the arts?

One of the challenges behind Performr was tendering, which was a new process 
for us. Despite the interest in social and digital media within contemporary 
theatre, the worlds of software development and performance are fundamentally 
quite different. However, we definitely managed to find common ground in the 
desire to think about interacting with audiences in a way that leaves a 
long-lasting impression, and hopefully we've achieved this in blending the 
digital and live experience.

As theatre and performance producers, we need to be making work that reflects 
the way that young people are embracing technology, and the effect this is 
having on all aspects of our lives. Otherwise it risks becoming an artform 
increasingly detached from contemporary culture.

David Sheppeard is producer at Pink Fringe <http://www.pinkfringe.org.uk/> – 
follow the company on Twitter@pinkfringeuk <https://twitter.com/pinkfringeuk>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 