
The opportunity for technology to be a force for innovation, education and 
change in the developing world has been widely acknowledged, with digital tools 
now recognised for their positive effects on children's lives across the globe.

However, as with any new force, it must all be in good measure and technology 
is no exception. Ensuring that the right type of product, whether that be a 
laptop, tablet or mobile, reaches the right communities with the infrastructure 
to maintain it, is vital to the success of a project.

In the above podcast, Christopher Fabian, co-lead of innovation at UNICEF, 
describes the "phenomenal failure rate" in the innovation unit's projects when 
they are built in New York. Fabian explains that achieving success at scale is 
one of the unit's biggest challenges.

"It's very easy to do a project that affects ten thousand or a hundred 
thousand people, but when we're looking at the number of people who need access 
to education and access to learning, much less access to medicine, basic 
healthcare, then we're looking at hundreds of millions of people.

"We have a serious set of issues to confront and we know that those issues 
can't all be met if we build things in New York, Boston or Geneva."

Building solutions that are appropriate for the environment they will be used 
in, and the people who will use them, is vital. Everything from the type of 
device to maintenance considerations to programmed language has an impact on 
the ability of a project to fulfill its goals. As discussed in the podcast, 
working with the local community to understand people's needs, rather than 
imposing technology upon them, lays the foundation for a successful project 
with far reaching impact.

Renee Wittemyer, head of social impact at Intel, explains that companies must 
take time to understand the local ecosystem and one way to do this is by 
partnering with local businesses.

So what is the business role in all this? Companies have the innovation, 
resources and capital to help bring access to the digital world to schools, 
health clinics and communities where the benefits of technology are yet to 
reach.

As Annie Kelly writes in her recent blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/technology-empower-children-developing-countries>
, several high profile technology giants are now getting involved. Dell runs
Youth Learning 
<http://www.dell.com/Learn/us/en/uscorp1/corp-comm/%20powering-possible-learning?c=>
, its own computer hardware and literacy programme while Intel haspartnered 
with the 10x10 campaign 
<http://newsroom.intel.com/community/intel_newsroom/blog/2013/04/18/intel-10x10-announce-new-efforts-to-empower-girls-transform-developing-economies-through-education>
, to work with policymakers in low- and middle-income countries to develop 
education and technology policies aimed at empowering women.

Alongside empowering the next generation to improve their future prospects, 
there is also a strong business case for equipping children and young people 
with the right skills and knowledge to succeed in the workplace.

"We are very interested in that space of 21st century skills that can succeed 
in the economy, both hard skills like technical and digital literacy, but also 
those skills around self confidence, critical thinking, being able to 
collaborate and work amongst social networks," Wittemyer explains.

"Those are the types of skills that employers are looking for and there's 
quite a big skills gap as of now and many of these efforts are pushing students 
in to a place where they have better chances of employability."

However, the intentions and actions of big tech companies have come under 
scrutiny recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/jun/03/africa-beware-tech-companies-gifts>
 for failing to meet the needs of the countries they target. Accusations of 
technology being "dumped" in Africa with little regard to development goals, 
maintenance or children's educational needs were raised at theeLearning Africa 
<http://www.elearning-africa.com/> conference in Windhoek, Namibia at the 
beginning of June.

So how can companies ensure that access to technology empowers children and 
young people? What are the challenges in bringing connectivity to remote 
regions and urban slums and once infrastructure in place, how can it be 
maintained and kept sustainable? The above podcast explores all these questions 
and more. On the panel, there is:

Renee Wittemyer, head of social impact at Intel 
<http://http://www.intel.co.uk/content/www/uk/en/homepage.html>

Christopher Fabian, co-lead of innovation at UNICEF <http://www.unicef.org/>

Gavin Paterson, managing director at Yellobric <http://www.yellobric.com/>

Giulia D'Amico, vice president of business development at One Laptop Per Child 
<http://one.laptop.org/>

Get involved

We'd love to hear your thoughts on the questions tackled in the above podcast 
so post them in thecomments section below 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/technology-digital-empower-children-developing-world-podcast#start-of-comments>
 or tweet us@GuardianSustBiz <https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 