
I suspect that we socialize more during the spring and summer months. Under 
the warm sun, patios bloom with cold drinks and conversation, barbecues get 
fired up, and parties quickly spill out on to decks and into back yards. 
Shifting these sweet summer parties to ones that are also waste-free can be 
both simple and inexpensive, with just a few small shifts to the status quo.

The first step is to keep invitations virtual. Creating a Facebook event or 
sending a simple email is perfect for inviting guests to your party without 
generating waste from paper invitations, and if you’re looking for something a 
bit more formal, sites such asGreenvelope <https://www.greenvelope.com/> and 
Paperless Post <https://www.paperlesspost.com/> have given the cheesy e-vite a 
brilliant makeover. Virtual invites also allow you to track RSVPs, communicate 
with guests, and provide clickable info about your event.

To decorate, make use of the candles, flowers and greenery already in your 
outdoor space rather than stocking up on store-bought flowers, and consider 
using decorations that can be reused (like a fabric happy birthday banner, for 
example) rather than one-time use decorations. Skip the helium balloons in 
favour of large tissue paper pom-poms, and offer up any decorations still in 
decent condition to a free group or a site like Craigslist after the event 
rather than just tossing them out.

Next, hit up your local secondhand store for vintage linens that’ll last, like 
tablecloths and napkins. Shopping secondhand for these items will help keep 
costs down – perhaps even less than buying plastic table cloths and paper 
napkins for each event – and it’ll be far less heartbreaking if a guest 
permanently stains a cloth tablecloth when it only cost you as much as a cup of 
coffee. After the party, cleanup is as simple as running a load of laundry 
(maybe drying them on yourclothesline 
<https://www.google.ca/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiPv9Kzp_DMAhUESlIKHY02A08QFggiMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fits-spring-stop-using-your-dryer-clothesline&usg=AFQjCNFamQ7tdEjoifz1SXJbBN82-O_lpg&sig2=zGEXGhE-5fINRlkRnAdURA&bvm=bv.122448493,d.aXo>
?) and folding your linens for next time.

The most obvious way to cut down on party waste, of course, is by ditching the 
disposable plates, cups and cutlery. I shouldn’t have to do much convincing in 
this department – does anyone actually enjoy using those flimsy plates that 
fold in half when you pile them high with too much greek salad or drip dressing 
through the bottom? Has anyone in the history of the world ever actually 
successfullycut anything with one of those completely useless plastic knives? 
Beyond making teeth impressions on styrofoam cups (come on, don’t act like you 
don’t do this), there really isn’t much to be gained from using disposables.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feco-friendly-ideas-party-supplies-summer-invites-barbecue-drinks-recipes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aed20f5d9e326c6309c802f0e46b07186fd16d9%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20throw%20an%20eco-friendly%20party&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feco-friendly-ideas-party-supplies-summer-invites-barbecue-drinks-recipes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20throw%20an%20eco-friendly%20party&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feco-friendly-ideas-party-supplies-summer-invites-barbecue-drinks-recipes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aed20f5d9e326c6309c802f0e46b07186fd16d9%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Linens and reusable utensils will cut down on waste. Photograph: Alamy 
Despite the disappointing experience of using these crap products, however, we 
sure do it a lot. About 40bn plastic utensils are used in the United States 
each year – most of them for a mere five minutes or less – and the EPA 
estimates that more than 780,000 tons of plastic and styrofoam cups are 
discarded annually. Not all of these come from backyard barbecues or birthday 
parties, of course, but going greener will certainly help make a dent in those 
numbers.

For most home-hosted events it’s completely feasible to avoid disposable 
dishware by investing in an extra set of dishes and cutlery from one of those 
secondhand stores we talked about earlier – maybe pick them up at the same time 
as your tablecloths!

Stocking up on one or two sets of cutlery is incredibly inexpensive and a 
stack of dishes (either all-white for a clean, cohesive look, or, my personal 
preference, a collection of vintage old-lady dishes with mismatched china 
patterns for a cute boho vibe). And yes, they’re breakable, but we’re all 
adults here – surely we can be trusted with real plates? Plus, at a few cents a 
piece you won’t be heartbroken if you lose one and sourcing them secondhand 
means it’s easily replaced if you do.

All of these party supplies – decorations, linens, plates and cutlery – fit 
neatly into a small box when not in use, and I lend them out to friends and 
family for their events, too. Yes, using the real thing does mean a bit extra 
in the way of cleanup, but is running one extra dishwasher load or laundry 
cycle really that debilitating? Even without a dishwasher, I’ve never found the 
task of a little extra washing up too onerous. The environmental impact of both 
of these tasks is certainly far less than it is to manufacture, package, 
transport and process the waste of disposable options.

With these shifts and a few other small tweaks here and there – paper straws 
instead of plastic, a large drink dispenser rather than individual soft drinks 
or juice boxes, providing a compost bin for food waste in addition to garbage 
and recycling bins – you’ll be set to celebrate all summer long, without 
suffering the accompanying garbage hangover the next day.
 