
We’re at the Coachella <https://www.theguardian.com/music/coachella> festival. 
What have you got planned for your performance?

I’ve got a 50-minute set, so we’re trying to navigate a few high-energy ones 
and I might do a cover and ask another artist up – we’ll see(1). There’s a huge 
amount of acts I’m looking forward to seeing – Steely Dan and AC/DC. They were 
shockingly good at the Grammys.

What’s your favourite festival memory as a punter?

One of my first festivals was Oxygen 2006. It had this amazing lineup with the 
Arctic Monkeys on their first or second album, the Strokes, Kings of Leon, the 
Magic Numbers and then the Who and James Brown. I waited in the pit for a good 
eight hours to see James Brown. He was on form, man, it was the year he died, 
and he had an enormous band and dancers with him. He wasn’t 1970sJames Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/james-brown> – he was an old man at this 
stage – but his band were insane.

Would you ever fine your band for playing a bum note, like he did?

I think that’s the ultimate dream, isn’t it? He was notorious, like. There 
were no first names – they had to call him Mr Brown. There’sa great interview 
with Bootsy Collins about him <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RdJlDHYSWL4> 
which we watch a lot on the tour – there’s this bassist calledTM Stevens 
<http://www.tmstevens.com/> who ended up playing with James Brown and he and 
Bootsy just talk about him – it’s hilarious(2). But no, I’m more laidback with 
my band.

Were you very nervous before playing the Grammys?

Yes, it was a big milestone in a way. It was exciting. It was a Grammys 
producer called Ken Eric who paired me withAnnie Lennox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/annie-lennox> (3). When I first heard that, 
I flipped a little. Afterwards I was dazed, scratching my head in a “Did that 
really happen?” kind of way. But it was a good feeling.

Take Me To Church has become a phenomenon (4); why has it struck such a chord?

I don’t know, I go back and forth over it. It wasn’t an overnight smash, it 
grew steadily over the space of about a year. I tried to be as honest as 
possible with the lyrics and the production has a choral energy to it, kind of 
a gospel feel, which adds a lift.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHZEChv1AaOk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHZEChv1AaOk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHZEChv1AaOk&media=>
 Hozier and Annie Lennox sing Take Me To Church at the Grammys. 
It’s an anti-religious song. Have you had any backlash from the church in 
Ireland or the US?

I didn’t receive any backlash in Ireland. The message went under the radar 
until it was in the charts. It was released the same year as the Murphy report 
andthe Ryan report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/nov/26/ireland-church-sex-abuse> (5), 
so there weren’t too many people who were coming out swinging for the church. 
In America, I’ve never been approached or received hate mail, but I’ve had a 
few delightful open letters from pastors who have a few choice words to say. 
But the song isn’t about Baptist or evangelical Christianity, it references 
more the Catholic church.

What did you think of Sergei Polunin’s dance to it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2015/feb/12/sergei-polunin-hozier-take-me-to-church-david-lachapelle>
, which went viral?

The one David LaChappelle made? It was gorgeous, man. I didn’t know that that 
was going ahead until it was done. I love making music, but if you make 
something that inspires somebody else to make something, without getting too 
airy fairy, you’ve contributed to the zeitgeist in some way and that’s just an 
amazing feeling.

He’s the bad boy of ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/06/sergei-polunin-give-up-ballet>, 
of course.

I did read that. I’d never seen a ballet dancer so heavily tattooed.

Coachella has banned selfie-sticks. Do you agree?

I would never want to ban it, but the very fact that an instrument exists at a 
music festival so that you can take pictures of just yourself … the whole point 
of live music is to enjoy the experience and you take yourself away from that. 
It doesn’t really need to be said, does it? The case against the selfie-stick 
does not need to be made. I didn’t know they were banned – thanks for that 
information. If I see someone with one, I shall blow the whistle. If someone 
puts one up in my set they’ll be roundhouse kicked and hounded out.

You’re influenced by James Joyce <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesjoyce>
. Have you ever read Finnegans Wake?

I have not attempted it. Like many people, I’m still working my way through 
Ulysses. The tour put that one to rest – I was a few hundred pages in and very 
much enjoying it but I haven’t the mental energy to get through it now. I’m 
reading a lot of poetry because it’s a lot easier to dip in and dip out when 
you’ve got 10 minutes to yourself. Someone gave me an old book of Seamus 
Heaney’s poetry at a gig, calledThe Haw Lantern 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1988/apr/28/second-thoughts/>.

Is it true you’re huge in Nashville?

I was lucky enough to do three nights at the Ryman there, which is a beautiful 
old venue. I’ve definitely received a lot of support in Nashville; it’s a huge 
music town. I like country music. Like any genre I’m largely unfamiliar with, 
there are elements I really enjoy and elements that go over my head.

Are you aware of the genre bro-country? It’s like the country music equivalent 
of EDM – very partycentric and lairy.

I’ll have to watch out for it now. That’ll be an interesting listen.

When you posted your mobile number on Twitter (6), what kind of response did 
you get?

At the time I was, and I still am, jarred by people’s excitement at seeing me 
or talking to me. Most of the phone calls were very sweet; it was people who 
were going about their day who had a spare few minutes and thought it was a 
hoax, but rang and got through and were pleasantly surprised. I got a lot of 
voicemails of people changing the lyrics to my songs and just singing them at 
me, sending their own little messages. It was a very strange experience, this 
fandom that I wouldn’t normally be aware of.

Did you expect to be this famous?

Certainly not so quickly. I didn’t think Take Me To Church would be a charting 
or a global or radio hit, so that took me by surprise; I thought it would be 
appreciated by a much smaller audience. So I feel very fortunate.

Are you too busy to write your second album now?

It’s tricky, yes. I have a day here and there or an hour, so I try to keep a 
guitar with me everywhere I go and just keep ideas flowing, cooking I suppose. 
I’m always thinking about the next album, what shape it will take and the 
landscape of it, but we’ll have to wait and see.

Has Jay Z tried to sign you up to Tidal?

I have not received that email. I think I fly very much under Jay Z’s radar. 
Taylor Swift came to a show in Nashville. She was very supportive from early 
on, tweeting about the music. I met her and she’s very funny – she’s got a good 
sense of humour.

Foot notes

1) He performed the Time’s Jungle Love with Este from Haim.

2) Check out the section at 10.18 where Bootsy discusses being accused of 
taking drugs by James Brown – including impressions.

3) The pair did a medley of Take Me to Church and I Put a Spell on You.

4) By December last year it had been streamed 87m times on Spotify.

5) The investigations were into child sex abuse by clerics, and the subsequent 
cover-up.

6) Hozier posted his number as he was retiring the phone and getting a new one.
 