
More than £5bn was wiped off HSBC’s stock market value after Britain’s biggest 
bank reported lower than expected profits and warned of the risk of 
investigations by regulators around the world.


The 4.5% fall in the shares dragged down Standard Chartered, which is due to 
report its results next week, and hit sentiment in the FTSE 100 index of 
leading shares, which was on track to close at a 15-year high beforeHSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> reported 2014 profits of 
$18.7bn (£12.2bn), a fall of 17%.

Stuart Gulliver, HSBC’s chief executive, admitted the results were 
disappointing. The bank, which is embroiled in a scandal about the tax avoiding 
strategies of itsSwiss banking arm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/hsbc-files>, said profits fell because 
of weakness in the investment banking arm and $3.7bn (£2.4bn) in regulatory 
fines and other conduct issues, such as compensation for mis-selling payment 
protection insurance.

“Profits disappointed, although a tough fourth quarter masked some of the 
progress made over the preceding three quarters,” said Gulliver, who embarkedon 
a strategy hinged on “courageous integrity” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/11/hsbc-strategic-review-fast-growing-markets>
 when he took the helm in 2011.

Along with the weaker than expected performance, Gulliver’s decision to reduce 
his targets for returns to shareholders and the rising costs of running the 
bank also hit the shares. He faced questions for the first time since the 
Guardian and other publications published leaked details of 100,000 bank 
accounts at its Swiss banking arm dating from 2005 to 2007 and Gulliver’s own 
banking arrangements through the Swiss bank and a Panama operation.

Revealed: Swiss account secret of HSBC chief Stuart Gulliver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/22/swiss-account-secret-of-hsbc-chief-stuart-gulliver-revealed>
“For all the recent media furore around potential conduct issues, it is the 
‘underlying’ performance which, we believe, should be the greatest cause of 
investor concern – right across revenues, costs and impairments,” said Ian 
Gordon, banks analyst at Investec.

Gulliver said it was no coincidence that the activities of its Swiss arm 
coincided with money laundering through HSBC’s Mexican operation in the 
mid-2000s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/dec/11/hsbc-bank-us-money-laundering>
, for which the US has fined the bank £1bn. He said HSBC had grown too large 
and that its management lost control of the business during the financial 
crisis. The bank had 35,000 employees when he joined in 1980, and by 2007 the 
number had grown to 330,000. “We diluted the culture while management were 
concentrating on trying to get through the financial crisis,” he said.

He insisted, however, that the bank was not too big after selling off 77 
businesses since he took charge in 2011. “We will need to continue simplifying 
the firm and I don’t rule out that we might make more disposals. But I don’t 
think the firm is too big to manage. You can see the validity of the business 
on the revenue side, even if the cost of running [a big bank] has clearly gone 
up,” he said.

HSBC and tax: complexity is no excuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/feb/23/hsbc-and-tax-ignorance-stemming-from-complexity-is-no-excuse>
HSBC was among the institutions fined by regulators last year for rigging 
foreign exchange markets 
<http://dian.com/business/2014/nov/12/foreign-exchange-fines-ubs-hsbc-citibank-jp-morgan-rbs-penalties-market-rigging>
, and in its annual report published alongside its results it said it had taken 
a further provision of $550m for on-going investigations.


The bank listed a string of investigations, including ones into the Swiss 
affair by tax authorities in Belgium, France, Argentina, Switzerland, India and 
elsewhere. It warned more could follow and that “in light of the recent media 
attention regarding these matters, it is possible that other tax 
administration, regulatory or law enforcement authorities will also initiate or 
enlarge similar investigations or regulatory proceedings”.

The bank also said its US arm, HSBC Bank USA, had received a subpoena from the 
US regulator, the commodities and futures trading commission, about its 
precious metals trading operations.

Douglas Flint, HSBC’s chairman, said the bank had doubled the number of 
compliance staff since 2011, but that “there is more work still to do to 
strengthen the group’s compliance capability”.

Flint warned about geopolitical risks, the crisis in the eurozone and the 
impact of the UK’s position in the EU. The Conservative party has promised a 
referendum on EU membership if it forms the next government after the general 
election in May.

“One economic uncertainty stands out for a major financial institution 
headquartered in the UK, that of continuing UK membership of the EU. Today, we 
publish a major research study which concludes that working to complete the 
single market in services and reforming the EU to make it more competitive are 
far less risky than going it alone, given the importance of EU markets to 
British trade,” Flint said.

The bank said Sir Simon Robertson, the former Goldman Sachs banker, had agreed 
to stay on the board for another year as deputy chairman instead of leaving as 
his nine-year tenure – a typical timeframe as a non-executive – had been 
reached.

Robertson, who chairs the bank’s remuneration committee, said: “The number and 
volume of regulatory changes that have been and are being proposed in 
connection with remuneration are, in the committee’s view, excessive and are 
hindering our ability to communicate with any certainty to our current 
employees and potential employees the remuneration policies and structures that 
would apply to them.”
 