
André Villas-Boas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andre-villas-boas> 
seemed blinded by his lack of both pace and shooting accuracy. Paolo Di Canio 
saw him as the "man with the keys" to solving Sunderland's myriad problems. 
Steve Bruce could not quite believe his luck when he said "yes".

There are those who believe Villas-Boas might still be Tottenham Hotspur's 
manager had he constructed his team around Tom Huddlestone. Di Canio's 
advocates remain convinced that, with the 27-year-old playmaking from central 
midfield, the Italian could have stayed in charge on Wearside, thereby quite 
feasibly changing an entire narrative. Almost everyone regards Huddlestone as 
the reason why Bruce'sHull City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> 
have not become embroiled in a relegation battle.

Beauty is in the eye of the beholder though and with Villas-Boas less than 
enchanted by his wonderful vision and passing range, a midfielder tipped as a 
dark horse to make England's Brazil-bound World Cup flight this summerchanged 
hands for a mere £5.25m last August. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/14/tottenham-tom-huddlestone-hull-city>

If Chelsea are to halt Hull at the KC Stadium on Saturday José Mourinho must 
find a way of stifling Huddlestone. As the former Tottenham midfielder and 
currentSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> manager, 
Gus Poyet, can tell him, it will not be easy.

"Tom's one of the few players in England, if not the only one, who can hit a 
ball 70 yards without moving 10 centimetres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/01/sunderland-gus-poyet-hull-huddlestone>
," says Poyet, who fully understands why Di Canio made Huddlestone his 
principal transfer target last summer. "Left foot, right foot, outside of the 
foot, whatever he uses he can really ping passes around. He's got an 
unbelievable ability to hit the ball from side to side. His delivery is very 
important to the way Hull play, a lot of what they do goes through him.

"Tom likes to have the ball at his feet as much as possible, if he has it more 
than the opposition then they will have a problem."

At 6ft 2in and boasting the sort of imposing physique sported by what the 
football fraternity dub "big units", Huddlestone is difficult to dispossess. 
Admittedly his acceleration is less than devastating and his shooting rarely 
incisive but Glenn Hoddle was not exactly speedy or a natural finisher either.

Huddlestone's admirers feel that, by discarding him, Spurs missed an 
opportunity to develop a "new Hoddle", even ifa series of unfortunate injuries 
undeniably hindered his cause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jul/25/tottenham-hotspur-tom-huddlestone-injury>
. Shortly after threatening to book a place in Fabio Capello's England first XI 
the midfielder sustained severe ankle ligament damage and complex 
reconstructive surgery was followed by nearly 18 months on the sidelines.

Once Villas-Boas arrived a player popular with Harry Redknapp sensed his White 
Hart Lane days were limited. "I didn't get a fair crack of the whip last 
season," says Huddlestone, who felt his face no longer fitted. "I played games 
where results were good and I felt my performances were good, then I'd find 
myself out of the team for six or seven weeks with no explanation.

"I know people go on about my injuries but I was fit and available most of 
last year. In my first few seasons down there the policy was to build around 
young British players like me, Aaron Lennon, Gareth Bale , Michael Dawson and 
Jermaine Jenas but now most of us have left and Spurs have gone very much down 
the continental route."

It was not Huddlestone's first setback. At the age of 12 a player who raised 
tens of thousands of pounds for Cancer Research by refusing to have his 
increasingly wild Afro hairstyle trimmed during the two-and-a-half year wait 
for his recent goal against Fulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/02/tom-huddlestone-haircut-hull-city-fulham>
 was released by Nottingham Forest after being deemed "not strong enough".

Derby County saw things rather differently and at 15 Huddlestone was up 
against adults in the reserves before making his debut at right wing-back as a 
16-year-old. "In terms of young players, Tom was the best passer of the ball 
I've ever seen," says George Burley, his then manager. "He's a terrific talent."

A move to Spurs was not too long in coming, with Martin Jol soon comparing his 
versatile prodigy – who, in an emergency, can operate as sweeper, wing-back or 
orthodox centre-half – to Franz Beckenbauer.

Bruce believes the time has come for Roy Hodgson to add to Huddlestone's four 
senior England caps. "Who am I to do Roy's job," says Hull's manager. "But is 
there anyone else in this country who plays off both feet like Tom week in, 
week out? He's producing fantastic performances. Tom's just an outstanding 
footballer, absolutely outstanding.

"It's going to be hot and humid in Brazil, the conditions will be horrible for 
a lot of English footballers to play in, so you're going to need technicians. 
Tom can make the squad, there's always a surprise or two."
 