
Army and militia units supporting the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, 
advanced further on Monday on a rebel region that is key to the capital’s water 
supply, launching strikes and artillery fire threatening a fragile nationwide 
truce.

Hundreds of civilians have fled the Barada valley region outside Damascus 
since Saturday, where government forces were battling several insurgent groups.


The region has been the target of days of airstrikes and shelling despite the 
recent nationwide ceasefire, which was brokered by Russia andTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and appears to be holding in other 
parts of the country, despite some reports of fighting.

UN welcomes Syria ceasefire against backdrop of deadlock and dissent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/31/syria-ceasefire-russia-united-nations-iran-turkey>
The truce went into effect early on Friday, and the government and the 
opposition are expected to meet for talks in Kazakhstan later this month.Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, a key military ally of Assad, and 
Turkey, a leading sponsor of the rebels, are acting as guarantors of the 
agreement, which excludes the al-Qaida-linked Fatah al-Sham Front and Islamic 
State.

The military said those fleeing Barada valley were relocated to safer areas 
and their names were registered by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. Rami 
Abdurrahman, who heads the opposition’s Britain-based Syrian Observatory for 
Human Rights, said there were buses in the region ready to evacuate civilians 
but could not confirm how many people had left. Reports suggested more than a 
thousand had left in the last three days.


He said the Barada valley region was not part of the ceasefire because of the 
presence of Fatah al-Sham Front, formerly known as the Nusra Front, and 
government forces and allied fighters were engaged in fierce clashes with 
rebels.

“Regime forces and fighters from Lebanon’s Hezbollah group are advancing in 
the region and are now on the outskirts of Ain al-Fijeh, the primary water 
source in the area,” he said.

Civil society organisations on the ground in the Barada valley region however 
denied in a joint statement issued on Monday that Nusra fighters were present 
in the area.

Rebels fighting under the Free Syrian Army banner in the Barada Valley region 
also warned in a statement that the truce was in danger of collapse.


“We call on the sponsors of the ceasefire agreement to assume their 
responsibility and pressure the regime and its allied militias to stop their 
clear violation of the agreement,” the statement said.

Otherwise, they warned, “we will call on all the free military factions 
operating insideSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> to overturn the 
agreement and ignite the fronts in defence of the people of Wadi Barada”.

Giles Duley, photojournalist: ‘I promised my pictures could help Syrian war 
victims. At last, I’ve kept my word’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/syria-disabled-refugees-update-giles-duley-photography>
The Barada valley is the primary source of water for the capital and its 
surrounding region. The government assault has coincided with a severe water 
shortage in Damascus since 22 December. The government says rebels spoiled the 
water source with diesel fuel, forcing it to cut supplies to the capital.
 