
England captain Nasser Hussain claimed his side could hold their heads high 
despite Australia's comprehensive 4-1 Ashes win which extends their ownership 
of the urn to years.

"I have been very proud of my team in the last couple of games and even before 
then they have showed a lot of character," said Hussain. "As coach Duncan 
Fletcher said to us in the dressing room, we have got some young lads that have 
come in and there is no point looking anywhere apart from the baggy green [of 
Australia] for the standards that are required."

Though Hussain praised the contributions of Glenn McGrath and Shane Warne he 
refused to say they had won Australia between the series. When asked about the 
difference between the sides, Hussain joked: "They [Australia] score more runs, 
take more wickets and hold more catches." Australia's supremacy in all areas of 
the game is no laughing matter.

It is not just the style of Australia's cricket that has impressed, but their 
conduct on and off the field and England's Man of the Series Mark Butcher paid 
tribute. "They've paid magnificent cricket from the moment they touched down," 
he said, "but we've also been impressed by the way they've carried themselves."

The key to Australia's success lies in their magnificent team spirit, as well 
as their huge resevoirs of individual talent, as captain Steve Waugh alluded to 
after accepting a glass replica of the Ashes.

"It was an important Test match after losing the one at Headingley, so we were 
determined to play well here," he said. "Warne and McGrath were superb, but 
it's a collective effort, that's how we view things. There are 17 men here and 
they all contributed. A few of them didn't play in the Test matches, but they 
still played an important role."

The last word, as ever, fell to Shane Warne, who was named Man of the Match 
for his figures of 11 for 229. "I think we'll have a couple of loud ones 
tonight," said the bullish Victorian. He certainly deserves them.
 