
Nasser Hussain has hinted he is willing to stay on as England captain after 
the World Cup but only if the side is then full of young players in need of an 
experienced leader.

"I've captained England for longer than I ever dreamed, for almost four 
years," he wrote in the Sunday Telegraph. "If it is time to stand down after 
the World Cup and [let] someone else take over as captain, I'm fine with that. 
Or if there are so many younger personnel in the Test side that [it] may need 
someone of experience to lead the team out against South Africa, I'd be fine 
with that too."

Hussain will discuss his position with the England head coach Duncan Fletcher 
and the selectors after the World Cup ends in March. "Various things - far too 
many in fact - have been written about my future. What I can say is that it 
would be unprofessional to think beyond this tour and the World Cup at present.

"After the World Cup will be the time to sit down with Duncan and the rest of 
the selectors and talk about my future, and then it will be what's best for 
English cricket and not what's best for Nasser Hussain."

Hussain is embarking on an extensive rebuilding programme, which has been 
forced by a succession of injuries, and at the MCG last night he was armed with 
a bowling attack that shared just 75 caps, with the Lancashire fast bowler 
James Anderson making his debut in place of the dropped Andrew Caddick.

"Andy was left out as we wanted to have a look at young Anderson as we feel 
there is nothing to lose," Hussain said in Melbourne yesterday. "It is not 
ideal to play them against Australia on an absolute belter of a pitch but they 
have sampled the most difficult challenge and it can only get easier for them.

"Continuity has gone out of the window but if someone can hold their hands up 
and do well against Australia then you know they have got what it takes. I was 
pleased with Anderson. He showed a lot of character to come back and get 
Gilchrist's wicket."

Sri Lanka await England in Brisbane tomorrow but a change of opponent brings 
another huge challenge, with Hussain knowing his side must win at the Gabba to 
stay in contention for the triangular series' final.

"In theory our pressure game comes up next," he said. "Over the past few weeks 
nobody has expected us to beat Australia so for Sri Lanka and us the crucial 
game is next."
 