
When I was a PhD student, I helped to decommission a piece of legacy lab 
equipment. Under the layers of paint, at the core of the instrument, was a 
yellowed typewritten sheet bearing a message: “What you’re working on isn’t 
important – it’s important only that you are working.” It was the sort of 
scholarly ideal to which I, as a young academic, aspired: the pursuit of 
knowledge for its own sake.


I'm not employed – but please recognise that I am an academic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/08/im-not-employed-but-please-recognise-that-i-am-an-academic>
Some of the most important discoveries – from the concept of buoyancy to the 
technology behind microwave ovens – have been accidental, arising from 
serendipitous research. But if I were to propose now tolock myself in my office 
for six years to solve a 350-year old problem in mathematics 
<http://www.nature.com/news/fermat-s-last-theorem-earns-andrew-wiles-the-abel-prize-1.19552>
, it might not be deemed the best use of public resources.

Three major changes have upset the arrangement: first, the rapid expansion of 
the higher education sector means we have to be far more selective about how we 
distribute scarce public resources; second,the scale of those resources has 
been consistently dropping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2015/mar/13/science-vital-uk-spending-research-gdp>
 in real terms; and third, the philosophy behind public funding has changed – 
research grants have become more commercially minded investments with some 
expectation of immediate, low-risk return.

Death sentence

A few years ago, all this was causing me problems. I had become recognised as 
one of the world’s leading experts in a niche area of applied physics; my 
papers were being published in the top journals; and I was getting invitations 
to all the glitzy conferences. Yet I was unable to get any funding for my 
research.

I was submitting two or three bids a year, but the outcome was always the 
same: top marks for scientific quality, but working in such a niche area meant 
phrases like “limited impact” and “few citations” were inevitable. Given the 
competition for funding, this was as good as a death sentence.

I failed to meet my revenue targets for three consecutive years, and was 
presented with some fairly stark choices by my institution. Then it occurred to 
me that there was another interpretation to “What you’re working on isn’t 
important.” I could change my focus to better meet the demands of the public, 
and still enjoy my work.

Some may suggest I've betrayed my ideals by leaving behind the 'true' science

This wasn’t easy – I had to find some way in which my expertise even remotely 
intersected with an area of “national priority”. But while the world at large 
had little interest in the science I was doing, it had a lot of interest in the 
tools I used.


Because I worked in such a specialist area, the market was too small for 
anyone to bother commercialising the equipment I needed. Over the years, I’ve 
had to develop my own unique technologies, techniques and instruments – and 
these have applications I never anticipated. Now, I’m working with space 
agencies, environmental agencies, the NHS and car manufacturers, turning these 
technologies into products.


What people want

I’ve enjoyed considerable success, and have had no trouble securing funding 
for my research; I’ve been in the newspapers, my university has asked me to 
feature in one of ourResearch <https://www.theguardian.com/education/research> 
Excellence Framework impact case studies, and my life as an academic has become 
much easier.

Some may suggest that I’ve sold out and betrayed my ideals by leaving behind 
the “true” science. Indeed, there’s little actual science in what I’ve been 
doing; within the community, the tools of the trade have never been considered 
that important (in the same way that people watching The Great British Bake Off 
aren’t really interested in how muffin tins are manufactured).

I've lost out on 100 academic jobs. Is it time to give up?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/10/ive-lost-out-on-100-academic-jobs-is-it-time-to-give-up>
However, my particular field of science was not one the public wanted. And 
while it’s not necessarily about chasing the latest fads or easy tabloid 
headlines (the focus on “impact” has also resulted in a lot of work on
lightsabers 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/how-close-are-we-to-building-a-real-lightsaber-a6781331.html>
,invisibility cloaks 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/07/20/health/invisibility-cloaks-research/> and 
hoverboards 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2532617/Could-hoverboards-closer-think-Researchers-develop-way-levitate-objects-3D-space-using-sound.html>
), we do have to ensure our work is somehow meeting the immediate needs of the 
public. This may not be the way we’d like to do things, but it is what’s being 
asked of us by those who pay for our work.

Whether we like it or not, academia has changed, and we now need to not only 
deliver good research but good short-term economic value. And I do sometimes 
sneak in a little curiosity-led science – even if I have to call it 
“commissioning trials” or “system integration tests” on a work plan.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 