
My name is Joel Bayliss and I’m an Aboriginal man. My cultural ties stretch 
from Borroloola in the Top End, to theArrernte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arrernte> lands of the central 
desert of the Northern Territory. I am a proud husband to Hilda, doting dad to 
to Ava and Isaiah.

The word identity means different things to different people. I identify as a 
husband, a father, a Crows and Glenelg supporter, a member of a political party 
and as stated before, an Aboriginal man.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fi-consider-myself-lucky-to-learn-about-my-culture-too-many-aboriginal-people-missed-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17e034cc7b425ecff62f9deb50d199a229a45402%2F27_108_683_843%2F683.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20consider%20myself%20lucky%20to%20learn%20about%20my%20culture.%20Too%20many%20Aboriginal%20people%20missed%20out%20%7C%20IndigenousX&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fi-consider-myself-lucky-to-learn-about-my-culture-too-many-aboriginal-people-missed-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20consider%20myself%20lucky%20to%20learn%20about%20my%20culture.%20Too%20many%20Aboriginal%20people%20missed%20out%20%7C%20IndigenousX&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fi-consider-myself-lucky-to-learn-about-my-culture-too-many-aboriginal-people-missed-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17e034cc7b425ecff62f9deb50d199a229a45402%2F27_108_683_843%2F683.jpg>
 ‘I am a proud husband to Hilda, doting dad to to Ava and Isaiah.’ Photograph: 
Supplied 
I have always known I was Aboriginal, people would look at my mother and ask, 
“Where are you from?” and I would always say I’m Aboriginal. We grew up in 
suburban Adelaide and went to a public school. My brother and I were only a 
handful of Aboriginal students at school. Through my teen years, I would 
constantly ask family about our culture, and they would politely go around the 
subject. I didn’t know how to take it then, but now I know.

Following school, I entered the workforce and went into Aboriginal-specific 
roles: mentoring Aboriginal students in school, advocating and supporting 
Aboriginal people within the justice system. You see, I needed to be around my 
people, something that seemed to be missing growing up.

Fast forward a few years and I went off to university. I was surrounded by 
like-minded brothers and sisters and I loved it. I vividly remember being in an 
anthropology class and it became apparent that I was learning my about culture, 
(a culture that is 40,000 years old) by an educated non-Aboriginal person. I 
didn’t know how to feel. We talked about this afterwards and she advised me to 
go home, speak to aunties, uncles and ask questions. So I did just that. My 
family must have got sick of the questions, but I wanted to know everything. I 
found out why growing up family did not want to talk about culture, it was 
because our culture wasn’t passed onto them.

My brother Benjamin had the wonderful opportunity a few years back, along with 
his partner, to work on my grandmother’s country in Borroloola. I am indebted 
to him for one day giving me the tour of this incredible country. You see, 
culture is incredibly important to one’s identity. I hope to pass the knowledge 
onto my two children. I do consider myself lucky, I will have the opportunity 
to learn about my culture, from my people. I think of the thousands of 
Aboriginal people who were forcibly removed from their families, about how the 
loss of culture, the loss of language, the loss of identity would have affected 
their lives.

I can't call myself an Indigenous Australian and also say sovereignty never 
ceded | #IndigenousX
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/11/i-cant-call-myself-an-indigenous-australian-and-also-say-sovereignty-never-ceded>
Being part of the oldest living culture on earth is the reason I support the 
recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in our constitution.

In 1901 when the constitution was implemented it ignored an entire group of 
people who called this country home for tens of thousands of years. Who knows, 
maybe if recognition does occur, it might give someone who is aware of their 
Aboriginal heritage, but for whatever reason does not want to acknowledge it, 
the confidence to say, “I am a proud Aboriginal person”.

 * “Our stories, our way” – each week, a new guest hosts the @IndigenousX 
Twitter account <http://twitter.com/indigenousX> to discuss topics of interest 
to them as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people. Produced with 
assistance of Guardian Australia staff.  