
I was born and raised in Syria. I did my bachelor’s degree at the University 
of Damascus and was pursuing my master’s and dreaming of an academic career 
when the uprising started.

Everyone thought it was going to be over in a matter of days, or weeks. The 
pace of life slowed down massively, and many things were put on hold. We 
waited, but unfortunately it the chaos grew. Days turned into months and years, 
and the life of every single citizen has been affected in one way or another.

Academics have been targets for misfortune throughout the country. This is 
either because the values of enlightenment and freedom they represent are 
perceived as a threat, or because they are considered valuable when being 
traded for ransom.

'We want to be part of the solution': universities reach out to refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/02/universities-scholarships-jobs-offer-refugees>
Some scholars have been forced out of their offices or laboratories to join a 
fight that was never theirs. A great number of Syrian academics have been 
killed, tortured, abducted or forced to leave the country to save their lives 
and their families. My supervising professor had to flee the country without 
prior notice after her husband, also a respected professor at the same 
university, was abducted. She feared she would be next.

Funding has disappeared and there’s a lack of research facilities and 
equipment. And then there’s the more fundamental scarcity of basic resources 
such as electricity, fuel and water. Some universities have had to move to 
temporary buildings that are not suited for teaching, let alone hosting 
research facilities.

 Achieving academic excellence was always my ambition, but once the war 
started it also felt like an obligation. I wanted to learn the skills that I 
could later use to help rebuild my country.

Lost dreams

As the war went on, with no foreseeable ending, I knew that those dreams were 
on the verge of being lost. I thought I would have to enlist in the military 
and all I felt was despair: instead of rebuilding my country I was faced with 
the possibility of killing or being killed for a vain cause that was nothing to 
do with me.

Then I heard about Cara <http://www.cara.ngo/>, the Council for At-Risk 
Academics. They are a community that helps academics in conflict zones find a 
temporary sanctuary where they can continue their academic work and arm 
themselves with the knowledge and experience they need to play an effective 
role in their countries once the risk is over. When I first approached Cara I 
thought that it wouldn’t be able to help me on short notice, and I imagined it 
would have strict criteria that I would not fulfil. The idea of starting a 
funded PhD degree at a university in the UK, where I knew higher education was 
outstanding, was only a far-fetched dream.

Cara saved my dreams from dying. Its understanding and compassion gave me hope 
again. It was such a relief to learn that, in the midst of all the chaos, there 
were organisations that recognised the importance of empowering academics in 
countries devastated by war.

The team were determined to help me find an academic placement that suited me. 
They tried tirelessly to match my research interests with possible programmes 
and connect me with potential supervisors until they managed to secure a 
placefor me at the University of Kent where I am now doing a PhD.

Healing my country

I’m eternally grateful for this opportunity. And I have resolved once again to 
become the academic I aspired to be, who will eventually help in resurrecting 
and healing my broken country. Meanwhile, despite the ravaging war, young 
Syrian academics back home are still working to achieve their aims.

'University is one place you're not labelled': refugees who flee war to study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/17/university-is-one-place-youre-not-labelled-refugees-who-flee-war-to-study>
I urge UK universities and educational institutions to take in and adopt more 
Syrian academics. Once they conclude their studies, they want to go back to 
their home universities with experience of how the higher education system in 
the UK operates, so they can help construct a similarly profound system back in 
Syria. When the war is over, this higher education system will unleash to 
humanity the buried creativity and brilliance of the country.

Premises and facilities are replaceable. What is irreplaceable are the minds 
that occupy those premises and operate those facilities.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 