
For Christmas, T got 12 hours of In The Night Garden on DVD. Some parents, 
including C, love this show, and not just for its magnetising effect on the 
child; it soothes their busy adult minds also, and brings a new dawn of peace 
to the whole house. My mind, it will astonish you to learn, is not that busy, 
and I find the sluggish tempo, the slightly creepy, empty-eyed child at the 
beginning, the way the stars turn into flowers ... the whole package does 
something to my biorhythms. I get sensory confusion from even a small amount of 
it. It makes me think of Guant√°namo Bay. So I'm in the last-resort camp, 
whereas C puts it on from the minute there is a discernible pulse in the same 
room as the telly, and as a consequence, C is much more fun than me, again. 
This is on top of all those well-documented other areas in which he is more fun.

There are other programmes that I will watch, but apparently only if I'm 
allowed to sing the theme tune in a sarcastic voice, not just while it's on, 
but for the rest of the day. What is my problem? I wish I knew. I was worrying 
to C the other day that T could actually hear my atonal derision while I was 
singing Nina and the Neurons, and he said I was anthropomorphising. I said, I 
can't anthropomorphise T, he's not a snake. This, people, is what happens when 
you watch too much In the Night Garden. It erases your vocabulary, like in The 
Stepford Wives. Strangely, the relentless denigration of C does not erase my 
shortcomings in this department, even from my own psyche.

There are people on CBBC (the older version of CBeebies) who are also on Radio 
4 (would you believe!) but that is the worst of all compromise solutions, 
because T might as well be watching Newsnight, and I might as well be listening 
to Radio 4. But I am not just less fun with telly. I have problems with the 
written word. I cannot muster any enthusiasm for those books that are just 
pictures of things, with its name written next to it. One step up is the book 
with the thing plus either a pop-up function or an additional noise function. 
Even though I understand that one-year-olds differ, cognitively, from 
35-year-olds, on some fundamental level, I don't see why Spot's tractor has to 
make that infernal noise, and why we can't just describe the noise with the 
wonderful world of words. The pop-up, meanwhile, I think was invented to create 
built-in obsolescence of children's books - they have to break, otherwise they 
last for ever. How do you break a book? Why, you add all these additional 
breakable flaps. There's one about a mole with a turd on his head that lasted 
so short a time I think it was actually the business model for the iPod.

One step above these are the books that have an actual story, but they tell it 
pretty slowly. It's meant to be a joy for parents and children, the way they 
splish- splosh through the puddles, then yimp-yomp through the mud, then 
swish-swash through the grass, but seriously, it goes on for ever. It's totally 
witless. If you skip the boring bits, you are immediately at the end.

One step above these are the two or three books in the world that are 
intensely beautiful, very simple and quite repetitive but for some reason not 
in a boring way, which you can read over and over again. There's one about a 
fluffy little kitten going to the football, and there's another one called How 
Do Dinosaurs Eat Their Food? T has no interest in either of them, I have to 
basically wrestle him down, seize Spot's Noisy Tractor and all the other books 
he likes, hide them, clamp him in a viable reading position with one hand and 
turn the pages with the other. Imagine how much fun that is.

One step above these are the books with an actual narrative thrust, but these 
are even more boring for T. It is not unusual for me to be still trying to find 
out how the lady resolved her space issues (her whole house is a squash and a 
squeeze), while T has gone off with C to watch In the Night Garden. Oh, and 
there's one more book about a toy bear who finds its special little person that 
actually makes me gag. But I will tell you about that another time.
 