
Reviews for Twilight: Breaking Dawn – Part 1 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142186/twilight-saga> have been so 
gleeful in their derision it reminds you that critics love nothing better than 
a chance to sneer. Why try to say something useful when you can exercise your 
excoriating wit? That's fine – I do it, too. Edward looks like a marble statue 
covered in talc, only now he's in shorts! The wolves argue with each other in 
English, not even wolf-talk, which is just silly! And let's face it, if you're 
going to have a caesarean, it's not a good idea to have vampires in the room.

But if Twilight is so awful, why do we invest so much effort into slagging it 
off? Especially since everything that needs to be said about teen chastity, 
female passivity and Mormonism-on-the-sly has already been trotted out in 
response to previous entries in the franchise. God knows I'm Team Buffy, not 
Team Bella, and I prefer my vampires evil, but it seems to me that Twilight 
attracts a lot more vitriol than any other nonsense aimed at the young male 
demographic. I gave up looking for sample quotes, because the same adjectives 
came up. Ludicrous, ridiculous and risible are favourites, along with cheesy 
and sappy, but words such as these could equally be applied to, say,Green 
Lantern <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141327/green-lantern>, Cowboys 
and Aliens <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/143036/cowboys-and-aliens>, or 
Conan the Barbarian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/143159/conan-the-barbarian>.

Except they aren't; reviews of such boy-tosh may be predominantly negative, 
but the tone is not so much derisive as regretful at opportunities wasted. No 
matter that movies aimed at boys feature superpowers or super-robots or saving 
the world with super-ninja skills. Those sorts of fantasies are permissible, 
almost cool, even when the films peddling them are awful. And I must confess 
that, ever since a brain transplant left me with the cultural tastes of a 
15-year-old boy, I, too, prefer them to the 
100-year-old-vampire-falling-in-love-with-little-old-me.

But Twilight caters to the sexual fantasies of teenage girls. I'm not saying 
in a good way, but at least it caters to them, and there's not a lot else at 
the cinema that does – not in a young adult fantasy genre that invariably 
reduces females to also-rans or decorative sidekicks while the Harry Potters 
and Lightning Thieves get on with their questing. In fact, I wish there were 
more films likeTwilight <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/twilight>, not 
fewer. There, I've said it. Because so long as supernatural fantasies aimed at 
teenage girls are raking in money, we're likely to see more of them produced.

The Twilight effect is already discernible, surely, in the new wave of 
fairytale movies – not quite Angela Carteresque revisionist as seen inThe 
Company of Wolves 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2004/oct/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview12>, 
but all featuring heroines spunkier than your traditional Disney 
princess-passive. We've had Catherine Hardwicke'sRed Riding Hood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/91641/red-riding-hood> (too much in 
thrall to the Twilight films she inaugurated) and there are two new Snow Whites 
to set alongside 1997's Snow White: A Tale of Terror. Pixar has its first 
female protagonist coming up in Brave, and Disney has come up trumps with the 
unexpectedly wonderfulTangled 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140039/tangled>.

I bet I'm not the only one impatient to see how 18-year-old Emily Hagins will 
followMy Sucky Teen Romance <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y5gN5MiuoyI>, her 
endearing vampire love story, which is everything Breaking Dawn is not. And, 
while it's more sci-fi than supernatural fantasy, next spring we haveThe Hunger 
Games <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142857/hunger-games>, adapted from 
the first of Suzanne Collins's trilogy, which plunges a resourceful heroine 
into a dystopian life-or-death situation; I started reading it expecting Battle 
Royale Lite, but ended up impressed. Here's hoping it's successful enough for a 
green light on the other two books, which introduce a romantic triangle far 
more interesting than Bella-Edward-Jacob. But would even the first Hunger Games 
have been made without Twilight?

Who knows? One of these days we may get a young adult fantasy that cracks the 
genre wide open, a teenage romance to rank with, say, the sublimeThe Ghost and 
Mrs Muir <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zN6S6FwT5HM>. It could happen! 
Breaking Dawn is a small price to pay.
 