
The Afghan war strategy is not working. After 10 bloody years, there are too 
many civilian casualties and no prospect of defeating the Taliban. We are 
propping up a Kabul government mired in corruption, which gained power through 
fraudulent elections. Our intervention has focused on war-fighting to the 
relative neglect of economic reconstruction and the empowerment of civil 
society. The cost to the British people of this half-baked venture is a 
staggering £5bn a year, when public services are being slashed. For all these 
reasons, I'm supporting the massanti-war assembly in Trafalgar Square 
<http://stopwar.org.uk/index.php/action-a-events/national-events/585-anti-war-mass-assembly-2011>
 this Saturday. But I do so critically.

As a leftwinger and internationalist, I can't accept the simplistic calls for 
immediate troop withdrawal. Don't get me wrong. I never supported the war 
strategy inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. The 
Nato-led occupation is wrong. Democracy and human rights cannot be imposed by 
western diktat. The troops should come home – but not with no regard for the 
consequences.

A hasty Nato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> withdrawal will not 
bring peace. Afghan security forces lack the training, equipment and numbers to 
stave off the fundamentalist threat. A premature exit could result in a Taliban 
victory – and a bloodbath. Is this what anti-war activists want? I'm sure they 
don't. So why do many of my colleagues make a demand that risks such a grisly 
outcome?

Campaigners against the war are rightly critical of Nato's ham-fisted 
intervention,human rights abuses 
<http://www.fidh.org/NATO-s-Objectives-Are-Challenged-By-a-Poor-Record> and 
reckless attacks thatkill civilians 
<http://english.aljazeera.net/news/asia/2011/05/2011529102045125188.html>. But 
why aren't they equally critical of the Taliban? Taliban fighters deliberately 
target civilians. They kill many more ordinary Afghans than the Nato forces, 
and they'd kill even more civilians if there was a rushed pull-out of western 
troops. A one-sided focus on Nato's wrongs, to the neglect of a far more brutal 
set of killers, is a tad hypocritical.

Nearly 90% of Afghans oppose the Taliban – a clerical fascist movement that 
seeks to impose a religious dictatorship. A Taliban regime would ban all 
political parties, trade unions, and women's organisations.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> and girls would be forced out 
of schools and jobs, back into the home. They'd be subjected to compulsory 
shrouding and gender apartheid. Any woman who refused to conform would risk 
lashing and stoning. Why has the anti-war movement never protested against the 
Taliban's crimes against female humanity?

Afghan advocates of women's equality oppose a swift troop pull-out. They fear 
it could result in a Taliban takeover, which would suppress women for decades. 
Despite Nato's failings,72% of Afghan women say their lives are better than 10 
years ago <http://www.actionaid.org.uk/doc_lib/a_just_peace.pdf>.

Afghan female MP, Fawzia Koofi, this week urged Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/oct/04/dreams-afghan-women-taliban-rights>
 "not to abandon us," arguing that without western help Afghanistan's 
precarious attempt at democracy "won't survive".

Women's rights campaigner and Kabul MP, Shinkai Karokhail, stresses: "In the 
current situation of terrorism, we cannot say troops should be withdrawn … the 
international troop presence here is a guarantee for my safety."

Dr Sima Samar, chair of Afghanistan's Independent Human Rights Commission, has 
appealed to western nations <http://www.cw4wafghan.ca/PolicyStatement>: "Finish 
the job you started. It's about the protection of humanity. This is a human 
responsibility."

Is it morally right for the west to ignore the Afghan people's fears and leave 
them vulnerable to the savage fate that will befall them if the Taliban seize 
power?

The "troops out" movement may be silent about the threat posed by the Taliban 
but most Afghans are not. Three-quarters still support the Nato invasion to 
topple the Taliban. More Afghans blame the Taliban for the violence than those 
who blame Nato. While a majority want foreign troops to leave, they don't want 
them to leave just yet. Nearly two-thirds of Afghans support the current 
presence of US-led Nato forces, according to anABC/BBC poll in December 2010 
<http://www.langerresearch.com/uploads/1116a1Afghanistan.pdf>.

If most Afghans want the troops to stay, should we still insist they go?

The anti-war movement in Britain is headed by the left. I don't see how 
immediate withdrawal – with the risk of mass repression by the Taliban – is 
compatible with the leftwing values of anti-fascism, international solidarity, 
human rights and support for oppressed people. Anti-war activists have never 
explained how they reconcile their humanitarian motives with the likely 
barbaric consequences of their demand for "troops out now".

There needs to be a more sophisticated anti-war alternative to the Nato 
strategy. I haven't got the answers but I know we should not abandon the Afghan 
people to a Taliban bloodfest. Anti-imperialism cannot be allowed to trump 
human rights.
 