
The inexorable rise of Ant and Dec continues. Not content with chart success 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PJ_&_Duncan_discography>, primetime ubiquity and 
encouraging celebrities to devour Australian jungle fauna 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/8396597.stm>, the cheeky Geordie duo 
have found their way intoWho's Who <http://www.ukwhoswho.com/>.

Declan Joseph Oliver Donnelly and Anthony McPartlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin>, as they are more properly 
known, are joined in the 2010 edition by another double act, Matt Lucas and 
David Walliams. While Lucas lists his hobbies as "eating crisps, watching 
football, eating chocolate, watching stage musicals, sleeping, eating 
crumpets", Walliams cites the love of swimming that propelled him across the 
Channel three years ago. Fellow comedian, actor and author Ricky Gervais is 
also among the 1,000-odd new entries.

The Hollywood A-list is represented by Seven 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0114369/> co-stars William Bradley Pitt and Morgan 
PorterfieldFreeman, with the British actors Anna Friel, David Morrissey and 
Ruthie Henshall also getting mentions in the 162nd annual edition.

The broadcasters and writers Mariella Frostrup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mariellafrostrup> and Malcolm Gluck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/malcolmgluck> are also new entrants, along 
withEdward [Bear] Grylls <http://www.beargrylls.com/>, adventurer and chief 
scout, who, predictably, likes to spend his spare time mountaineering, 
paragliding, and sailing, practising yoga, martial arts and the piano.

The world of sport boasts a clutch of new entries, including the world No 1 
tennis player,Roger Federer <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roger_Federer>. Away 
from the court, the 28-year-old Swiss player says he enjoys golf, soccer, 
skiing, friends, Playstation, music and playing cards.

Two football managers – David Moyes, of Everton FC and Samuel Allardyce, of 
Blackburn Rovers FC – also make the list. However, the most popular team with 
this year's new names is Arsenal, with 14 people placing the team among their 
recreations. A total of 20 people in Who's Who list supporting Everton FC among 
their recreations, and seven list Blackburn Rovers.

In the commercial sector, there is a new entry for Matthew Brittin, managing 
director of Google UK and Ireland, who is kept busy in his spare time by his 
climbing, cycling and swimming sons. There are also new entries for 
restaurateur Michael Belben, Laura Wade-Gery, the CEO of Tesco.com and Tesco 
Direct, and Evelyn Webster, IPC Media Ltd's chief executive.

The average age of the 2010 entrants is 52. The youngest non-hereditary new 
entrant is MP Chloe Smith, who was born in May 1982. She is followed by Roger 
Federer (born August 1981) and violinist Sarah Chang (December 1980). The 
artist and sculptorLouise Bourgeois 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/modern/exhibitions/louisebourgeois/default.shtm>, who 
will celebrate her 98th birthday on Christmas Day, is the oldest new entrant, 
followed by Emeritus Professor Reginald Ward, who was born in March 1925. 
 