
I don’t know how to talk to people. This may sound like a small thing, but 
it’s one of my defining features.


What does a Russian literature expert look like? Not me, apparently
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/06/what-does-a-russian-literature-expert-look-like-not-me-apparently>
For as long as I can remember, I have been quiet and shy. I think I was a 
fairly normal, talkative child, but as a teenager I went into my shell and 
never really came out of it again. My fear of embarrassment often leads me to 
say little or nothing when I’m around other people, even those that I know. Far 
better to be the odd one in the corner who stays quiet, rather than saying 
something wrong.


I live a relatively normal life. I don’t have many friends but I’m married, I 
have a child and I’ve managed to make it some way in academia; I’m currently in 
my second post-doc role.

But it’s not the usual (and very real) pressures around workload, job security 
and publications that have me worrying. It’s the fact that every time I walk 
into a room with other people, I find myself thinking: “Why am I here? Why do I 
put myself through this? I can’t do this.”


The opportunities for social awkwardness are plentiful at a university: 
meetings, seminars, training days, coffee mornings, leaving parties, drinks in 
the pub, Christmas meals, to name a few. These are bad enough, but at least 
they are usually over fairly quickly, it’s the conferences that I particularly 
dread.


It’s not the substance of these events that worry me. Like most people, I get 
nervous when I’m about to speak in public, and I wonder whether I really belong 
when I hear about the amazing research that others are doing, but it’s the 
social element that I fear more than anything else.

Will I suffer in future because of the connections I have already failed to 
make?

Some people seem to thrive in this environment – they are confident and almost 
seem to have their own gravitational pull. I am the opposite. I find myself 
sitting alone during coffee and lunch breaks, trying to blend in, to disappear.

Over the years I’ve learned how to cut down on these awkward moments. If it’s 
an option, you can go to the room where the next session is due to take place 
and sit down early. This is easier if you have a phone or conference material 
to look at, so you appear to be doing something.

Alternatively, you can just take yourself away. This could mean going for a 
walk and coming back, or it might mean hiding in the toilet (something I have 
done many times).

Or you can avoid going in the first place. I recently skipped an entire drinks 
reception because I knew it would be awful. Needless to say, none of these are 
positive solutions.

Every now and then there will be a kind-hearted person who sees you standing 
on your own and invites you over to join them. These people are lovely, but 
they only make things worse. I can’t help but wonder what they must think as 
they take pity on me.

Sadly, this is not just a personal thing, it is also affecting my work. It has 
been affecting my work for a long time, I suspect. It becomes a self-fulfilling 
prophecy; the more I think about the fact that I am not talking to anyone, the 
less likely I am to be able to do it.

Managing an anxiety disorder in academia is a full-time job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/29/managing-an-anxiety-disorder-in-academia-is-a-full-time-job>
Perhaps I am putting too much pressure on myself, but it feels like networking 
is really important in this career. So why have I chosen a career that hinges 
on something I am terrible at? Will I suffer in future because of the 
connections I am failing to make? I’m sure things would be easier if I was 
outgoing and articulate.

I recently attended a conference where one of the keynote speakers was a 
leading professor in my area of research. I should have introduced myself and 
spoken about my work. I should have asked for advice. It was important. It is 
my job. But I didn’t do it, I couldn’t do it. I sat at the back of the lecture 
theatre on my own, and then left. I went back to my hotel room and cried.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 