
Early last year, I was looking through the first book of a creative writing 
graduate. It was a book of poems based on theirPhD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd>, and I recognised 
some of the lines in it as possibly plagiarised.

Some of them came with named sources, but a handful didn’t and clearly should 
have done. When I looked harder, I found chunks from blogs and other websites, 
chopped up with line-breaks, no quote marks and no acknowledgements.


Bad PhD supervisors can ruin research. So why aren't they accountable?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/11/bad-phd-supervisors-can-ruin-research-so-why-arent-they-accountable>
Clearly, poetry written as part of a doctorate should not such show cavalier 
disregard for referencing. I knew a senior lecturer in that student’s 
department, so I emailed them my findings. I received an “oh dear” 
acknowledgement and a chatty note to say that they were “just heading over to 
the library now to check this out”.

I wish I’d headed over first. The PhD was withdrawn from the library shelves, 
and soon disappeared from the university library’s catalogue. For more than 12 
months afterwards, I was unable to verify whether these plagiarisms were also 
in the bound PhD thesis.

I checked with the British Library because they have rights to a second copy 
and only need to ask the awarding university for it through the Electronic 
Thesis Online Service (Ethos). I asked them to request it, but the awarding 
university or the author said no.

My contact with the lecturer went quiet, so I made a handful of freedom of 
information requests to the university, asking when the PhD would go back into 
the library and if there was any sort of plagiarism enquiry under way. In each 
case it took 10 days for them to reply. Each reply would invite a follow-up 
question. Confidentiality needed to be respected, they said. Could they give a 
time frame, I replied. No. Why not? No answer.


After a year, I sent a very precise question: can you confirm if this author 
is still entitled to use the title “Dr” with a doctorate from your university? 
The university said yes. I also received an email telling me that the PhD 
thesis would be going back onto the shelves that weekend, and on to Ethos at 
the British Library.


I'm not LMAO at ridiculous emails from my students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/05/im-not-lmao-at-ridiculous-emails-from-my-students>
I checked that Monday and found that the poems in the PhD were presented 
identically to how they’d been printed in the book, with no acknowledgment. 
(I’d half-dreaded that the university would give the candidate time to add 
corrections as if they’d always been there).

Moreover, there was a critical component: a long essay about contemporary 
poetry, comprising two-thirds of the PhD. This is the part where candidates 
show their academic ability. But I found this prose component was also rife 
with uncredited verbatim sentences from other academic criticism. Sentences 
specifically discussing one artwork had been cut and pasted to refer to 
another; sentences about an exhibition of painting were applied to an anthology 
of poems; sentences about the specifics of one poem inspired by jazz were 
transposed to discuss a poem by a completely different author. It was waffle.

I vetted the thesis and found that it had 75 pages with uncredited verbatim 
sentences, often more than one per page. Sometimes they were from items cited 
in the bibliography, suggesting amateur citation skills – cut and paste instead 
of paraphrase (even though the candidate knew full well to use quote marks when 
quoting elsewhere in the thesis). On at least 10 occasions sentences were from 
items not cited in the bibliography at all, but from academic articles and 
reviews. You could make a case for postmodern ghosting in creative writing, but 
copying verbatim sentences from uncredited sources in a critical analysis is 
simply academic plagiarism.


Our obsession with metrics turns academics into data drones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/27/our-obsession-with-metrics-turns-academics-into-data-drones>
I wonder what will happen if I report these latest findings. Will the 
university remove the bound thesis from the shelves, and deny permission to the 
British Library for use of its copy? Will it investigate? Will it stall its 
response again?

This PhD sets a precedent that suggests other candidates would not have their 
doctorates stripped from them for using multiple uncredited texts in their 
creative writing. This also sets a precedent that a PhD with nearly a 100 
verbatim borrowings in its critical writing does not lead to the removal of the 
doctorate from the doctor. Once it’s passed, it’s passed.

This creates a legal minefield, one that other universities should be 
concerned about.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 