
So here you are, awake at 4am, trying to figure out how to reinvent your 
professional life. Again. For the third time in a decade. You weren’t fired – 
you definitely weren’t fired – you were made redundant. You aren’t unemployed 
now because you were bad at your job, but because of cutbacks. That’s supposed 
to be the good news.

Students! Your lecturers are on strike because they are struggling to survive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/26/students-your-lecturers-are-on-strike-because-they-are-struggling-to-survive>
You think back to earlier today when you joked that you felt like 
Schrodinger’s cat as you waited for your appointment. The cat is stone-cold 
dead now.

You weren’t laid off because of performance issues. This was a “restructure 
reduction”, and you’re leaving with a large group of your colleagues. We’re in 
difficult economic times, they told you. But the economic situation has been 
the same for years now – and it would have been kinder to do this to you 
earlier, rather than slashing and burning at the time of year when academic 
jobs are hardest to find.

But at least you got to hear the news from a respected supervisor (rather than 
the impersonal human resources representative). The minute she made eye 
contact, you knew. You held it together so she could get through her prepared 
speech, and you tried to say thoughtful, positive things while haemorrhaging 
hopes and dreams. Finally, you saw that she was holding back tears too and you 
wept – apologising for not keeping it together while she was being so kind and 
so professional.

You left the building for an hour to give yourself time to get your head 
straight, because you still had a class to teach. You took in the river and 
thought about how lucky you’d been to see this view every workday.

University examiners stage mass resignation over pay offer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/26/professors-resign-as-external-examiners-in-support-of-university-strikes>
 You sent some texts and wept some more, until you finally sat down and let 
the wind flow through the empty space where your stable future used to be.

 Realising the time, you pulled yourself together. You made a 
spur-of-the-minute decision to shift your class plan to an interactive final 
(which you’d been toying with for two weeks anyway) and pulled together 
last-minute supplies. You entered the classroom with a smile and announced: 
“Surprise, no review, we’re doing the final now!” You knew this class could 
handle it.

All too soon, it was over and they were surrounding you. They already knew. Of 
course they knew, there are no secrets on a small campus. Some were crying, 
some were smiling with encouragement, some were angry – one even vowed to write 
a strongly worded letter and you laughingly offered to check it for grammatical 
errors.

 You spent two more hours tying up loose ends; sending emails and making phone 
calls as your colleagues commiserated and tried to disguise their pity for one 
another. You left early, hauling your things to the car in a conference bag. 
You will spend more time on this campus in the coming weeks, but – there’s no 
use denying it – the space is no longer yours.

You fell asleep easily this evening, wondering why the gravity of your 
situation wasn’t crushing you. Then your eyes shot open at 4am, mind racing as 
you started trying to figure out who you would be now that the person you chose 
to be – who you love to be – is gone, through no fault of your own.

Academics! You've got to fight for your right to job security
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/01/academics-fight-for-right-to-job-security>
In the following weeks, your colleagues express anger, frustration and 
confusion. Some leave immediately, others wait out the week, others opt to stay 
until the very end. At after-hours campus get-togethers, the mood is awkward 
but sweet. Those who remain in their jobs feel awful, and worry about further 
cuts.

Those who opt to stay do so in order to prepare their classes for finals, 
while those leaving immediately do so quietly, without protest. Notably, no one 
takes it out on the students. We came into this for them, and we’re not going 
to leave any differently.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 