
“The most successful rock star in history! The youngest artist to top the 
album and singles chart in the UK and America! Sell out tours worldwide! 
Platinum albums! Millions of adoring fans…”


I’m talking about Ash Wild, of course - the fictional rock star of Target 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400039/>, the latest 
book in my Bodyguard series.


Ash is the rock star I wanted to be - aside from the maniac killer who wants 
him dead, of course.


You see, before I became a full-time children’s author, I was a professional 
musician and songwriter. I gigged the length and breadth of the UK, recorded 
four albums (one for a small indie label and the others self-funded) and, amid 
the countless knockbacks, I experienced some incredible moments including:

 * selling out at The Borderline Club in London 
 * having my album sold in HMV Oxford Street 
 * hanging out with Robbie Williams, Blur and Kylie Minogue 
 * appearing as the songwriting coach for E4’s School of Performing Arts 
 * and even performing for the Queen at the 21st Celebration of the 
Commonwealth! Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCLpMwRhMxtA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCLpMwRhMxtA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCLpMwRhMxtA&media=>
 See Chris in E4’s School of Performing Arts! 
But becoming the ultimate rock star proved elusive (I was definitely 
surviving, not thriving as a musician). Almost every major and independent 
record company, publisher and manager said “No!” and closed the door in my 
face. It was enough to break the will of even the most dedicated musician.


But I don’t begrudge any of it. In fact all those experiences and rejections 
made me into the author I am today. After more than a decade of slogging my 
guts out as a musician, I was given the opportunity to write a book about 
songwriting, Heart & Soul: The Craft of Songwriting – suddenly the wheels of 
fortune turned for me.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fi-wanted-to-be-a-rock-star-but-became-an-author-instead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6357cd0f270988e47dfcfb5fa7f083e9bc46c70a%2F0_0_921_1381%2F921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20wanted%20to%20be%20a%20rock%20star%E2%80%A6%20but%20became%20an%20author%20instead!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fi-wanted-to-be-a-rock-star-but-became-an-author-instead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20wanted%20to%20be%20a%20rock%20star%E2%80%A6%20but%20became%20an%20author%20instead%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fi-wanted-to-be-a-rock-star-but-became-an-author-instead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6357cd0f270988e47dfcfb5fa7f083e9bc46c70a%2F0_0_921_1381%2F921.jpg>
Rejection karma. That’s what I called it. Following years of “no” from the 
music industry, everyone in the book publishing world said yes!


The success of Heart & Soul quickly led on to four more books about 
songwriting and the music business, before I was struck by the idea forYoung 
Samurai <http://www.youngsamurai.com> and my writing career really took off.


Now four books into my Bodyguard series <http://www.bodyguard-books.co.uk>, 
I’ve come full circle and returned to my musical roots. Those experiences (good 
and bad) in the music business have become crucial to writing Target.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3mCD3cS0oys&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3mCD3cS0oys>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3mCD3cS0oys&media=>
 Watch Chris Bradford’s Bodyguard defence tips! 
Ash Wild, the world’s biggest teen rock star in history, is the target of a 
crazed stalker. Top bodyguard recruit Charley Hunter is assigned to protect the 
superstar on his sell-out US tour. Faced with death threats, suspicious 
“accidents” and a rebellious rock star, Charley is in a race to unmask the 
killer in their midst - but how will she spot a killer in a crowd of 50,000 
screaming fans?


Now while I was never the focus of such adulation that Ash experiences in the 
book, I saw first-hand the intoxicating world of celebrity… and its dangers: 
the over-obsessed fan, the jealous musician, the maniac stalker.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIQjybZPljZ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIQjybZPljZ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIQjybZPljZ0&media=>
 In preparation for his new book Bodyguard: Target, author Chris Bradford 
interviewed Jacquie Davis - one of the world’s top female bodyguards. 
And as a former musician I could really get inside the head of my character 
Ash Wild. Understand the deep satisfaction of writing a song, the thrill of a 
live show and the sheer craziness of being in the midst of a mass of screaming 
fans.


In fact the songs I wrote and performed as a musician form part of the 
storyline. These are the songs that Ash performs in his concerts and readers 
can evenhear sample Ash Wild tracks online <http://www.bodyguard-books/AshWild>…

So I have lived my dream of being a rock star at last… albeit through my 
character Ash Wild.


Chris Bradford on the Bodyguard series - children and teen books podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2014/may/07/ransom-bodyguard-chris-bradford-podcast>
Yet, if the truth be said, being a children’s author isn’t that far off being 
a rock star… I get to tour the world, appear at festivals, sign autographs, 
meet obsessed fans, I even experience the occasional scream or two after a 
performance (authors are the rock stars of the literary world to librarians!). 
But most important of all, I get to influence and inspire young people - with 
words rather than music.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fi-wanted-to-be-a-rock-star-but-became-an-author-instead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d0c0c073efd5a9df28320fbdbd0f29234a9d3ae%2F0_0_1514_2339%2F1514.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20wanted%20to%20be%20a%20rock%20star%E2%80%A6%20but%20became%20an%20author%20instead!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fi-wanted-to-be-a-rock-star-but-became-an-author-instead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20wanted%20to%20be%20a%20rock%20star%E2%80%A6%20but%20became%20an%20author%20instead%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fi-wanted-to-be-a-rock-star-but-became-an-author-instead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d0c0c073efd5a9df28320fbdbd0f29234a9d3ae%2F0_0_1514_2339%2F1514.jpg>
Chris Bradford’s Bodyguard: Target (published by Puffin Books) is available to 
order from the Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400039/>. 

 