
The passage of time is strange. Without recognition of the days and weeks 
slipping past, suddenly one finds oneself on the other side of a dark valley 
breathing a bit easier than before.

Friday, 7 February 2015, seemed to be an ordinary day in Bentiu, South Sudan, 
filled with the work and challenges of humanitarian life – until suddenly it 
wasn’t. Suddenly it was a day that will forever define me.

Before, 6 February: I am just a regular humanitarian worker in South Sudan. I 
am tired and planning my next vacation.

After, 8 February: I am a rape victim, not yet on my way to be a rape 
survivor. I am sick and scared, sending messages to my closest friend alluding 
to something that I cannot yet say out loud: “I think that I was raped.”

I no longer view the world in the same way. There are relationships that are 
irreparably damaged by people’s first reactions to what happened to me. I do 
not trust as easily. I am less comfortable in party situations. I do not know 
when I will stop holding back.

Aid worker: I was drugged and raped by another humanitarian in South Sudan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>
As I write this I am wrapping up another mission in South Sudan. Coming back 
was a painful but empowering decision. Despite the lack of support from my 
soon-to-be former organisation, in particular their disappointing mental health 
policies and procedures, I am glad that I came back to this country one last 
time.


South Sudan does not feel the same for me anymore. I am tense all of the time, 
inwardly and outwardly, and aware that people I have never met know who I am. 
Sensitive conversations with new colleagues smoothed my way through the first 
few weeks, but I know that I am a different person on this mission. I am more 
guarded and distant – relieved to drift away from the partying atmosphere of 
Juba to my field site, even if it is rather isolated and lonely.

There is also a feeling of anger and hostility among humanitarians demanding 
additional security because of theincreasing reports of sexual violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/20/secret-aid-worker-south-sudan-personal-attacks>
. On the one hand, there is something encouraging about the strength of the 
emotion towards this issue, but this is offset by feelings of helplessness and 
desolation, as I hear of how organisations in South Sudan are responding badly 
to their employees being attacked. I wonder sometimes if this change in the 
atmosphere is felt so strongly by others, or if I am projecting my own feelings 
on this country that holds so much baggage.

It is becoming increasingly clear that there is a sexual violence problem in 
the humanitarian aid community

Many bad things have come out of the last year. However, the good is beginning 
to outweigh the bad.

I may have lost many friends who could not handle my pain, but I have also 
strengthened relationships with others in my life.

I am beginning to find a peace out of all this chaos and unhappiness that will 
alter how I approach problems in the future.

I have found a community of like-minded individuals who have gone through 
similar experiences, and throughReport the Abuse survey 
<http://reporttheabuse.org/the-survey/> I set up, the evidence is growing that 
we are very much not alone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/06/sexual-assaults-against-aid-workers-how-serious-is-the-situation>
. It is becoming increasingly clear that there is a problem of sexual violence 
within the humanitarian aid community that we must start addressing properly.

Some days are still a roller coaster of fear and doubt; sometimes I still want 
to curl up in a ball under my sheets and wish the world away.

Raped by a colleague then fired: the aid worker who refused to keep quiet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/19/raped-by-a-colleague-then-fired-the-aid-worker-who-refused-to-keep-quiet>
Other days I feel stronger than I have ever felt before. Those days are 
becoming the norm. Finding my voice and standing up to say that what is 
happening is not OK has changed my life. Opening up the space for others to 
begin their healing process, on a scale so much larger than I imagined, is one 
of the most profound experiences of my life.

When I sat down to write this piece, I thought it would be cathartic – an 
expression of my recovery process, if you like. Instead, a path has opened for 
survivors like me to come forward. Please keep reaching out toReport the Abuse 
<http://reporttheabuse.org/>. Please keep sharing what has happened to you. 
Please keep finding your own voices.

Life can change in a moment. I live with a distinct before-and-after Megan. 
There will be hard times ahead, but the accomplishments will ultimately 
outweigh them.

By the time you read this I will be back with my family in Canada, getting the 
last of my HIV/Aids test results. I will be breathing a bit easier. I will be 
continuing the process of healing.

We are reporting stories on this subject; you can contact us confidentially at 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com withSexual violence against aid workers in the 
subject line.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 