
I’m 17, and I’m the only girl in my computer science class. I’m pretty much 
the same as my classmates, only shorter. I expected a large majority of my 
classmates to be male, but being the only girl is slightly mind-blowing. I also 
study engineering, and am hugely outnumbered in that too.


 People think it’s unusual for me to study a subject that is associated with 
boys and leads to what is generally considered a man’s job. Stem subjects are 
still male dominated: nearlyfour out of five <http://www.wes.org.uk/statistics> 
of those who took A-level physics in 2012 were male. Andonly about half 
<http://www.wes.org.uk/statistics> of female Stem graduates go on to work in 
Stem roles.


Female students start to show more interest in science and engineering
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/18/female-students-science-engineering-sixth-formers-stem-subjects>
This may be due to lack of encouragement from parents, teachers or classmates, 
or down to the individual – they simply believe they are better suited to a 
different role.


But for as long as I can remember, I have had an interest in these types of 
subjects, in particular computer science and engineering. I wanted to learn 
more about them, so I was encouraged to consider a University Technical 
College, which teaches specialised subjects, such as engineering, to sixth-form 
students.

When I visited the college, I observed the teachers’ performance and really 
liked their university-style approach to learning. The students seemed 
extremely dedicated to the subjects they had chosen and to the UTC itself – and 
that convinced me to enrol.

I have often been questioned about my subject choices, and so has Olivia, who 
studies engineering at the same college as I do. She is also outnumbered in her 
classes – the ratio is generally around 1:7. “The teachers help me out and are 
sensitive about my being one of the only girls. They ask if I need help in 
private. Therefore, if I do, the boys can’t make fun of me,” she says.


Classroom coders: students dash to develop the computer science bug
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/06/classroom-coders-students-develop-computer-science>
When you tell people that you’re studying a subject that they think seems 
manly, they are very surprised. Olivia says people ask her whether it is 
difficult to participate in the practical side of engineering and seem slightly 
concerned.

Holly Garrod is currently in year 12 studying multiple Stem subjects at our 
UTC. She’s experienced no sexism from her male classmates. “They treat me the 
same as everyone else,” she says.


Holly feels more girls should be encouraged to pursue a science career and 
hopes that women are taken more seriously within science-based industries in 
the future. She is enjoying the subjects she’s chosen and hopes to continue her 
studies by doing an apprenticeship in microbiology in the future.

In the end, for Holly, Olivia and me, the fact that our subjects are dominated 
by boys and men just makes us more determined to prove that as young women we 
can thrive in what is considered a male subject.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 