
This article is the subject of a legal complaint made on behalf of Axonn Media 
Ltd

I spent just under 18 months working as a journalist for Adfero, "the UK's 
leading dedicated online news provider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/31/adam-afriyie-profile-tory-plot-rumours>
" and brainchild of Adam Afriyie, MP for Windsor andwould-be leader of the 
Conservative party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/28/adam-afriyie-pm-tories-problem>
. It was easily the most stressful, bizarre and, at times, hilarious period of 
my life.

The warning signs were there from my first morning on the job. I was 
encouraged by colleagues to enjoy lunch while it lasted because in the next 
couple of weeks I would get my full allocation of clients, which would make 
lunch breaks a thing of the past.

The workload subsequently increased from writing 16 stories a day (which was 
barely manageable) to 25 within a couple of weeks. When I raised concerns with 
my manager about not being able to handle the amount of work being given to me 
I was told that the desk had to accommodate it somehow. With everyone else 
battling their own burden and unable to help, I was plunged headlong into a 
world of trying to produce 25-30 stories a day about double glazing, human 
resources, conservatories, holidays in Dubai, garden tools and – my personal 
favourite – white furniture.

The job boiled down to scouring the internet for stories to rewrite such that 
they were tailored to a client and, most importantly, could include keywords 
that would boostsearch engine optimisation 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Search_engine_optimization>. By publishing this 
material on their websites, clients would, it was hoped, be given a leg up in 
the Google rankings. My team was made up of young, recent graduates whose 
Adfero adventure was, for many, their first employment since gaining a degree. 
We worked in a cramped office [see footnote] above a takeway where the smell of 
fast food would waft in on a regular basis, and when the internet was 
disconnected some of us worked in a coffee shop over the road. On another 
occasion the editor had to break into the office because workmen had accidently 
locked a door that no one else had a key for. You couldn't make it up. We often 
joked that it was like an out of control GCSE business project.

The turnover of employees, who soon realised what the gig entailed, led to low 
morale – propped up by gallows humour and large quantities of caffeine. 
Alongside the desks of writers there was a dedicated team of researchers who 
tried their best to provide us with interviews that were general enough to be 
relevant to a wide range of subjects, but when things get as specific as white 
furniture – writers had to pad things out. I remember being so desperate for a 
white furniture story that I wrote a 160-word piece based solelyon this picture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/nov/23/writers.rooms.martin.amis> of 
Martin Amis's writing room, which – thank the Lord – contained some white 
bookcases.

The darkest day on the job was when I had to write 36 stories in order to meet 
my end-of-month target. I was in the office at 7am and at about 25 stories in, 
things started to get surreal. After a 10-minute lunch break I was looking down 
the barrel of my fifth story about holidays in Dubai. I couldn't find a thing. 
I'd searched all the usual sources, but nothing – I was desperate. Then it 
happened. I founda story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/26/robert-mugabe-reported-health-scare>
 about Robert Mugabe being treated in a Dubai hospital. Quickly my brain put 
two and two together and made crazy: a piece about medical tourism in Dubai 
pegged to the Mugabe story. Job done! Thankfully my equally overworked subbing 
partner was more lucid, and reasoned with me before spiking the piece. But that 
was the kind of tenuous, content-farm churnalism that came from the tired minds 
of Adfero employees and was dished out to clients on a regular basis.

If Afriyie thinks this is the right way to run a business God knows what he'd 
do if in charge of the country. There is a strand within the Conservative party 
that can't help themselves when it comes to filling the internet with rubbish – 
whether it's former Tory MP Louise Mensch'sMenshn <https://menshn.com/>, 
Afriyie's Adfero or Grant Shapps and hisMichael Green internet marketing guru 
alter-ego 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/oct/08/grant-shapps-how-to-corp-michael-green>
. In the case of Adfero, it's the employees who suffer. After working so hard 
to get a degree they are then faced with a ridiculous workload, non-existent 
support and a work culture that means they know if they don't like it they can 
soon be replaced by another hopeful graduate. Before readying his leadership 
bid, perhaps Afriyie should get his own house in order.

• Lanre Bakare worked at Adfero in Leeds for 15 months between April 2009 and 
July 2010. The office where Mr Bakare was based was fully refurbished between 
April 2010 and June 2010.
 