
Iain Duncan Smith confides to the latest issue of Westminster's House Magazine 
his passionate belief that "what I am doing is the right thing". "If I doubted 
that for one moment," the work and pensions secretary says, "I couldn't put up 
with what I do every day." What a shame this satisfaction should be less than 
universally shared in the world over which he presides. On budget day, the 
Commons public accounts committee, chaired by that latterday Torquemada, 
Margaret Hodge, examined a representative of Atos, one of the companies 
entrusted with the introduction of the personal independence payment scheme – 
already running late, partly becauseAtos was judged not to be ready 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/20/atos-accused-misleading-government-process-claims-sick-disabled>
.

But Mrs Hodge had an even more serious target: Mr Duncan Smith's department. 
Why, given its record of underperformance, she asked its permanent secretary, 
had Atos even been considered? This after all is the company responsible for 
that fiasco thework capability assessment 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_Capability_Assessment>, which the 
disabilities minister Mike Penning admitted last month wasa cause of concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/27/benefit-mismanagement-hurting-sick-and-disabled-atos-capita>
 – and from which Atos, it later emerged, is trying to pull out before the end 
of its contract.

The people to blame for that, Mr Penning had earlier told the Commons, were 
the last Labour government, whose launching of this enterprise in 2008 had been 
"a mess". Yet Labour left office in 2010, and the signs that the mess was 
multiplying were clear from the time the coalition took over, with appeals 
against Atos rulings succeeding in some 40% of cases. Back in July 2012, the 
BBC's Panorama and Channel 4's Dispatches screened chilling exposés. Channel 
4's featured a long-serving GP who took work as an Atos assessor and secretly 
filmed the training he was given. Atos had been accused ofsetting DWP-friendly 
targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jul/27/disability-benefit-assessors-film>
 for the number of claimants an assessor should disqualify. Not true, said his 
superintendent. There were no formal targets. On the other hand, if you are 
seen to be acting too generously your work is going to be challenged …

Perhaps the most memorable contribution then was that of the responsible 
minister at the time, Chris Grayling, a man apparently incapable of recognising 
a can of worms even when one is thrust into his face. There have been other 
serious DWP misadventures too – see the saga of Mr Duncan Smith's adored
universal credit <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Credit>. Figures 
published this month 
<http://tabulation-tool.dwp.gov.uk/UC/Universal_Credit.html>showed only 3,780 
people were receiving the credit, at a cost of more than £160,000 per person. 
The only DWP performance rating that continues to soar is its secretary of 
state's self-satisfaction level. Elsewhere in his House Magazine interview, Mr 
Duncan Smith further confides that he does not really care what people think 
and say about him. Perhaps that's the core of the problem.
 