
Steve Jobs took the stage to announce iCloud on Monday at Apple's Worldwide 
Developer Conference.Cloud computing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/cloud-computing>? From Apple?

iCloud <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/icloud> also encompasses iTunes 
Match, which is in effect an amnesty – 10 years after the original file-sharing 
Napster was ground into the dust – for people who have illicitly downloaded 
music from filesharing networks, and marks a way for music labels to get some 
money back from them.

The simplest way to deal with what iCloud 
<http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2011/06/06icloud.html/> and iTunes Match do 
(apart from reading Apple's press release, linked there) is to deal with all 
the questions we've been asked via Twitter. So here you go.

• Why? <http://twitter.com/realpaulbrown/status/78038115377348609> Because 
whereas 10 years ago Steve Jobs talked about the personal computer being the 
"digital hub", Apple now thinks that cloud computing is going to be the hub, 
because it has diversified its product range – iPhone, iPad, Mac, iPod Touch – 
so that you don't necessarily need a "PC" to do the tasks that previously 
needed the power of a CPU on your desk. We live in a world of multiple devices 
– PC, smartphone, tablet, music player – where you want to be on top of your 
calendar, contacts and music, as well as being able to edit and save documents 
on the go wherever you have internet connectivity. The storage – and, more 
importantly, synchronisation – of those shouldn't need to wait for you to get 
to one canonical device (the PC). All you should need is a reliable internet 
connection.

• Is the iTunes bit US only? 
<http://twitter.com/benfysh/status/78037904496144385> For now, yes. No date has 
been given for a UK or rest-of-world release for iTunes Match (where the songs 
in your iTunes library can be synchronised with a list in the cloud, for $24.99 
per year). That was in fact the very first question we asked Apple after the 
keynote finished. "No date has been given," came the reply.

However, as MobileMe will officially die on 30 June 2012 (and you can no 
longer sign up), and the explanatory email fromApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> says that it's going to be 
replaced with iCloud, it's clear that it's going to be rolled out to the rest 
of the world in time. Apple's given itself a year to get the other music labels 
in other territories on board, it seems.

• Can I give my friend access to my account so they can have all my music? 
<http://twitter.com/adamcranfield/status/78038910038585344> Well, think about 
it. You'll have to let them log in as you. They'll also have to log in as you 
on any and all devices that they want to use. The music will get downloaded – 
but it's not clear quite how accessible that will be to pull off your iPhone, 
say. And when your friend logs off, perhaps the music goes. You might be able 
to do this – but the chances are the deal with the music labels is going to 
make it extremely difficult to do easily.

• Are iTunes syncs included in the 5GB limit? 
<http://twitter.com/tombot18/status/78038169391611905> As we understand it, 
that only the songs that have to be uploaded from your collection because 
they're not found on the iTunes Music Store will count against your limit of 
5GB of free storage.

• 5GB is really small ... is that just so the next announcement of "we're now 
giving you 20GB" seems generous? 
<http://twitter.com/willsh/status/78038287368994816> iCloud's free allocation 
of 5GB of storage is only 2GB less than you get with Google's free Gmail 
account, and Google is usually thought of as the king of cloud computing. Then 
again,Microsoft's Skydrive <http://www.windowslive.co.uk/skydrive> is 25GB, and 
is free. It doesn't offer the push syncing between devices, though. By limiting 
who can access it (people who are using iOS5 or OSX Lion) Apple is taking a 
cautious approach: it doesn't want anotherMobileMe disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/31/apple.email>.

• What's the cost of extra storage? 
<http://twitter.com/fraserspeirs/status/78038482429284352> Not known at the 
moment.

• Does it stream music or do you download, or both? Will it stream effectively 
over 3G? <http://twitter.com/adamcranfield/status/78038729121480704> It's a 
download for the free element (music that you previously purchased on the 
iTunes Music Store). iTunes Match is also a download, not streaming.

• Where are the server farms? How green will they be? Apple don't have a great 
record ... <http://twitter.com/rellimluap/status/78038766207508480> Maiden, 
North Carolina and two other locations. The Maiden one is near a major source 
of hydroelectric power. Server farms of that sort often are as it's one of the 
most reliable.

• Will it sync seamlessly with my PC & Linux netbook? Will it have version 
control? Shareable URLs to send photos to Gran? 
<http://twitter.com/north5/status/78038810927177728> (a) iTunes Match will work 
on Windows Vista and Windows 7, as well as Mac OSX, as will iCloud. (b) No 
signs of version control that we've seen, though Lion does have that built in – 
so you may get it on that platform. (c) Logically there must be a URL for a 
photo, but whether you'll be able to share that directly is still unclear. It 
might be that you'll either have to send it via Twitter, or embed it in an 
email. Gran might like to get an email– it's been too long since you got in 
touch.

• Will iOS 5 & iCloud improve management of Podcasts? Auto download new 
episodes? Notifications of new episodes? 
<http://twitter.com/qtaran111/status/78038870331105280> That would be an iTunes 
improvement, so you'd need to look at that.

• What/how much integration will there be on the non-iOS side – ie, on Lion? 
<http://twitter.com/SebastianEPayne/status/78038926446694400> On Lion, as much 
as on iOS. On earlier versions of Mac OS X (and on versions of iOS before iOS 
5), it's much less clear. Our best guess would be that, since iOS 5 will work 
on the iPhone 3GS and up – which makes the majority of iPhones sold – that it 
won't be very backward-compatible at all, by contrast with Windows, where it 
will work with Vista and Windows 7. (Outlook 2010 is recommended for calendars.)

• Will it enable easy group sharing of photos and docs? 
<http://twitter.com/adamcranfield/status/78039370803838976> Neither Jobs nor 
Apple said so, but since it wasn't shown off doing this, and since Apple isn't 
an enterprise-oriented company (where group sharing like this would be a big 
feature), our guess is that for documents and photos, you'll be using email 
again.

You will however be able to share calendars.

• 1 – why no streaming? 2 – is iCloud music US only? 3 – why no video? 
<http://twitter.com/Inaba_kun/status/78039495961882624> 1 – because streaming 
is more expensive and harder to cache than a download: you can't just dump a 
load of data on the line, but have to keep it flowing. 2 – see above. 3 – video 
takes up far more storage, and Apple doesn't have the deals with film and TV 
studios for this. Baby steps.

• Will the interface still be iTunes, or will it be new? 
<http://twitter.com/adamcranfield/status/78039514135805952> You don't specify 
which interface on what device. It's iTunes-like in iOS devices, but iCloud 
covers a lot of different applications, including documents. iTunes Match will, 
yes, work through iTunes.

• Will it put Dropbox out of business? 
<http://twitter.com/StephenMcGann/status/78039725348364288> We doubt it, 
because Dropbox is cross-platform in a way that iCloud's document service isn't 
trying to be. The aim of Dropbox is broad: get people to use it to sync content 
between diverse systems. iCloud is trying much more to tie people into using 
iOS devices; working on Windows is necessary because the majority of 
iPhone/iPad owners are on Windows. Dropbox also lets large groups of people 
share files. Apple isn't into that at all.

• Can you upload any doc? Encrypted all the way? Other security? 
<http://twitter.com/njr/status/78039730503159808> From our reading, only 
documents that are readable across all iOS devices can be uploaded (that's why 
Pages was shown – though Pages can open Microsoft Word documents). Encryption 
will be there, but obviously only as good as your password. If you're worried 
about encryption in transit, that's already the case with MobileMe, so it won't 
change with iCloud.

• what will the UX [user experience] be like on Windows? Will it be a viable 
solution for backups, file management, etc? 
<http://twitter.com/adamcranfield/status/78040010670092288> We don't know what 
the UX will be like. (Windows-y?) It's not going to be your first port of call 
for version management. Apple is making something for the average user, not the 
computer expert. The whole point is that you shouldn't need to be an expert to 
use it. If you're looking for version management, there are plenty of free Unix 
solutions out there – starting with Github.

• What happens to those of us with MobileMe subs between its end in June and 
iCloud's availability in Autumn? 
<http://twitter.com/jwp555/status/78041620431380480> Great question.  No 
obvious answer. Sign up for another year and hope for a refund, or watch as 
your email and stored data vanishes in a puff of cloud, seems to be the initial 
response. All MobileMe accounts are being extended free for another year to 
June 2012. (Thanks @spikediswhack.)

• What happens if you stop paying for your iCloud match service per month – 
what do I lose and what do I keep? 
<http://twitter.com/bruntonspall/status/78042561809350657> First, it's annual: 
$24.99 (which will probably translate to £20 in the UK). If you stop paying, 
you'll still be able to access your purchased iTunes Music Store music on any 
iOS device, but your uploaded music, and the rest of your library, will revert 
to living only in one place – a hard drive somewhere at home or work.

• How do you think Apple will identify music for iTunes Match, and if it's 
file-signature based, could they identify pirated music? And, should they not 
carry that track on iTunes, could they be legally compelled to identify users 
with those files? <http://twitter.com/fatred/status/78044013814493184> It will 
probably work initially on ID3 tags, and possibly an MD5 hash if that's 
available (but ID3 tags are going to be more likely to be right, since you'd 
have named your music, where the MD5 hash will vary depending on how long the 
song is and its sample rate.) As for piracy, stop fretting. Apple can't 
possibly have every song, and it could argue that people might have written 
their own songs.

• Is iTunes Match not a licence to get music cheap? Leech the album illegally, 
match it to iTunes and claim under the $25 account? 
<http://twitter.com/fatred/status/78046204503658496> You've got it the wrong 
way round. Previously if you leeched it, the record label would never have 
gotten any money before. Now it'll get a cut of that $25. It's about as much as 
it would get through Spotify. (Update: this may be a 70/30 music labels/Apple 
split, as happens with app sales. Ironically, this sort of split between 
service provider and music supplier is exactly what some US music publishers 
wanted with the original Napster. It's taken 10 years for the record labels to 
come round to it.)

• I have one AppleID tied to iTunes content. Another ID for MobileMe mail. 
Which does iCloud need? <http://twitter.com/Carniphage/status/78048622196957184>
 Oooh, tricky. MobileMe comes after iTunes, so that will be the disposable one. 
Your MobileMe identity will shift to iCloud, but the iTunes accounts are tied 
to that ID, so you'll need to keep that one.

• iTunes Match, Amazon Cloud Music, Google Music – will any of them ever work 
in the UK? Will Spotify ever launch in US? 
<http://twitter.com/grahamterris/status/78058886506094592> Yes, Probably, 
Probably, Yes. Just don't ask us about timescales.

We're sure you'll have some more and we'll see if we can bug Apple to give us 
more information. In the meantime, keep the questions coming.
 