
Idris Elba’s chances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/31/author-of-latest-007-novel-lambasts-recent-bond-films>
 of being cast asthe first black screen Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/31/author-of-latest-007-novel-lambasts-recent-bond-films>
 took a hit this week when the authorAnthony Horowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthony-horowitz> claimed the star of Luther 
and The Wire was “too street 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/film/movie-news/james-bond-idris-elba-anthony-horowitz/>
” to be Britain’s favourite spy.

Hackney-born Elba, 42, has been one of the frontrunners to play 007 since 
leaked Sony emails suggested he was being considered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/30/idris-elba-says-never-say-never-as-he-calls-james-bond-role-a-rumour>
 to replace Daniel Craig. Might the filmmakers now be influenced by the 
writer’s comments?

James Bond author Anthony Horowitz lambasts recent films
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/31/author-of-latest-007-novel-lambasts-recent-bond-films>
Horowitz gave his opinion to Cole Moreton in the Mail on Sunday’s Event 
magazine while promoting his new James Bond novel,Trigger Mortis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/28/new-james-bond-novel-trigger-mortis-pussy-galore-anthony-horowitz>
: “For me,Idris Elba <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> is a bit 
too rough to play the part. It’s not a colour issue. I think he is probably a 
bit too ‘street’ for Bond.”

Horowitz, who found fame with the teenage spy series Alex Rider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/07/skeleton-key-alex-rider-anthony-horowitz-review>
 before going on to write for shows including Poirot and Midsomer Murders and 
Foyle’s War, was quick to point out that his objection wasn’t race based. He 
said he’d be happy for another black actor, such as the Hustle star Adrian 
Lester, to don the famous tuxedo.

So what is it about Elba that doesn’t float the author’s boat? Growing up in 
urban London, developing some form of street smarts was a necessity. Just being 
aware of our environment – of who is who and what they might do – is an 
incredibly useful life skill. One I would have thought a secret agent might 
find useful.

Entering the world of work, it quickly became obvious that appearing too 
“street” would play against me. It would be assumed that I was unpolished, and 
that I would cut corners. My bosses might also fear how I would come across to 
clients or customers. Modifying my accent and manner helped me put colleagues’ 
minds at rest. I tell anyone that asks, the most important thing I learned at 
university was how not to scare middle-class people.

Sometimes this required way of behaving and speaking is given the false label 
of “professionalism”, but usually when you ask people to define this required 
skill the response is ambiguous. This kind of social filter closes down 
opportunities and leads to monocultured work places.

Some of the brightest, most able people I know never succeeded in the 
corporate world because they were unable to scale this credibility barrier. 
Often they would give up after repeatedly failing at the interview stage, with 
phrases such as “the wrong cultural fit” ringing in their ears.

Ignoring the fact that Elba is an accomplished actor who has expertly adapted 
to play an American gangster, a Norse god and a South African icon, Horowitz 
feels that the British actor lacks the ability to be suave.James Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond> has an exalted position in British 
culture. He is the symbol of a Britain and a Britishness that probably never 
really existed. This makes it hard to define or emulate his qualities: 
quintessentially British means different things to different people.

For an upper middle-class writer, this might mean they went to the right 
school and know what cutlery to use with their quinoa salad, but for the rest 
of the country this definition is much broader.

There is, of course, no law that says Bond needs to evolve with society. He 
can remain fixed in an imaginary past with outdated views and irrelevant 
skills. But if M’s door is closed to anyone with street smarts or a London 
swagger, Bond’s Britain will be a little bit less safe.

Horowitz went on to explain his reservations about Elba: “Is it a question of 
being suave? Yeah.” In the writer’s view, Elba just doesn’t measure up, but if 
suave means charming, sophisticated, charismatic and gallant, I know dozens of 
girls and a more than a few guys who would very much beg to differ.

 * This article was amended on 3 September 2015. The original failed to 
attribute the interview in which Horowitz made his comments.  