
Idris Elba has addressed controversial comments made by James Bond author 
Anthony Horowitz <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthony-horowitz>, who 
claimed the actor was “too street” to play 007.

Horowitz, who has penned the “continuation” Bond novels, including the latest, 
Trigger Mortis,apologised earlier this week for his “clumsily” chosen words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/01/anthony-horowitz-apologises-idris-elba-too-street-bond>
 to discuss the prospect of Elba being cast in the notorious role.

In response, Elba has posted a screengrab of Horowitz’s apology on Instagram 
<https://instagram.com/p/7GtPfvzGHh/> with the accompanying message: “Always 
keep smiling! It takes no energy and never hurts! Learned that from the Street!”

Media sites and fans have praised the actor, best known for his roles in hit 
TV shows Luther and the Wire, for his “perfect” and “classy” reaction.


The dispute began after Horowitz told the Mail on Sunday he believed the actor 
Adrian Lester would make a more suitable Bond. “For me,Idris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> is a bit too rough to play the 
part. It’s not a colour issue. I think he is probably a bit too ‘street’ for 
Bond. Is it a question of being suave? Yeah,” he said.

But critics said the author’s choice of words were insensitive and reminiscent 
of racist discourse, which sees terms like “street” used to describe and demean 
black subcultures. Writer Ta-Nehisi Coats tweeted: “Just be honest and say 
‘James Bond’s being white is important to me; and be done with it. Elba is ‘too 
street’ in much the same way that Obama was ‘too foreign’, and King was ‘too 
communist’.”

Horowitz’s apology, which he released on Tuesday, read: “I am mortified to 
have caused offence. I’m really sorry my comments aboutIdris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> have caused offence. That 
wasn’t my intention.

“I was asked in my interview if Idris Elba would make a good James Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond>. In the article I expressed the 
opinion that to my mind Adrian Lester would be a better choice, but I’m a 
writer not a casting director so what do I know?”

Elba, 42, has been one of the frontrunners to take over from Daniel Craig when 
the current Bond retires. But a number of public figures have disagreed with 
the concept of a black actor playing the role.

American rightwing radio host Rush Limbaugh said: “James Bond is a total 
concept put together by Ian Fleming. He was white and Scottish. Period.”

Former 007 villain Yaphet Kotto added: “He cannot be black. Political 
correctness be damned. Play 003 or 006, but you cannot be 007.”

Last month, actor David Oyelowo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-oyelowo>, who is of Nigerian descent, 
was cast to play Bond in the audiobook version of Trigger Mortis.
 