
New casting announcements for Idris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba>, Taraji P Henson and Lupita 
Nyong’o suggest that the ongoing furore over alleged racism within the Academy 
of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences is having a positive impact on the industry.

Academy president: #OscarsSoWhite 'a punch to the stomach' but new rule 
changes not ageist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/11/academy-president-oscarssowhite-a-punch-to-the-stomach-but-new-rule-changes-not-ageist>
Elba is currently in talks to take on the lead in romantic drama Mountains 
Between Us, a role that was originally written as white in the source novel. 
His Pacific Rim co-star Charlie Hunnam was originally earmarked for the part. 
The film centres on two strangers who are involved in a devastating plane crash.

If he signs on, it will be a notable piece of colourblind casting and continue 
his ascent towards the A-list. The actor will be seen this year in action 
thriller Bastille Day, British drama A Hundred Streets and sci-fi sequel Star 
Trek Beyond, as well as heard in animated films Zootropolis and Finding Dory.

It’s not the first piece of colourblind casting for the actor. He’s also been 
circling a role in an adaptation of Stephen King’s adventure The Dark Tower, 
originally written as white. Elba’s absence from the best supporting actor 
category at this year’s Oscars for his role in war drama Beasts of No Nation 
was seen as a notable snub.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fidris-elba-taraji-p-henson-casting-news-oscarssowhite-effect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff853d6119a46f68b69d8f7e84fdba1854444e0eb%2F0_31_3904_2344%2F3904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Idris%20Elba%20and%20Taraji%20P%20Henson%20casting%20news%20suggests%20%23OscarsSoWhite%20effect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fidris-elba-taraji-p-henson-casting-news-oscarssowhite-effect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Idris%20Elba%20and%20Taraji%20P%20Henson%20casting%20news%20suggests%20%23OscarsSoWhite%20effect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fidris-elba-taraji-p-henson-casting-news-oscarssowhite-effect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff853d6119a46f68b69d8f7e84fdba1854444e0eb%2F0_31_3904_2344%2F3904.jpg>
 Taraji P Henson in Empire. Photograph: Everett/Rex Shutterstock 
The casting news arrives at the same time as word of a new project to star 
Elba’s No Good Deed co-star, Taraji P Henson. She’s set to play mathematics 
genius Katherine Johnson inHidden Figures 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/taraji-p-henson-hidden-figures-katherine-johnson-1201702679/>
, the true story of three African American women who were the brains behind the 
launch of an astronaut and his return home.

Female lead roles rose in 2015's biggest films – but not for women of colour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/10/number-female-hollywood-lead-parts-rises-not-women-colour>
Biopics centred around important African American women from history are a 
rarity with most recent attempts heading to the small screen, such as Queen 
Latifah’s SAG-winning turn in Bessie, a drama about blues singer Bessie Smith.

Henson, who was Oscar nominated for her role in The Curious Case of Benjamin 
Button, has recently found work on the small screen as the star of the hit 
music drama Empire. She recently won a Golden Globe for her performance.

Earlier this week also saw news that Selma director Ava DuVernay was attached 
toIntelligent Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/09/lupita-nyongo-sci-fi-thriller-intelligent-life-ava-duvernay-poss-director>
, a sci-fi thriller set to headline Lupita Nyong’o. The role would be Nyong’o’s 
first visible role since winning the best supporting actress Oscar for 12 Years 
a Slave in 2014. Her role in Star Wars: The Force Awakens was motion-capture 
and her next on-screen performance will be a voice role in The Jungle Book.

It will also be the most high-profile project from an African American female 
director since DuVernay’s last film, Selma.

The announcement of an all-white set of Oscar acting nominees, for the second 
year running, has led to the Academy putting togethera new set of changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/27/oscars-rule-changes-not-political-correctness-academy-bosses-boone-isaacs-hudson>
 that will increase the diversity of their members.
 