
Adele <https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> has been praised for speaking 
out about postnatal depression in herinterview 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2016/10/adele-cover-story> with Vanity Fair. 
The singer’s comments about feeling “obsessed”, “inadequate” and “like I’d made 
the worst decision of my life” after the birth of her son have resonated with 
people around the world. But her discussion of the pressures and societal 
expectations placed on women were also deeply revealing.

“Actually, I think it’s the bravest thing not to have a child; all my friends 
and I felt pressurised into having kids, because that’s what adults do,” she 
said.

With news bulletins regularly suggesting that “time is running out”, “the 
clock is ticking” and that women in their 20s should panic-freeze their eggs in 
the face of impending fertility doom, it’s no wonder that many women feel the 
same way. Not to mention the notion that it is somehow selfish, unnatural or 
strange for women to decide that theydon’t want children at all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/29/do-not-brand-me-a-failure-im-a-survivor-all-unhappily-childless-people-are>
.

But it is eye-opening to realise that the same cultural pressure to procreate 
or risk feeling invalidated should impact on an international superstar such as 
Adele – with worldwide sales of over 40m albums, 10 Grammys, an Oscar, a Golden 
Globe, three Ivor Novellos and an MBE to her name (to listbut a few 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_awards_and_nominations_received_by_Adele>
).


Society expects that women should have children, and have them soon, but it 
wasn’t the only subjectAdele <https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> felt 
pressured by.


She hints in the interview at the pressures women face around their 
appearance: her fake nails “are coming off straight after the tour” and her 
legs are shaved in case “people in the front row at her concerts might notice 
them”.


At one point, she is asked if she will have more children, because “women 
often want to give their child a sibling”. Adele then describes how the fear of 
being labelled a “bad mom” caused her to remain silent about struggling to cope 
with a newborn. When she decided to try taking an afternoon a week for herself, 
one friend asked: “Really? Don’t you feel bad?”

Ironically, for an article that focuses on the pressures and stereotypes 
facing modern women, the interviewer herself seems to impose a few. She writes 
approvingly that Adele “doesn’t dress like a fairground stripper” and is “not 
one of those celebrity mothers who hands the kid off to a caretaker after a 
photo op in a fake playground”.

Reading the article in full – from the pressure Adele felt to have a baby, to 
the guilt she feels on nights she doesn’t put her son to bed, it is difficult 
not to feel exhausted. It is near impossible to imagine a similar piece with a 
male star of Adele’s international standing, exploring the litany of ways in 
which he is led to believe, as a man, that he might be letting down society. If 
this is how one of the most successful women in the world is made to feel, what 
hope is there for the rest of us?


It is refreshing that Adele has spoken out so openly. But saddening to realise 
the extent to which these impossibly high standards and conflicting pressures 
seem to impact all women, no matter how successful.


For her sake, and for that of the millions of women who do not have the 
privilege of being able to pay for childcare and other support, it is time we 
stopped judging female value according to fertility, career, appearance, 
modesty – and a million other demands. And most of all, it is time to end the 
guilt that besieges women who do or do not have children, do or do not take 
sole responsibility for childcare, and do or do not choose to focus on their 
careers.


As bestselling author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie put it in a recent Facebook post
 <https://www.facebook.com/chimamandaadichie/posts/10154412708460944>:

I have no interest in the debate about women ‘doing it all’ because it is a 
debate that assumes that care-giving and domestic work are exclusively female 
domains, an idea that I strongly reject. Domestic work and care-giving should 
be gender-neutral, and we should be asking not whether a woman can ‘do it all’ 
but how best to support parents in their dual duties at work and at home.”

With a recent study showing that women around the world still work an average 
39 days per year longer than men <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37767411>, 
mainly due to the burden of unpaid work such as childcare, the irony is that we 
are judging women and making them feel inadequate while they are already doing 
far more than their fair share. It is not women’s choices or behaviour that 
need to change.
 