
Oliver Burkeman (The shadow he casts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/05/donald-trump-anxiety-psychology-politics-election-2016>
, 5 November) reveals the American Psychiatric Association (APA) has a 
self-imposed Goldwater rule, set up after 1,100 psychiatrists told a news 
magazine that they believed the Republican candidate in the 1964 presidential 
election, Barry Goldwater (who had advocated the use of atomic bombs in North 
Vietnam), was unfit for office. Goldwater went on to lose by 39% to 61%. How 
unfortunate that the APA prohibition – not to diagnose from a distance – has 
prevented what would surely be a far stronger assertion of unfitness for 
purpose in respect of Trump, who has repeatedly asked why the US does not 
deploy nuclear weapons. Attention has been drawn to the similarities in 
mannerism and message between Trump and another authoritarian and belligerent 
narcissist, Benito Mussolini (Down with Donald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/05/donald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz>
, Guide, 5 November). There seems little room for doubt as to how Trump, with 
his dysfunctional personality, would have reacted to the 1962 Cuban missile 
crisis and subsequent foreign policy flashpoints. If elected, he is arguably 
the greatest threat to all our futures that we have seen.
Graham Stevens
Crowborough, East Sussex

• For readers of Philip Roth’s novel The Plot Against America 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/plot-against-america.html>, Donald Trump’s 
campaign for the White House may sound rather familiar.

Published in September 2004, Roth’s novel centres on an alternative history in 
which aviation hero Charles Lindbergh is nominated as the Republican party’s 
candidate for president in 1940 and goes on to defeat Franklin D Roosevelt on 
the back of a strong tide of popular support.

Lindbergh’s first act is to sign a treaty with Nazi Germany and Adolf Hitler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/adolf-hitler>, promising that the US will 
not interfere with German expansion in Europe. With Lindbergh as president, 
Jewish families increasingly feel like outsiders in American society. If you 
swap Russia for Germany, Putin for Hitler and Muslims for Jews, then Roth’s 
novel seems frighteningly prophetic. Scrape away at the surface of American 
society and there is something very nasty lurking underneath.
Richard Fisher
Saffron Walden, Essex 

• You say police fended off Trump supporters who attacked a peaceable 
protester (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/trump-protester-i-was-beaten-for-holding-a-republicans-against-trump-sign>
, 7 November), but not whether they arrested the aggressors who had piled on 
him, kicking, punching, holding him on the ground and grabbing his testicles 
while he was choked by one man who had him in a headlock. Those familiar with 
fascism in Europe will recognise the technique.
Adrian Betham
London

• I cannot help thinking a lot this past year of the pioneering American 
journalist Dorothy Thompson (expelled from Nazi Germany in 1934) who lamented 
that “No people ever recognise their dictator in advance … When our dictator 
turns up you can depend on it that he will be one of the boys, and he will 
stand for everything traditionally American. And nobody will ever say Heil to 
him, nor will they call him Führer or Duce. But they will greet him with one 
great big, universal, democratic, sheeplike bleat of “OK, Chief! Fix it like 
you wanna, Chief! Oh Kaaaay!” She didn’t say “Make America Great Again”, but 
you get the point.
Emma Jones
Oxfordshire

• Jonathan Freedland (Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/if-donald-trump-wins-new-age-endarkenment>
, 5 November) may be unduly optimistic to suggest that a victory for Clinton 
will end the nightmare of Trump. It may be only the beginning. Trump has 
indicated that he will not accept the result if it goes against him. It is not 
beyond possibility that with his “crooked Hillary” mantra, Trump will accuse 
the “liberal elite” of fixing the result and lead an armed insurrection. After 
all, the extreme right in the US is nothing if not numerous, paranoid and 
well-armed. Certainly such a prospect is a deep concern of many American 
liberals.
Roy Boffy
Sutton Coldfield

• Jonathan Freedland fears that a Trump victory would endarken us all. Let’s 
hope instead that on Tuesday Americans remember the motto of Jebediah 
Springfield – “A noble spirit embiggens the smallest man” (although I imagine 
it is the women we will need to rely on).
Jem Whiteley
Oxford

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 