
It all started with a list. I had decided to write a superhero book and wanted 
to look at what made a great one, so I started to jot down names of 
superheroes. Superman…check, Batman…check, Iron Man…check. The word “man” just 
kept popping up.


I counted – on my somewhat slapdash list – how many female superheroes I could 
think of. I had three: Wonder Woman, Catwoman, and Black Widow. A quick visit 
to google on my laptop assured me there were others out there, but what 
troubled me was how quickly and easily I thought of many more male superheroes 
than their female counterparts.

In this day and age, I like to think that female protagonists are common 
place; they are at least in YA fiction, my own genre. So what was going on? Was 
my mental block a symptom of single-mindedness on my part, or a wider lack of 
female superheroes in mainstream culture? I decided to investigate.


Superheroines have always had a tough time getting their stories told in 
mainstream media. I mean what hope could they have when Microsoft Word doesn’t 
even recognise “superheroines” as an actual word. Sorry ladies; the red 
squiggly line says you’re out… But lately there seems to be a greater 
appreciation for superheroines in all their diversity.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433761198737%2F2f055027-1a76-4f89-8c8c-919dda074ec0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20Hollywood%20won't%20feature%20modern%20superheroines%20then%20it's%20up%20to%20YA%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20Hollywood%20won%27t%20feature%20modern%20superheroines%20then%20it%27s%20up%20to%20YA%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433761198737%2F2f055027-1a76-4f89-8c8c-919dda074ec0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Marvel comic’s Kamala Khan (second left) with her family Aamir, father Yusuf, 
mother Disha and friend Bruno, from the “Ms Marvel” issue. Photograph: AP 
In 2014, Kamala Khan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ms._Marvel_%28Kamala_Khan%29> appeared as the 
first Muslim character to have her own comic book as Ms Marvel. Classic 
superheroes are even being reinvented as superheroines; sorry Chris Hemsworth 
fans… Thor is now a woman. A truly courageous act on the part of Marvel, though 
the backlash was severe: after all, you can inflict upon a man many a 
transformation, but turn him into a woman and… well, turns out there are some 
things you just can’t come back from.

As you may have noticed, Hollywood has also been revisiting classic comic book 
stories, but with slightly less emphasis on creating new female characters. 
There’s a new Avengers movie out, Age of Ultron, and the list of upcoming film 
releases for 2015/16 reads like a stock take from a 1960s comic book store 
(there are a total of eight DC and Marvel films scheduled for release 2016, and 
in case you were wondering, none of them have a female lead).


You would be hard pressed not to have seen the negative attention the 
Avengers: Age of Ultron has received in the press and on social media since its 
release back in May. It probably didn’t help that lead cast members Chris Evans 
and Jeremy Renner called the Black Widow character a “slut” at the film’s press 
junket, simply because she is treated as a love interest for a different 
character in every film.


The scene in which Black Widow seems to call herself a monster due her 
inability to have children also caused a huge backlash. It seems like the 
multiple male characters in The Avengers create a diverse view of masculinity 
by portraying a range of temperaments, opinions (and super powers), whereas the 
one female superhero in the film gets to represent women with an archaic set of 
social prejudices.

Most Hollywood films do try to avoid sexist representations of superheroines – 
by simply omitting them altogether (as the eight forthcoming superhero films 
for 2016 demonstrate). And when they do appear, like Gamora in Guardians of the 
Galaxy, they are usually portrayed as sexualized beings that cannot escape 
their biology.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433794253190%2F5cb64c32-3681-4dd0-8e3c-d624fd51b7bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20Hollywood%20won't%20feature%20modern%20superheroines%20then%20it's%20up%20to%20YA%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20Hollywood%20won%27t%20feature%20modern%20superheroines%20then%20it%27s%20up%20to%20YA%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433794253190%2F5cb64c32-3681-4dd0-8e3c-d624fd51b7bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The former Miss Israel Gal Gadot will follow in the footsteps of Lynda Carter 
as Wonder Woman. But will she be a sexist representation of a superheroine? 
Photograph: Alamy 
One of Hollywood’s most eagerly anticipated superhero releases is the 2017 
revival of 1940’s Amazonian bombshell, Wonder Woman, to be played by former 
Miss Israel, model and actress, Gal Gadot. 2018 will see the release ofCaptain 
Marvel <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4154664/>: it will be interesting to see 
whether these films change anything.

 As an author, I’m proud of the progress of female protagonists in literature 
since the 1940s. Today some of the best characters are found in YA books – 
Katniss fromThe Hunger Games 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/hunger-games-8.html> being a prime example; 
Tris from Veronica Roth’sDivergent 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/divergent-8.html>; Katsa from Kristin Cashore’s
Graceling <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/graceling-2.html>, and of course, my 
very own superheroine, Chopstix… the list goes on, so why are the Hollywood 
bigwigs regurgitating in Wonder Woman a female character written at a time when 
neither the Equal Pay Act or the Sex Discrimination Act had been passed?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435046829512%2F38ec216e-963f-4149-97a6-7708b7618240-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20Hollywood%20won't%20feature%20modern%20superheroines%20then%20it's%20up%20to%20YA%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20Hollywood%20won%27t%20feature%20modern%20superheroines%20then%20it%27s%20up%20to%20YA%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435046829512%2F38ec216e-963f-4149-97a6-7708b7618240-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tough: Jennifer Lawrence as Katniss Everdeen in the film version of Suzanne 
Collins The Hunger Games. Photograph: LIONSGATE/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
And does this undermine the continuing progress literature has made in 
creating female protagonists that are defined by traits other than their 
sexuality?

My superheroine, Chopstix <http://chopstix.tv/>, doesn’t wear tight spandex 
but a coat, it’s cold in New Valliant City after all. She doesn’t use her 
femininity to seduce her enemies, but her quick wittedness and physical 
strength to defeat them. And she doesn’t play second fiddle to anyone, female 
or male. I hope this makes a small dent in the status quo. One thing is for 
sure, if Hollywood insists on revisiting outdated female models, it will take 
us authors to keep culture looking forward, not back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433760922511%2Fa1406cd9-0d0c-4069-b99a-c79151d5ccd7-1329x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20Hollywood%20won't%20feature%20modern%20superheroines%20then%20it's%20up%20to%20YA%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20Hollywood%20won%27t%20feature%20modern%20superheroines%20then%20it%27s%20up%20to%20YA%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhollywood-black-widow-female-protagonists-ya-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433760922511%2Fa1406cd9-0d0c-4069-b99a-c79151d5ccd7-1329x2040.jpeg>
If you do happen to be an Avengers fan, which I would consider myself to be, 
you can buy a toy set of the complete Avengers team, including Ultron, only 
Black Widow is missing from that set. It’s a good job she was already on my 
list.

Chopstix <http://chopstix.tv/>, the debut YA novel by AT Raydan is published 
by Unique Inspiration.
 