
Striking blows for gender equality used to be an intimidating undertaking: 
you’d really have to pull out something major. Hunger strikes, dying afterbeing 
felled by a horse at the Derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/jun/01/suffragette-emily-davison-knocked-down-kings-horse-video>
,skinned alive with oyster shells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/08/harridans-harlots-heroines-women-classical>
 – it’s understandable why most would decide: “You know what, I won’t.” Other 
options not involving death weregoing undercover as a Playboy Bunny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/26/gloria-steinem-bunny-tale-still-relevant-today>
, taking part in violent protests, or beingimprisoned for refusing to keep 
quiet about injustice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/29/pussy-riot-protest-vladimir-putin-russia>
.

Gloria Steinem's 'a bunny's tale' – 50 years later
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/26/gloria-steinem-bunny-tale-still-relevant-today>
These days? Almost anything can be claimed as a feminist act, and frequently 
is. Hell, I’ve already completed three Acts ofFeminism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/feminism> today (going by current standards 
of measurement) – and that was before breakfast.

And you can do it too! Here’s how to gauge whether what you’re doing is 
feminist and important, or not. Ask yourself: have a wave of media commentators 
gushed overLena Dunham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/21/rabidly-sexist-lena-dunham-language-rules-feminists>
,Alicia Keys <http://madamenoire.com/346457/alicia-keys-on-her-son/> or Cara 
Delevingne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/23/celebrity-women-lesbian-relationships-no-big-deal-cara-delevingne>
 doing it recently? And have many people got very aggravated about it at the 
same time? They have?! Then it follows that you are likewise a disrupter of 
societal mores, empowering women every day – up there withbell hooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bell-hooks> and Ada Lovelace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/sifting-the-evidence/2015/oct/13/why-ada-lovelace-day-matters>
. Future generations of feminists will thank you for your sacrifices, and your 
bravery.

We’re told – ad nauseam – that Dunham is a feminist icon because she wrote a 
show that has female leads and sex in it. Even more important than that: 
sometimes she takes her clothes off while simultaneously being chubby. Theworld 
is amazed 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/lena-dunham-jemima-kirke-girls-lingerie-advert-that-we-can-actually-relate-to-a7211811.html>
 andalso very angry 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/is-it-me-or-is-there-nothing-empowering-about-lena-dunhams-fake-lesbian-photoshoot-for-lonely-a7216101.html>
 every time she does this. For those who call her a role model, the novelty of 
these acts has even overshadowedracist tweets 
<https://twitter.com/lenadunham/status/90660103879016448>, and uncomfortably 
racist essays about her time in Japan 
<http://thisrecording.com/today/2011/3/19/in-which-we-regularly-play-ping-pong-with-the-princess-masak.html>
. “Wow, she’s so fat and naked right now,” many gasp with wonderment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F01%2Fsuffragette-emily-davison-knocked-down-kings-horse-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F6%2F1%2F1370104727006%2FEmily-Davison-hit-by-hors-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suffragette%20Emily%20Davison%20knocked%20down%20by%20King's%20horse%20at%20Epsom%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F01%2Fsuffragette-emily-davison-knocked-down-kings-horse-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suffragette%20Emily%20Davison%20knocked%20down%20by%20King%27s%20horse%20at%20Epsom%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F01%2Fsuffragette-emily-davison-knocked-down-kings-horse-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F6%2F1%2F1370104727006%2FEmily-Davison-hit-by-hors-016.jpg>
Suffragette Emily Davison knocked down by king’s horse at Epsom - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/jun/01/suffragette-emily-davison-knocked-down-kings-horse-video>
Keys has sparked feelings of gratitude because she’s been pictured at awards 
shows without a full face of makeup. Yet others are so angry about her decision 
that the singer has felt the need to make it clear thatshe’s not “anti” makeup 
<https://twitter.com/aliciakeys/status/770327503495958528>, as though we live 
in a reality where cosmetics have feelings that Keys could be hurting by not 
associating with them any more.

Delevingne has been lauded as empowering to women because she contorts her 
face and sticks her tongue out during red-carpet events instead of smiling 
demurely. Plus,she ate a pizza in public once 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2760881/What-Kate-Moss-say-Cara-Delevingne-tucks-pizza-hitting-catwalk-Fendi-SS15-fashion-show.html>
. That makes her “quirky” and worthy of note.

Wearing pants, and then not wearing pants; walking around with a face; taking 
in life-sustaining fuel – can you do that? Would you dare to do any of that, 
while being female, at the very same time? Well, gee! You do that every day, or 
you know someone who does and you haven’t karate-chopped them in the neck in 
retaliation. But no one is loudly acclaiming you for it. There are no ahhs of 
amazement as though you’re a pet hamster who’s suddenly executed a triple 
backflip while reciting the spoken-word bit ofShake It Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/26/taylor-swift-shake-it-off-video-new-zealand-retirement-village-viral>
.
Alicia Keys (@aliciakeys) 
Y'all, me choosing to be makeup free doesn't mean I'm anti-makeup. Do you! 😘😘
pic.twitter.com/Mg0Ug9YA9q <https://t.co/Mg0Ug9YA9q>
 <https://twitter.com/aliciakeys/status/770327503495958528> August 29, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/aliciakeys/status/770327503495958528> 
Reactions of shock and amazement play out in smaller ways for females here on 
the ground, going about their lives: perhaps a look of discomfort from someone, 
any gender, who didn’t expect you to be talking or acting that way, because 
they’ve taken in the lesson that women just don’t do that, or shouldn’t; or you 
didn’t take the time to blowdry your hair to an acceptable standard, and you’re 
looking likeMickey Rourke in The Wrestler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/18/the-wrestler-review-mickey-rourke>
; or you talk too tough, and you laugh too loud.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> may not be gifted a 
rulebook on how to act in public with “don’t dress like a slob, don’t laugh 
ugly, don’t eat pizza” directives, but the celebration of behaviour that dares 
to go against these unwritten rules is controlling and prescriptive in its own 
way. What’s frightening for me is that the rules are so ingrained that they can 
continue on, invisible.

The “Finally, I feel confident in my body at 46!” magazine covers featuring a 
naked female TV personality don’t excite any feminist fervour within me, or 
reassure me. I do not feel grateful for women doing this, and the furore that 
flurries up is insulting. Flabby nakedness happens, so does eating, so does 
looking like crap – it’s the human condition, whatever your gender. Something 
as vital as equality shouldn’t be confused with things so trivial, unless we 
all deserve a Nobel peace prize for eating greasy food and snort-laughing 
sometimes.
 