
With the end of the school education year comes the ritual release of 
end-of-school exam results. Once again we’ll parade the names of the top 100 
schools and marvel at those that seem to do so well.

At the risk of raining on their parade it is all very predictable: two thirds 
of the top 100 are still there when the schools are ranked by the 
socio-educational level of the parents. Even the public/private school 
comparisons are largely spurious: results coming out of schools enrolling 
similar students don’t vary much between the school sectors.

But if all that amounts to raining on this week’s parade, then the recent 
release of the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (Timss) 
and Programme for International Student Assessment (Pisa) results amounts to a 
deluge. At the end of November we woke up to discover that we had evenfallen 
behind Kazakhstan 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/wakeup-call-australian-students-fall-behind-kazakhstan-in-maths-and-science-rankings-20161129-gszvt1>
. Then a week later we were told that our science, maths and reading resultsare 
in long term decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/pisa-results-australian-students-science-maths-and-reading-in-long-term-decline?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
.

International maths and science rankings: keep calm but change direction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/international-maths-and-science-rankings-keep-calm-but-change-direction>
But there is more: in fortuitous timing the education ministers around 
Australia are gathering again this Friday for another in the series of Coag 
education meetings. You can’t forget the last time they met. After furious 
disagreement and blame shifting they firmly resolved … to meet again.

In fairness, no one expects them to come up with a magic bullet solution to 
the plateauing and plunging emerging in Australia’s global test scores. In fact 
it’s best they don’t hurry - because one of theproblems in such global testing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/may/06/oecd-pisa-tests-damaging-education-academics?CMP=share_btn_fb>
 is precisely because the results push countries towards quick-fix solutions.

But we can certainly expect the usual posturing by key players to continue as 
it has in the past. It’s variously about the need to furiously reform schools, 
focus on maths and science or whatever, spend more money, spend less money, 
make schools more accountable or more independent or both, provide more support 
for the needy without upsetting the greedy and so on.

We are in good company: Australia is not the only country experiencing 
post-Pisa pains – and furtively looking at what high achieving countries are 
doing. As Amanda Ripleyrecently reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/06/upshot/what-america-can-learn-about-smart-schools-in-other-countries.html?_r=0>
 in the New York Times:

the smartest countries tend to be those that have acted to make teaching more 
prestigious and selective; directed more resources to their neediest children; 
enrolled most children in high-quality preschools; helped schools establish 
cultures of constant improvement; and applied rigorous, consistent standards 
across all classrooms.

We are working on some of those things but side-stepping others. And there is 
a variety of other solutions. Professor John Hattie talks about theneed for a 
reboot 
<http://education.unimelb.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1993904/Deans-lecture-June-2016-Jack-Keating-lecture.pdf>
 in our education system. The productivity commission wants to gather together 
the evidence of what works and make it readily available. Therecent Grattan 
report 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-28/new-model-for-school-funding-that-wont-break-the-budget/8063902>
 revived the idea of master teachers.

In broad terms the solutions and many of the players fall into two categories. 
The first lot believe that the problems and solutions lie almost entirely 
within schools and school systems. These “within-school” reformers are often 
quite distant from schools and include governments, some academics, 
commentators and corporate donors. They variously propose, mandate, research 
and/or fund a range of interventions. Their ideas fully range from the sensible 
to the stupid.

The second lot believe that the key to improving schools lies in the ways in 
which we provide and resource them. They point to the context in which schools 
operate: their establishment, obligations and operation, location and sector, 
funding, the SES profile of their students and parents.

We’re with this lot, not because the “within-school” reformers are wrong, but 
simply because their best ideas won’t take hold and succeed if we continue to 
ignore the problems which are external to the school.

Let us demonstrate it this way. There are many proposals to improve teachers 
and to parachute the best into the really struggling schools. But the remaining 
student role models, leaders and achievers in those schools go out the back 
door to attend both public and private schools further up the socio-educational 
ladder. Due to acombination of known factors 
<http://apo.org.au/files/Resource/the_state_of_australias_schools_final.pdf>, 
the task faced by those “gun” teachers becomes much harder. The odds pile up 
against their success.We have shown 
<http://apo.org.au/files/Resource/the_state_of_australias_schools_final.pdf> 
what is happening to these schools across Australia and why they don’t seem to 
be delivering.

The Gonski panel ably demonstrated how our structure of schooling concentrates 
problems in some schools and advantage in others. And the schools which are 
gathering more of the advantaged students aren’t lifting our levels of 
achievement. They are just cruising.

Recent years have seen more focus on what is happening outside the school, in 
the process creating a better balance in the search for solutions. The Grattan 
Instituteillustrates <http://grattan.edu.au/report/widening-gaps/> how 
solutions need to address problems on both sides of the school fence. John 
Hattie talks about the need to focus on reading and maths, and teacher quality. 
But he also sees the need to build confidence in the public school system and, 
like others, is very concerned about inequity.

Now here is something different: Hattie also says schools need to demonstrate 
that they are inviting places to come and learn – and they need to have 
multiple ways to be excellent in upper high school. He hints at a problem that 
usually escapes attention. For decades schools have been locked in a 
marketplace competition which has not created quality but has instead ensured 
that they cater for the mainstream students who best respond to the way we “do 
school”. Just as in politics, competing schools lean towards the centre.

Students are disengaging from a school system which pushes them through 
externally imposed hoops and measures their achievement in limited ways. This 
might suit around a third of our students, but another third just learn how to 
play the game and cruise along.

Worse: we have all but lost the remainder. For them, schools are certainly not 
“inviting places to come and learn”. We know about these young people; they are 
prominent on our streets and in the statistics.Mitchell Institute research 
<http://www.mitchellinstitute.org.au/reports/educational-opportunity-in-australia-2015-who-succeeds-and-who-misses-out/>
 shows that 26% of students fail to finish school or a vocational equivalent.

Parental anxiety and Pisa: to lift academic standards, stop segregating kids | 
Joel Windle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/parental-anxiety-and-pisa-to-lift-academic-standards-stop-segregating-kids>
Alas, Hattie’s “multiple ways to be excellent” don’t get much of a look-in. We 
are instead told to do mainstream school harder, better and longer. Not 
surprising: it resonates with commentators, tabloid media and with governments. 
But the crisis also calls for schooling to re-engage young people in learning 
for life. Harder-better-longer is no longer enough. The schools which are
authentic innovators 
<http://www.bigpicture.org.au/transforming-learning-and-schools>are too few and 
far between.

Amid all our (justified) concerns about equity perhaps our failure to meet the 
needs of all our young people is the greatest inequity of all.

If current trends continue we can confidently expect that our structural, 
equity and achievement deficits will continue to mount. Sure, we can “reform” 
schools to the hilt, hammer the maths and science and the rest of it – but if 
that’s all we do not much will change. Separating our strivers and strugglers 
into different schools, as we do both within and across sectors, creates 
schools that end up just coasting at one end or declining at the other. The net 
result is a decline, and we are now paying the price.
 