
If you want an easy way of telling how doomed a media company is, just look at 
its stated ambitions and acquisitions. For instance, in 2010 the Huffington 
Post was a loss-making operation with 200 employees andjust over $30m  
<http://www.thesmokinggun.com/documents/arianna-huffington-aol-money-756432>in 
revenue; at the beginning of 2011, however, it was acquired by AOL for $315m. 
Why would AOL throw hundreds of millions of dollars at such an operation? For 
the same reason that Yahoo spenttens of millions of dollars  
<http://articles.latimes.com/2012/jul/19/business/la-fi-tn-marissa-mayer-salary-20120719>
to acquire the buzzy Marissa Meyer, who in turn spent hundreds of millions more 
on buzzy aquisitions likeNick D’Aloisio 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/26/business/media/nick-daloisio-17-sells-summly-app-to-yahoo.html?_r=0>
 andHenrique de Castro 
<http://valleywag.gawker.com/marissa-mayers-sidekick-made-58-million-by-getting-fir-1564288553>
 andDavid Karp 
<http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-05-22/what-tumblrs-millionaires-tell-us-about-the-tech-industry>
, of Tumblr. (Acquisition price: $1.1bn. Employees at acquisition: 178. 
Revenues at acquisition: zero.)

Most of these deals turn out to be duds. But that doesn’t mean they’re stupid. 
Indeed, sometimes it’s entirely rational to destroy value in this manner. 
There’s even an entire literature around crazy bets like these ones: they’re 
called “gambling for resurrection”.

At most normal companies, risk is generally considered a bad thing, or at the 
very least something to be carefully managed. In the worst-case scenario, 
something really horrible will happen and the entire company will fail. So 
boards and managers do everything they can to avoid such risks. When a 
desperate company starts gambling for resurrection, the results are generally 
pretty predictable.

And yet, companies take such gambles more often than you might think. At 
Nokia, there was even aninfamous memo  
<http://blogs.wsj.com/tech-europe/2011/02/09/full-text-nokia-ceo-stephen-elops-burning-platform-memo/>
written by the then chief executive, Stephen Elop, in 2011. He opens with what 
he calls “a pertinent story about a man who was working on an oil platform”, 
which shortly finds itself on fire. He ends up jumping into “the dark, cold, 
foreboding Atlantic waters” – and living.

“We too, are standing on a ‘burning platform,’” wrote Elop, “and we must 
decide how we are going to change our behaviour.” Basically, Elop decided to 
start playing the role of Butch Cassidy, telling his employees to follow him 
off a cliff. Hey, in the story, “the man survived the fall and the waters”. 
Elop’s strategy, though, was a failure.

Cassidy’s logic, before he jumped off that cliff, was impeccable: “We got to, 
otherwise we’re dead.” And when you’re already dead, anything which creates the 
possibility of resurrection, no matter how improbable, is automatically a good 
idea.

AOL <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol>, for instance, was spun off 
from Time Warner because the Time Warner shareholders hated it, and they hated 
it for good reason. It had mouthwatering revenues from its dial-up internet 
service, but those weren’t going to last long, and so it needed something, 
anything, to replace them – and to replace them fast. The only hope was to buy 
something with buzz and an impressive growth rate. Something, that is, like 
Huffington Post.

Look at another business which was hated so much by Time Warner’s shareholders 
that it ended up being spun off: Time Inc, the magazine publisher. Joe Ripp, 
Time Inc’s chief executive, has said “magazines as a print business will 
ultimately die”, but also that he wants to turn the company around, rather than 
simply draining off its impressive cashflows for as long as they last. And so 
he has done things like hire Scott Havens, whosaid he wants Time Inc “to build 
the next LinkedIn or Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/29/time-inc-scott-havens-digital-linkedin>
”. We all know what the chances of that are – but the simple fact of being a 
public company, with a board which wants the share price to go up for ever, 
forces the likes of Time Inc into increasingly desperate gambles.

The spun-off News Corp, on the other hand, has been pursuing a strategy which 
looks downright sensible and boring in comparison. Its core print-media 
business is just as doomed as Time Inc’s, but chief executive Robert Thomson is 
not talking about building the next Facebook: instead, he spent $415m to buy 
Harlequin, a reliable source of romance-novel revenues which can easily survive 
into the digital age. And then he spent another $950m to buy Move Inc, a 
real-estate listings site which fits perfectly with News Corp’s existing 
cash-cow Australian property site, REA.

News Corp clearly thinks it has the resources to survive indefinitely, and 
therefore doesn’t need to do anything foolish. Similarly, you won’t find 
successful TV companies doing anything particularly risky or interesting on the 
internet, because they don’t need to. They’re successful already.

In general, then, the more certain managers are that their company is doomed, 
the more bonkers the stuff they’re going to attempt  – and the more value 
likely to be destroyed in doing so. So if you want to identify a media company 
where the board and senior management can see the fatal bullet fast 
approaching, just look for one taking ever-bolder strategic risks. And then 
move sharply in the opposite direction.
 