
The photograph, a still image drawn from video footage captured by a security 
camera, shows a mass of cylindrical shapes squashed together in a box and 
wrapped in what appears to be silver foil, their surfaces glistening like 
sardines in a tin.


The shapes are not sardines, however, but human beings. And they are wrapped 
not in foil but in emergency blankets, handed out to them as they were put into 
a cramped detention center at the US border, courtesy of the federal agency, 
Customs and Border Protection (CBP).

The image, and several others like it released on Thursday at the order of a 
federal judge, gives the most damning evidence yet seen of the exceptionally 
harsh and some say abusive conditions to which immigrants are subjected when 
detained at the southern US border with Mexico.

Previously held under seal in a federal lawsuit in which the CBP is being sued 
for allegedly degrading and unconstitutional treatment of its charges, the 
photos offer a window into a world that until now has been rarely seen.

The shapes disclose that about 15 immigrant detainees were packed into a 
single cell at the Border Patrol’s facility in Tucson,Arizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona>. They are wrapped from head to 
toe in Mylar aluminium sheets for warmth, and appear to be lying directly on 
top of the concrete floor with no mattressing or other bedding of any sort.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fus-border-patrol-facility-images-tucson-arizona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e749985473ab6d18346faf1596562e053b0390d%2F23_0_968_781%2F968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Images%20from%20US%20Border%20Patrol%20facility%20reveal%20harsh%20conditions%20for%20immigrants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fus-border-patrol-facility-images-tucson-arizona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Images%20from%20US%20Border%20Patrol%20facility%20reveal%20harsh%20conditions%20for%20immigrants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fus-border-patrol-facility-images-tucson-arizona%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e749985473ab6d18346faf1596562e053b0390d%2F23_0_968_781%2F968.jpg>
 September 2015; Douglas facility; woman changing a child’s diaper on top of 
Mylar sheets on concrete floor in a trash-strewn cell. Photograph: American 
Immigration Council 
The image – timed and dated as 5.16am on 19 August 2015 – shows detainees so 
tightly squashed together that there is no room for them to move.

Groups working with immigrant detainees at the border have long complained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/12/migrants-face-brutal-conditions-after-capture-sleep-deprivation>
 that the inmates are treated inhumanely, kept in bare concrete cells that are 
freezing in temperature as a form of punishment. The colloquial word for the 
cells is “hieleras”, or ice boxes.

The CBP has consistently denied that it treats inappropriately those it has 
picked up at the border attempting to enter the country illegally, and has also 
denied that it keeps its cells unacceptably cold. But the litigants in the 
lawsuit say that the newly released images prove that their concerns were 
justified.

“Migrants detained in the Tucson sector have long suffered horrific 
conditions,” said Dan Pochoda, senior counsel for the ACLU of Arizona. “It is 
unconscionable that the federal government continues to detain people including 
infants in this manner. The Border Patrol continues to operate in violation of 
US and international law as well as its own standards without being held 
accountable for these egregious abuses.”

“The images unsealed by the court leave no room to debate the fact that 
thousands of immigrants are subjected to inhumane and unconstitutional 
conditions by the Border Patrol,” said Nora Preciado, staff attorney with the 
National Immigration Law Center.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fus-border-patrol-facility-images-tucson-arizona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae7ea39ede29551e90c1e02cb89984972c7d080b%2F27_26_675_405%2F675.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Images%20from%20US%20Border%20Patrol%20facility%20reveal%20harsh%20conditions%20for%20immigrants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fus-border-patrol-facility-images-tucson-arizona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Images%20from%20US%20Border%20Patrol%20facility%20reveal%20harsh%20conditions%20for%20immigrants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fus-border-patrol-facility-images-tucson-arizona%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae7ea39ede29551e90c1e02cb89984972c7d080b%2F27_26_675_405%2F675.jpg>
 Undated; Tucson facility; men wrapped in Mylar sheeting lying and sitting on 
concrete floor and benches, including near trash can and toilet area; cell so 
crowded there is not room for all to lie down. Photograph: American Immigration 
Council 
“We urgently need meaningful and lasting reforms that put an end to these 
abuses, hold the agency accountable, and ensure that people are treated with 
dignity.”


The lawsuit 
<https://www.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/litigation/challenging-unconstitutional-conditions-cbp-detention-facilities>
, which continues, has been brought on behalf of all detainees held in CBP 
facilities in the Tucson section of the border for more than eight hours. It is 
designed to prevent the Border Patrol holding them in what the plaintiffs say 
are unconstitutional circumstances.

As part of the evidence gathered in the case, the American Immigration Council 
consulted Eldon Vail, a former corrections officer with 35 years experience in 
prisons. In his expert opinion, he said that he had never been in a prison or 
jail that treated inmates as badly as CBP treated the border detainees.

“I have seen and experienced the effects of overcrowding but no jurisdiction 
would cram so many people into so little space, without beds and bedding,” he 
said.

 