
There is no denying it: like it or not we are all getting older. According to 
theUN World Population Prospects 
<http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/publications/files/key_findings_wpp_2015.pdf> 
report, the global population of older people is growing at an unprecedented 
rate. By 2050, for the first time in human history, there will be more over-65s 
than children under 15. The number of people over 100 will increase by 1,000%. 
And as by then 70% of the world’s population will likely live in cites, this 
will present huge challenges, and cities will need to adapt.

Of course an ageing population is not inherently a bad thing: it reflects 
improved health and rising life expectancies. However, as we age, our housing, 
transport and social needs change. By preparing for this, policymakers, town 
planners and architects can make it more likely that older populations can 
still lead fulfilling lives.

The global engineering firm Arup has looked at how authorities are responding 
to this demographic shift. Stefano Recalcati, project leader behind the firm’s 
reportShaping Ageing Cities 
<http://publications.arup.com/Publications/S/Shaping_Ageing_Cities.aspx>, 
explains that cities must adjust if older people are to maintain quality of 
life: “It’s important to be conscious of the ageing trend. It is a huge 
challenge for world cities – they will need to change, to make sure older 
people continue to play an active role in the community and don’t become 
isolated. Isolation has a negative impact on health so tackling that is really 
important.”

“Small innovations can make a difference,” Recalcati adds. “Older people are 
less likely to drive, favouring public transport and walking. The average 
person over 65 manages a walking speed of 3km/hour. At 80 that goes down to 
2km/hour, compared with the average for a working age person of 4.8km/hour. 
Reducing the distance between transport stops, shops, benches, trees for shade, 
public toilets and improving pavements and allowing more time to cross the road 
all encourage older people to go out.”

In the UK, the government has just announced the building of 10 new towns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/01/ten-new-healthy-towns-to-be-built-in-england>
 designed to address ageing and health issues such as obesity. As well as 
encouraging more active lifestyles, the designs could include wider pavements, 
few trip hazards and moving LCD signs, making the streets easier to navigate 
for people with dementia and other age-related conditions. London-based charity
Living Streets <http://www.livingstreets.org.uk/> has also been working 
alongside communities carrying out street audits with older residents to see 
what improvements could be made, as well as campaigning at a strategic level to 
influence positive legislative and infrastructure changes. Their project Time 
to Cross campaigned to increase pedestrian crossing times which resulted in 
Transport for London (TfL) agreeing to a review.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fimproving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dee3a36b4bac985aff288c68ff94c75ea28cc6c%2F0_107_3579_2148%2F3579.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Improving%20with%20age%3F%20How%20city%20design%20is%20adapting%20to%20older%20populations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fimproving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Improving%20with%20age%3F%20How%20city%20design%20is%20adapting%20to%20older%20populations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fimproving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dee3a36b4bac985aff288c68ff94c75ea28cc6c%2F0_107_3579_2148%2F3579.jpg>
 ‘Allowing more time to cross the road encourage older people to go out.’ 
Photograph: Francisco Calvino/Moment Editorial/Getty Images 
Cities that have addressed accessibility are likely to be ahead of the game in 
age-friendliness. In recent years there have been efforts to make cities more 
accessible to both disabled and elderly residents and visitors. Berlin is 
aiming for 100% accessibility by 2020. The city authorities are working to 
widen pavements, bring in tactile guidance at road crossings and easier access 
to trams and buses. This year Milan won the European Commission’sAccess City 
Award 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1170&langId=en&videosId=2683&vl=en&furtherVideos=yes>
 for its high standard of building design and access to transport.

What lessons can urban planners learn from looking at existing retirement 
communities? These are popular in the US and growing in other parts of the 
world: separate towns, often gated, for over-55s. Deane Simpson, an architect 
who teaches at the Royal Danish Academy of Arts in Copenhagen, recently spoke 
at an event organised by Museum of Architecture and The Building Centre in 
London about designing cities for an ageing population. In his bookYoung-Old: 
Urban Utopias of an Ageing Society 
<http://www.architectmagazine.com/practice/deane-simpsons-young-old_o>, Simpson 
looks at communities likefor 55-75 year olds who are retired and in good health 
with money to spend. One scheme The Villages in Florida, a network of “village” 
developments housing 115,000 over-55s linked by a 90-mile network of car-free 
golf-cart roadways – and offers a life of restaurants, bars, cinemas and sports.

Simpson is critical of the way this type of lifestyle cuts people off from the 
rest of society, with age becoming a new form of segregation. However he 
accepts that they reflect a desire for an active, experience-filled lifestyle. 
Simpson admits that there are certain elements that could be applied to a 
multigenerational urban setting: “The golf cart infrastructure provides a 
transport network for vehicles slower than cars. This could be replicated as a 
way of integrating mobility scooters and electric wheelchairs and bicycles. In 
Denmark and the Netherlands where biking culture is strong, bike lanes are 
increasingly being used by mobility scooters. It is a way of enabling safe 
mobility for those not able to walk and not able to drive.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fimproving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc52f63dcd0a1786129cb28e0a78406cd0cca56b2%2F659_214_4959_2976%2F4959.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Improving%20with%20age%3F%20How%20city%20design%20is%20adapting%20to%20older%20populations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fimproving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Improving%20with%20age%3F%20How%20city%20design%20is%20adapting%20to%20older%20populations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fimproving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc52f63dcd0a1786129cb28e0a78406cd0cca56b2%2F659_214_4959_2976%2F4959.jpg>
 Mobility utopia or exclusive haven? Golf carts are the main transportation at 
The Villages in Florida. Photograph: Alamy 
The US model of retirement communities is increasingly being exported. In 
China more than a quarter of the population will be over 65 by 2050. The 
elderly have traditionally been taken care of by the extended family – often 
with three generations living together. But demographic changes are severely 
challenging that family unit. The one child policy combined with longer life 
expectancy means that a typical married couple could be looking after four 
parents and up to eight grandparents.

There is a rise in assisted living schemes, like the US-designed Merrill 
Gardens in Shanghai and Harbin. Lead 8 is an architecture and design studio 
working in the region; their co-founder and director Simon Blore explains that 
they have worked on new developments in China that are 80-100% geared towards 
elderly groups. “We attempt to maintain the scale of a typical Chinese village; 
all needs are met within a short walking distance (the elderly in China do not 
have cars, and may no longer even use bicycles). Overlaid on this is a system 
of ‘local’ health clinics, essential services, open spaces and leisure 
facilities, which is not so different from assisted living housing, but on a 
much larger scale.”

Blore has reservations about whether US-style senior living will be widely 
accepted: “I think most people want to be part of regular society, part of the 
community, so that’s probably a challenge internationally – trying to get that 
balance right – a place with a high level of care and a sense of community and 
a relationship with the wider society.”

Lead 8 is working on a Malaysian residential complex in Kelana Jaya, near 
Kuala Lumpur, that could offer a solution. “On each floor there are flats of 
different sizes next to each other, with a wall that can be taken down. An 
owner can buy two adjoining apartments - one large and one small. The family 
lives in the big one with grandparents next door, and they can either be 
separate or interconnect.”

Integration rather than segregation is advocated by London architect Stephen 
Witherford. His firm, Witherford, Watson, Mann, will be building a complex of 
57 flats for over-75s in Bermondsey, London. The project is based on the 
traditional almshouse model of charitable housing for pensioners, but updated 
for the 21st century. “Traditionally almshouses were set back behind a fence,” 
explains Witherford, “but we wanted to create a version that would tackle the 
problem of isolation. It will have a lounge that opens directly on to the high 
street.” There will be a cookery school, performance space, rooftop allotment 
and a workshop. Residents can hold craft fairs, cake sales and perform or watch 
plays. “The public can come in and get involved. Amenities are nearby and there 
is a bus stop outside for trips into town.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fimproving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0650a6416c996a6d6ceeb456447267be1781f404%2F0_0_5472_4640%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Improving%20with%20age%3F%20How%20city%20design%20is%20adapting%20to%20older%20populations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fimproving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Improving%20with%20age%3F%20How%20city%20design%20is%20adapting%20to%20older%20populations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fimproving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0650a6416c996a6d6ceeb456447267be1781f404%2F0_0_5472_4640%2F5472.jpg>
 The inner courtyard of a complex of flats in south London, designed for 
over-75s. Composite: Witherford Watson Mann 
Rethinking traditional designs is also a priority for Susanne Clase, an 
architect with White Arkitekter, who is designing flats for seniors in 
Gothenburg, Sweden, and including potential residents and home-care 
professionals in the decision-making. She explains the flats are designed to 
accommodate regular visits from professional carers who help with personal 
tasks: “in our design the public and private spaces are reversed. The bedroom 
and bathroom are by the front door so the carer can access them. The living 
room and kitchen are at the back and are the resident’s private space.” Clase 
believes that designing with ageing in mind is good for everyone. “It’s 
important to help people live independently for as long as possible, and to 
design that in from the beginning rather than make adaptations later on. We 
already have a high level of accessibility in Sweden. You won’t get a permit to 
build unless you can show that if the resident breaks a leg it won’t be a 
problem. So we are already thinking ahead.”


While Europe may be looking to the future, in Japan the future has already 
arrived. The country has the oldest population in the world: 33% is over 60, 
25% over 65, and 12.5% over 75. “Japan is very aged so the government is 
prioritising making cites age-friendly,” says Setsuko Saya, head of regional 
policy at the OECD-ledresearch into ageing in cities 
<http://www.oecd.org/regional/ageing-in-cities-9789264231160-en.htm>. Toyama, 
where 26% of residents are over 65, has adopted the principle of acompact city 
<http://www.oecd.org/greengrowth/compact-city-policies-9789264167865-en.htm> – 
which promotes high density, public transport, walking and cycling. The aim is 
to avoid the urban sprawl that can be so isolating for those with limited 
mobility. Despite being on a large area of flat land, which could be developed, 
the policy is not to expand outwards. A tram circles the city and investment is 
focused along the tramline and in the city centre, where there are public 
spaces for people to get together. People live in limited residential areas 
close to services and with good public transport – so they don’t need to drive. 
Saya points out that it’s important not to characterise ageing as a problem, 
and to recognise that these strategies don’t just help older people: “The tram 
connects people as well as transports them. It’s good for everyone.”

'Disney World' for retirees: inside America's fastest-growing community
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/08/the-villages-florida-retirement-community>
While developing public transport is important, there will always be some 
unable to access it. A UKreport by the International Longevity Centre 
<http://www.ilcuk.org.uk/index.php/publications/publication_details/the_future_of_transport_in_an_ageing_society>
 found that despite transport being free for the over-65s, more than 30% of 
them don’t use the service. In these cases, self-driving cars are put forward 
as a solution that could “liberate” older people, as a mobility service for 
those who can no longer drive and are not served by public transport. Google 
are even“targeting” their self-driving cars to retirees 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2014/05/28/the-future-of-googles-driverless-car-is-old-people/>
. The city of Suzu in northern Japanhas already been trialling 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/japan-road-tests-self-driving-cars-to-keep-aging-motorists-mobile-1453357504>
 the use of self-driving cars to keep older people mobile.


But how will these innovations work in an age of austerity, reduced pensions, 
later retirement and rising housing costs? Age-friendly design can help us 
rethink our cities, but how can we make sure these innovations reach the 
majority of older people? Looking to the future, withmillennials expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/09/income-young-families-falls-pensioners-prosper>
 to be poorer than their baby-boomer parents, young people unable to get on the 
housing ladder today are unlikely to have equity in old age. Professor 
Christopher Phillipson of Manchester University believes more political will is 
needed to make sure age-friendly cities include those hit by austerity and 
industrial decline: “age friendly cities cost money but in the UK there is less 
money available for local authorities wanting to take action. There are 
considerable barriers – given pressures on budgets and limited commitment from 
policy-makers and developers. In the absence of these the possibility of 
creating age-friendly environments will be constrained.”

In Manchester, the first UK city to be recognised as age-friendly 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-27201484> by the World Health Organisation, the 
Manchester Institute for Collaborative Research on Ageing 
<http://www.micra.manchester.ac.uk/> (Micra) has been training older people to 
research what makes an age-friendly city. They found that for most people it 
was human contact, rather than high-tech gizmos that were important – such as 
door-to-door community visits for people unable to use public transport. 
“Manchester is age-friendly because it has strong political leadership and the 
city supports neighbourhood groups, and works with community leaders,” 
continues Professor Phillipson. “The most important thing is collaboration 
across a broad range of interests, not least older people themselves.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 