

Flaws in security precautions at an Algerian gas plant partially operated by 
BP,where seven British residents were murdered by jihadis in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/jan/25/algeria-hostage-crisis-full-story>
, have been highlighted by a coroner.

Delivering a verdict at an inquest in London on Thursday that the men had been 
unlawfully killed, judge Nicholas Hilliard QC drew attention to multiple 
failures by the plant’s management to upgrade protection – partly on the 
grounds of cost.

Security drills were rarely held, there were no armed guards protecting the 
foreign workers’ living quarters, risk assessment policies obscured the true 
dangers and Algerian gendarmes arrived well after terrorists had seized the 
main compound, he explained in his narrative verdict.

At one stage, the captors put explosive cord around the hostages’ necks, 
Hilliard said. Two men were singled out for execution if the jihadis’ demands 
were not met.

Responsibility for the deaths lay with the terrorists, the coroner said, even 
though they were killed by Algerian army bullets in the subsequent rescue 
operation.

BP could now face civil claims from the victims’ families. The In Amenas gas 
plant, which has reopened, is reported to generate $4bn (£2.6bn) worth of gas a 
year, withBP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> taking a quarter of the 
proceeds.

Timeline of the In Amenas siege
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/25/in-amenas-timeline-siege-algeria>
Evidence heard by the inquiry revealed there were no armed guards on the gates 
of the living quarters, in the compound’s 12 watchtowers or even in the 
immediate vicinity of the living quarters at the In Amenas site, which was 
jointly operated by BP, the Algerian state company Sonatrach and the Norwegian 
company Statoil.


The gas field was not far from the border with Libya, a failed state which was 
collapsing into civil war and awash with weapons. The front gates were said to 
have been frequently left open: the terrorists drove in at 5.48am, largely 
unimpeded.

The night before the attack, there had been a confrontational meeting between 
joint venture officials and local Tuareg staff, at the end of which one driver 
allegedly said: “You have made your law, but tomorrow when you wake up, you 
will have a surprise and blood will be shed.”


Six Britons and a UK resident died in January 2013 when the Algerian gas plant 
was targeted by al-Qaida-linked militants. Altogether, 39 foreign workers, an 
Algerian security guard and 29 militants were killed before Algerian special 
forces retook the gas plant after a four-day standoff in the Sahara desert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/19/algerian-crisis-over-death-hostages>
.

There was an article in the Algerian El Khabar newspaper in the November 
before the attack, which warned that al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) 
were photographing petrochemical facilities in preparation for attacks.

The raid was launched by gunmen under the control of the Algerian jihadi 
leader Mokhtar Belmokhtar.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fin-amenas-murders-coroner-finds-algerian-gas-plant-had-security-flaws%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424977270652%2F62c0b30c-cc7a-4bde-90a6-56f33637f54f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20Amenas%20murders%3A%20coroner%20points%20to%20security%20flaws%20at%20Algerian%20gas%20plant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fin-amenas-murders-coroner-finds-algerian-gas-plant-had-security-flaws%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20Amenas%20murders%3A%20coroner%20points%20to%20security%20flaws%20at%20Algerian%20gas%20plant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fin-amenas-murders-coroner-finds-algerian-gas-plant-had-security-flaws%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424977270652%2F62c0b30c-cc7a-4bde-90a6-56f33637f54f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Carlos Estrada Valencia, one of the men killed at In Amenas. Photograph: Irwin 
Mitchell/PA 
The Britons who died were Carson Bilsland and Kenneth Whiteside, both from 
Scotland; Sebastian John, from Norfolk; Stephen Green, from Hampshire; Paul 
Morgan and Garry Barlow, both from Liverpool, and Carlos Estrada Valencia, 
originally from Colombia, who lived in London.

Late last year, the Foreign Office resorted to the rarely used legal device of 
a public interest immunity (PII) certificate, allowing officials to apply to 
withhold material deemed too sensitive to be released in open court.

The inquest under Hilliard, who was appointed as assistant coroner, began last 
September. In an interim decision last month upholding the PII application, he 
said the government had received information from a local newspaper alleging 
that terrorists were seeking information about British workers inAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> with a view to kidnapping them. The 
information was later deemed to be unreliable, the FCO said.

Key documents and forensic records have been denied to the inquest because the 
Algerian authorities are putting on trial several alleged militants who 
survived the attack. Some of those who died were killed by bullets fired by 
Algerian soldiers.

David Green’s 47-year-old son, Stephen, was one of those murdered during the 
assault. He had worked as a safety manager. His father said this week: “His 
murder was totally preventable and avoidable. The massive security improvements 
made by BP and others since the attack would have prevented the terrorists if 
performed earlier.”

When Stephen Green was captured, he and other hostages had explosives looped 
around them. The inquest heard that he refused to kneel down when the Algerian 
helicopters flew overhead and told his captors: “Show me the bullet that you 
will use to shoot me.”

He and and four hostages were later placed in a car, which drove at high speed 
away from the living quarters towards the gas plant. The vehicle overturned and 
caught fire; the other hostages escaped but Stephen died of a gunshot wound.

It has been heartbreaking … to feel that Carlos’s death could and should have 
been prevented
Claudia Gaviria, Carlos Estrada Valencia's widow 
Hilliard said that the risk management policy operated by the joint venture 
obscured the likelihood of a terrorist attack by amalgamating it with the 
lesser expectation of damage to a pipeline – producing a combined lower score 
that did not trigger an alarm.


Andrew Ritchie QC, who represented Claudia Gaviria – the widow of Valencia, a 
BP vice-president – questioned whether the security patrols that were supposed 
to go into the surrounding desert were dispatched on the night of the attack.

The gendarmes, it emerged, had to borrow jeeps and drivers from the company to 
carry out their security sweeps. There was no attempt to ramp up security 
before the attack, Ritchie had told the inquest. Security was mainly left to an 
Algerian gendarme unit who lived 500 yards away.

Valencia was hit by Algerian army bullets – killed by the men who were 
supposed to protect him.

Gaviria, who attended the inquest, said: “It has been heartbreaking to hear 
the evidence presented and to feel that Carlos’s death could and should have 
been prevented. My husband had never been to In Amenas before and, as far as I 
know, he had no warning from BP about the risks that faced him there before he 
went.

“To this day, I find it very hard to comprehend how Carlos could simply kiss 
us all goodbye one day as he headed off to work, never to return. For so long, 
I was unable properly to grieve because I was kept in the dark over what 
happened to Carlos on those dreadful days.

“The evidence I have heard throughout the inquests has been truly staggering. 
It is now clear to me that very basic security mechanisms at the In Amenas 
facility were flawed and that security advice was simply ignored.”

Nicola John, the widow of Sebastian John, said: “I will always wonder if 
Sebastian’s death may have been preventable if all the security measures that 
had been identified as necessary for the protection of workers at the site had 
been implemented.


“I am angry that BP chose to send a young and inexperienced graduate to a 
risky destination such as In Amenas at a time of unrest in bordering Libya and 
Mali. My husband did not feel he had a choice to refuse this placement at a 
company he aspired to join.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fin-amenas-murders-coroner-finds-algerian-gas-plant-had-security-flaws%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424977385014%2Fcc34e146-ecc6-45be-9686-767a5719ecda-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20Amenas%20murders%3A%20coroner%20points%20to%20security%20flaws%20at%20Algerian%20gas%20plant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fin-amenas-murders-coroner-finds-algerian-gas-plant-had-security-flaws%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20Amenas%20murders%3A%20coroner%20points%20to%20security%20flaws%20at%20Algerian%20gas%20plant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fin-amenas-murders-coroner-finds-algerian-gas-plant-had-security-flaws%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424977385014%2Fcc34e146-ecc6-45be-9686-767a5719ecda-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Stephen Green, who was killed at the In Amenas plant. Photograph: Family 
handout/PA 
Ritchie said: “The In Amenas facility was only 48 miles [77km] from the Libyan 
border. It was a sitting duck. The Algerian military were regularly catching 
terrorists in vehicles in southern Algeria carrying weapons bought in Libya.”

Clive Garner, a lawyer at Irwin Mitchell, who is also representing the 
families of Valencia and John in their civil claims, said: “Our clients are 
very disappointed that BP continues to deny civil liability and we now invite 
BP to accept the coroner’s findings … If a negotiated solution cannot be 
reached very shortly, we will be commencing formal court proceedings against BP 
in the coming months.”

There was a dispute whether the plant was within 31 miles (50km) of the Libyan 
border: the Foreign Office in 2012 had warned that UK citizens should not go 
within that distance for fear of attacks by militants. Other gas plants in the 
region were said to have have better defences.

BP said: “[We] will now closely review the findings. Since the attack, BP and 
Statoil jointly carried out an extensive review of security arrangements in 
Algeria and have been working with the Algerian state energy company Sonatrach 
on a programme of security enhancements.


“The focus of BP and our partners in the In Amenas joint venture is to do all 
we can to prevent any such incident from happening again. Our thoughts remain 
with the families and friends of everyone who was affected by this tragedy – we 
will always remember them at BP.”



 