
There’s been a lot of talk since the Oscar nominations were announced, in 
January, about the Academy Awards’ – and Hollywood’s – problems with diversity; 
and while the figures onethnic minority and women’s participation in the film 
industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/22/hollywood-so-white-diversity-report-us-film-industry-ethnic-minorities-lgbt-women>
 make for grim reading, there is at least one area where progress has been 
made. As Mexican film-makerAlejandro González Iñárritu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu> waits to find 
out if he is the first person since Joseph L Mankiewicz to win the best 
director Oscar two years in a row, the Latino presence at Hollywood’s very top 
table is significant, in quality if not quantity.

As director of The Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/04/the-revenant-review-gut-churningly-brutal-beautiful-storytelling>
, which leads the total number of nominations for Sunday’s ceremony with 12 
(including best picture, best actor for Leonardo DiCaprio, and best supporting 
actor for Tom Hardy), Iñárritu is currently exerting an Oscar stranglehold for 
the second year in succession, after Birdman won four Academy Awards (including 
best picture and best director for Iñárritu) at the 2015 edition. Reinforcing 
the Latino ascendancy in Hollywood, another Mexican, Alfonso Cuarón, won the 
best director award in 2014, for Gravity; while cinematographerEmmanuel Lubezki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/15/the-revenant-american-society-of-cinematographers-awards-emmanuel-lubezki>
, who has collaborated with both Cuarón and Iñárritu, could well win his third 
Oscar in a row for The Revenant, having won for both Gravity and Birdman.

This is not to underplay the problems facing Latinos in the film industry: the 
recent Comprehensive Annenberg Report on Diversity in Entertainment concluded 
that only 5.8% of actors in Hollywood films were identifiably Hispanic/Latino, 
as compared to 16.3% of the actual US population. The wider political climate, 
which sawIñárritu chastise presidential candidate Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/09/donald-trump-denounced-by-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu>
 for xenophobic remarks, also makes the issue more urgent. But the ascendancy 
of a clutch of gifted Mexican film-makers, with an ability to craft films that 
appeal to the broad range of mainstream Oscar voters, is a remarkable 
development.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Flatino-film-maker-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-ethnic-diversity-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1889ec74f9d17a8954672932c4c3e294e32d8453%2F65_0_2885_1731%2F2885.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20a%20year%20of%20%23OscarsSoWhite%2C%20a%20Mexican%20film-maker%20quietly%20dominates%20the%20Academy%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Flatino-film-maker-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-ethnic-diversity-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20a%20year%20of%20%23OscarsSoWhite%2C%20a%20Mexican%20film-maker%20quietly%20dominates%20the%20Academy%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Flatino-film-maker-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-ethnic-diversity-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1889ec74f9d17a8954672932c4c3e294e32d8453%2F65_0_2885_1731%2F2885.jpg>
 Mexican cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki on the set of The Revenant. 
Photograph: Kimberley French/AP 
Iñárritu’s early career hardly suggested he would arrive at this position. His 
debut feature, Amores Perros, was released in 2000, and was considered a key 
part of“la buena onda” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/jul/19/artsfeatures> – the “good wave” – 
of Latin American cinema that encompassed Brazilian films such as Walter 
Salles’ Central Station and Fernando Meirelles’ City of God, as well as 
Cuarón’s Y Tu Mamá También. (Guillermo del Toro, the third high-profile Mexican 
film-maker to successfully cross over to Hollywood, has come through a parallel 
route of genre and fantasy film-making: his best Oscar performance was winning 
three for Pan’s Labyrinth in 2007.) Despite his determinedly arthouse 
credentials, established via a series of thematically complex and stylistically 
elevated films, Iñárritu quickly switched to English-language film-making and 
employed big name American actors: Sean Penn in 21 Grams (2003) and Brad Pitt 
in Babel (2006).

Katey Rich, Hollywood editor of Vanity Fair, says that Iñárritu’s current 
status as an Oscar frontrunner is down to the fact that “he tends to pick 
challenging, visually exceptional projects, which means they are guaranteed to 
receive Academy attention. And he’s chosen to work with actors who also 
guarantee that kind of attention, while bringing out exceptional performances 
in them. Both Birdman andThe Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant> are incredible technical 
accomplishments, which contributed greatly to their success.”

Alejandro González Iñárritu: I made 'irresponsible decisions' on The Revenant 
shoot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/18/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-the-revenant-shoot-irresponsible-decision>
Eugene Hernandez, deputy director of the influential Film Society of Lincoln 
Center in New York says: “Win or lose, what Iñárritu has achieved is 
significant ... While many directors and actors have embraced work on smaller 
screens in recent years, Iñárritu is showing audiences and the industry that 
the big screen still matters. And his peers have responded by celebrating these 
efforts.”

The acceptance of Mexican film-makers at the highest levels in Hollywood has 
no doubt also been buoyed by American cinema’s interest in cross-border themes, 
or “Tex-Mex” cinema – from the work of San Antonio-born Mexican-American 
director Robert Rodriguez, who made his name with Latino-inflected films such 
as El Mariachi and Once Upon a Time in Mexico, to more recent films such as the 
acclaimed thriller Sicario. However, the numbers of US-born Latinos actually 
nominated for Oscars remains poor,with only eight in total 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Hispanic-American_(U.S.)_Academy_Award_winners_and_nominees>
 and none as best director. Benicio del Toro, arguably the most high-profile 
Latino actor in Hollywood, was born in Puerto Rico, a US territory, andhas 
since also acquired Spanish citizenship 
<http://content.usatoday.com/communities/entertainment/post/2011/11/oscar-winner-benicio-del-toro-singer-ricky-martin-become-spanish-citizens/1#.VtA-XmTNyhc>
.

Hernandez is confident, however, that Iñnáritu’s success, and that of his 
compatriots, can play its part in the mood of change in Hollywood. “The voices 
speaking out in support of creating and celebrating a more inclusive 
entertainment industry are surely buoyed by the success of Iñnáritu, Cuarón and 
Lubezki [and are] determined to build on their success by ensuring that 
opportunities will emerge for more American women and people of colour.

“This can be a tremendous moment of opportunity if Hollywood chooses to fully 
embrace it.”
 