
Few things hurt more than being called childish, which is why last week was an 
upsetting one for fans ofSimon Pegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/simonpegg>. The actor and film-maker’s 
claims that geek culture has dumbed down society left many people feeling hurt 
and betrayed. I mean, isn’t escapism the whole point of cinema – especially the 
kind he often makes?

“Obviously I’m a very much a self-confessed fan of science fiction and genre 
cinema, but part of me looks at society as it is now and just thinks we’ve been 
infantilised by our own taste,”he said to the Radio Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/19/simon-pegg-criticises-dumbing-down-of-cinema>
. “Now we’re essentially all consuming very childish things – comic books, 
superheroes. Adults are watching this stuff, and taking it seriously.”

“Sometimes [I] feel like I miss grownup things,” he continued. “And I honestly 
thought the other day that I’m gonna retire from geekdom.”

He didn’t (and so far hasn’t). And in response to the outcry, Pegg took to his 
own blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/20/simon-pegg-still-a-nerd-and-proud-after-dumbing-down-of-cinema-comments>
 to clarify his sentiments and to stress the importance of prioritising real 
life over fantasy.

“As a society, we are kept in a state of arrested development by dominant 
forces in order to keep us more pliant,” he explained. “We are made passionate 
about the things that occupied us as children as a means of drawing our 
attentions away from the things we really should be invested in: inequality, 
corruption, economic injustice, etc.”

Which is a legitimate concern to have. It’s easy to look at the success of 
movies likeAvengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron> or Mad Max: Fury 
Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road> and assume our 
collective enthusiasm for a genre once reserved for kids and teens alludes to 
our inability to grow up. In fact,even Pegg himself sang the praises of 
Tomorrowland <http://simonpegg.net/2015/05/19/big-mouth-strikes-again/> – a 
movie that shares the name of a Disney theme park (and is alsoinfluenced by 
Disney’s vision of utopia 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/tomorrowland-disney-ant-man-cinemacon-1201477444/>
). Pegg isn’t wrong about our zest for “geek culture” or for the franchises of 
our youths or even our misplaced priorities in terms of pop culture over social 
awareness. (That’s something we all need to work on.) What Pegg is wrong about 
is the importance of fandoms – for everyone.

Geek culture has spread and engulfed us all. In a subculture once (seemingly) 
reserved for sci-fi, it now encompasses shows as diverse asThe Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>, Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>
 andThe Simpsons <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons>. Once 
a specialist event,Comic-Con <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comic-con> 
now draws personalities from all walks of film, television and music. Last 
week, the internet was collectively obsessed withthe finale of Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/may/21/mad-men-11-things-matthew-weiner-revealed>
 - a show that regularly tackled such heavy adult themes as sexism, alcoholism 
and death. And yet, like some fans cling to Batman, many of us clung to Don 
Draper, effectively proving that pop culture obsessions have less to do with 
genre than they do with our own need to escape reality.

Because escapism, by definition, isn’t a bad thing. It’s bad when you bury 
your head in the sand and seek solace only in fictional words, but to escape 
for an hour a week (or a couple more, by talking about said TV show or movie 
with friends, co-workers, or family) isn’t just a way to decompress, it’s a way 
to create community.

As children, we discover ourselves through our imaginations. My schoolfriends 
and I would watchTeenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles> or Power 
Rangers and act them out, using them as a jumping off point to create new 
worlds or to articulate thoughts and feelings we may not have otherwise been 
able to. As adults, we approach series and movies in much the same way, using 
them to stimulate conversations.

We might begin to talk to someone by asking “Do you watch Game of Thrones?” or 
by quoting a few lines from a movie, to gauge the tastes of another person, and 
suss out whether or not they’d make good friends. It’s the same way we asked 
new pals about their favourite bands in high school, or how our parents would 
discuss the latest plot twist in Dallas.

Because that’s the thing: geek culture itself isn’t new. It has always existed 
in various forms before we saw fit to name and define it. For some of us, 
escapism through pop culture provides an outlet that we need to keep our brains 
healthy and functioning. For others, it creates a sense of community. For most, 
it stimulates the last remnants of imagination left over from our years 
convinced we too could live off pizza in a sewer, fighting a giant rat. (Even 
though that giant rat is now the folks atMcCann-Erickson 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/cmo/2015/04/06/mccann-mad-men-portrayal/>.)

But regardless, there’s nothing wrong with an inclusive geek culture – or even 
an extended adolescence. Without it, we wouldn’t have anybody to write movies 
and TV in the first place.
 