
This week, Pakistan is 60 years old; that it exists at all is due to one man: 
Muhammad Ali Jinnah 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/jinnah_mohammad_ali.shtml>. As 
the historian Stanley Wolpert noted it is rare for one man to change the course 
of history, rarer still for an individual to modify the map of the world and 
hardly anyone can be credited with creating by force of will alone a 
nation-state.

Muhammad Ali Jinnah did all three: on August 15 1947, Jinnah took his oath as 
the first governor general of the new nation of Pakistan. The other players in 
the story of independence and partition -Gandhi 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/gandhi_mohandas.shtml>, 
Mountbatten <http://www.banglapedia.org/HT/M_0337.HTM>, Nehru 
<http://www.india-today.com/itoday/millennium/100people/nehru.html> - are far 
more familiar than Jinnah, the man Pakistanis refer to as Qaid e Azam - the 
father of the nation.

As a young British Pakistani growing up in Britain, I knew Jinnah only as a 
man whom all Pakistanis should respect and admire. At the age of 14, my family 
visited Pakistan and I remember visiting his marblemausoleum 
<http://www3.nationalgeographic.com/places/images/photos/photo_lg_karachi.jpg>. 
Back then, I knew very little about the actual life of Jinnah; all I knew was 
that without Jinnah there would have been no Pakistan and thus the man was a 
hero. Earlier this year, I returned to Pakistan for a BBC Radio 4 programme on 
Jinnah in which I travelled across the country in an effort to try and 
understand more about who exactly Jinnah was and how much modern Pakistan 
resembles the nation he envisioned.

One typically scorching morning, I again visited Jinnah's mausoleum in 
Karachi, a dazzling white tomb set among gardens where many Pakistanis were 
spending a Sunday afternoon with their families. They told me that they were 
there to pay tribute to their great leader, but as I wandered through the 
museum I could not help but wonder whether those paying homage truly understood 
the man to whom they were paying their respects. Pakistan may today be a byword 
for Islamicextremism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international/story/0,,2125332,00.html> and 
military rule, but its founder was a dandyish Anglophile who drove a Bentley, 
enjoyed billiards and was described by one gushing biographer as "sounding like 
Ronald Coleman, dressing like Anthony Eden, adored by most women and admired by 
most men". Did the bearded men and burka-clad women know that their beloved 
Jinnah enjoyed drinking and, according to some reports, even ate ham sandwiches?

At the time of partition, Jinnah was already a sick man, ravaged by 
tuberculosis, and he died on September 11 1948, leaving a nation only one year 
old. In the years since, Pakistanis have been arguing ever since about Jinnah's 
vision for Pakistan. This was a man who fought passionately for a homeland for 
India's Muslims but who, in his inaugural speech as governor general, told 
Pakistanis: "You are free to go to your mosques or to any other place of 
worship in this state of Pakistan. You may belong to any religion or caste or 
creed - that has nothing to do with the business of the state." The longer I 
spent talking to those who knew him and those who had studied him, the more I 
was convinced that Jinnah's vision forPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> was that of a progressive, secular 
nation, and the more sure I became that, were he around today, he would be 
deeply disappointed at the nation he had brought into being.

Without Jinnah, there would not be a Pakistan, but comparing how India and 
Pakistan have fared during the past 60 years also made me wonder whether
partition 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/static/in_depth/south_asia/2002/india_pakistan/timeline/1947.stm>
 had perhaps been a mistake. The human cost of dividing India and Pakistan was 
huge, with the greatest migration in history and one million people killed in 
the months leading up to partition.

Sixty years on and today's India is sexy, forward-looking and economically 
powerful; Pakistan, on the other hand, remains trapped by the contradictions 
which led to its creation and in thegrip 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/home/index.cfm?id=1628&l=1> of the mullahs and the 
military. India has thousands of years of history its citizens can cite; 
Pakistan sits on an ancient land but as a nation it is younger than my mother. 
Muhammad Ali Jinnah firmly believed that Muslims would suffer in a united 
India; in this, he might have been correct but when you think about the two 
wars that India and Pakistan have fought and the fortunes that both nations 
have spent on defence spending one does wonder whether Jinnah's faith in 
separation as a solution was misplaced.

In his novel Shame 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099578611>
, Salman Rushdie described Pakistan as a "place insufficiently imagined"; when 
one considers its troubled history, perhaps it is not heretical to confess some 
sadness that it was ever imagined at all.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 