
Antony Beevor is a military historian who makes us look afresh at events we 
thought we understood. Hisnew book on D-day 
<http://www.antonybeevor.com/D-Day/index.htm>, impeccably timed for next 
weekend's 65th anniversary, lives up to that billing. No event in 20th-century 
warfare is more gleamingly defined in the national narrative than the invasion 
of Normandy in June 1944. For many, the D-day campaign is the apotheosis of 
Britain's good war, the brilliantly planned act of military heroism crowning 
the nation's lonely years of defiance against Hitler. This national myth has 
been jealously defended against American attempts to marginalise the British 
role and against what many see as impudent French efforts to get in on the act. 
Mr Beevor yields to no one in his appreciation of the audacity and bravery of 
the Normandy campaign. But he also unflinchingly reveals the morally dark parts 
of the story. His account of D-day finds a larger space than most versions for 
the sufferings of the French. More than 15,000 Norman civilians were killed by 
Allied bombing before D-day. Another 20,000 perished in the bombings and 
battles in the two months following the landings, particularly in Caen. More 
French civilians, 70,000 people, were killed by Allied bombs during world war 
two than British civilians by German bombs. Normandy's sacrifice has been too 
readily written out of earlier versions of the story. Mr Beevor's historical 
honesty is an important corrective and a reprimand to the anti-French prejudice 
of the British media this week.
 