
David Almond

Nothing by Janne Teller 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781905537327>
Translated by Martin Aitken
Strident Publishing

This beautiful and frightening book stopped me in my tracks. Like many other 
readers around the world, I couldn't put it down. Pierre Anton decides that 
life is meaningless, so he leaves school, climbs into a plum tree and stays 
there. His pals pelt him with rocks, mock him, plead with him, but cannot bring 
him down. They set out to prove that he is wrong: they begin to build a pile of 
meaningful things in an abandoned sawmill, challenging each other to contribute 
their most precious possessions. Their demands, their sacrifices and their 
search for the meaning of life become more extreme, more perilous, more 
terrifying.Nothing, a profound book set in a very ordinary world, has won a 
number of major European and US awards, and deserves to be better known in the 
UK.

Melvin Burgess 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2013/apr/11/melvin-burgess-life-in-writing>

Real World by Natsuo Kirino 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099523192>
Translated by Philip Gabriel
Vintage

I love Japanese fiction for the same reasons I love Japanese cinema. There is 
far less preoccupation with providing characters the consumer will admire, and 
a willingness to experiment with story in ways UK publishers are unwilling to 
encourage. Natsuo Kirino is a true cross-boundaries writer, unhampered by any 
sense of obligation to teach her readers lessons. LikeAnthony Burgess in A 
Clockwork Orange 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/14/clockwork-orange-anthony-burgess-review>
 she expects the reader to find their own sense in the text, rather than be led 
towards expectations society approves of. InReal World, a teenage girl suspects 
that the brutal murder of her neighbour has been carried out by the neighbour's 
own son. She and her friends gradually become obsessed by this act, and the boy 
who perpetrated it, and meet him secretly as he goes on the run. It is a story 
of obsession, disengagement and isolation. It's quite unlike anything that is 
written over here – we would be a good deal poorer without this translation.

Catherine Constable

Little Katia by EM Almedingen
OUP
 Karlson 
"Alone in that big house…" This is the opening chapter heading, and those five 
words completely beguiled me. I read on and was transported to the world of a 
young girl growing up in 19th-century Tsarist Russia. The descriptions of her 
life were precise, dramatic and enthralling. To my 10-year-old self, it was 
more like watching a film than reading: it was such a visual, sensual and 
harrowing book. The edited translation of Catherine Almedingen's memoirs by her 
great niece was a real touchstone of my childhood. And, as with the best books 
of childhood, it was also a signpost to my adult taste. I would still love Ivan 
Bunin withoutLittle Katia, but perhaps I would never have made the effort to 
find him without that love of Russian writing ignited as a child.

Julia Donaldson

Karlson on the Roof 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780192727725>
,Karlson Flies Again <> and The World's Best Karlson 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780192727732>
 by Astrid Lindgren
Translated by Sarah Death
OUP

I have always loved books in which an unreasonable magical character – such as 
Mary Poppins, Peter Pan or E Nesbit's wish-granting Psammead – enters an 
otherwise completely reasonable world. Astrid Lindgren is an expert in this 
genre, and I findKarlson On the Roof even funnier than Pippi Longstocking. A 
rotund, boastful little man with a helicopter propeller on his back, Karlson 
lives in a tiny house on the roof of an apartment inhabited by a "perfectly 
ordinary" seven-year-old boy. Together they have adventures, catching thieves 
and tricking a bad-tempered babysitter, but the real entertainment lies in 
Karlson's conversation. When the boy complains that his granny fusses about him 
changing his socks and getting into fights with Lars Janson, Karlson retorts: 
"And I suppose you think my granny isn't much good at nagging, eh? You don't 
believe she sets her alarm clock to ring its head off at five every morning, 
just so she'd have enough time to nag me about changing my socks and not 
fighting Lars Janson?" If you share my enjoyment of deliciously flawed logic, 
these books are for you.

Sally Gardner

Emil and the Detectives 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099572848>
 by Erich Kästner
Translated by Eileen Hall
Vintage

This has been one of my favourite children's books for years. It was 
originally published in 1929 and I was nine years old when it was first read 
to me and my brother. Back then England wasn't keen on showing the human face 
of Germany, which made this book even more delicious. I loved the fact that 
Emil is entrusted to take 140 marks to Berlin for his grandmother. He goes to 
great pains to keep it safe, and when it is stolen on the train it is almost 
unbearable. Emil's dogged bravery and determination that he will get it back 
are inspiring. This is a modern fairy tale and detective story, which has a 
good measure of darkness and adventure at its core, and avoids moral undertones.
 Moomin 

Adèle Geras

Vitello Scratches a Car  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781782690023>
andVitello Gets a Yucky Girlfriend 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781782690030>
 by Kim Fupz Aakeson and Niels Bo Bojesen
Translated by Ruth Garde
Pushkin Children's Books

The name caught me offguard. "Vitello" is Italian for "calf" so I assumed our 
hero was Italian, but he's a Dane. He is an endearing 
hero: flawed, mischievous, but also curious and gifted, with an optimistic 
imagination. In the second book, which I like even better than the first, the 
writer catches the mixture of disgust and strange fascination that little boys 
feel at the prospect of little girls. New people move in next door, Vitello 
hopes for "cool boys" called things like Wayne, but ends up with the 
redoubtable Camilla – who has ideas of her own… These books are a perfect 
bridge between traditional picture books and un-illustrated texts. Try them on 
any boys who think they don't like reading.

Gill Lewis

The Moomin books 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/dec/07/moomins-great-flood-tove-jansson-review>
 by Tove Jansson
Translated by Thomas Warburton, Kingsley Hart, Elizabeth Portch, David McDuff 
and Sophie Hannah
Macmillan

As a child I was drawn to the Moomins, the creation of the Finnish author and 
artist Tove Jansson. I loved Jansson's bizarre and wonderful creatures, such as 
lovable and reliable Moomintroll, the philosophical Snufkin, the bossy 
Hemulens, the brave, chaos-loving Little My and the Hattifatteners, who roam in 
silent herds. I followed their incredible adventures in the Moomin Valley and 
across seas to distant islands, before they returned and stuffed their bellies 
with pine needles to sleep through the long dark winter. The characters seemed 
so different, and yet strangely familiar. Jansson has the ability to weave the 
ordinary with the extraordinary, to tell a simple story with deep underlying 
themes.

Marcus Sedgwick

The Asterix books 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444004915>
 by René Goscinny and Albert Uderzo
Translated by Anthea Bell and Derek Hockridge
Orion

When I was young, my Dad ran a painting weekend just outside Rye every year, 
one of the highlights of which was the chance to visit a bookshop and buy 
anything I wanted. And what I almost always chose was an Asterix book. It was a 
long time before I realised that these books weren't British, and longer still 
before I understood the enormous skill of Anthea Bell and Derek Hockridge in 
making these translations, complete with all their wonderful puns, work. But 
what does it matter to a small person where a book has come from? All that 
matters is that the book is good; and in the UK we miss out on wonderful 
fiction that's published overseas. Of course, the main obstacle is the lack of 
second languages for many British people, even among book publishers, but I'm 
glad thatAsterix <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> was one early 
success – I still chuckle over the cheese orgies fromAsterix in Switzerland, 
though shouting "Into the lake with weights tied to his feet!" over a fondue 
can get you some funny looks.

Meg Rosoff

Duck, Death and the Tulip 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/dec/19/wolf-erlbruch-children-picturebook-review>
 by Wolf Erlbruch
Translated by Catherine Chidgey
Gecko Press

Duck, Death and the Tulip is the creation of award-winning German artist and 
writer Wolf Erlbruch, who has chosen childhood as his subject in the manner of, 
say, William Golding or Harper Lee. Erlbruch is a much-venerated figure in 
Germany; his subjects emerge from the uncozy side of childhood. The story is 
simple. A duck notices that she is being followed. She is scared stiff, and who 
can blame her, for her stalker is an eerie figure in a checked robe with a 
skull for a head. Ehrlbruch gives the impression that he is an artist incapable 
of sentimentality, but his drawings have a delicacy and a sweet humour that 
help us cope with the immensity of the subject. Slowly the two become if not 
friends, exactly, then familiars. They speculate about the afterlife, and Duck 
begins to accept the presence of Death in her life. Eventually, on a still 
night as snowflakes drift down, she lies down and stops breathing. Erlbruch's 
simple eloquence in the face of life's greatest inevitability makes this one 
of the all-time great works of children's literature.
 