
"I take serious offence to the RNC being in my fuckin' city; it's really 
pissing me off. It's the same scumbags who don't live anywhere near you, but 
are still going to organize a force to stop you from having an abortion - 
because they care about you. The same people want to feel our pain over 9/11, 
but they don't realize that we're in a completely different place. The people 
who actually experienced it have no connection to these people coming in. They 
didn't experience it, they don't understand what we feel, and they don't 
understand us. It's just manipulation." - Brooklyn, NY, rapper El-P

Art Spiegelman's works, especially the groundbreaking Holocaust comic Maus, 
have always been as much about phenomena occurring outside his vertiginous 
comic strip frames as it has been about the events within them. This is because 
the world around the famed comix lifer has always seemed on the verge of 
annihilation - as he confesses more than once in his sprawling, sharply 
satirical In the Shadow of No Towers, a collection of strips built by 
Spiegelman over the last three years and finally published by Pantheon Books 
just before the third anniversary of 9/11.

In his foreword to No Towers, Spiegelman writes that the book's gorgeous 
"single-page units," printed on 42 pages of heavy card stock and designed to 
resemble the Sunday newspaper comics panels of a bygone era, "corresponded to 
my existential conviction that I might not live long enough to see them 
published." His parents' ordeal in Auschwitz at the hands of the Nazis, he goes 
on, taught him to "always keep [his] bags packed." Spiegelman freely admits 
that the psychic terrors of 9/11 corresponded to a deep-seated "self-inflicted" 
trauma, a fervent belief that Armageddon - both the religious conflict and the 
Bruce Willis movie - was, as the Rolling Stones sang in Gimme Shelter, "just a 
shot away".

This kind of unrelenting dread has kept artists of all kinds in full 
sublimation mode since the invention of the cave drawing, and has provided 
human culture with no shortage of standout works. But this latent fear has also 
invigorated the capitalist schadenfreude of everyone from Fox News to Manhattan 
street merchants to the Bush administration, not to mention the supposedly 
liberal New York publications that avoided Spiegelman's post-9/11 rants like 
they were undocumented Arab immigrants. And Spiegelman, always the astute 
cultural critic, knows this better than anyone.

Indeed, his July-August 2003 installment of the No Towers series dedicates 
itself to the profit others have reaped off the backs of citizens thrown into 
chaos by a national tragedy. In one of two vertical strips (as with everything 
Spiegelman, the arrangement and construction of his comics deviate from 
standard convention whenever possible), one of the artist's doppelgangers holds 
up a garish tourist trap clock emblazoned with the twin towers, a looming 
American eagle, FDNY figurines and a United States flag, confessing that he was 
an eyewitness and even a participant in "the bombardment of kitsch" that hit 
the US after 9/11 like an X-rated Xtina video on Kazaa.

In the second strip, the same clock blows up like a bomb in Spiegelman's face, 
as cowboy boots branded with dollar signs fall from the sky on a fleeing 
populace filled with cartoon legends like Annie, Wimpy, Hapless Hooligan (who 
repeatedly serves, as do the meek mice from Maus, as a Spiegelman alter ego), 
Charlie Brown and many more. Even this summer's Republican National Convention 
- the capitalization on misfortune to end all capitalizations on misfortune - 
is identified by the author as an example of tragedy "transformed into 
travesty". This must-have collection of hard-hitting, self-deprecating strips 
on life during wartime was ignored during its creation by the very publications 
that made Spiegelman a big name in New York literary and artistic circles: the 
New York Times, the New York Review of Books and the New Yorker (which has both 
commissioned Spiegelman for cover art and employed his wife, Francoise Mouly, 
as an art editor). As he admits in the foreword, "Outside of the left-leaning 
alternative press, mainstream publications that have actively solicited work 
from me ... fled when I offered these pages or excerpts from the series." In 
fact, the only mainstream homes for his controversial work were found in the 
countries - Germany, France, Italy, the Netherlands - that were lambasted by 
Donald Rumsfeld and George W Bush as "old Europe" and derided by the American 
media.

In a sense, this neglect helped push the work further. "The feelings of 
dislocation reflected in these No Towers pages," Spiegelman writes, "arose in 
part from the lack of outcry against the outrages [of the Bush administration] 
while they were being committed". Now, in the most heated political season of 
recent generations, those who once spurned Spiegelman's work have recovered 
their cojones, and No Towers is something of a hot commodity.

New Yorkers like rapper El-P, quoted above, are justifiably sick and tired of 
facile 9/11 sympathies that turn out to be marketing gimmicks. But no one's 
going to accuse Spiegelman of cashing in on the tragedy's third anniversary, 
and not just because he is a New York lifer who has consistently raged against 
the machines of oppression and manipulation since his days editing the seminal 
80s graphic mag Raw. The Pantheon press kit is now packed with fawning 
headlines from the publications that showed him the door two years ago, but 
Spiegelman can only control what ends up on the spectacular colored pages that 
set In the Shadow of No Towers apart from every other 9/11 interrogation.

As Spiegelman notes in No Towers while fleeing the crumbling World Trade 
Center and encountering a giant billboard for Arnold Schwarzenegger's 
fireman-revenge drama Collateral Damage, irony is not dead. Neither is the idea 
that art can sometimes transcend the pleasure, pain and callous commerce of the 
world that generates it. Spiegelman's highly personal exploration of the 
horrors of 9/11 and how they nearly destroyed him (even as they were being 
perverted by the "Architects of Armageddon," as he calls Bush, Cheney and 
Rumsfeld, into a blank check for imperial aggression) offers a more powerful 
criticism of postmodern America's state of affairs than most of those found in 
this season's Bush-bashing titles. Even better, this lavishly produced, 
eye-popping collection costs only $20 - a bargain for a work of comics art this 
sophisticated (and likely to become a collector's item).

If anything, the fact that the American intelligentsia finally seems ready to 
admit that Spiegelman was speaking truth to power in the dark years of 2002 and 
2003 ought to make us sleep a little better at night - at least until, as 
Spiegelman explains in No Towers, the sky starts falling again and the duct 
tape market catches fire.

Â· Scott Thill is the editor of Morphizm.com and the author of Salon's "Writing 
in the Margins" column. He has written on media, politics and music for 
Popmatters, All Music Guide, AOL, XLR8R and other publications.
 