
Car dealerships operator Inchcape saw its price slashed on Monday after 
Société Générale warned that that two of the group's core markets, Australia 
and Singapore, were looking weak.

Analyst John Baillie suggested it was "time to switch gear and sell". Seven 
interest rate hikes and retail profit warnings are worrying Australian 
consumers. And in Singapore, whereInchcape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/inchcape> is the exclusive distributor of 
Toyota, BMW has taken the number one spot.

The shares fell 8.2%, or by 33p, to 374p. The falls exceeded even those of the 
UK's largest banks yesterday, which were on the wrong end of a widespread 
sell-off in financial stocks that saw theFTSE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 close 91 points down at 5,752.

A bullish note from Goldman Sachs on Aggreko failed to spark a rise in the 
temporary power supplier's share price. Goldman said it believedAggreko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aggreko> had an "unrivalled industry 
leadership position", pinning a £27.48 price target on the stock. The shares 
fell 53p despite the push, down 2.6% to £19.69.

Recruitment group SThree was a faller despite announcing a special dividend 
and a 21% rise in first-half profits. The shares were 4.3% down, losing 18p to 
reach 390p.

Ashtead was also lower, falling 5.9%, or by 10p to 156p, hitting its lowest 
point since December. The shares were at 176p ten days ago and drifted all last 
week, with brokers unclear on what the trigger for the falls was.

Good news from Spain prompted a temporary lift in the share price of Imperial 
Tobacco. Analysts at Citigroup said a rise in the price of British American 
Tobacco's Pall Mall brand in Spain "confirms the price war is over". Imperial 
shares finished a fraction down, dragged down by the general lack of 
confidence, but outperformed the market. The shares fell 2p, or by 0.1%, to 
£21.48.

Thomas Cook agreed a deal with its lenders to extend its borrowing at a lower 
rate. The shares fell 4.9%, or by 3.5p, to 67p.

Outdoor retailer Blacks Leisure saw its shares slipping further after Friday's 
announcement that it was seeking to raise capital. Blacks said on Friday that 
it had enough money to keep going until at least February when "there may be a 
need to raise more capital if we want to roll out more stores". The shares fell 
34% on Friday, and a further 20% on Monday as investors continued to sell. The 
shares were worth just 8.6p at the close. New CEO Julia Reynolds starts next 
month.
 