
Before I'm away for a week, a belated catchup with a good post over at 
flavorwire.com 
<http://flavorwire.com/76686/indie-rocks-5-favorite-classical-composers#more-76686>
 (thanks toPeter Meanwell <http://twitter.com/petermeanwell>, breakfast 
researcher <http://londonreviewofbreakfasts.blogspot.com/>, Ligeti and ukulele 
fanatic, and Radio 3 producer, for alerting me to it) on the links between 
today's indie scene and yesterday's – well, and today's – classical composers. 
Max Willens has come up with a quixotic concatenation of influences, from 
echoes of Stockhausen in arecent album from Dirty Projectors 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2009/dec/17/dirty-projectors-bitte-orca>
,John Adams 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/oct/19/classicalmusicandopera-usnationalsecurity>
's subliminal inspiration onOwen Pallett 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/jan/16/owen-pallett-interview-heartland> 
andArvo Pärt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2008/may/29/timetogivepartarest>'s 
effect on Radiohead.

There's already a well-documented link between the postwar classical and pop 
scenes; more intriguingly, Max suggests a speculative link between Monteverdi's 
madrigals, Dirty Projectors (again) andA Sunny Day in Glasgow 
<http://www.myspace.com/sunnydayinglasgow>. It's obvious to hear what he means 
in A Sunny Day in Glasgow's Secrets at the Prom, but Temecula Sunrise has a 
more oblique relationship with Claudio's polyphony, to my ears at least.

But the point of Max's post isn't that these pop musicians have definitively 
been influenced by the classical tracks he chooses, rather that there are 
musical connections between them, whether intentional or unintentional. And 
it's more than a bit of fun to think about whatBjörk 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WiyeDPyRBDc> has in common with Stockhausen, 
whatBrian Eno <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B9kPIp4MtX0> shares with Erik 
Satie or John Cage, or whatBattles <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IpGp-22t0lU> 
might have got from Steve Reich and medieval techniques ofhocketing 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iDUTNUof-Mg>.

Important, too, to realise that this isn't a one-way street of classical 
influencing pop, but it works just as powerfully the other way round: among 
hundreds of examples you could choose, listen to whatThomas Adès 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2007/feb/26/classicalmusicandopera.tomservice> 
has been inspiredto do with techno 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ArrnrolcC6M&feature=related> (listen from 
3'54'' into this clip), what Tansy Davies has learned from funk 
<http://www.tansydavies.com/?27,Default>, or what Anna Meredith has got from 
beatboxing <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rto5HB1rHFE>. It's a mind and 
ear-opening exercise to think cross-musically like this, and besides, it's what 
we're all doing consciously and subconsciously every day. As Zee comments at 
flavorwire: "Pop music and classical music aren't supposed to be different 
worlds … if you listen with an open mind, you will start to pick out the 
similarities between music from 250 years ago and music from today. It's the 
process of putting it on an ivory pedestal that has led to its lessening 
popularity, and thankfully, people have been taking it off that pedestal and 
bringing it back into our world."

Everyone has their own collection of pop-classical connections. Where would 
Frank Zappa <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fhz5LTcPUkc> have been without 
Varèse <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edgard_Var%C3%A8se>, Stravinsky, or 
Webern? Oh, and I recently discovered the Coronation Street theme tune in the 
horn parts in the first bar ofNielsen's Fourth Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HJTcvxk69qs> – not quite the same, but one of 
those musical coincidences that you can't get out of your head once you've 
found it. Meanwhile, thanks to Max for introducing me to the Knife'sTomorrow, 
in a Year 
<http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0035YPYR2?ie=UTF8&tag=flavorpill0e-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B0035YPYR2>
 – they might have started out as a Scandinavian synth-pop combo, but now 
they've written an electronic opera about Charles Darwin, and it's fascinating. 
To my ears, it fuses John Carpenter's film scores with pseudo-operatic camp, 
whereas to Max's, it mashes up Varèse and Dufay. It's probably all that, and 
more.
 