
A photo made the rounds recently, inciting the ire of the internet in the way 
only a simple photo can. It showed pre-peeled oranges neatly packaged in clear 
plastic boxes, sitting on a shelf at a Whole Foods store.

I’ll admit I joined in on the mockery, too. I glanced at the picture when it 
popped up on my feed and I remember rolling my eyes. I remember being 
momentarily disheartened by our laziness. And typically, this would have been 
the extent of my interaction – a brief two-second downvote for humanity.

Later on in the day, however, I came across a comment about the photo, buried 
pages deep. It spoke about how, for disabled people, those suffering from 
arthritis, or those who don’t have full use of their hands, peeling oranges is 
completely out of the question. Suddenly, the plastic packaging took on a much 
different slant.

Whole Foods ended up apologizing, the oranges disappeared, and the world moved 
on. But I kept thinking about what it takes to belong to the environmental 
movement.
Nathalie Gordon (@awlilnatty) 
If only nature would find a way to cover these oranges so we didn't need to 
waste so much plastic on them.pic.twitter.com/00YECaHB4D 
<https://t.co/00YECaHB4D>
 <https://twitter.com/awlilnatty/status/705375555030556672> March 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/awlilnatty/status/705375555030556672> 
Green-minded people can be incredibly judgmental. People active in the 
community often have their worth and merit judged by the number of faddish 
initiatives they have taken on or ignored (100-mile diet, zero-impact,zero-waste
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/22/zero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions>
), the number of solar panels they’ve installed, or the kilometers they’ve 
cycled.

But what happens when disability or disadvantage render many of the basics of 
an eco-friendly life inaccessible, or even impossible? Is the environmental 
movement exclusionary by nature?

Zero-waste bloggers: the millennials who can fit a year's worth of trash in a 
jar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/22/zero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions>
The unofficial face of trendy environmentalism is a smiling white woman 
meandering through a sunny farmers’ market, leafy greens popping up through her 
reusable shopping bags. It’s a shallow representation of a diverse movement, 
and one that ignores the faceted contributions and challenges experienced by 
those outside this narrow representation.

These challenges include disability, but they also extend to geography and, 
perhaps most importantly, socio-economic status (picture someone trying to 
locate one of those sunny farmers’ marketsin a food desert 
<http://americannutritionassociation.org/newsletter/usda-defines-food-deserts>).

On one hand, some measure of economic disadvantage seems to help eco-friendly 
causes, at least in the abstract. The world’s richest 10% are responsible for
fully 50% of carbon emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/02/worlds-richest-10-produce-half-of-global-carbon-emissions-says-oxfam>
, and the poor are disproportionately likely to use public transportation and 
avoid driving and long-haul flights. But this isn’t so much choice as it is 
circumstance, and when it feels like the door’s shutting on your face because 
you can’t afford organic food, it’s a hard sell to want to identify with a 
movement.

In a piece examining the role of minorities in environmentalism, writer 
Ann-Marie Alcantara, herself a millennial Latina,states 
<http://ensia.com/voices/the-end-of-exclusive-environmentalism/> that 
“environmentalism is once again in danger of becoming irrelevant if membership 
to its ranks remains – intentionally or otherwise – exclusive.” 
Environmentalism can’t afford to exclude, police, and grant participation to 
the handful of individuals able to live the perfect green life.

When eco-friendly concerns become fractured and some fight for access to 
healthy food while others protest a vital access to clean water, it’s hard to 
identify a clear-cut solution. As a result, the answers that do emerge tend to 
pander to the group with the louder voice. We see the needs of minorities, 
disabled persons and the poor consistently ignored in favour of trendier issues 
(such asenergy-generating spin studios 
<http://earth911.com/eco-tech/gym-uses-indoor-cycling-classes-to-generate-power/>
).

Meanwhile, as a piece on Grist 
<http://grist.org/poverty-the-environment-on-economic-and-ecological-survival/> 
reminds us, “the worst consequences of environmental degradation are visited on 
the homes, workplaces, families, and bodies of the poor.”

An eco-friendly life shouldn’t be a luxury afforded only to those with lots of 
time, lots of money, or both. It’s also naive to think that environmental 
problems such as pollution, water shortages and global warming will affect us 
equally, and expecting equal participation in the form of a one-size-fits-all 
prescription for the perfect green life is just as ignorant.

There’s a flip side to environmentalism that doesn’t get nearly as much media 
play. This bit isn’t about sold-out Tesla cars or solar panels, but decidedly 
unglamorous, not Instagram-worthy tasks such as washing out compost buckets and 
owning clothing until it wears out. It supports a radical course of action 
summed up last week by aGuardian commenter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/19/earth-day-five-things-to-make-a-difference-plastic-paper-towels#comment-72682080>
: it’s about doing what is right any time you have any choice at all.

It acknowledges the limitations and systemic roadblocks in the way of making 
eco- friendly change. Perhaps, then, it also allows for pre-peeled oranges.
 