
Whistleblowers' allegations of a culture within G4S <http://www.g4s.com/> that 
ignored health and safety risks and knowingly put lives in jeopardy is shocking 
but not surprising (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/feb/08/g4s-deportees-lethal-risk-warning-mubenga?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 9 February). The risks of positional asphyxia have been well-known since the 
April 2004 restraint death of 15-year-old Gareth Myatt in the secure training 
centre at Rainsbrook.

As the organisation supporting Jimmy Mubenga's widow and other families 
bereaved by restraint-related deaths in custody, we know how crucial robust 
public scrutiny is. Two weeks ago an inquest jury returned a highly critical 
verdict at the inquest into the restraint-related death of 14-year-oldAdam 
Rickwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/jan/27/unlawful-restraint-inquest-adam-rickwood?INTCMP=SRCH>
 in Hassockfield secure centre. It was the six-year legal battle againstSerco 
<http://www.serco.com/> that exposed the unlawful use of force against children 
in detention.

That a culture of secrecy currently pervades the use of force on detainees is 
illustrated byUK Border Agency <http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/>'s recent 
rejection of Inquest's freedom of information request for an unredacted copy of 
the guidance on the use of force provided to escorting contractors. The home 
affairs select committee must now instigate a full parliamentary inquiry.

Deborah Coles

Co-director, Inquest <http://www.inquest.org.uk/>

â€¢ It is ironic that 60 years after the UN convention for refugees 
<http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49da0e466.html> came into force, many of those not 
given permission to stay here appear to be treated with such disregard during 
their last hours on British soil. We would therefore urge the home affairs 
select committee to scrutinise these allegations to guarantee there will never 
be another tragedy like that of Jimmy Mubenga late last year.

Donna Covey

Chief executive, Refugee Council <http://www.refugeecouncil.org.uk/>
 