
In the fall of 2011, author Ann Patchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ann-patchett> and publishing veteran Karen 
Hayes opened Parnassus Books in Nashville, Tennessee. “It was never my dream to 
open a bookstore,” said Ann. “When our bookstores closed, I waited a 
respectable period of time, certain that someone more qualified or interested 
would show some initiative, but it didn’t happen. I opened a bookstore because 
I didn’t want to live in a city without one.”

What’s your favorite section in the store?


Karen Hayes: Oh, that’s hard to pick. I think the art section. Well, or the 
music section. I don’t know! I like the whole store. Maybe the front table, 
actually, because it’s always fresh. There’s always new stuff coming in.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

KH: More event space. It would be fun to have drinks in the store. And I would 
love to do a bookmobile someday, so we could pop up in different neighborhoods.
 Ann Patchett with one of the store dogs. Photograph: Literary Hub 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?

KH: I know we love what we do. And I know we might be a little unusual: not 
only do we have lovely human booksellers, but we have canines on staff! Our 
shop dogs are very cute, and everyone loves being able to bring their dogs to 
work, but more than that, I think they add to our friendly atmosphere. Kids 
love them, adults love them. We have people come in and the first thing they 
ask is, “Where are the dogs?” If it’s a day where the dogs don’t happen to be 
here, sometimes customers are disappointed. Books and puppies, you can’t go 
wrong. We even gave them their own blog –Shop Dog Diaries 
<http://parnassusmusing.net/category/shop-dog-diaries/%20> – on our store lit 
journalMUSING <http://parnassusmusing.net/>.

Who’s your weirdest regular?

KH: Our weirdest regulars are toddlers. They get really excited about the 
books they like and really vocal about the things they don’t like. Sometimes 
they have so much fun at the train table that they don’t want to leave and we 
have to help the parents lure them to the door with stickers. The kids’ section 
is really close to our back office, too, and toddlers have no fear about 
walking right on back to the office to say hello or look for a dog.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-parnassus-books-ann-patchetts-store-in-nashville%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cd5981e4dcb5a2629c1aacccb52ce4e632092ed%2F0_0_700_296%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20Parnassus%20Books%2C%20Ann%20Patchett's%20store%20in%20Nashville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-parnassus-books-ann-patchetts-store-in-nashville%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20Parnassus%20Books%2C%20Ann%20Patchett%27s%20store%20in%20Nashville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-parnassus-books-ann-patchetts-store-in-nashville%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cd5981e4dcb5a2629c1aacccb52ce4e632092ed%2F0_0_700_296%2F700.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

KH: Definitely our grand opening. We had close to 3,000 people come through 
the doors that day. Our store is still small, but back then it was even 
smaller, about 2,500 square feet. We opened with a puppet show; we had a YA 
signing in the afternoon by multiple authors; and in the evening, we threw a 
cocktail party with 30 or 40 local authors. There was so much excitement and SO 
many people. At one point, we looked around and thought, “Has the whole city 
come through this little store today?’

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Ann Patchett flies flag for indie bookshops with her own store
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/02/ann-patchett-indie-bookshops-nashville-store>
Ann Patchett: The bookstore of my youth was Mills. Mills could not have been 
more than 700 square feet, and the people who worked there remembered who you 
were and what you read, even if you were 10. If I wanted to re-create that kind 
of bookstore, one that valued books and readers above muffins and adorable 
plastic watering cans, a store that recognized it could not possibly stock 
every single book that every single person might be looking for, and so stocked 
the books the staff had read and liked and could recommend—if I wanted to 
re-create the bookish happiness of my childhood, then maybe I was the person 
for the job. Or maybe not. I wanted to go into retail about as much as I wanted 
to go into the Army.

If you weren’t running a bookstore what would you be doing?

KH: I’d still be selling books in one way or another, maybe working for a 
publisher. I’ve always been in the book and publishing world.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

KH: The people. This really is a family—my bookselling family. And I’m always 
amazed at how far people are willing to travel to come to the bookstore.

The staff shelf

What are Parnassus Books’ booksellers reading?

 * Tiny Beautiful Things by Cheryl Strayed 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tiny-beautiful-things.html> (2012). Ann 
recommends: “Strayed’s essays are so generous, complicated, and raw that every 
one of them was shocking to me — shocking in that she was willing to stick her 
fingers so deep inside the muscle of her own heart to bring back exactly what 
the reader needed. I’ve never read anything like it.” 
 * Euphoria by Lily King 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/euphoria-341430.html> (2014). Karen 
recommends: “Set in the 1930s, this amazing novel tells the story of three 
young anthropologists studying the tribes of New Guinea. A passionate love 
triangle develops that threatens their bonds, their careers, and ultimately 
their lives.”  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-parnassus-books-ann-patchetts-store-in-nashville%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e5f15753a22b07f61c185b3474ff12657d0d9f1%2F0_0_1431_2034%2F1431.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20Parnassus%20Books%2C%20Ann%20Patchett's%20store%20in%20Nashville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-parnassus-books-ann-patchetts-store-in-nashville%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20Parnassus%20Books%2C%20Ann%20Patchett%27s%20store%20in%20Nashville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-parnassus-books-ann-patchetts-store-in-nashville%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e5f15753a22b07f61c185b3474ff12657d0d9f1%2F0_0_1431_2034%2F1431.jpg>
 * The Cuckoo’s Calling by Robert Galbraith 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/cuckoo-s-calling-3.html> (2013). Niki, 
marketing and events director recommends: “I’m always in search of a good, 
action-packed mystery that doesn’t make me feel like I’ve lost IQ points. JK 
Rowling’s first foray into mystery writing is absolutely fantastic. There’s a 
good plot, pacing, and it’s a completely delightful reading experience. I 
devoured it, and the follow-up, in very short order.” 
 * Brown Girl Dreaming by Jacqueline Woodson 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/brown-girl-dreaming.html> (2014). Ann 
recommends: “This book is so big-hearted and open that there’s room for the 
reader to walk right into the story and experience what it’s like to live and 
dream alongside the author. I’ve bought a dozen copies of this book and given 
it to people as young as 10 and as old as 92. Every single person has loved it.” 