
Readings <http://www.readings.com.au/> first opened in 1969, and it was a 
partnership of three – Ross Reading, his wife Dorothy Reading, and Peter Reid. 
At the time, Australia had a very small local publishing industry and most 
books came from overseas, as Australia was regarded as part of the British 
Commonwealth via UK publishers.

Breaking borders: how to make the best bookshop in the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/16/breaking-borders-how-to-make-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world>
The Readings owners saw an opportunity to bypass the UK gatekeepers and import 
these new books directly from wholesalers. In 1976, Ross Reading retired and 
sold the business to Mark Rubbo, Greg Young and Steve Smith, who owned several 
record stores in Melbourne. Rubbo, Young and Smith continued running theCarlton 
shop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/16/breaking-borders-how-to-make-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world>
, and rebadged their record shops as Readings stores as well, adding books to 
the mix. Business boomed through the 80s and 90s, and Rubbo became managing 
director of Readings, eventually receiving a Medal of the Order of Australia 
(OAM) for service to the community through fostering an awareness of Australian 
literature as a bookseller.

Readings now has five stores around Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>, plus a growing 
e-commerce business, and will be opening a sixth store later this year. It 
produces the Readings Monthly, a print newsletter featuring staff reviews, 
features and interviews, which has over 15,000 subscribers. Readings is 
involved with more than 300 events per year, with over 200 of those held in its 
shops. It runs a charitable arm, administers two awards for early-career 
Australian writers, has a very active online presence, and, of course, it sells 
lots and lots of books.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1d4257d99b45600cd9229f22e6c460c0ac1240b%2F0_30_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Melbourne's%20Readings%2C%20the%20best%20bookshop%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Melbourne%27s%20Readings%2C%20the%20best%20bookshop%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1d4257d99b45600cd9229f22e6c460c0ac1240b%2F0_30_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 The interior of Readings’s store in the State Library of Victoria. Photograph: 
Courtesy of Readings 
What’s your favorite section of the store?

Mark Rubbo (managing director): I love our Australian sections – literature 
and nonfiction. I also have a secret passion for remainders.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Mark: More books!

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Mark: I think we have a clear vision and execute that really well. Everything 
we do is driven by our passion for Australian literature and supporting 
Australian authors – be it the merchandising in our stores, the features in the 
Readings Monthly, the focus of our online marketing or our extensive events 
program. Our two most recent initiatives are the establishment of a charitable 
arm, The Readings Foundation, which supports literacy and the arts, and the 
creation of two awards for early-career Australian authors –the Readings prize 
for new Australian fiction 
<http://www.readings.com.au/the-readings-prize-for-new-australian-fiction> and 
the Readings children’s book prize. We sold 2,000 copies of last year’s winner 
of our Readings prize for new Australian fiction,The Other Side of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/20/the-other-side-of-the-world-stephanie-bishop-review>
 by Stephanie Bishop; the publisher had to reprint because of our award.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd846c80d1c220edcf702f0e3c04a88b67df8ccc%2F0_0_800_1120%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Melbourne's%20Readings%2C%20the%20best%20bookshop%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Melbourne%27s%20Readings%2C%20the%20best%20bookshop%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd846c80d1c220edcf702f0e3c04a88b67df8ccc%2F0_0_800_1120%2F800.jpg>
 Mark Rubbo, Readings’s manager. Photograph: Courtesy of Readings 
Who’s your favorite regular?

Mark: A woman who works for our Department of Justice; she used to be the 
sheriff of Melbourne which was pretty interesting. She comes in most weeks, 
buys many books, is charming and lovely to staff, tells us how great we are and 
has very good taste – doesn’t get better than that!

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Mark: Shoplifting is something most booksellers don’t like to talk about – I 
reckon I’ve had $4m stolen that way in my 40 years bookselling – goodness the 
things we could have done with that! Sadly we don’t catch that many, but one 
day a gentleman left the store with a very full bag and set off the alarm. I 
approached him and asked him if I could look in the bag. “No.” He didn’t have 
time as he had an appointment to keep. “Fine,” I said. “It’s a lovely day, do 
you mind if I walk with you?” He grunted and we set off down the street, with 
me trying to make conversation. After about two blocks, he put his bag on the 
pavement and said “I have to go now.”

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Mark: I remember visiting Cheshires in Little Collins Street in Melbourne; it 
was a basement full of books and erudite booksellers. They also had this cool 
system of making transactions. When you bought something your money was put 
into a canister that was flung across the room on wires to the cashier who’d 
make the change and send it back to the salesperson – I loved that.

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Mark: Not sure – at university I started studying medicine. Maybe that?

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Mark: It is all-consuming but so rewarding. In Australia, at least, we have a 
wonderful industry and wonderful colleagues – be it writers, publishers or 
booksellers.

The staff shelf

What are Readings’s booksellers reading?

 * The Other Side of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/20/the-other-side-of-the-world-stephanie-bishop-review>
 by Stephanie Bishop (2015). Elke Power (editor of Readings Monthly) 
recommends: “Stephanie Bishop has a rare gift for capturing the intangible – 
nostalgia, homesickness, ambivalence about identity and family, and more – and 
casting it anew. The Other Side of the World is an exciting contribution to the 
Australian literary canon and a deserving winner of the Readings prize for new 
Australian fiction 2015.”

 * The Family Law 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Family_Law.html?id=5vpKN5Gmrc0C&redir_esc=y&hl=en>
 by Benjamin Law(2016). Lian Hinge (digital marketing manager) recommends: “The 
Family Law is snort-laughingly funny. Law’s acerbic wit coupled with his 
unconventional family remind me a little of a David Sedaris’ Dress Your Family 
In Corduroy and Denim but the distinctly Australian voice (coupled with my own 
experience of growing up in an Asian family) lends the book a delicious 
familiarity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9c2ca34e8f287d20235835341ae49a4652039c2%2F0_0_670_1024%2F670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Melbourne's%20Readings%2C%20the%20best%20bookshop%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Melbourne%27s%20Readings%2C%20the%20best%20bookshop%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9c2ca34e8f287d20235835341ae49a4652039c2%2F0_0_670_1024%2F670.jpg>
 * The Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/22/the-bush-by-don-watson-review-driven-by-the-burning-truth>
 by Don Watson(2014). Mark Rubbo (managing director) recommends: “I love this 
book; I love the writing, I love the language, I love the breadth and the 
insights. It took Watson seven years to write this book and it was worth the 
wait. What does the bush and what we’ve done to it mean to us? Watson mines our 
history to explain our country in a most marvellous way.” 
 * The Natural Way of Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/19/charlotte-woods-the-natural-way-of-things-wins-50000-stella-prize>
 by Charlotte Wood (2015). Jemima Bucknell (online fulfillment manager) 
recommends: “Charlotte Wood’s The Natural Way of Things is a haunting vision of 
a dystopian present and an allegory of patriarchal complexities. Her rhythmic 
prose ties you to each page, mixing images of brutality, nurture, survival and 
sex to paint a sincere portrait of the modern feminine condition.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04c24c24d60e5aed3bea69cf4c4fc0ebf6e94c85%2F0_0_703_500%2F703.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Melbourne's%20Readings%2C%20the%20best%20bookshop%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Melbourne%27s%20Readings%2C%20the%20best%20bookshop%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04c24c24d60e5aed3bea69cf4c4fc0ebf6e94c85%2F0_0_703_500%2F703.jpg>
 * Rivertime <http://www.readings.com.au/products/18130976/rivertime> by Trace 
Balla (2014). Angela Crocombe (children’s books buyer) recommends: “We chose 
graphic novel Rivertime as the winner of the Readings children’s book prize in 
2015 for many reasons: it is unique, we love its artistry and it is a stunning 
debut that heralds the arrival of an exciting new Australian 
author–illustrator.”  