
9.55pm GMT 

That’s it from me. What have we learned tonight? Largely, that they play a lot 
of international friendlies - especially when you’re trying to keep an eye on 
all of them. Should you want updates onPortugal v Cameroon, you can head to our 
scores service here <https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/3704835>. Or 
you can followSpain 0-0 Italy here Ian McCourt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/spain-v-italy-live>. Thanks 
for your emails - bye!

9.53pm GMT 

GOAL! Australia 3-4 Ecuador

Ha ha ha ha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/06/australia-ecuador-friendly-live>
.

9.52pm GMT 

FULL TIME! France 2-0 Holland

That’s that. France with a strong victory over Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> in which the home side were much 
the stronger.

9.51pm GMT 

That’s full time: England 1-0 Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/england-denmark-international-friendly-mbm>
. There is a minute left as France lead Holland 2-0.

9.48pm GMT 

Jacob Steinberg has the closing minutes of England v Denmark here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/england-denmark-international-friendly-mbm>
. While in France, Cabaye has just fizzed a free-kick past the Dutch post.

Updated at 9.49pm GMT

9.45pm GMT 

It’s still France 2-0 Holland. You can watch all the action from that match 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/france-netherlands-live-video-stream>
 with five minutes to go.

9.43pm GMT 

Wilfried Bony with that last minute equaliser for Ivory Coast!

9.41pm GMT 

GOAL AND FULL TIME! Belgium 2-2 Ivory Coast

A last minute equaliser! I’ll let you know who scored it in a jiffy

9.40pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Germany 1-0 Chile

And in other news: England have scored against Denmark in the 82nd minute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/england-denmark-international-friendly-mbm>
.

9.39pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Republic of Ireland 1-2 Serbia

The first defeat of the O’Neill era - but you sense this was a match in which 
Martin O’Neill was examining his squad so he may not be too worried about that.

9.38pm GMT 

It’s Australia 3-3 Ecuador now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/06/australia-ecuador-friendly-live>
. A mad one.

9.37pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Wales 3-1 Iceland

The Gareth Bales have it all their own way against Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland>. The Real Madrid man completely 
in charge, the rest of the team may as well have been shadows.

9.35pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Poland 0-1 Scotland

A fantastic result for Scotland, and an excellent winner from Scott Brown. 
ElsewhereCameroon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon> have scored 
one back against Portugal. It’s now 1-1 there. Lorient’s Aboubakar with the 
equaliser.

9.32pm GMT 

Serbia very much in charge in Ireland with four minutes left to play. Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland>, into extra time, are still 
just about clinging on - all defending manfully.

9.30pm GMT 

Simon McMahon, with the truth: “Can’t help but think that Scotland’s excellent 
victory in a meaningless friendly inPoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> tonight means that we’re going to 
get a hiding when the real business takes place there in October. You know how 
these things work. Why couldn’t we have lost 3-0 tonight?”

9.28pm GMT 

Poland are putting pressure on Scotland, not happy that they’ve opened up a 
lead so late in the game. Scotland are hanging on though ...

9.25pm GMT 

It finished Austria 1-1 Uruguay, incidentally. It’s still Germany 1-0 Chile, 
France 2-0 Holland andPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> 
1-0 Cameroon.

9.24pm GMT 

GOAL! Belgium 2-1 Ivory Coast (Drogba)

The former Chelsea striker gets his country back into the game.

9.23pm GMT 

Follow live here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/06/australia-ecuador-friendly-live>
James Riach (@James_Riach) 
Ecuador score 2 in 2 minutes, Australia have keeper sent off but still lead 
3-2. It's all happening here...
 <https://twitter.com/James_Riach/statuses/441322924369518592> March 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/James_Riach/statuses/441322924369518592> 
9.22pm GMT 

In Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>, Robson-Kanu throws the 
kitchen sink, the utensil draw, the dish rack and several shelves of the fridge 
at the ball, slamming it at goal from distance. The Iceland keeper knocks it 
over.

9.20pm GMT 

It’s over in Switzerland. Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> 2-2 Croatia.

9.19pm GMT 

Scotland captain Scott Brown scores a wonderful goal. Poland volley the ball 
out from defence, but only as far as Brown who rifles it straight back in and 
into the goal.

9.18pm GMT 

GOAL! Poland 0-1 Scotland

I’ll let you know some details when I have them ...

9.17pm GMT 
MisterChip (English) (@MisterChiping) 
POR 1-0 CMR (21') - Cristiano Ronaldo becomes Portugal national team's 
all-time goalscorer (48) surpassing Pauleta (47).
 <https://twitter.com/MisterChiping/statuses/441321503221874688> March 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/MisterChiping/statuses/441321503221874688> 
9.15pm GMT 

And with that goal, Bale is subbed - no doubt to much relief in Madrid.

9.14pm GMT 

GOAL! Wales 3-1 Iceland (Bale)

It’s a one-man show. Gareth Bale has just run half the length of the pitch, 
sprinting past the Iceland left-back who shoved him off the pitch, outpaced him 
into the box and hit a high class shot into the bottom corner. Wow.

9.12pm GMT 

Portugal are 1-0 up against Cameroon. Guess who scored.

9.10pm GMT 

Ian McCourt is in position in front of Spain v Italy: join him here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/spain-v-italy-live>.

9.08pm GMT 

GOAL! Wales 2-1 Iceland

Bale whizzed down the line, fired a shot at goal only for it to be beaten back 
out. Vokes jumped highest to head the rebound home.

Updated at 9.09pm GMT

9.07pm GMT 

GOAL! Republic of Ireland 1-2 Serbia (Djordjevic)

A mistake from Coleman and Matic gets into the box. He cuts it back to Tadic, 
who miskicks and Djordjevic knocks it home.

9.00pm GMT 

GOAL! Belgium 2-0 Ivory Coast

Nainggolan, currently at Roma on loan from Cagliari, puts the home side 2-0 up.

8.57pm GMT 

GOAL! Austria 1-1 Uruguay (Pereira)

For Uruguay <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uruguay> in Austria, Luis 
Suarez has just run at incredible speed through the box before lashing a shot 
at the keepr, who makes an excellent save. But, from the corner, and after a 
mad scramble in the box, Pereira scrambles the ball home from an inch out.

8.55pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Romania 0-0 Argentina

Well, that’s quite the result for Romania. Meanwhile, after Neymar went the 
full 90 minutes againstSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southafrica>, so too has Messi here. 
Can’t imagine Barcelona will be very pleased about that. Ukraine have beaten 
the USA 2-0 to further complicate a difficult political climate.

8.54pm GMT 

GOAL! Ireland 1-1 Serbia (McCarthy OG)

With Kolarov threatening, McCarthy gets himself in the way and manages to 
divert the ball into the net.

8.49pm GMT 

Darren Fletcher has come on at half-time for Scotland. The second half has 
just kicked off there, as indeed it has in Ireland 1-0Serbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serbia> and Wales 1-1 Iceland.

8.48pm GMT 

It’s half-time in France, where the hosts lead 2-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/france-netherlands-live-video-stream>
.England are drawing 0-0 at half-time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/england-denmark-international-friendly-mbm>
.

8.47pm GMT 

Now it’s all Argentina. First Di Maria hits the side netting before Argentina 
attack again, whizzing the ball about in the box. Only an utterly extraordinary 
Tatarusanu save from a wild Lavezzi shot preventsArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> from going ahead. Quite 
brilliant.

8.45pm GMT 

In France <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france>, Holland are under 
attack. Griezmann crosses well and into the area and Van der Wiel is lucky to 
scramble the ball away.

Updated at 8.46pm GMT

8.44pm GMT 

It’s still 0-0 in Romania, and every time I look up Argentina seems to be on 
the back foot and the Romanians appear to be attacking. I’ll admit that I may 
not always be looking up at the right time but still, this would be quite the 
result forRomania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/romania>.

8.43pm GMT 

GOAL! France 2-0 Holland (Matuidi)

What a finish! France break at about 2,000mph up the right hand side in a move 
started by Benzema. Valbuena crossed and Matuidi - twisting backwards - half 
bicycle kicks into the goal.

8.41pm GMT 

GOAL! Switzerland 2-2 Croatia (Olic)

And now Olic gets his second in the match against Switzerland - a fine finish 
into the bottom corner.

Updated at 8.58pm GMT

8.40pm GMT 

Valbuena fires a free-kick at the Dutch goal after Van der Wiel had earned 
himself a yellow with a lunge on the edge of the box. He hits the ball straight 
at Cillessen, though, who saves comfortably.But you don’t need to read this, 
when you could watch it here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/france-netherlands-live-video-stream>
.

8.35pm GMT 

Half time in the 7.45pm kick-offs:

Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> 1-0 Chile

Poland 0-0 Scotland

Wales 1-1 Iceland

Ireland 1-0 Serbia

Belgium 1-0 Ivory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast>

Updated at 8.36pm GMT

8.34pm GMT 

GOAL! France 1-0 Holland (Benzema)

Karim Benzema puts the French ahead on the 32nd minute. Watch the match live 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/france-netherlands-live-video-stream>
.

8.30pm GMT 

GOAL! Ukraine 2-0 USA

Vladimir Putin is smiling. Follow along here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/usa-v-ukraine-live>.

8.27pm GMT 

This is the sort of hot action you could be watching if you were tuned into 
our live stream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/france-netherlands-live-video-stream>
.
101 Great Goals (@101greatgoals) 
Ouch! Patrice Evra got studded in the face by Holland's Quincy Promes [Vine] 
http://t.co/zFN7UFRegF <http://t.co/zFN7UFRegF> pic.twitter.com/cApBmGfBbh 
<http://t.co/cApBmGfBbh>
 <https://twitter.com/101greatgoals/statuses/441308337980715008> March 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/101greatgoals/statuses/441308337980715008> 
8.26pm GMT 

Callum Robertson has put the England U19s 3-0 up against Turkey U19s. 
Elsewhere PluckyCape Verde <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cape-verde> 
have secured a goalless draw against Luxembourg. Well done them.

8.24pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Turkey 2-1 Sweden

That’s full time in Turkey. Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sweden> unable to recover from conceding 
inside a nanosecond.

8.23pm GMT 

Here’s David Flynn on the Ireland match: “The pre match interview was 
intelligible, the players were passing, PASSING, in triangles no less, like 
some sort of pasty Barcelona, there was a fairly large crowd in attendance. 
Then Ireland go and ruin it by scoring via a long hoof forward out of defense. 
DAMN YOU TRAPPATTONI.”

8.22pm GMT 

Chelsea’s Lewis Baker, a rising star at the club, has given England u19s a 2-0 
lead againstTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/turkey> U19s, having 
scored from the spot.

8.19pm GMT 

Australia are currently 2-0 up against Ecuador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/06/australia-ecuador-friendly-live>
. Tim Cahill has scored at least one of them.

8.19pm GMT 

Turkey are still leading Sweden by two goals to one. That one’s into the last 
minute.

8.17pm GMT 

That’s half-time in Switzerland. The home side lead 2-1 against Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia>. In Romania, Argentina are still 
finding it hard to break the Romanians down. Poland v Scotland remains goalless.

8.14pm GMT 

GOAL! Wales 1-1 Iceland

Gareth Bale is absolutely running the show in Wales. He set up the goal, he’s 
whacking shots from miles out and has Iceland terrified. But … Iceland have 
equalised, a left foot shot takes a bad deflection of Ashley Williams goes into 
the goal.

Updated at 8.15pm GMT

8.13pm GMT 
Miguel Delaney (@MiguelDelaney) 
Ireland are already, very identifiably, a Martin O'Neill in the way they use 
the ball and the intensity.
 <https://twitter.com/MiguelDelaney/statuses/441304154518986753> March 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/MiguelDelaney/statuses/441304154518986753> 
8.12pm GMT 

GOAL! Switzerland 2-1 Croatia (Drmic)

Well, that didn’t last long. Drmic beat the offside trap after a route one 
ball and stabbed the ball home for his second international goal.

8.10pm GMT 

GOAL! Switzerland 1-1 Croatia (Olic)

Croatia equalise while the Swiss were mithering about a corner they didn’t 
believe should have been given. Olic steered the ball home from that corner, 
somewhat scrappily.

8.09pm GMT 

GOAL! Belgium 1-0 Ivory Coast (Fellaini)

Marouanne Fellaini has scored! Some hope for Manchester United fans...

8.07pm GMT 

While Paul Connolly has Australia v Ecuador right here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/06/australia-ecuador-friendly-live>
.

8.06pm GMT 

Join Jacob Steinberg for live coverage of England v Denmark right here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/england-denmark-international-friendly-mbm>
.

8.05pm GMT 

GOAL! Switzerland 1-0 Croatia (Drmic)

A cracking strike from range from Drmic, who scores his first international 
goal.

8.04pm GMT 

A reminder: we have a live stream of France v Holland right here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/france-netherlands-live-video-stream>

8.02pm GMT 

GOAL! Germany 1-0 Chile (Gotze)

Gotze puts the home side ahead with a smart strike.

8.01pm GMT 

GOAL! Wales 0-1 Iceland (Collins)

James Collins puts Wales ahead with a 13th minute strike.

8.00pm GMT 

The score there is Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> 1-0 
Uruguay. I’m sure I mentioned that, didn’t I? Must have done. Janko scored the 
goal in the 14th minute, in case you were wondering.

7.59pm GMT 

The Austria keeper goes down in a heap as the Uruguay No7, Rodriguez, rushes 
through to attempt to karate kick the ball into the net. But Almer had cleared 
and instead got Rodriguez’s boot in his guts for his efforts.

7.57pm GMT 

Ivanovic, by all accounts passed back to his keeper only for Long to intercept 
and chip the Serbia stopper.

7.56pm GMT 

GOAL! Ireland 1-0 Serbia (Long)

This time Ireland lead! Shane Long scores after an Ivanovic error.

7.54pm GMT 

Full time in Cyprus: Cyprus 0-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> (who were down to 10 
men). Also: Macedonia 2-1 Latvia.

7.52pm GMT 

Half time scores: Romania 0-0 Argentina, Ukraine 1-0 USA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/usa-v-ukraine-live>.

Updated at 7.53pm GMT

7.51pm GMT 

Ireland have go a goal up inside three minutes! Or at least they think they 
do: but Glen Whelan is ruled offside.

7.48pm GMT 

GOAL! Turkey 2-1 Sweden (Adin)

It had just started going right for Sweden and then … calamity. Olcan Adin 
puts the home side back ahead.

7.46pm GMT 

Meanwhile Sergio Aguero has just dribbled though the entire Romania defence 
and forced a very good save from their keeper. In Switzerland, Croatia very 
nearly went ahead through, I think, Pranjic.

7.45pm GMT 

GOAL! Turkey 1-1 Sweden (Toivonen)

Sweden get one back against Turkey, after going down so early. Toivonen is the 
man who has put them on level terms.

7.40pm GMT 

The Croatia side are basically defending on their own goal-line, so deep are 
they having to play. Switzerland certainly the more likely to score at this 
point.

7.38pm GMT 

Look away now ...
Ben Lyttleton (@benlyt) 
So Messi was sick on pitch for Argentina pic.twitter.com/U0G2a0Ze9U 
<http://t.co/U0G2a0Ze9U> via @Chase_Ryan <https://twitter.com/Chase_Ryan> who 
says it's coz he pushes himself/being pushed too much
 <https://twitter.com/benlyt/statuses/441296261602230272> March 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/benlyt/statuses/441296261602230272> 
7.37pm GMT 

It remains Cyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cyprus> 0-0 Northern 
Ireland with three minutes to play. But the Nothern Irish are a man down after 
McAuley was sent off for hauling down Christofi.

7.35pm GMT 

Luis Suárez kicks off for Uruguay against Austria, but the home side 
immediately go on the attack and Junuzovic’s shot whistles wide. Meanwhile, 
Switzerland have had the best of the opening minutes against Croatia.

7.33pm GMT 

It’s half time in Turkey and, indeed, in the minnows match IN Luxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/luxembourg>. Turkey 1-0 Sweden and 
Luxembourg 0-0 Plucky Cape Verde

7.30pm GMT 

If it’s 7.30pm, that means it’s time for ...

Austria v Uruguay

Switzerland v Croatia

While at 7.45pm, we’ve got:

Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> v Ivory Coast

Germany v Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile>

Republic of Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> v 
Serbia

Poland v Scotland

Wales v Iceland

7.27pm GMT 

Goals latest: Gibraltar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gibraltar> 0-1 
Estonia, Andorra 0-3 Slovakia and Macedonia 1-1 Latvia.

7.26pm GMT 

Romania’s No9, Marica, flashes a header just over the Argentina bar: so close. 
Ben Bronx has filed a full match report of Greece vSouth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southkorea>, including teams. This is 
exemplary stuff - everyone else reading take note:

The difference between the two sides was clinical finishing. South Korea took 
their chances whilstGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/football/greece> will 
rue missed opportunities.

South Korea deservedly took the lead on 18 minutes when Park Chu-Young was put 
through on goal after an assist from Son Heung-Min.

Greece had a chance to equalise four minutes later when Konstantinos 
Katsouranis found himself with an open goal three yards out but could only hit 
the post.

The South Korean goal lived a charmed life with the woodwork twice more coming 
to their rescue when both Georgios Samaras and Avraam Papadopoulos hit the 
crossbar in the space of a few seconds on 31 minutes.

The second half brought immediate changes for Greece with Lazaros 
Christodoulopoulos and Giorgos Karagounis replacing Dimitrios Salpingidis and 
Giannis Maniatis respectively. South Korea brought on Kim Shin-Wook to replace 
the goalscorer Park Chu-Young.

Ten minutes after the interval South Korea effectively killed off the game 
when Son Heung-Min scored from a tight angle with his shot hitting the 
underside of the bar before going in.

Greece: Panagiotis Glikos, Vasilis Torosidis (Giorgios Tzavellas – 82), Kostas 
Manolas, Avraam Papadopoulos, Jose Holebas, Giannis Maniatis (Giorgos 
Karagounis – 45), Alexandros Tziolis (Dimitrios Papadopoulos – 59), Kostas 
Katsouranis, Dimitris Salpigidis (Lazaros Christodoulopoulos - 45), Georgios 
Samaras, Kostas Mitroglou (Ioannis Fetfatzidis – 60).

South Korea: Sung-Ryong Jung, Jeong-Ho Hong, Young-Gwon Kim, Yong-Joon Lee, 
Jin-Su Kim, Ki Sung-Yueng (Dae-Song Ha – 86), Ja-Cheol Koo (Keun-Ho Lee – 85), 
Kook-Young Han, Chung-Yong Lee, Heung-Min Son (Bo-Kyung Kim – 73), Chu-Young 
Park (Shin-Wook Kim - 46).

7.24pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Czech Republic 2-2 Norway

An entertaining game comes to an end with much handshaking and hugging on the 
pitch. Elsewhere: it’s still Romania 0-0 Argentina with the Romanians getting 
the odd chance against what should be stronger opposition.

7.20pm GMT 

GOAL! Czech Republic 2-2 Norway (Pedersen)

Evening again. In the precise minute we were changing over there, Pedersen 
equalised. His goal came in the 88th minute, meaning the Czechs will have to go 
some to get the result they were expecting.

7.18pm GMT 

Tom has wolfed down his sandwich, filled up his water bottle and he is ready 
to get back to work. Remember, if you only follow one MBM tonight, I think this 
one would be worth it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/spain-v-italy-live> ... Bye! 

7.14pm GMT 

GOAL! Israel 1-3 Slovakia (Mak)

Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/football/israel> were one nil down, then 
two nil down, then two one down, now they are ... three one down.

7.13pm GMT 

GOAL! Israel 1-2 Slovakia (Buzaglo)

Israel were one nil down, then two nil down but now they are now two one down. 
And they have Buzaglo to thank for that. There is about 8 minutes left for them 
to rescue something from that game.

Updated at 7.13pm GMT

7.10pm GMT 

Your oversized comedy cheque picture of the day.
Joe Crann (@YesWeCrann) 
Man of the Match... Neymar. pic.twitter.com/Zt6kCBzqd4 <http://t.co/Zt6kCBzqd4>
 <https://twitter.com/YesWeCrann/statuses/441288608700702720> March 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/YesWeCrann/statuses/441288608700702720> 
7.09pm GMT 

Elsewhere on the website. Jacob Steinberg is typing his way through the 
England v Denmark encounter. You can join him by simply clickingthe hyperlink 
within this text 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/england-denmark-international-friendly-mbm>
.

7.05pm GMT 

Hi all. How you going? Ian here. Let’s kick off with some Irish based team 
news shall, we? It’s only a friendly, we know, but it s a very positive line-up 
from Mon-Keano as they usher in a new era of Irish football.
FAI (@FAIreland) 
Tonight's starting XI- you heard it here first! Forde, Coleman, Keogh, Wilson, 
Ward, McGeady, McCarthy, Whelan,Hoolahan,McClean,Long#IrlSer 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23IrlSer&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/FAIreland/statuses/441278441933901824> March 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/FAIreland/statuses/441278441933901824> 
Updated at 7.17pm GMT

7.01pm GMT 

I’m going to nip off for a sandwich: but for the next 15 minutes Ian McCourt 
will be trying to steer this ship away from the rocks. I’ll leave you with news 
that it is nowBosnia 0-2 Egypt and Israel 0-2 Slovakia. While Romania v 
Argentina is about to get underway.

6.58pm GMT 

Here’s Ben Bronx, whose second half report lacks something of the completion 
of his first half though beggars (and we’re certainly that) can’t be choosers: 
“RESULT: GREECE 0-2 SOUTH KOREA: The difference between the two sides was 
clinical finishing. South Korea took their chances whilst Greece will rue 
missed opportunities.”

Updated at 6.58pm GMT

6.57pm GMT 

FULL TIME! South Africa 0-5 Brazil

The only real surprise was the fact that Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> played the first half in gold and 
the second in blue, if we’re honest.

More full-times from 5pm: Hungary 1-2 Finland, Montenegro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montenegro> 1-0 Ghana (which is quite a 
result for the Montenegrins, no?).

6.55pm GMT 

GOAL! South Africa 0-5 Brazil (Neymar)

Hat-trick for Neymar! And the team look delighted for him, both bench and 
players on the pitch rushing to congratulate him. He was teed up by Jo, who 
headed across goal to give Neymar the tap in.

6.54pm GMT 

Egypt have scored in the 52nd minute in their match against Bosnia-Herzegovina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bosnia-herzegovina>. They lead 0-1.

Some full times from the 5pm kick-offs:

Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> 2-0 Malta

Greece 0-2 South Korea (awaiting match report from Ben Bronx)

Half time in the 6pm kick-offs:

Andorra 0-2 Moldova <https://www.theguardian.com/football/moldova>

Cyprus 0-0 Northern Ireland

Macedonia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/macedonia> 1-0 Latvia

Colombia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colombia> 1-1 Tunisia

6.46pm GMT 

Neymar charges forward for Brazil again, but is stopped just inside the box. 
He’s desperate for a hat-trick, but I wonder what Barcelona will make of him 
playing for the full 90 minutes here.

6.45pm GMT 

Finland have come back from a goal down against Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hungary> to lead 2-1 now. Two goals from 
Joel Pohjanpalo, a man with a name that is oddly satisfying to say.

6.44pm GMT 

“Turkey seem to have a thing for scoring fast,” emails Joshua Poindexter. “I 
remember in 2002 against South Korea, in the 3rd place game, Turkey scored in 
11 seconds.” They did indeed - the immaculate Hakan Suker.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw_mf1W6lGRg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw_mf1W6lGRg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw_mf1W6lGRg&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw_mf1W6lGRg&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw_mf1W6lGRg>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw_mf1W6lGRg&media=>
close 
6.43pm GMT 

GOAL! South Africa 0-4 Brazil (Fernandinho)

A rocket from a mile out. What a hit - swerve, dip and unbelievable pace.

6.41pm GMT 

We’ve got live coverage of Ukraine v USA: you’ll find it here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/usa-v-ukraine-live>. 
Meanwhile, Tunisia have equalised against COlombia: 1-1 there.

6.40pm GMT 

The other 6.30pm kick-off tonight is Luxembourg v Plucky Cape Verde. 
Presumably, this will be one of the few times the perennial whipping boys 
Luxembourg face a team they are expected to whip. They may not have it all 
their own way.

Daniel Alves misses a good chance for Brazil v South Africa, while one-on-one 
with the keeper. No matter, we know which way this one’s going.

6.37pm GMT 

The stats don’t make good reading if you’re a Sweden fan. Turkey, in the 
opening 7 minutes, have had 88% of the possession, two shots and five free 
kicks. Still, Zlatan’s playing so anything’s possible.

6.35pm GMT 

Finland have equalised against Hungary: it’s 1-1 there. Meanwhile, the Czech 
Republic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/czechrepublic> v Norway is up 
and running once more. Let’s hope the second half offers as much action as the 
first.

6.33pm GMT 

Mevlut Erding was the man with the one-minute goal in Turkey. So now you know.

6.32pm GMT 

Well, that didn’t take long. No sooner had Turkey and Sweden kicked off than 
there was a goal. Will bring you the scorer in a second, but Turkey are 1-0 up 
against Sweden.

6.31pm GMT 

Moldova have gone 0-2 up against Andorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra>, scoring two in quick succession.
Macedonia are 1-0 up against Latvia. While in South Africa, Jo aims a header at 
goal and manages to knock it backwards, in completely the opposite direction. 
The Manchester City and Everton fans in the stadium all nodded knowingly.

6.28pm GMT 

While all that was happening, Colombia have gone a goal up against Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tunisia>. Monaco’s James Rodriguez seeing 
the ball home from the penalty spot.

6.28pm GMT 

Amongst a flood of substitutions in South Africa, Jo comes on for Fred, 
keeping the Working Man’s quotient high. A minute later, Patosi nearly scores 
with his first touch. He was one of the subs and smacked a powerful shot at 
goal, which Julio Cesar saved with admirable agility. Before the subsequent 
corner, David Luiz was hoiked in place of Bayern’s Dante. But the Brazilian, 
with characteristic WTFing, refused to come off until after the set piece was 
taken. Dante was not impressed.

6.24pm GMT 
MisterChip (English) (@MisterChiping) 
RSA 0-3 BRA (55') - 29 goals for Neymar (in 47 games with Brazil). Overtakes 
Luis Fabiano and equals Kaká (87 games) and Careca (60 games)
 <https://twitter.com/MisterChiping/statuses/441277879033561088> March 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/MisterChiping/statuses/441277879033561088> 
6.24pm GMT 

The 5.30 games have all reached half time now. 

Bosnia-Herzegovina 0-0 Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt>

Israel 0-1 Slovakia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia>

Czech Republic 2-1 Norway <https://www.theguardian.com/football/norway>.

Elsewhere, it’s: 

Albania 2-0 Malta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/malta>

Algeria 2-0 Slovenia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovenia>

Greece 0-2 South Korea

Hungary 1-0 Finland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/finland>

Montenegro 0-1 Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana>

South Africa 0-3 Brazil

6.21pm GMT 

Ben Bronx, who may as well be our man in Greece given how timely his updates 
are ... actually come to think of it, if his updates are timely, he’s too good 
to be our man in Greece. Anyway, he points out: “GOAL: Greece 0-2 South Korea. 
Son Heung-Min (55 mins) converts from a difficult angle with his shot hitting 
the underside of the bar and going in.”

6.20pm GMT 

Makridis nearly scores for Cyprus against Northern Ireland, with only 
McGiven’s quick thinking sparing some blushes. He nipped in to clear the ball 
off the line after Mannus was beaten.

6.18pm GMT 

That’s half time in the Czech Republic. The home side lead Norway 2-1 in what 
has been a good game full of chances - 10 shots on goal so far, and 18 chances.

Updated at 6.19pm GMT

6.17pm GMT 

Slovakia are leading Israel 1-0, and have been for a few minutes now. Amkar 
Jakubko of the Russian Premier League and Amkar Perm specifically, is the man 
to make the difference.

6.15pm GMT 

Five minutes into the second half, the South Africans bring on Ndlovu for 
Claasean. Have never really understood those kinds of changes. Why not make it 
at half-time? Unless, of course, Claasen has colour-blindness and is struggling 
with the blue kits.

6.14pm GMT 

In Cyprus, Northern Ireland’s Brunt lashes a shot at goal only for the Cypriot 
defender Merkis to make an excellent block.

6.13pm GMT 

South Africa are all over the place, perhaps rattled by the fact they were 
playing a team in gold in the first half and are now playing one in blue. 
Neymar breaks free and is only prevented from his hat-trick by a marginal 
offside call.

6.12pm GMT 

GOAL! Czech Republic 2-1 Norway (Vydra)

From a corner, the ball is pinballed around in the Norway box. West Brom’s 
Vydra is the fastest to react and stubs the ball home for a scrappy goal.

6.10pm GMT 

Uh-oh, this doesn’t bode well for South Africa. Willian screeches into the box 
and knocks the ball just wide of the post.

6.10pm GMT 

GOAL! South Africa 0-3 Brazil (Neymar)

Straight from the kick-off - South Africa’s kick off! The home side lose the 
ball immediately, Fred lifts the ball over the defence and Neymar chips the 
keeper. Lucky blue kit!

6.09pm GMT 

The Brazil squad are trotting back onto the pitch now in their blue away kit, 
having changed at half time in a bid to flog more of the things. It’s a 
Chelsea-centric set of substitutions as Ramires replaces Oscar and Willian (a 
letter away from being in the Working Man’s XI) comes on for Hulk.

6.07pm GMT 

Incidentally, the Cyprus v Northern Ireland match and the later Ukraine v USA 
(which is being staged on the island because of the unrest in the Ukraine) were 
only able to go ahead after referees called off a strike in the aftermath of 
their boss getting his car bombed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/28/cyprus-postpone-matches-bomb-damages-referee-car>
. Yikes.

6.05pm GMT 

Cyprus v Northern Ireland: team news
Cyprus: Georgallides, Charis Kyriakou, Junior, Merkis, Antoniades, Nicolaou, 
Laban, Makrides, Christofi, Aloneftis, Mitidis.
Subs: Mastrou, Loizou, Elias Charalambous, Stylianou, Charalambos Kyriakou, 
Sielis, Artymatas, Charalambidis, Efrem, Alexandrou, Papathanasiou, Makris.


Northern Ireland: Mannus, Cathcart, McGivern, McAuley, Bruce, Davis, Norwood, 
McGinn, Brunt, Ward, Paterson.

Subs: Carroll, McGovern, Danny Lafferty, Ferguson, Kyle Lafferty, McKay, 
Shiels, McArdle, Paton, Reeves, McCourt.


Referee: Liran Liany (Israel) 

Updated at 6.05pm GMT

6.01pm GMT 

It’s nearly 6pm (or in fact, may actually be 6pm by the time I’ve finished 
typing this): under starters orders ...

Andorra v Moldova

Colombia v Tunisia

Macedonia v Latvia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/latvia>

Cyprus v Northern Ireland

5.56pm GMT 

GOAL! Czech Republic 1-1 Norway (Elyounoussi)

Norway, who have been completely under the cosh somehow level. That man 
Elyounoussi, who missed a sitter earlier, finally comes good.

5.55pm GMT 

Other half-times: Hungary 1-0 Finland, Albania 1-0 Malta (Sion’s Vullnet Basha 
the scorer),Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> 1-0 Slovenia 
(Zagreb’s Soudani troubling the net there). Montenegro 1-0 Ghana.

5.52pm GMT 

Dean Furman of Doncaster Rovers has the final say in the first half of South 
Africa v Brazil. His long-range shot wheeches low and to the right of Julio 
Cesar’s post. Half time:South Africa 0-2 Brazil.

5.50pm GMT 

Algeria have gone 1-0 up over Slovenia on the stroke of half-time. Meanwhile 
Ben Bronx has emailed in with what amounts to a match report of the first half 
of Greece 0-1 South Korea. In the spirit of open journalism, here it is:

The Georgios Karaiskakis Stadium (home of Olympiacos) is playing host to 
Greece v South Korea tonight. Unlike the last time these two nations met, at 
the 2010 FIFA World Cup, which South Korea won 2-0, it’s not being played in 
front of a full-house. Infact it’s over half empty.

Park Chu-Young, making his first start in over a year for the Taeguk Warriors, 
deservedly gave South Korea a 1-0 lead on 18 minutes. This comes after the 
28-year-old striker has admitted this could be his last opportunity to impress 
South Korea boss Hong Myung-Bo before the World Cup.


Greece had the chance for an almost immediate response but Kostas Katsouranis 
managed to miss an open goal from no more than three yards out on 22 minutes.


Half an hour on the clock and Greece hit the crossbar twice in the space of 
five seconds. The pressure is starting to grow on the Koreans and Greece can 
consider themselves unfortunate to not be level.

Updated at 5.51pm GMT

5.48pm GMT 

The Czech Republic nearly go 2-0 up, pinging the ball around the park with 
quick incisive passing. But Vydra, receiving the ball on or around the penalty 
spot, can only strike the ball just wide of the post. In Brazil, there is also 
half a chance, but the Czech chance was absorbing 95% of my attention I’m 
afraid.

5.44pm GMT 

GOAL! South Africa 0-2 Brazil (Neymar)

The Brazilian striker gets the ball on the shoulder of the South African 
defence and rampages into the box. He looks up briefly, then lashes the ball 
into the net.

5.44pm GMT 

GOAL! Czech Republic 1-0 Norway (Rosicky)

But then what a mistake! The Norway keeper Nyland rolls the ball out and it 
goes straight to Tomas Rosicky. He takes a couple of touches and unleashes a 
rocket straight back past the keeper.

5.42pm GMT 

In the Generali Arena, Norway miss a gilt-edged chance to go ahead. The Norway 
No10, TarikElyounoussi, drove into the box (not literally), rounded Petr Cech, 
stumbled then hit a tame shot wide of the empty goal while trying to find his 
balance. People on the bench react as if a death has occurred.

Updated at 5.46pm GMT

5.38pm GMT 

It’s finished Bulgaria 2-1 Belarus. There will be dancing on the streets Sofia 
- which might explain why there was no-one in the stadium, it’s very hard to 
navigate through the traffic of people dancing in the streets, which might 
explain why no-one made it to the game.

5.36pm GMT 

Here’s some Northern Ireland news we’ve copy and pasted from the wires:

Hull defender Alex Bruce and St Johnstone goalkeeper Alan Mannus were handed 
their first Northern Ireland starts in over a year for the friendly against 
Cyprus.

The pair last lined up in the first XI in last February’s 0-0 draw in Malta 
but were given another chance to impress by manager Michael O’Neill.

Returning striker Kyle Lafferty, back in the squad for the first time in six 
months, made do with a place on the bench as Jamie Ward and Martin Paterson got 
the nod up front.

5.35pm GMT 

“re. Park Chu-Yong,” emails James. “Should be a good sign of his stepping up 
to help Arsenal make a renewed push for the title... if he were still there...”

5.33pm GMT 

Neymar goes through, one-on-one with the keeper. The South Africa defence was 
all over the place and unable to catch up with the Barcelona man. He attempted 
to lift the ball over the keeper, who stayed admirably big and deflected the 
ball behind.

5.31pm GMT 

Back in South Africa, Brazil are still well on top and the vuvuzelas are still 
making the racket that we’ve all missed so much.

5.30pm GMT 

An appalling goal in Bulgaria. The Belarus No.7 lashed from the edge of the 
area and the Bulgarian keeper bellyflopped over the ball.Bulgaria 2-1 Belarus.

5.28pm GMT 

It’s getting on for 5.30, which means that another crop of friendlies are 
about to kick off: Bosnia-Herzegovina v Egypt, Czech Republic v Norway, Israel 
v Slovakia. In Albania, meanwhile, the home side have gone 1-0 up against 
Malta. Also, I have finally discovered the scorer of South Korea’s goal against 
Greece - it is, of course, none other than Park Chu-Young of Watford and the 
Arsenal.

5.25pm GMT 

A bit of a bobble denies Neymar a shooting chance. The ball just evaded his 
lashing foot and allowed the South African keeper to sprawlingly touch the ball 
behind. nothing doing from the corner.

5.24pm GMT 

“Re. Brazil’s Working Man’s Club XI,” ey-ups John Palethorpe. “As the Guardian 
reported today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/mar/05/brazil-world-cup-2014-diego-costa-spain-neymar>
, they could soon be bolstered by the capping of Walter, who even looks like 
he’s spent his time sinking pints of heavy and sampling the hot pot.”

5.23pm GMT 

Well, that’s bad news for South Africa: their captain Bongani Khumalo - once 
of Tottenham Hotspur, Reading and Doncaster - has been stretchered off, 
squirming in pain.

5.19pm GMT 

The Hungarian goalscorer was Gergely Rudolf, the Nancy striker who doubles up 
as the sound of a reindeer with stomach issues. South Korea have just scored 
too, they lead Greece by a goal to nil.

5.16pm GMT 

Hungary have gone a goal up against Finland - 1-0 there. Meanwhile Montenegro 
lead Ghana 1-0. Mauritania are also beating Niger 1-0 but, if I’m dead honest, 
it might be a stretch covering that game.

5.14pm GMT 

What a pass! Hulk rattled the ball forward from the halfway line, entirely 
taking out the South Africa back four as he did so. Oscar’s finish was classy 
and stylish, while his celebration - the textbook ball up the jumper - was less 
so.

5.14pm GMT 

GOAL! South Africa 0-1 Brazil (Oscar)

The Chelsea forward strikes his ninth international pass, having been played 
on by an immaculate Hulk pass.

5.13pm GMT 

South Africa aim a long-range sighter at goal, but the ball bobbles past Julio 
Cesar’s right-hand post with the keeper as relaxed as any man who has spent the 
season as Rob Green’s No.2 might be.

5.12pm GMT 

Brazil have already got their swagger on and are busy passing the ball around 
the pitch at pace. Fred has already had one chance, made for him by Oscar 
(whose name is too middle class to be part of the working man’s XI). 
Incidentally,Vladimir Gadzhev was the Bulgarian goalscorer.

5.10pm GMT 

In South Africa, the vuvuzelas are swarming: no such problems with empty 
stadiums as they have in Bulgaria. Meanwhile Bulgaria have gone 2-0 up against 
Belarus - a majestic diving header into the top corner from 15 yards.

Updated at 5.21pm GMT

5.08pm GMT 

Montenegro have gone a goal up against Ghana already. Damjanovic, who plays 
his football in China, the man to steer the ball into the back of the net.

5.04pm GMT 

We’re off: The other matches kicking off at 5pm again: Albania v Malta, 
Algeria v Slovenia, Greece v South Korea, Hungary v Finland, Montenegro v Ghana.

5.02pm GMT 

Not to be outdone by South Africa, Brazil will be airing two entirely 
different kits in this match - their World Cup kit in the first half and their 
change strip in the second. And who says international friendlies have no value?

5.00pm GMT 
Ben Lyttleton (@benlyt) 
Bentaleb #THFC <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23THFC&src=hash> starts first 
game for Algeria in 4-3-2-1 formation v Slovenia, KO in one hour, via@BilelGhazi
 <https://twitter.com/BilelGhazi>
 <https://twitter.com/benlyt/statuses/441253645594546177> March 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/benlyt/statuses/441253645594546177> 
4.59pm GMT 

The Brazil XI to face South Africa looks like this: Julio César; Rafinha, 
Thiago Silva, David Luiz, Marcelo; Fernandinho, Paulinho, Oscar; Hulk, Neymar, 
Fred.

Only one member of the Brazilian working man’s club XI there: disappointing 
absences from Wallace, Jo, Bernard, Jean and Maxwell (at a push) all propped up 
with pints of mild elsewhere.

The South Africa side looks like this: Williams, Matlaba, Khumalo, Nthethe, 
Ngcongca, Serero, Jali, Claasen, Furman, Rantie, Parker

Updated at 5.07pm GMT

4.55pm GMT 

News from South Africa: Bafana will be wearing special shirts against Brazil 
to honour Nelson Mandela. Each of the white shirts will feature Mandela’s 
prison number of 46664 to commemorate the man. Not to do the gesture down but 
it does slightly bring to mindthis Bill Hicks skit 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=me3c6zuxrSs> (warning: bad words aplenty, so 
I’ll link to it rather than embed).

4.37pm GMT 

In other news, Bulgaria are beating Belarus 1-0 in the 46, 340 capacity Vasil 
Levski Stadium. The capacity is relevant because, by my estimation, there are 
around 46,000 empty seats - the various technical staff, subs and ballboys 
appear to be in danger of outnumbering the actual crowd. It is very much the 
equivalent of the sort of gig that young bands play at which their only crowd 
is the support band.Still, the 46,000(ish) empty seats would still not get it 
into the top 10 of emptiest stadiums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/17/worlds-biggest-emptiest-stadiums-knowledge>
.

3.07pm GMT 

Preamble

Welcome to rolling coverage of, gulp, all* today’s post 5pm international 
friendlies - except England v Denmark and Spain v Italy, for which we’ll have 
dedicated minute-by-minutes. You can also watch France v Holland live (and for 
free)with our stream, which goes live at 8pm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/05/france-netherlands-live-video-stream>
.

There are 35 international matches today, and the feast of football began 
first thing with Japan 4-2 New Zealand and continued with Russia v Armenia. 
Assorted Eastern Europeans and Southeast Asians and Mediterraneans have also 
been in action -news of which can be found here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live> - but we’ll be picking things up 
from 5-ish, when the pick of the games is South Africa v Brazil.

The full 5pm kick-off list is as follows:

Albania v Malta


Algeria v Slovenia

Greece v South Korea

Hungary v Finland

Montenegro v Ghana

and South Africa v Brazil

Other matches of interest today include (but are not limited to ... hey, we’re 
a broad church here)

Turkey v Sweden – 6.30pm

Romania v Argentina – 7pm

Ukraine v USA – 7pm (followed by political uneasiness)

Germany v Chile – 7.45pm

France v Holland – 8pm

While, Switzerland v Croatia (7.30pm), Belgium v Ivory Coast (7.30pm), Austria 
v Uruguay (7.30pm) and Portugal v Cameroon (8.45pm) are all worth keeping tabs 
on.

And from the home nations

Cyprus v Northern Ireland – 6pm

Poland v Scotland – 7.45pm

Republic of Ireland v Serbia – 7.45pm

Wales v Iceland – 7.45pm

* Well, as many as we can keep an eye at once.


Updated at 3.37pm GMT
 