
How, in your experience, have internet technologies been employed to make the 
world a better place? 

To varying degrees each of us likes to learn, socialize, be entertained, buy 
and sell goods and services, and stay in touch with friends and family. The 
internet enables us to do this more effectively. I believe this is a good thing.

However, the internet is neither godlike nor demonic. It's a disruptive 
technology like the printing press, locomotive, and the car; it makes the world 
feel like a smaller place and it can bring people closer together and, of 
course, give a boost economic growth. The internet is an exciting new medium, 
but it doesn't fundamentally change human nature.

And where for you are the real problem areas that remain that you think web 
technologies can help to tackle? 

Often, politicians and governments try to force us into a straight-jacket of 
'one size fits all' whether in education, healthcare or lifestyle. There are 
billions of people on the planet but very few identical twins. Each of us has a 
unique set of desires, characteristics, abilities and disabilities.

By bringing different people together, I hope that the internet will enable us 
to feel comfortable with ourselves. For example, when our education system is 
failing so many, the advent of online learning has the potential to enable 
students to learn in their own style and at a pace and place of their choosing.

However, making technology work for the most vulnerable in society remains a 
great challenge. We cannot forget all those people in the world who have never 
even made a phone call, let alone sent an e-mail.

So what projects are you currently engaged in on a day to day basis and how 
does the internet fit into this? 

Alongside my job as Shadow Science Minister, David Cameron has asked me to 
take a lead on innovation across the public sector. I've started by looking at 
cumbersome Whitehall IT, and the way IT policy can be improved to strengthen 
society and kick-start the digital economy. One key area for the future must be 
public sector information â€“ we have a vast resource of data sets which 
currently lie dormant in Whitehall departments. These can be re-used by the 
public, adding both commercial and social value to these public assets.

Who do you admire in this space? Who's inspiring you? Who's pushing the 
boundaries and how? 

Overall, I think Conservatives have been pretty innovative in the use of the 
internet. You only have to look at the list of political bloggers. These aren't 
controlled by the party leadership, and they give some of us a headache most of 
the time. But they are proof of a strong community of political activists of 
all persuasions who see the potential for technology to enrich and inform our 
democracy. Given the state Parliament is in at the moment, that's no bad thing.

And what can we expect from your presentation at Activate 09? 

Our economy has become too reliant on property, finance and government debt. 
Activate 09 provides an important opportunity for all those interested to ask 
the right questions about how technology can help to re-balance a lop-sided 
economy. I'll be talking about what Conservatives plan to do, and are already 
doing, to make that happen.

Click here to register 
<https://www.medivents.co.uk/webivents/portal/guardian/activate2009.asp>
 