
Iranians are not very expressive about matters of personal intimacy. Whether 
on film, in the theatre, or even the visual arts, most Iranian artists at home 
and abroad don’t explicitly address intimate behaviour. They prefer discretion 
and metaphor. This is the effect of a cultural phenomenon that goes well beyond 
official censorship.

In one well-known example the married couple, Nader and Simin, in Asghar 
Farhadi’s filmA Separation 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2011/12/cinema-2-saffron-candies-and-the-big-kallak-rethinking-a-separation.html>
, never frankly discuss the state of their intimate relations in front of the 
camera. It is, rather, their social problems – the illness of Nader’s father, 
Simin’s desire to leave the country, their financial difficulties – that 
justify her request for a divorce. As nothing about any deeper explanations for 
the breakup is made clear, spectators (especially foreign ones unfamiliar with 
Iranian culture and artistic codes) have to figure out what is really going on.

Even better examples may be found in the theatrical work of Amir Reza 
Koohestani. In 2001, he staged a remarkable autobiographical play, Dance on 
Glasses, about a romantic relationship and its conclusion.

“At the age of 22,” he recently described, “I was crazy about Metallica 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2011/01/and-i-know-metallica-at-the-tehran-museum-of-contemporary-art-1.html>
 and a girl I haven’t seen since. Metallica’s CD was always on the player, and 
at any time for no particular reason, while writing or not, day or night, we 
could hear James Hetfield’s voice from my room. Even the day the girl knocked 
at my door to break up for always, the CD was playing.

“We talked for one hour or two using words boys and girls say at this age when 
they break up. Despite the fact I could hardly hear her voice, and that she 
kept saying ‘what, what?’ when I was asking her questions, I didn’t make a move 
to turn off the music. I couldn’t. I was knocked out by her words and unable to 
stand up anymore.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ftimeloss-intimacy-love-iran-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F16%2F1387226940303%2Fc32f733c-231a-445a-a8b5-085608d7b656-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Intimacy%2C%20love%20and%20separation%20in%20contemporary%20Iranian%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ftimeloss-intimacy-love-iran-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Intimacy%2C%20love%20and%20separation%20in%20contemporary%20Iranian%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ftimeloss-intimacy-love-iran-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F16%2F1387226940303%2Fc32f733c-231a-445a-a8b5-085608d7b656-1020x612.jpeg>
 'Dance on Glasses', a play by Amir Reza Koohestani. Photograph: Tilo Beue 
In Dance on Glasses, a man and a woman face one another, sitting on opposite 
sides of a long table. They desperately try to communicate and understand each 
other. As if paralysed, they are fixed to their chairs. Their love is condemned 
and they are forced to break up their relationship.

Created during Mohammad Khatami’s first term in office, often considered a 
golden age of artistic freedom inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, 
it is striking to see how this play freely reflects intimacy as well as 
passionate feelings and despair. The man and woman are both 20 years old. She 
lives in a friend’s house and regularly visits her lover to rehearse a dance 
performance named Dance on Glasses. She smokes and seems to have drug problems. 
Throughout, the unusual way Koohestani directs actors is notable: a specific 
way of dealing with the Farsi vernacular, a subtle body language that is 
extremely unusual in Iranian theatre, where overacting and loud if not 
hysterical dialogue remain the norm.

As I rediscovered the piece on DVD, I was astonished to see how flexible the 
censorship system was 12 years ago. It actually authorised scenes in which the 
couple danced together and talked about matters such as drugs, freedom and 
intimacy. More broadly, it authorised the depiction of a young girl who has 
fled her family home and is trying to lead an independent life.

According to Koohestani, “This Khatami period was a very creative era. And 
directors like myself, Hamid Poorazari, Reza Servati and Hassan Madjooni, among 
others, we all started directing plays during that time. Things were much 
easier and we had much more freedom of speech.”

Dance on Glasses’ vision of youth at a time of transition, right after the 
dark postwar period, is fascinating. During this transitional era, Iran had 
very limited access to western culture, to satellite channels or the web in its 
early years. Young people listened in secret to rock music, particularly hard 
rock acts such asMetallica <https://www.theguardian.com/music/metallica>, 
Queen, and Scorpions, whose sounds seemed to perfectly echo Iran’s suffocating 
atmosphere.

Dance on Glasses was a major hit and toured internationally for four years. 
While Khoosetani observed that the play was “a success much bigger than we 
could ever imagine,” his feelings about it are mixed. Today, at the age of 34, 
he is celebrated in Iran and abroad. He writes and mostly directs his own plays 
and his MehrTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Group travels 
around the world. However, he spent years without returning to the subject of 
love. He went through great doubt and hesitation before deciding to undertake a 
project that builds on the 12-year-old work that first made his name.
 'Timeloss', a play by Amir Reza Koohestani. Photograph: Mani Lotfzadeh 
At the Festival Actoral in Marseille this autumn, Koohestani presented his new 
play, Timeloss. Commissioned by the festival and co-produced by the Mehr 
Theatre Group and Switzerland’s Festival La Bâtie in Switzerland, the play 
premiered in Geneva a few days before its Actoral debut.

In a program note, Koohestani wrote, “Some weeks ago, I was cleaning my room 
and found an old Kunsten Festival des Arts brochure with one visit card inside. 
On it, there was my name followed by a phone number. Flashback, 2004: the show 
Dance on Glasses comes across with an unexpected audience success. The day 
after our last show, the festival has given me a mobile phone with a Belgium 
SIM card and some visiting cards with my name and new phone number.

“Back in 2013: I looked at the visiting card and dialed the number. After some 
rings, a young man picked up the phone. I said hello in English. He answered me 
in English too, but with a foreign accent. So I asked him in Persian: ‘I’d like 
to speak to Amir Reza Koohestani.’ He answered: ‘This is him.’ Then I said: 
‘I’d like to ask you for the right to adapt Dance on Glasses.’”

This surreal anecdote suggests the structure of his new play. Koohestani’s 
voice is fragmented through three characters: a stage director, heard only as 
an offstage voice; an actor, playing his former life; and another offstage 
voice, heard at the beginning and end, reading a love letter for the woman he 
lost. By using multiple narratives strategies, combining the past and the 
present, Koohestani distances himself from his own personal history and 
confuses spectators about a couple’s intimate relationship.

In Timeloss, two actors – played by Mahin Sadri and Hassan Madjooni – meet one 
another after years of separation. They are called upon to collaborate again as 
the director of Dance on Glasses wants to dub their voices for a DVD version of 
the play. The action happens in a recording studio, using video sequences from 
Dance on Glasses over which the actors on stage speak.

After a while, they start arguing about their separation, and it becomes 
difficult to understand whether their words belong to the text of Dance on 
Glasses or if they are debating their own past relationship. One thing, 
however, is certain: this couple is no longer a couple. In contrast to the 
previous play, they sit at two different tables and face the audience; they do 
not look at one another until the play’s end.

The reason for their separation is unclear. They did not fight nor did they 
make any effort to give things another chance. They simply decided to end the 
relationship, while each secretly hoped that the other would save it. And now, 
we discover, neither has been able to rebuild a life – they cannot repair the 
past, and they cannot move on from it. Once again, Koohestani shows us a couple 
who cannot withstand the reality of their relationship.

In conversation, he evoked the difficulty of his own mental journey back in 
time. “Rather than expressing my personal intimacy, I was looking for a 
documentary reality. You see, Timeloss is a time explorer machine. How could I 
get back to my twenties, when I didn’t even know what theatre really was? I had 
barely seen four or five plays in my life. And even though I really wanted to 
get back to my early feeling of love, I realised it was impossible because my 
conception of love has radically changed since that time. Also, I have no 
relation to memory and never feel nostalgic.

“Twelve years have passed and Timeloss is the story of a separated couple 
still in love and unable to stay together more than an hour. In Islam it is 
said that the dead, before reaching paradise or hell, have to pass an 
intermediate state, a space where nothing is good or bad, an indefinite space 
where everything is unclear and transitional. And here is the state of this 
couple in Timeloss: they play an endless game where they make their partner and 
themselves suffer.

“Such a situation is really linked to Iranian society: in Iran, single 
individuals are not socially recognised and they face difficulties whenever 
they want to rent an apartment of their own or find a job – not to mention the 
family pressure. Therefore, the young are, to some extent, forced to live in 
couples and may face endless issues in their relationship if they can’t get 
along. Basically, in order to be part of the society, couples do whatever they 
can to save their relationship.”

For Iranians, the consequences of separation are not easy to bear. Timeloss is 
about not only personal intimacy, but also the seeming impossibility of living 
a single, independent life in Iran. “What needs to be found is a legal 
recognition of the single individual,” according to Koohestani. One might 
suggest that something else needs to be found as well: social (and legal) 
recognition of personal intimacy.

Koohestani is now presenting Timeloss in Tehran. How did the Iranian censors 
react?

“Once they read the play, they didn’t know what to say," Koohestani said. 
"They found it so intimate that they felt the need to judge it once it was on 
stage.”

The play is scheduled to run in Tehran through 10 January 2014
 