
Abbey National faces a high court challenge to its Â£9bn takeover by Banco 
Santander Central Hispano because of concerns about criminal charges faced by 
executives of the Spanish bank.

A private investor in Abbey yesterday lodged an application in the high court 
claiming that the views of shareholders who attended a meeting two weeks ago to 
ratify the deal were overlooked.

Michael Johnson's application was adjourned to November 8, the date already 
scheduled for the courts to approve the takeover of Abbey, which is due for 
completion on November 12.

He has turned to the court after the rowdy shareholder meeting where another 
small investor, Richard Pout, moved an adjournment motion after hearing of 
charges some Santander executives, including chairman Emilio Botin, face inSpain
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>.

Abbey's chairman, Lord Burns, used proxy votes from institutional investors to 
block the motion, which was supported by a show of hands among the 900 or so 
investors in the hall.

Mr Johnson wants the court to rule Lord Burns's use of the proxy votes invalid 
and uphold the verdict of the "overwhelming show of hands".

He alleges that Lord Burns failed to consider the "serious criminal 
allegations" facing the Santander executives and failed to advise shareholders 
of the allegations.

Mr Botin and some colleagues face trials in Spain over allegations of payoffs 
to former directors and helping clients to evade tax. Abbey said it disclosed 
the allegations in the documents it sent to investors and "entirely rejects any 
allegations that the meeting was not conducted legally".

It added: "Abbey does not feel these cases [against the Spanish executives] 
have a significant bearing on the offer to Abbey shareholders, and should not 
be blown out of proportion.

"Importantly, the Financial Services Authority, which has to approve the deal, 
has said it sees no material impediments to working with the relevant parties 
so that its approval can be provided prior to the proposed scheme becoming 
effective on November 12."

The bank pointed out that Mr Johnson has just one share, and Abbey has an 
unusually large number of private in vestors - 1.7 million - because of its 
history as a building society.

"It is important that people who own a very small proportion of the company 
cannot overturn the wishes of the majority of the shareholders".

Mr Johnson also claims Lord Burns failed to allow proxy shareholders an 
opportunity to recast their votes at the shareholder meeting and used the 
proxies "illegally and/or unconstitutionally".

His brief appearance in the high court yesterday coincided the release of 
Abbey National's third-quarter trading statement, which showed its share of the 
mortgage market slipped from 6.1% to 4.4%.

Luqman Arnold, the outgoing Abbey chief executive, said that fall was in part 
because of impending mortgage regulations which require lenders to be more 
cautious. Many people were also redeeming mortgages taken out two years ago.

Mr Arnold said he had lobbied Santander to appoint a Spanish executive to run 
Abbey rather than a local banker. "What was more important was that [the 
person] was someone who knew about Santander," he said.

Santander's finance director, Francisco Gomez-Roldan, will run Abbey after the 
takeover.

The Spanish offer, swapping one Abbey share for one of Santander's plus 31p in 
cash, was valued at 619p last night. Abbey's shares closed at 617p.
 