
Iran's main film industry guild has reopened 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-24069129>, almost two years after 
it was closed by hardliners, reports the state news agency, Irna.

The demise of the House of Cinema was criticised by high-profile directors 
such as Asghar Farhadi, whose film,A Separation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/30/a-separation-review>, won the 
2012 Oscar <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KOEUgGqTQWg> for best 
foreign-language film. The reopening could signal a change in attitude towards 
film under the leadership of new Iranian president Hassan Rouhani, who is seen 
as more moderate than his predecessor and has hinted at a greater tolerance on 
cultural issues.

The guild, which has more than 5,000 members from all corners of the Iranian 
film industry, was closed in January 2012 after being accused of changing its 
statutes without consulting officials. Deputy culture minister Hojatollah 
Ayoubi criticised the closure and confirmed that the decision indicated the new 
president's support for local directors. "When a cultural issue – like the one 
about the House of Cinema – becomes a political one, that is [because] the 
situation was not managed properly," he told Irna.

The reopening will raise hopes that Iran's best-known film-maker, Jafar 
Panahi, might soon benefit from the country's increasing tolerance. Panahi, the 
celebrated director ofThe White Balloon 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r6G5vLObkuw> and Offside 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hUA7pfS9MpU&list=PLD20EC5E9B9D04C9F>, is 
currentlyunder house arrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/04/jafar-panahi-ban-film-festival-skype>
 for defying authorities with his films. He was banned from making films for 20 
years andsentenced to six years in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/oct/18/jafar-panahi-loses-appeal-prison> 
in December 2010.

• Jafar Panahi's Closed Curtain collaborators grounded in Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/28/jafar-panahi-closed-curtain-iran>
 