
A ceremony to honour the makers of Oscar-winning Iranian film A Separation has 
been abruptlycancelled by the Iranian authorities 
<http://hosted.ap.org/dynamic/stories/M/ML_IRAN_OSCAR_FILM?SITE=AP&SECTION=HOME&TEMPLATE=DEFAULT&CTIME=2012-03-12-09-30-45>
, despite official praise for the drama's victory over an Israeli competitor at 
the Academy Award ceremony last month.

Director Asghar Farhadi <https://www.theguardian.com/film/asghar-farhadi> was 
expected to attend the event, organised by two of Iran's most high-profile 
cinema groups, the Centre for Directors of Iranian Cinema and the High Council 
of Producers of Iranian Cinema. However, the semi-official Ilna news agency 
yesterday said a permit had been denied, without giving any reason.

A Separation won the best foreign language Oscar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/27/a-separation-best-foreign-language-oscar>
, beating entries from Israel and three other countries, in Los Angeles on 26 
February. It was the first time a film from the country had won an Academy 
Award, and Farhadi's movie also picked up a nomination for best original 
screenplay.

"We intended to have a simple and friendly meeting to say 'thank you' for the 
great achievement you broughtIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> and 
Iranian cinema but the cultural custodians did not let us realise this," 
organisers of the ceremony told Farhadi in a statement. "We deeply regret this."

The cancellation comes as something of a shock because Iran's political 
leadership had appeared keen to label A Separation's victory a sign of the 
country's triumph over Israel at a time of extreme tension between the two 
nations. However, conservative figures close to Iran's leaders have previously 
criticised the film for insulting the Islamic republic â€“ with hardliners 
concerned over the film's depiction of domestic turmoil, gender inequality and 
the desire of many Iranians to leave the country. In a programme broadcast in 
state-run television, writer Masoud Ferasati said: "The image of our society 
thatA Separation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-separation> depicts is the 
dirty picture westerners are wishing for." All public events in Iran require a 
government permit.

Iranian film-makers have often faced persecution from the authorities in the 
Islamic republic. Farhadi was himself refused permission to shoot A Separation 
in September 2010 after expressing support for fellow directors Mohsen 
Makhmalbaf and Jafar Panahi, respectively exiled and imprisoned by the regime 
for their film-making activities.Farhadi later apologised and was allowed to 
resume work 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/04/world/middleeast/04iran.html?_r=1>.

Millions of Iranians stayed up all night to watch Farhadi pick up the Oscar 
last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/27/oscar-success-a-separation-iran> 
and speak of the importance of recognising his country's glorious and 
essentially peaceful culture at a time of "war, intimidation and aggression". A 
Separation's popularity in Iran forced authorities to put the film forward for 
the Oscars, where it beat Belgium'sBullhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143490/bullhead>, Israel's Footnote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144232/footnote>, Poland's In Darkness  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146047/in-darkness>and Canada's 
Monsieur Lazhar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146048/monsieur-lazhar> 
to win the best foreign film prize.
 