
On 29 August 2003, a massive car bomb killed the Iraqi Shia cleric Ayatollah 
Mohammed Baqir al-Hakim in the holy city of Najaf, along with 85 others. The 
attack, four months after the US-led invasion and the overthrow ofSaddam Hussein
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saddam-hussein>, was carried out by Sunni 
militants. The assassination echoed across a Middle East still in shock at the 
destruction of an Arab regime by western arms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a898d57541f834de9c1470c70a0cede25650abf%2F0_138_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iraq%20war%20still%20casts%20a%20long%20shadow%20over%20a%20dangerous%20and%20deeply%20unstable%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iraq%20war%20still%20casts%20a%20long%20shadow%20over%20a%20dangerous%20and%20deeply%20unstable%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a898d57541f834de9c1470c70a0cede25650abf%2F0_138_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Iraqi mourners at the symbolic funeral for Ayatollah Mohammed Baqir al-Hakim 
in 2003. Photograph: David Guttenfelder/AP 
Horror piled upon horror over the following years. In February 2006, al-Qaida 
in Iraq, recently founded by the Jordanian Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, blew up the 
golden-domed al-Askari mosque in Samarra. The wider target was the country’s 
Shia majority, elated by the removal of the hated Sunni dictator. Next door, 
the Islamic Republic of Iran was celebrating the demise of its enemies – the 
Baathists of Baghdad and the Taliban in Kabul – courtesy ofGeorge Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/george-bush> and Tony Blair.

 And then, on 30 December 2006, Saddam was hanged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/30/iraq.iraqtimeline>. As he stood 
on the gallows, men in ski masks taunting him with Shia slogans, he denounced 
them contemptuously as “Persian dwarves”. Blurred video footage of his final 
moments was viewed by millions of Arabs – unleashing both fury and praise for 
his courage in the face of death. The timing, just as Sunnis were celebrating 
the Eid al-Adha holiday, added insult to injury. The rest is not only history 
but the current reality of a dangerous and deeply unstable region.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feac5be7bb97136d00e78e3b44fb4f83e4c2d6c2e%2F0_107_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iraq%20war%20still%20casts%20a%20long%20shadow%20over%20a%20dangerous%20and%20deeply%20unstable%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iraq%20war%20still%20casts%20a%20long%20shadow%20over%20a%20dangerous%20and%20deeply%20unstable%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feac5be7bb97136d00e78e3b44fb4f83e4c2d6c2e%2F0_107_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Television footage shows masked executioners prepare to execute former Iraqi 
president Saddam Hussein. Photograph: HO/REUTERS 
 Now, as the British government faces intense public scrutiny from the Chilcot 
report, the war continues to cast a long shadow over Iraq, the Arab world and 
beyond. Even at the time, in the face of bitter controversy and mass protests, 
it was seen as a pivotal event. That judgment has been repeatedly confirmed by 
its toxic and destabilising legacy – the spread of hateful sectarianism, the 
growth of al-Qaida and then Isis, the empowerment of Iran: all were the 
unintended but undeniable consequences of 2003; all, like thelatest carnage in 
Baghdad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/04/baghdad-blast-death-toll-rises-to-142-pm-orders-tighter-security-checks>
, are still making headlines today.

Syria's civil war: five years of Guardian reporting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/syria-civil-war-five-years-guardian-reporting>
Arab and western analysts and historians are in broad agreement on these 
points. Hindsight naturally helps, though some spoke out at the time of the 
risks involved in the war – and were ignored. “People did not think that 
al-Qaida andIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> would play the role 
that they did,” Blair told the inquiry. Chilcot however, stated clearly on 
Wednesday: “The risks of internal strife in Iraq, active Iranian pursuit of its 
interests, regional instability, and al Qaida activity in Iraq, were each 
explicitly identified before the invasion.”

On another related issue, sometimes used to try to justify the invasion, few 
see any direct link between the fall of Saddam and the later uprisings of the 
Arab spring, which toppled four other dictators but left many in place, 
unscathed and more ruthless than before.


And, bringing a bleak story up to date, most experts argue too that the 
current crisis inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> – the 
bloodiest of our times with 400,000 dead and millions made homeless – has been 
heavily, and negatively, influenced by the events of 2003 and after.

In the wake of the Iraq war, intervention became a dirty word, at least in the 
west – and arguably to calamitous effect. “It’s the ghost ofIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> that stops Barack Obama intervening 
overtly in Syria,” says Toby Dodge, of the London School of Economics.

Emile Hokayem, of the International Institute of Strategic Studies, agrees: 
“Iraq is seen by many asthe original sin, and for understandable reasons. 
People read what they want into the tragedy. It is indeed a massive tragedy. It 
permeates everything, the way we talk about politics. It is pervasive.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c9ba02669005470239c0882ee5559fdcd68fc73%2F0_29_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iraq%20war%20still%20casts%20a%20long%20shadow%20over%20a%20dangerous%20and%20deeply%20unstable%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iraq%20war%20still%20casts%20a%20long%20shadow%20over%20a%20dangerous%20and%20deeply%20unstable%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c9ba02669005470239c0882ee5559fdcd68fc73%2F0_29_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Tunisians celebrate the first democratic elections following the Arab spring. 
Photograph: Anis Mili/REUTERS 
 Back then, the head of the Arab League, the Egyptian politician Amr Moussa, 
warned memorably that an invasion would “open the gates of hell”. Reservations 
like that were not out of love for Saddam – his “republic of fear” was a byword 
for cruelty at home and aggression abroad – but out of anxiety about who, and 
what, would follow him.

 For Hayder al-Khoei, an Iraqi-British academic, Saddam’s domain was already 
“hell” because of his brutal repression and the ravages of a decade of western 
sanctions. The weapons of mass destruction (WMD) issue was barely relevant. But 
the war meant, above all, the replacement of a Sunni regime by a Shia one. 
“That was an earthquake for the region, and the tremors and recriminations are 
continuing,” he argues. “And the fact that it was a cowboy from Texas who 
overturned a 100-year-old status quo was insulting. It was hard to stomach and 
psychologically difficult to deal with.”

 Gilbert Achcar, a Lebanese professor at SOAS, London University, sees the 
invasion as a direct continuation of the unfinished business of 1991, when Bush 
senior left Saddam in power to crush the Shia intifada that erupted in the wake 
of his ejection from Kuwait. The US intervention – what he succinctly calls 
Bush’s “cakewalk into an Iraqi quagmire” – created the conditions for both the 
raw sectarianism and jihadi violence that followed. “You didn’t need a crystal 
ball,” he sighs. “It was very predictable and what happened was exactly what 
was predicted.”

 Aimen Dean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2015/jun/05/former-al-qaida-spy-for-mi6-urges-effort-to-confuse-islamic-state>
, a Saudi who now works as a consultant in Dubai, has an unusual perspective – 
and rare inside knowledge. In 2003, he was an undercover agent for the British 
intelligence service MI6, having defected from al-Qaida as his doubts grew 
about its violent methods. “If Saddam is removed, a pillar of Arab nationalism 
will fall and it will only be replaced by Islamism on the Sunni or the Shia 
side,” he cautioned his handlers.

Why Isis fights | Martin Chulov
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/why-isis-fight-syria-iraq> 
 Events proved him right: after Saddam’s hanging, Salafis in the Gulf donated 
millions of dollars to fund al-Qaida’s war of bombings, beheadings and 
kidnappings against Shia “apostates”. Luay al-Khatteeb, an Iraqi scholar at 
Columbia University, believes the Sunni autocracies preferred these terrorists 
to a Shia democracy imposed by American power. “The invasion was not only shock 
and awe for Iraq, but a wake-up call for the region,” he haswritten 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/luay-al-khatteeb/debating-militancy-in-pos_b_10790300.html>
.

“Virtually all of Iraq’s neighbours provided shelter, support and in some 
cases finances and training to different insurgent groups. Iraqi Baathists were 
able to organise attacks from the safety of Amman and Damascus, while some Gulf 
states either tolerated or oversaw funding for Salafist-jihadist groups.”

But Abdelkhaleq Abdulla, a political scientist from the UAE, holds the US and 
UK primarily responsible for giving a deadly boost to the takfiri extremism 
embodied by the psychopathic Zarqawi – and to his successor, Abu Bakr 
al-Baghdadi, emir of today’s Islamic State (also known as Isis, or Daesh). “If 
it wasn’t for 2003, there would have been no Daesh,” he insists. “To blame it 
exclusively onSaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> or 
Wahhabism is to dodge the issue.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F187e13164fb99df42b041afd64508967985cd525%2F120_408_3096_1858%2F3096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iraq%20war%20still%20casts%20a%20long%20shadow%20over%20a%20dangerous%20and%20deeply%20unstable%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iraq%20war%20still%20casts%20a%20long%20shadow%20over%20a%20dangerous%20and%20deeply%20unstable%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F187e13164fb99df42b041afd64508967985cd525%2F120_408_3096_1858%2F3096.jpg>
 The site of the car bomb attack by Islamic State at Karrada, Baghdad, on 2 
July. Photograph: Ahmed Saad/Reuters 
Buthaina Shaaban, then and now an aide to the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, predicted “inflamed 
conflict” between Sunnis and Shias if Saddam was ousted. Assad’smukhabarat – 
secret police – sent Syrian extremists across the border to join the Iraqi 
resistance to the Americans. In 2011, he crushed initially peaceful protests 
and released jihadis from his prisons so they would militarise the uprising and 
make it easier to fight.

Iran condemned the invasion but took advantage of its aftermath and gloated 
when Saddam was killed. “Iran was sucked into this conflict without wanting to 
get involved,” insists Foad Izadi, of Tehran University. “The Americans carved 
out a role by playing on Sunni-Shia tensions. We did not benefit.” Tehran’s 
enemies watched apprehensively.

“Iran won twice, first in Afghanistan and then in Iraq,” recalls Sima Shein, 
at the time a senior official with Israel’s Mossad spy agency. “The moment 
Saddam was gone, the Shia came out on top and the Iranians won a strategic 
victory.”


What to expect from the Chilcot inquiry: revelation or whitewash?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/04/chilcot-inquiry-iraq-war-whitewash>
The American architects of the war defended their vision, even after the 
catastrophic disbanding of the Iraqi army in May 2003 – widely seen as the 
greatest blunder of the post-war period. Neoconservative ideologues came up 
with a spurious “domino theory” according to which regime change in Iraq would 
be emulated elsewhere and even somehow promote recognition ofIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> by the Palestinians and moderate 
Arab states. “Baghdad is for wimps, real men go to Tehran,” went the 
(half)-jokey Washington saying.

 In 2005, the US hailed regional changes it attributed in part to the removal 
of Saddam: one was the cedar revolution in Lebanon, where mass protests erupted 
after the assassination of former prime minister Rafiq al-Hariri, a Sunni with 
close Saudi links, and culminated when the Syrian army withdrew after a 30-year 
occupation.

 Condoleeza Rice, Bush’s secretary of state, talked up “democracy promotion” 
that arm-twisted a reluctant Hosni Mubarak to hold parliamentary elections in 
Egypt, and even the Saudis to allow municipal polls. “How much credit went to 
Iraq, how much to the internal dynamics of each country and how much to luck 
depended on whom you asked and what position he or she wanted to justify,” 
wrote George Packer inThe Assassins’ Gate 
<https://www.amazon.com/Assassins-Gate-America-Iraq/dp/B004KAB5AA>, his fine 
study of US policy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F026c7753b8b5385e45b80d5e65188bb63d2a14d7%2F0_238_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iraq%20war%20still%20casts%20a%20long%20shadow%20over%20a%20dangerous%20and%20deeply%20unstable%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iraq%20war%20still%20casts%20a%20long%20shadow%20over%20a%20dangerous%20and%20deeply%20unstable%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Firaq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F026c7753b8b5385e45b80d5e65188bb63d2a14d7%2F0_238_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The Chilcot report will examine Tony Blair’s role in the Iraq war, alongside 
US president George W Bush. Photograph: Stephen Jaffe/AFP/Getty Images 
US claims, never convincing, have not stood the test of time. “It is utter 
bullshit in any way to link the Arab spring to Iraq as the neoconservatives 
do,” says Dodge. “What causal link could a quasi-imperial failed invasion of 
Iraq have to mass popular uprisings?” Toppling Saddam’s statue in Baghdad’s 
Firdaus Square made for a great if stagey photo opportunity. Its fall may 
indeed have “demystified the power of dictatorships that had hitherto seemed 
eternal and unbreakable,”in the words 
<https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/public/Research/Middle%20East/0513pr_iraqtenyearson.pdf>
 of Nadim Shehadi of Chatham House. But the changes that followed elsewhere 
were caused by more underlying factors, some of them also visible in Iran in 
the “Green” protests that erupted after the “stolen” presidential election in 
2009.

 Iraq’s turmoil continued to affect the wider region, and to be affected by 
it, even as attitudes to the occupation shifted. “In the early years you had 
strong anti-US resistance among the Sunnis but after 2006-7, with the civil war 
and defeat of al-Qaida, Sunnis came to see the Americans as the lesser evil to 
Iranian domination,” notes Achcar.

The ultimate irony came in 2010 when Tariq Aziz, Saddam’s veteran foreign 
minister, accused Obama ina Guardian interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/05/tariq-aziz-interview-iraq> from 
his prison cell of “leaving Iraq to the wolves” by pressing ahead with a 
withdrawal of US combat troops in the face of continuing instability.

Isis will continue to kill in Iraq while there’s a corrupt political class | 
Ranj Alaaldin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/04/isis-iraq-corrupt-political-class>
Libya’s uprising, after those in Tunisia, Egypt and Bahrain, stirred the 
ghosts of Iraq. Ordinary Libyans fought to overthrow Muammar Gaddafi while 
Nato’s air campaign, driven by Britain andFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> while Obama “led from behind”, was 
coordinated with Arab Gulf allies who backed rival rebel groups. It fuelled 
another angry but inconclusive debate about how to respond to the Arab spring. 
The aftermath has not been kind to Obama’s reputation or the credibility of US 
power in the Middle East.

“In a way, the US-British invasion of Iraq was the unintentional catalyst for 
a lot of these regional transformations,” argues Hokayem, who did not support 
the war but is a fierce critic of vacillating US responses to Syria compared to 
the strategic approach taken by Iran and Russia. “They would have probably 
occurred in one way or another as these weak, repressive and incompetent Arab 
governments were already there. But the invasion was an enabler. And there is a 
clear link between 2003 and the second age of jihadism and sectarianism. 
Westerners did not create these destructive phenomena but the invasion 
exacerbated them decisively. That’s an important distinction.

 “People talk about the Iraq war the way they want to talk about it. There are 
a lot of self-serving arguments. The hypothetical scenario I and others are 
struggling with is this: let’s imagine that tomorrow Assad survives in the same 
way Saddam survived in 1991. If there is then a semblance of 
internationally-accepted ‘stability’ in Damascus, would I, five years down the 
road, advocate another intervention in similar circumstances? The Iraq war 
fundamentally changed our collective view of what is feasible and desirable and 
the constraints that policy makers operate under.”

Basra after the British: division and despair in Iraq's oil boomtown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/04/basra-british-iraq-oil-boomtown-legacy-chilcot-saddam>
Debate about the Chilcot report will take place largely in Britain but it will 
likely be listened to far more widely. In the Middle East of 2016 perhaps only
Kurds <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kurds> still view the war in a 
positive light – though in the words of Barham Salih, a leading Iraqi-Kurdish 
politician and deputy prime minister under Nouri al-Maliki, “Isis has 
demonstrated that the mission was not accomplished in Iraq”.

Another important promise failed to materialise. Part of the case for the 
invasion – “that action in Iraq could be made more palatable”, as Rice put it 
in her memoirs – was that it would be followed by an initiative to restart 
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. Bush’s endorsement of the “road map” for 
peace was seen as a sop to Blair. The claim that impetus would be provided by 
Iraq has been described as “naive if not deliberately deceptive”. In any event, 
that map led nowhere slowly.


“The Iraq war is going to affect this part of the world for many generations 
to come,” concludes Izadi. “It shows what happens when you invade a country and 
don’t think carefully – when you have a president like Bush in the US and 
someone like Blair, who should have known better given the long history of 
British involvement in the region and the disasters that were caused by the 
colonial powers.”

 