
“Algorithms can’t do it alone. They’re very handy, and you can’t do something 
of this scale without ‘em, but you need a strong human element.”

That’s Apple’s Jimmy Iovine, talking to the Guardian in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/09/apple-music-interview-jimmy-iovine-eddy-cue>
 ahead of the launch ofApple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/30/apple-music-launch-spotify-radio>
, the company’s new music-streaming service. The same interview saw him label 
rivals like Spotify as mere “utilities” lacking Apple’s human touch.

Three months on, Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> Music’s 
earliest adopters are nearing the end of its three-month free trial, and must 
decide whether its blend of algorithms and people is worth paying for.

Their decision will be based on a service that does some things well, but – as 
Apple itself has admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/03/apple-music-improve-festival-streaming>
 – needs improvement in other areas.

Basic details

Apple Music <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music> is available 
for PC and Mac as part of the iTunes software, and for iOS devices within their 
preloaded Music app. An Android version will follow later this year.

Like rival services, the core of Apple Music is a catalogue of recordings – 
30m songs – to stream “on demand”, with recommendations, themed playlists and 
radio-like stations to help people navigate it. Here, there’s also a live radio 
station, Beats 1, and a social section called Connect.

For the most part, the catalogue is the same as those of its rivals. Apple 
does have Taylor Swift’s latest album 1989 as a streaming exclusive, while new 
releases from Dr Dre and Drake/Future have debuted on Apple Music a week or two 
before appearing on other streaming services.

A membership – Apple is avoiding the word “subscription” – costs £9.99 a month 
for one person, or £14.99 for a family plan covering up to six people. Some 
elements, including Beats 1, are available for free to non-members who sign in 
with an Apple ID.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fis-apple-music-worth-paying-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F21%2F1442842639500%2F6f5f5eae-fe7a-4a28-bda5-60c066a7f841-1020x732.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Apple%20Music%20worth%20paying%20for%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fis-apple-music-worth-paying-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Apple%20Music%20worth%20paying%20for%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fis-apple-music-worth-paying-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F21%2F1442842639500%2F6f5f5eae-fe7a-4a28-bda5-60c066a7f841-1020x732.jpeg>
 Apple Music’s New section. 
Exploring the music

You can search for albums and songs on Apple Music to play, as well as adding 
them to your own playlists and downloading them for offline access. Like its 
rivals, it also recommends you old and new music that it thinks you’ll like.

These recommendations are found in two sections of the app: New and For You. 
New is where you’ll find new tracks and albums, popular playlists, music videos 
and other promotional suggestions – for example, in September, links to artists 
playing that month’s Apple Music Festival.

Apple Music interview: 'Algorithms can't do it alone – you need a human touch'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/09/apple-music-interview-jimmy-iovine-eddy-cue>
New is also the way in to the playlists being compiled by Apple’s in-house 
team and guest curators. It’s one of Apple Music’s strongest features: a deep 
selection of playlists that mines plenty of interesting niches.

In one day exploring, I flitted between Resident Advisor’s guide to Ninja 
Tune; Pitchfork’s Early ‘80s Disco playlist; a Northern Soul collection; a 
selection of hip-hop tracks sampling Booker T & the MGs; and playlists 
exploring the influences on Chvrches, Nirvana and My Bloody Valentine.

Apple Music also has a group of “The A-List” playlists covering pop, dance, 
alternative, hip-hop, rock, R&B, electronic and new artists, which offer a good 
selection of what’s bubbling up on the service.

The obvious comparison is to Spotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify>, which also has a large 
selection of playlists compiled in-house. Apple’s tend to be shorter with 12-20 
tracks at a time, while Spotify’s tend to be longer at 80 tracks or more: 
better suited for playing on shuffle. Both approaches can work well, though.

Bar the odd tone-deaf moment – a penny for St. Vincent or Sleater-Kinney’s 
thoughts on topping a “Girls with Guitars” playlist – Apple’s playlist curation 
is a strong point, although its rivals are far from the characterless utilities 
that Apple paints them as on this front.

Algorithms at work

The For You feature is where Apple’s algorithms come in to play, providing a 
feed of suggestions for playlists and albums based on your iTunes music 
collection and Apple Music listening habits. The more you use it, the better 
the recommendations should become – in theory.

Three months in, it’s too early to provide a definitive verdict on this, 
especially as in my case Apple Music was challenged from the start: I’ve been a 
paying Spotify user since 2008, so Apple knows very little about my music life 
over the past seven years, apart from that I bought the last Beyoncé and Taylor 
Swift albums (which weren’t on Spotify).

Spotify has six years of my music data, but does it understand my tastes?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/06/spotify-music-streaming-taste-profile>
Unsurprisingly, my early days of For You were driven by this: lots of Britpop, 
mid-90s dance and singer-songwriter recommendations based on my pre-2008 iTunes 
collection, and the odd “Workout like Beyoncé” playlist – which sounds 
inappropriate, but as a bangers-not-ballads collection of Bey and Destiny’s 
Child tracks is actually marvellous.

Spotify, by contrast, knows what I’ve been listening to in the last seven 
years: its “Discover” section is currently recommending me albums similar to 
Disclosure, Best Coast, Courtney Barnett, Django Django and Jamie Woon among 
others. Meanwhile, its excellent Discover Weekly playlist throws a new batch of 
new artists and songs at me every week.

Somewhere between these two poles lies a full picture of the musical me. As 
things stand, Spotify is better at recommending me new artists, while Apple 
Music is better for bathing in the warm, neon-gloved glow of Best of ‘90s 
Indie-Dance, Vol. 2.

Even so, Apple Music’s algorithms are learning fast: later in the three-month 
trial, one day’s recommendations included introductions to Hot Chip, Laura 
Marling and Orbital as well as albums by Primal Scream, Saint Etienne, Django 
Django, Jungle, Sharon Van Etten and the Chemical Brothers. An encouraging 
start.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fis-apple-music-worth-paying-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F21%2F1442842975834%2F78aa8e26-317b-4558-b1b5-93e88ce5702f-1020x792.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Apple%20Music%20worth%20paying%20for%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fis-apple-music-worth-paying-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Apple%20Music%20worth%20paying%20for%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fis-apple-music-worth-paying-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F21%2F1442842975834%2F78aa8e26-317b-4558-b1b5-93e88ce5702f-1020x792.jpeg>
 Apple Music’s For You feature. 
Radio rocks?

Radio is a big part of Apple Music, including live Beats 1 and the themed 
collection of “stations” – rock, pop, hip-hop etc – which aren’t quite as 
specific as playlists, but may work if you just want something on in the 
background.

Beats 1 is a big deal for Apple Music, broadcasting live to the world for 12 
hours a day, then repeating that run of shows for the following 12 hours, with 
a mixture of professional DJs and guest artists with their own shows.

What happens when you listen to Beats 1 radio for 24 hours? Lots and lots of 
Drake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/02/beats-1-drake-jaden-smith-st-vincent-ezra-koenig>
Beats 1 will feel familiar to anyone who’s listened to the BBC’s specialist 
radio shows and stations in the UK: no wonder given that Apple poached several 
of the Beeb’s producers as well as Radio 1 DJ Zane Lowe.

The focus is squarely on new music, which won’t appeal to everyone, although 
with iOS devices now owned by a broad section of the population, there’s 
clearly scope for a Beats 2 for older and/or more mainstream music fans in the 
future.

Beats 1 is good, with artist-run shows from the likes of St Vincent, Josh 
Homme, Q-Tip and Elton John reminding me (in a good way) of why the likes of 
Iggy Pop, Cerys Matthews, Jarvis Cocker, Guy Garvey and Huey Morgan have helped 
the BBC’s 6Music build such a strong character.

Lowe’s enthusiasm for new music remains infectious, and colleague Julie Adenuga
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/01/apple-beats-1-dj-julie-adenuga-interview>
 is a real breath of fresh airwaves too. Beats 1’s weakness at launch was its 
lack of archived shows for time-shifted listening, but that’s since been 
sorted: shows can be searched for within Apple Music, and are posted on DJs’ 
Connect profiles.

Failing to Connect

If Beats 1 is a strength for Apple Music, the Connect section is a big 
disappointment. It was pitched as part Twitter, part Instagram and part 
SoundCloud: a place for artists, DJs and tastemakers to post status updates, 
photos, videos and even full songs.

As a fan, you follow your favourites to get a feed of their posts, which you 
can comment on. Apple saw it as a special club for exclusive tracks, raw lyrics 
and behind-the-scenes insights beyond those available on other social networks. 
For now, few artists are delivering on that promise.

Apple admits it has 'homework to do' to improve Apple Music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/03/apple-music-improve-festival-streaming>
In fact, many notable musicians are posting barely once a week, with many of 
those updates either reposted photos from Instagram and Twitter; exhortations 
to buy tickets, stream or buy albums; or tune in to Beats 1 shows.

Connect isn’t offering anything you can’t get from Twitter and Facebook, and 
while Apple is promoting songs and videos “discovered on Connect” within Apple 
Music, it’s nowhere near as vibrant a pool of new and unsigned music as, say, 
SoundCloud.

Apple Music also reinforces the familiar criticism that Apple doesn’t get 
social. There’s no sense of what your friends are listening to, unlike Spotify 
with its live ticker of their plays, and its chart of your friends’ top tracks.

Apple Music’s system for creating and sharing your own playlists with friends 
also lags behind: the sense is of a top-down approach, Apple’s editors and its 
media partners are the curators, and you’re the listener.

This will suit plenty of people just fine, but if you cherish the moments 
where a friend says “I’ve never heard of [band X]” and five minutes of 
dragging-and-dropping later you’re pinging them a personalised playlist... it’s 
still possible on Apple Music, but it could be easier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fis-apple-music-worth-paying-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F21%2F1442843169813%2F42dbd423-5761-451e-a0c7-fa1edb392838-1020x673.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Apple%20Music%20worth%20paying%20for%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fis-apple-music-worth-paying-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Apple%20Music%20worth%20paying%20for%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fis-apple-music-worth-paying-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F21%2F1442843169813%2F42dbd423-5761-451e-a0c7-fa1edb392838-1020x673.jpeg>
 Two snapshots from my Connect feed: promotion and reposted updates. 
Interface and iCloud issues

If you’re switching from another streaming music service like Spotify or Rdio, 
being hurled back into daily usage of iTunes on the desktop or the iOS Music 
App can be a jarring experience.

If you’re already using either or both of those, you’ll face less of a culture 
shock, and in fairness the more I used it, the less I found myself grimacing at 
the user interface.

More troubling were the anguished howls in the early days of Apple Music from 
some users with large iTunes music libraries, who’d seenportions of their 
collections deleted without warning 
<http://www.loopinsight.com/2015/07/22/apple-music-is-a-nightmare-and-im-done-with-it/>
. Other complaints have focused on problems adding albums to local libraries, 
and keeping that synchronised between devices.

My iTunes library appears to be intact, although it’s hard to say for sure 
since it’s been gathering digital dust since 2008.

One of Apple Music’s key strengths should be the way it brings your MP3 
collection together with the wider streaming catalogue, so it’s baffling that 
such a major – for those affected – bug was allowed to slip through the 
pre-launch checks.

Apple has since patched the error, but if you’ve yet to try Apple Music and 
are concerned, back your library up before signing up. A sensible move 
regardless of any specific bug.

So, is Apple Music worth paying for?

As with Spotify, Deezer, Google Play All Access and other streaming services, 
£9.99 a month for unlimited access to 30m tracks is good value for any music 
lover.

Apple Music’s family plan is particularly good value, whether you’re a parent 
wanting to keep your kids off torrent sites, or living with housemates. While 
some rivals have family plans already, they tend to be more expensive: £9.99 
for the first person then £4.99 for each additional family member. Google Play 
has become the first to match Apple’s family-plan price, though, and other 
rivals will surely follow.

How much do musicians really make from Spotify, iTunes and YouTube?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/03/how-much-musicians-make-spotify-itunes-youtube>
Is Apple Music worth £9.99 a month more than its rivals are? My main reason 
not to move over from Spotify is less about features, and more about data – the 
data Spotify holds on my music habits, and how it uses that data for 
recommendations, whether in the Discover Weekly playlist or the “Now” feature 
that recommends music based on your habits at the current time of day.

That, plus the prospect of rebuilding my own playlists (not to mention giving 
up Discover Weekly and the dozen-or-so trusted playlists that I follow from 
other people) is what will keep me with that service for the time being.

The people most willing to pay for a music-streaming subscription may be the 
toughest for Apple to sign up, then. But we’re in the minority: 20 million 
Spotify subscribers plus six million on Deezer, three million on 
Rhapsody/Napster and an unknown number paying for Rdio, Tidal and other rivals. 
There are hundreds of millions more people streaming music for free on services 
like YouTube, SoundCloud and Spotify’s free tier.

So if you’re looking for a paid streaming service, Apple Music is worth paying 
for. But if you’re happy getting your music for free, you’ll probably want to 
save yourself £9.99 a month. Apple’s challenge is to change your mind, and 
while it’s made an encouraging start, there is more work to do.

Oh, and one more thing … if you’re a trial member it’s worth noting, the New 
York Post claims thataround half of the 15 million trial members of Apple Music 
haven’t turned off its auto-pay option 
<http://nypost.com/2015/09/21/apple-music-has-been-a-surprising-success/>. So 
if you’re one of them, you might want to check you’re not making your choice by 
default.
 