
Thursday night’s episode of Top of the Pops 1980 should – assuming the BBC 
haven’t tampered with the tapes to avoid anyYewtree-related 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Yewtree> DJ embarrassment – end with 
Abba performing Super Trouper, the No 1 single at this point 35 years ago. It’s 
a staggering record: seemingly an almost meaningless nursery rhyme at first 
listen (“Su-pah-pah! trou-pah-pah!”), but soon revealed to be a tightly wound 
coil of existential misery, gift-wrapped then tied neatly with the prettiest of 
bows.

Super Trouper was Abba’s last UK No 1, and signalled the start of their last 
phase, when the relationships within the group were falling apart, and their 
lyrics at last started to take on meaning and reflect their lives, which meant 
they were often pretty grim. In the UK, Super Trouper was preceded as a single 
by The Winner Takes It All, and some countries also got On and On and On, with 
its truly extraordinary lyric, which began: “I was at a party and this fella 
said to me / ‘Something bad is happening, I’m sure you do agree / People care 
for nothing, no respect for human rights / Evil times are coming, we are in for 
darker nights.’” Ring Ring was a long time in the past.

Super Trouper might also be the truest song written about the life of the pop 
superstar, stuck in that curious netherworld in which adoration and alienation 
sit side by side. “Facing 20,000 of your friends,” sings Anni-Frid Lyngstad, 
“how can anyone feel so lonely?” Naturally, beingAbba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/abba>, while telling you how wretched being 
in a huge pop group really is – “wishing every show was the last one” – they 
don’t make you wallow in their self-pity, making sure every element of the song 
is the most finely honed of pop. Super Trouper sounds joyful, even if it isn’t. 
It doesn’t ask for your sympathy, and by holding out the prospect of the lover 
who can make things right, it holds out the prospect of redemption. It’s a far 
more palatable and enjoyable way of hearing how miserable it is being a star 
than anything Thom Yorke has managed to come up with.

It rather sounds as if it’s a song Adele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> has been listening to on repeat. The 
other day she told the New York Times: “Performing to that many people for 
every night, for that long, I find something very lonely about it. Which sounds 
weird, because you’re performing for like, 20,000 people every night, but you 
leave on your own. You don’t go home and, like, share a bed with 20,000 people 
and have a little pyjama party and watch movies.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBshxCIjNEjY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBshxCIjNEjY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBshxCIjNEjY&media=>
It’s not as elegantly and economically phrased as Abba put it, but it’s 
exactly the same sentiment, right down to the choice of adjective (“lonely”) 
and the number of people (20,000). “The thought of how lonely that could be 
frightens me more than the load of doing a worldwide tour,” she said.

I’ve met two kinds of musicians. The first are those who love touring, even if 
it’s only the two hours on stage they really enjoy, rather than the 22 hours 
hanging around and travelling (there’s a subset of that group: the ones so rich 
they can create their own environment wherever they go, so it’s not like 
touring in any normal sense – such as Rod Stewart, who always has an extra 
hotel room so he can work on his model railway in his spare time). The second 
are those who hate touring, who would rather be at home, or in the studio, who 
don’t see any attraction at all in the briefest visit to cities they never see 
more of than the block around the venue, and for whom the prospect of having to 
set everything in their minds to one side for two hours a night to be a 
performing seal fills them with horror. And those musicians are surprisingly 
common: pretty much everyone I’ve spoken to has expressed an attitude to the 
road that is, at best, ambivalent, just like Super Trouper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fis-adele-living-in-an-abba-song-super-trouper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F3%2F1449153896189%2F1c6f2792-c761-41e3-af75-c25ae0e99a93-1546x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Adele%20living%20in%20an%20Abba%20song%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fis-adele-living-in-an-abba-song-super-trouper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Adele%20living%20in%20an%20Abba%20song%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fis-adele-living-in-an-abba-song-super-trouper%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F3%2F1449153896189%2F1c6f2792-c761-41e3-af75-c25ae0e99a93-1546x2040.jpeg>
 Alone in a crowd: Adele appears on the NBC’s Today show in New York in 
November. Photograph: NBC/Getty Images 
But that’s not a point of view it’s easy for the music fan to sympathise with. 
We tend to see only the surface: the person getting paid to travel the world, 
and be adored daily. Which is why Super Trouper, and Adele’s extrapolation of 
it, is so brilliant. It recognises the incomprehensibility of the situation by 
asking how anyone could feel so lonely, it doesn’t hide from the fact that 
performance is pretence (“Smiling, having fun / Feeling like a number one”) but 
it doesn’t blame the audience for the anomie. And it obeys the rules of the 
love song by offering The One as the cure-all, even if the rest of the lyric 
rather undermines the possibility of The One being any more than a sticking 
plaster on a deep psychic wound.

Yet you rarely hear Super Trouper referred to in the list of great songs about 
life on the road. It doesn’t have tales of derring do and debauchery, it 
doesn’t wallow – everything about it seems too scrubbed clean to reflect the 
reality of tour buses and late night check-ins. But, plainly, it’s a version of 
the truth. Which is why, 35 years on,Adele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> is more or less quoting it.
 