
The claim


David Cameron was asked during an interview with ITV's This Morning today 
about the news that 100,000 more children would be tipped below the poverty 
line by the measures announced in the Autumn statement this week. He disputed 
the figures. My colleagueAndrew Sparrow 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/andrewsparrow> recorded the exchange here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2011/dec/01/davidcameron-edmiliband>. 
The prime minister said:
 LONDON, ENGLAND - DECEMBER 02: Prime Minister David Cameron speaks during the 
Business in the Community annual general meeting on December 2, 2010 in London, 
England. Cameron and England were disappointed today after losing to Russia in 
their bid to stage the FIFA 2018 World Cup. (Photo by Andrew Winning - WPA 
Pool/Getty Images) Business Finance Politics Photograph: Wpa Pool/Getty Images 
I think there is a real problem with the way we measure child poverty in this 
country. Because it's done on relative poverty, if you increase the pension, 
that means more children are in poverty. I think that's illogical. It's the 
right thing to do to increase the pension. It does not make any child in our 
country poorer, because you are giving pensioners more money at a time when 
they need it. I think what we have got to start doing is measuring how we help 
children out of poverty and keep them out of poverty.

Cameron was claiming that more children are poor because this measure judges 
relative poverty across the age and income groups. The fact that the government 
decided to uprate pensions in line with inflation by 5.2% makes other groups 
appear poorer even if their incomes have not changed.

Is this true?


Child poverty is defined as the proportion of children in households with an 
equivalised income below 60 per cent of the median. Previously the coalition 
has insisted that its austerity measures to date would not increase child 
poverty but this changed with Tuesday's autumn statement.A distributional 
analysis of the impacts of the autumn statement 
<http://cdn.hm-treasury.gov.uk/as2011_distributional_analysis.pdf>, produced by 
the Treasury, concluded:

On this basis, analysis shows an estimated increase of around 100,000 in 
2012-13, but this does not represent a forecast of the actual change in child 
poverty between 2011-12 and 2012-13. In fact, when CPI is substantially higher 
than average earnings growth, as is currently and exceptionally the case, 
uprating benefits by CPI will reduce this measure of child poverty year on 
year, all other things being equal.

But all other things are not equal. The 100,000 figure was highlighted in the 
analysis of the impact of the autumn statement by theInstitute for Fiscal 
Studies <http://www.ifs.org.uk/>, published yesterday. I've just spoken to 
Robert Joyce <http://www.ifs.org.uk/people/profile/416>, the IFS researcher who 
analysed those figures yesterday. You can read his assessment inthis 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/5930> document on page 14. 

The IFS says that there are two predominant reasons why child poverty has gone 
up: the tax credit cuts announced on Tuesday and the fact that the government 
is now including in its measure the cuts to housing benefits.

Both of these would have an absolute effect of tipping more children into 
poverty rather than a relative effect of making it look like more children are 
in poverty.

Robert told me that though there is a relative impact as described by the 
prime minister, there was "undeniably" an absolute effect as well and that this 
was "almost certainly" more significant:

Cameron is having a dig at relative poverty measures. If you do something that 
benefits median household income and no one else you increase poverty even 
though no one is poorer in absoute terms. The government have made lots of 
reforms, each will have an effect on relative poverty. It wouldn't just be 
being more generous to pensioners, they increased the personal allowance which 
increased the medium household as well.

But it's certainly true that the measures announced on Tuesday will on average 
take-away from people lower down the household income spectrum. They will 
undeniably affect families in absolute terms. Tax credit cuts will make low 
income children worse off as will cuts to local housing allowance. The 
government will have cut the welfare budget Â£18bn a year by end of parliament. 
That is clearly going to have absolute impacts on many lower income people. 
Almost certainly that is a bigger effect than the relative impact of the 
pension changes.

It would be false to say that the coalitions' reforms increase child poverty 
only by raising median income. They also raise poverty measured against a 
fixed, rather than relative, poverty line. In other words, they reduce the 
absolute incomes of low-income families.

I asked Robert whether any work was being done to disaggregate the relative 
and absolute effects of the government's policies on child poverty and he said 
the IFS had not done it yet. It is a very complex piece of work, but if done it 
could ultimately say what the true figure of additional child poverty is.

Verdict

The prime minister is wrong to blame child poverty solely on a statistical 
system that rates it in relative terms. Some policies will change the average 
household income, meaning the number of children in relative poverty increases. 
But this impact is almost certainly outweighed by policies which have reduced 
the income of the lowest earners and tipped more children into absolute 
poverty. Child poverty is rising in absolute terms as a result of the 
government's cuts.
 