
There are only a handful of people in Britain who think they can get away with 
comparing themselves to John Maynard Keynes without provoking guffaws.

Ed Balls is one of those people. In the most important speech 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/wintour-and-watt/2011/jan/25/edballs-georgeosborne>
 in last year's Labour leadership contest, Balls drew comparisons with the 
father of modern macroeconomics to explain why he was opposed to Britain's two 
deficit reduction plans. These were: George Osborne's plan to eliminate the 
stuctural deficit over the course of this parliament, outlined in hisemergency 
<http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/2010_june_budget.htm> budget in June 2010, and 
Alistair Darling's plan to halve the deficit over four years.

In his speech on 27 August last year at Bloomberg 
<http://www.edballs4labour.org/blog/?p=907>, Balls explained that he was happy 
to stand outside the consensus because there were examples in the last century 
when "dissenting voices of economists were silenced or ignored". Two of the 
examples cited by Balls involved Keynes:

• The decision in 1925 by Winston Churchill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/winston-churchill>, who was then chancellor, to 
return Britain to the Gold Standard on the grounds there was no credible 
alternative. This was opposed by Keynes "at the fateful 11 Downing Street 
dinner where Churchill made the decision".

• The decision in 1931 by Ramsay MacDonald, the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> prime minister, to impose 
spending cuts to reduce the deficit. This was opposed by Keynes.

In his Bloomberg <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bloomberg> speech, Balls 
had a vivid phrase to explain why it was wrong of Osborne nearly 80 years later 
to cut spending so far and so fast to tackle the deficit:

George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> was fond 
of saying – wrongly – that the Labour government had failed to fix the roof 
while the sun was shining. What he is now doing is the equivalent of ripping 
out the foundations of the house just as the hurricane is about to hit.

Balls showed, in his response to the chancellor's autumn statement on Tuesday, 
that he feels vindicated when he revived the language of his Bloomberg speech:

We said that the chancellor's plan was reckless, not cautious, and that he was 
ripping out the foundations of the house, leaving our economy not safe, but 
badly and deeply exposed to the growing global storm.

The remarks by Balls highlighted the two dividing lines (a favourite phrase of 
his mentor Gordon Brown) that will define British politics between now and the 
general election:

• The dividing line between Balls and Osborne. Balls believe that Osborne's 
Plan A – the elimination of the structural deficit – has failed. The chancellor 
admitted on Tuesday that he will not achieve his original ambition – to achieve 
this by the 2015 general election. Osborne says he will still meet his original 
fiscal mandate – the elimination of the structural deficit and ensuring that 
debt is falling as a share of GDP – within the timeframe of his "fiscal 
mandate" by 2015-16. But Balls says that the first part of this is a "dodgy 
rolling target", assessed on a five yearly basis, which means that there is 
never a definitive point where a judgment can be made on the deficit.

Balls said that by cutting too far and too fast the chancellor has sucked 
demand out of the economy. This has slowed the recovery and led to an increase 
in borrowing by £158bn.

Osborne believes this position is ridiculous. His thinking was reflected in 
the Times on Wednesday by Daniel Finkelstein who wrote:

Ed Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> ended up yesterday 
arguing that we are borrowing too much and that the way to borrow less is to 
borrow more...I promise you, this is never going to work politically. Ever.

• The dividing line between Balls and supporters of Tony Blair and David 
Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidmiliband>. Blairites 
believed that Labour should have acknowledged the concerns of voters about the 
size of the deficit. This is why they fervently support the Darling plan to 
halve the deficit over four years – a tough plan which would have led to around 
80% of the coalition's cuts.

Balls believes Labour has no need to apologise because the bulk of the deficit 
was racked up by the increase in spending and the fall in tax receipts during 
the recession of 2008-09. Balls also believes, asI blogged in September 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/wintour-and-watt/2011/sep/26/edballs-gordon-brown>
, that it is wrong for an opposition to lock itself into a specific economic 
plan such a long time before the next general election.

The shadow chancellor believes his warnings in his Bloomberg speech are coming 
true. But he also believes that what he now calls Osborne's "catastrophic error 
of judgment" – the assumption that the private sector would pick up the slack 
as the public sector shrinks – is now clear from an examination of a speech by 
the chancellor to Bloomberg. This is what Osborne said inhis speech on 17 
August 2010 <http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/press_37_10.htm>, ten days before 
the Balls speech:

Here in Britain we can start to be cautiously optimistic about the economic 
situation. GDP growth in the second quarter surpassed expectations at 1.1%, 
with all but 0.2% of that coming from the private sector.

Employment is growing at the fastest pace for over a decade, confounding 
predictions that the economy cannot generate private sector jobs. Manufacturing 
is picking up and exports are recovering thanks to increasing global demand.

As the Bank of England confirmed last week, this is consistent with the kind 
of gradual recovery forecast by theOffice for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/office-for-budget-responsibility> at the 
time of the Budget. The much-needed rebalancing of our indebted economy - away 
from government and towards the private sector, away from consumption and 
towards business demand, away from imports and towards exports - is beginning.

Osborne did strike a cautious note:

But of course, we must remain cautious. Inflation is proving more persistent 
than expected, as the Bank of England Governor explained in his letter to me 
this morning. The availability of credit to support business expansion is 
limited and needs to improve.

Despite the strength of the German economy, data for Japan and the US has been 
less encouraging, undoubtedly contributing to lower global confidence. And of 
course, the world remains concerned about sovereign debt issues at a time when 
our budget deficit remains the largest in the G20.

So I agree with Mervyn King when he said last week that we are likely to face 
a choppy recovery. To expect a smoother ride after the biggest economic crisis 
of our lifetimes, and with the debt problems this government has inherited, 
would be asking too much.

The battle over the Bloomberg speeches will clearly rumble on right up to the 
next election.
 