
Those who say that sport is just about winning obviously haven't seen too much 
of Roger Federer. He has turned tennis into art first, sport second, and his 
silken destruction of Andy Roddick at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> today took sporting 
aesthetics into the giddiest of stratospheres.

Art is supposed to be temperamental, but Federer allies it to a chilling 
consistency: at the age of 25, he has won nine grand slams - including eight of 
the last 12, including three consecutive Wimbledons and three consecutive US 
Opens. He has yet to complete the set by winning the French Open but, either 
way, is on course to obliterate Pete Sampras's record of 14 grand slams. These 
days, Federer's victories are so routine that the biggest headlines come when 
he loses a set (or, in today's astonishing second set, a point).

The only serious competition for greatest current athlete is Tiger Woods: at 
31 he has 12 majors - including, unlike Federer, the full set - and is six away 
from equalling Jack Nicklaus's record. But Woods has never accumulated the big 
prizes with Federer's devastating frequency: there were three majors in 2000, 
but since then Woods's gradient has inevitably levelled off.

The way Federer is going, it is entirely conceivable that he will one day be 
seen as the greatest sportsman in history. There are numerous contenders - Don 
Bradman, Shane Warne, Sugar Ray Robinson, Muhammad Ali, Pele, Diego Maradona, 
Woods, Michael Johnson, Stephen Hendry - but there is something otherworldly, 
almost orgiastic, about Federer's work that makes him like nothing we have ever 
seen before. Last year, the New York Times' David Foster Wallace wrote about 
Federer asReligious Experience 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/20/sports/playmagazine/20federer.html?ei=5090&en=716968175e36505e&ex=1313726400&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss&pagewanted=all>
. Has there ever been a higher sporting power?
 