

Music that conjures an instant magic ... Estonian composer Arvo Pärt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arvo-part>. Photograph: Andrea Merola/EPA

Stray close to an arthouse cinema this summer and chances are you'll hear the 
plangent music of Arvo Pärt emanating from within. The Turkish filmTimes and 
Winds <http://www.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/feature/49335>, a tale of boyhood 
jealousies set in a remote Anatolian shepherding community, reverberates with 
the repeated stark tones of Pärt's Orient and Occident.The Banishment 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d2YngCFu4j8>, a Russian film directed by 
budding Tarkovsky-like Andrei Zvyagintsev, sets a key scene to the sparse piano 
piece Für Alina and its end credits to the choral opus Kanon Pokajanen. And 
these two come only months after Paul Thomas Anderson interrupted Jonny 
Greenwood's screeching score for There Will Be Blood with a version of Fratres, 
composed by Pärt for strings and piano.

This has been going on for a decade. Where once film directors in need of some 
mournful gravitas would reach for Samuel Barber'sAdagio for Strings 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=6427815> - famously, in 
Oliver Stone's Platoon; recently, in Michael Moore's Sicko - it now seems that 
Pärt is first in line, not only for arthouse auteurs but in Hollywood too. 
Pärt's music has been appropriated for The Good Shepherd and Candy, for Shane 
Meadows' Dead Man's Shoes and Cédric Kahn's Red Lights, for Tom Twyker's 
Heaven, Gus van Sant's Gerry and Carlos Reygadas' Japón. It's there in Michael 
Mann's The Insider, it's there to furnish the terrible aftermath of the World 
Trade Center attack in Fahrenheit 9/11, and, incongruously, it's there when 
Madonna snogs the feet of her fellow castaway in Guy Ritchie's desert-island 
stinker Swept Away.

Pärt, a bearded Estonian living in prolonged exile in Berlin and a devotee of 
the Eastern Orthodox Church whosesevere if ineffably beautiful music 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/features/story/0,,1844430,00.html> is released on 
Manfred Eicher's high-minded ECM label, might seem an unlikely candidate to be 
the film world's maestro du jour. Except, of course, that the music-buying 
public has also long proven a large appetite for this stuff, bringing Pärt a 
success and recognition that is rare for a living composer. Such pure, 
spiritually inflected work has struck a chord, providing, as critic Alex Ross 
points out in his bookThe Rest Is Noise 
<http://www.therestisnoise.com/2004/05/what_is_this.html>, "oases of repose in 
a technologically oversaturated culture".

It's easy to see why so many film directors would want to latch on to these 
stirring resonances: music placed astutely on a sound track can conjure an 
instant magic for the most routine of sequences. Take that scene fromSwept Away 
<http://youtube.com/watch?v=H_-LWLpKvoM&feature=related>, in which the yearning 
delicacy of the music bestows grace on a risible montage of sunsets, 
smouldering fires, and hand-in-hand lovers on the beach. P T Anderson's 
visionary filmmaking needs no such crutches, but the use of Fratres still feels 
a little easy. This is music that drops jawsin any context 
<http://www.linusakesson.net/music/fratres/index.php>.

Lest Pärt's sound begin to work in the opposite direction, jolting us from our 
involvement with a film as we recognise what a cliché its use has become, it is 
I think time to give it a rest. I mean this as no deterrent from seeing Times 
and Winds, which quietly stole the London Film Festival two years ago; it is an 
extraordinary film and its release is cause for rejoicing. But from now on, 
filmmakers of the world, before the allure of pieces like Spiegel im Spiegel is 
lost, let's have an Arvo armistice.
 