
Afternoon session preamble  "I've been feeling ropey all morning, but when I 
read Flintoff was out I had to go and be sick," says Jim Carpenter. "Anyone 
else suffering physically just from reading a website?"

41st over England 141-5

(Pietersen 49, Collingwood 0)

Lee bounces Pietersen - who hooks him for six over fine leg! Listen to those 
boozy post-lunch roars and, if I'm not mistaken, the first chant of "Barmy 
Army". "I just realised that if Australia win today we'll have a palindromic 
Test series: Aus win, Eng win, draw, Eng win, Aus win," says Brendan Jones from 
Australia. "Wouldn't that be nice?"

43rd over England 160-5

There's a fine line between genius and foolhardiness - and at the moment 
Pietersen's an absolute genius. "I think I may be suffering from RSI from 
pressing F5," says Jonathan Carter. "I know it refreshes but I'm too nervous to 
wait."

44th over England 162-5

Warne continues to wile and beguile. Collingwood is struggling, until Warne 
bowls too short and he gets off the mark. "Just come from the pub," writes 
James LeMaurier. "I had to leave after two overs because the guy next to me was 
one of these Johnny Come Lately, season-ticket-at-Chelsea types. He asked me 
how long it had taken England to 'shoot' their first 130 runs. I wished 10,000 
deaths on him, especially when he started clapping and cheering Pietersen's six 
off Lee. I almost prayed for an Aussie win, just to keep his sort out of my 
way. The upshot: I came back to the office to sit in righteous indignation in 
front of the computer."

46th over England 173-5

What a turnaround since lunch: only six overs but England have smashed nearly 
50 runs. "Re: Brendan Jones' wishful palindrome (41st over). This is wrong. An 
appropriate example would be 'a man, a plan, a canal; Panama' or some such," 
writes Tom Rawson.

49th over England 181-5

Great over from McGrath, tight and straight. Maiden. Meanwhile this from 
Richard Moore. "Apparently my wife's boss, who only learned the rules of 
cricket yesterday from her young son, has announced in a conference call with 
the Sydney office that 'Shane Warne is a perfect sporting example' for her 
young son, and that 'she hopes he grows up just like him'. There was an obvious 
guffaw from Sydney, closely followed by the sound of my wife's head hitting the 
desk due to a sudden dizzy spell."

51st over England 182-5

McGrath is keeping it tight, but [famous last words alert] he's not look like 
taking a wicket. That's drinks, and England surely have one hand on the Ashes. 
"Let's not be too hard on the JCLs," says Christopher Price. "Over the weekend 
I have finally explained the basic laws of cricket to my French and female 
housemate. After a summer of confusion we had a moment of My Fair Lady-like 
clarity, and by jove she's got it. While I am suffering at work she is watching 
the cricket on her own. I feel like a proud father who has just taught his 
child how to ride a bike."

59th over England 209-7 (Pietersen 95, Giles 5)

Giles picks up three after a flick off his pads. "You don't need to remind us 
after each wicket that it's game on," says Joshua Davis. "From the burning in 
our stomachs and residual taste of vomit in our throats, I think we all know!"

61st over England 212-7

After Pietersen takes a single, Tait has five deliveries at The Guardian's 
Ashley Giles - who blocks and evades them all. Meanwhile this from Anthony 
Kerr. "My wife's cat was cremated in June and its remains are in a box in our 
living room," he writes. "I plan to run round with it above my head and emulate 
the 1953 commentator by shouting 'It's the Ashes' at the close tonight. Who's 
good in your legal department?"

To order Is It Cowardly To Pray For Rain?, Guardian Unlimited's chronicle of 
the Ashes, for Â£7.99 inc p&p, go towww.guardianbookshop.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk>
 