
Q I bought a house two-and-a-half years ago, which I have now discovered - 
though an independent surveyors report - has rising damp. A builder has 
estimated that a new damp proof course together with associated building work 
will cost about Â£2,000 to put right. According to the papers that came with the 
property a damp proof course was installed about four years ago, and I have a 
copy of the associated 30-year damp proof guarantee. Unfortunately, the damp 
proof guarantee stipulates that it needs to be conveyed to the owner of the 
house every time the property is sold.

This did not occur with me and the original damp proof contractors are 
refusing to honour the guarantee. I contacted the solicitors who looked after 
the conveyance, who were helpful but did seem to think they had any liability. 
Could you tell me if either my solicitor or the damp proof contractors are 
liable for the cost, and what should my next steps be to resolve the issue? I 
would prefer not to have to engage other solicitors to act for me as money is 
quite tight, although I will if it is necessary.
ESwift

A Whether you have any rights under the long-term guarantee depends on the 
terms on which it was granted to the previous owner of the property. Usually, 
guarantees of this type can be taken over if you inform the damp proof 
contractors of the change of ownership and pay a small registration fee.

However, in some cases it is necessary to formally assign the guarantee at the 
same time as the purchase of the property or it will be invalid. Your 
solicitors should have picked this up when they conveyed the property into your 
name, so you might like to take up the matter with them. If your solicitors 
were aware of the long-term guarantee you could argue they were negligent for 
failing to advise you on the formalities required to transfer the benefit of 
the guarantee into your name.

Alternatively, if the rising damp was present when you bought the property and 
your surveyor failed to warn you about it, you may have a claim against them on 
the basis of surveyor's negligence. However, this would only be an option if 
you had a proper survey carried out as opposed to a mere valuation for mortgage 
purposes. A valuation is not required to be sufficiently detailed to give you 
grounds for complaint for a failure to notice rising damp on this scale.
 