
Q My vacuum cleaner blew up last month, around seven or eight months after I 
bought it. The manufacturer won't replace or repair it under my two-year 
warranty unless I send them my receipt, which I already sent in with my 
two-year warranty registration card when I purchased the item. The manufacturer 
said they send the registration cards to a marketing research company and 
cannot retrieve it. Is there anything I can do?
BJ

A If you registered the guarantee at the time you purchased your vacuum 
cleaner, the manufacturer should have a record of it, so it seems unreasonable 
of them to insist on a receipt, especially if you can provide them with proof 
of identity.

Complain to them in the strongest terms, but if they still will not honour the 
guarantee try offering proof of purchase in the form of a bank or credit card 
statement. In any event, quite apart from your rights under the manufacturer's 
guarantee, you are entitled to look to the seller for compensation in 
accordance with your rights under the Sale of Goods Act. These make it clear 
that the vacuum cleaner supplied should be of satisfactory quality and fit for 
purpose. Since it blew up after only seven months, the shop that sold it to you 
is in breach of contract.

It is too late now to demand a refund, but you are entitled to ask for a 
replacement or repair. If the vacuum cleaner is beyond economic repair and the 
shop will not supply you with a replacement, you are entitled to a refund less 
a small amount to reflect the use you've had from the cleaner over the past 
seven months.
 