How would you characterise your child’s immediate social circle?  They’re noisy 
and chaotic, but basically good-natured.  They’re actually a pretty disciplined 
and well-organised group.  They’re disciplined and well-organised, but their 
Nazi armbands get them into trouble at school. Yes, I’ve seen my child hanging 
around on street corners with big groups of lads, but they do need …  a place 
to meet, and there’s nowhere else for them.  some kind of social outlet now 
they’ve closed the youth club.  the numbers to intimidate strangers into buying 
alcohol for them. I’m worried because I have noticed that lately my teenager’s 
room is full of …  unwashed clothes and dirty plates.  cigarette ends and cider 
cans.  TVs and mobility scooters. A neighbour said she saw my son and his mates 
behaving antisocially at the shops. I checked and found out that they had …  
entered as a group of four, in violation of a sign stating that no more than 
three schoolchildren were allowed in at once.  entered as a group of four, and 
were loud and boisterous.  entered as a group of four, so they could carry off 
the cashpoint. Lately, before he goes to school, my son has been sneaking into 
my room to steal …  loose change from my pockets.  my travel card, because he’s 
lost his – again!  my car keys. I sometimes think I can smell marijuana in his 
room. I’m not happy, but …  I did the same when I was his age.  I’d rather he 
was smoking it at home than on the streets.  there’s no way I’m watering all 
those plants while he’s at school. When my son goes out at night, I always get 
a phone call …  telling me exactly when he’ll be home.  telling me he’ll be 
much later than we agreed.  from the police, telling me where to pick him up. I 
suppose my son can exhibit challenging behaviour from time to time but, in the 
end, he’s only hurting …  himself.  boys in the year below  small, helpless 
animals.  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  