
The dancer Hazel Merry 
<http://www.ballet.co.uk/magazines/yr_11/mar11/jeffery-taylor-black_swan_0111.htm>
 looked critically at her own left foot, captured half a century ago by an 
artist she had never even noticed in the shadows of the rehearsal room: "That 
foot is not quite right, I think. Not entirely happy with that."

In 1963 Merry, with her Royal Ballet colleagues Antoinette Sibley 
<http://vimeo.com/41346269> and Vyvyan Lorrayne 
<http://www.arenapal.com/imageflows/preview/t=arenapal&f=ARP1303424>, was in 
rehearsal forThe Kingdom of the Shades 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P4wzCIWHHOc>. It was choreographed for Covent 
Garden byRudolf Nureyev 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2003/jan/30/dance.artsfeatures>, one of the 
most famous dancers of the 20th century, who had sensationallydefected from 
Russia and the Kirov Ballet 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/russian-ballet-star-nureyev-defects>
 at Le Bourget airport in Paris just two years earlier.

Nureyev was an exacting taskmaster and the rehearsals were hard work. Merry 
never noticed that there was a strikingly good-looking woman sitting quietly in 
the background with sketchbook and charcoal, trying to capture the essence of 
the dancers as bodies in movement.

That woman was Isabel Rawsthorne 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/arts/yourpaintings/artists/isabel-rawsthorne>, and her 
drawing – a composite image of the three dancers who never actually performed 
those steps together – is now part of a free exhibition at the Royal Opera 
House, Covent Garden. Rawsthorne's sketches and paintings will be displayed on 
the corridor walls just a few feet from the seats in the auditorium where she 
often sat sketching performances by dancers includingMargot Fonteyn 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2009/nov/29/anne-marie-duff-fonteyn>.
 Fine lines … a detail of Antoinette Sibley in rehearsal 
Rawsthorne is an almost forgotten name, although her work was well known in 
her day, and her stage and costume designs for the ballet much admired. Her 
designs forTiresias 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/COVENT-GARDEN-BALLET-TIRESIAS-BERLIN/dp/B002HECWSK> in 
1951, to a score by her then-husbandConstant Lambert 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2005/may/07/dance.proms2005>, caused uproar: 
they seemed to leave the women bare-breasted, though in fact they were covered 
with transparent gauze. When Fonteyn was invited to the royal box after a gala 
performance, she had to wear a cardigan over her costume.

Rawsthorne's biographer Carol Jacobi 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/talks-and-lectures/curators-talk-and-private-view-carol-jacobi>
 says part of the reason for the artist's obscurity is that she was born Isabel 
Nicholas but married three times, changing her working name when she married 
Lambert, and again when she married Alan Rawsthorne, who was on the music staff 
at Covent Garden.

Isabel Rawsthorne was born in London's East End but brought up in Liverpool 
where the family was left penniless by the early death of her mariner father. 
She won a scholarship to the Royal Academy art school but could only afford to 
stay six months, leaving to become thesculptor Jacob Epstein 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2011/jun/14/vorticists-epstein-rock-drill>
's studio assistant. She met and befriended a glittering company of artists 
includingAndré Derain <http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/andre-derain-998>, 
Balthus <http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2001/feb/19/guardianobituaries2>, 
Alberto Giacometti <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/giacometti>, Francis 
Bacon <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/bacon> and Pablo Picasso 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/pablo-picasso> – "whose many advances 
she steadfastly resisted," recounted Jacobi.

The biographer adds that there is still much to learn about Rawsthorne's long 
break from art during the second world war, when she worked for the government 
in black propaganda, and may have been a spy.

Some of her work remains in the Royal Ballet archives, and Covent Garden 
acquired more after her death in 1992, but much of it has remained with her 
family and had hardly been exhibited until a centenary show at theNew Art 
Gallery in Walsall <http://www.thenewartgallerywalsall.org.uk/> last year 
helped revive her reputation.

"I never even knew these existed," Merry said. "It's extraordinary and quite 
moving to see them now, after so many years."
 