
The United States will face years of “sustained vulnerability” from Islamic 
State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> fighters even after the fall of 
its so-called caliphate in Iraq and Syria, intelligence chiefs have warned.


Giving evidence in the wake of the recent bombings in New York and New Jersey 
bombings, they told a Senate panel on Tuesday that pushing Isis out of the 
territory it has claimed will lead to a diaspora of operatives in the US and
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> rather than the 
destruction of the jihadi army.

Nicholas Rasmussen, the director of the National Counterterrorism Center, 
expanded upon anemerging consensus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/16/cia-orlando-shooter-omar-mateen-isis-pulse-nightclub-attack>
 within US intelligence circles, saying: “The effects we’re looking to see are 
simply going be delayed or lag behind the physical progress on the 
battlefield,” Rasmussen told the Senate homeland security and government 
affairs committee.

“It’s not surprising. It puts us in a period of sustained vulnerability that I 
don’t think any of us are comfortable with, but it’s a reality.” He doubted 
that such a period would end within a year of the caliphate’s downfall.

Abu Muhammad al-Adnani's death does not signal the demise of Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/abu-muhammad-al-adnanis-death-does-not-signal-the-demise-of-isis>
Not only has the US-led war against Isis in Iraq and Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> not “significantly diminished” the 
group’s external terrorism operations, Rasmussen testified, “we don’t think 
battlefield or territorial losses alone will be sufficient to completely 
degrade the group’s terrorism capabilities – necessary, but not sufficient.”

James Comey, the director of the FBI, told senators he believed “at least 
hundreds” of Isis operatives would exfiltrate fromIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and Syria for years, with a potency 
exceeding the aftermath of the Soviet Union’s 1980s counterinsurgency in 
Afghanistan that led to al-Qaida.

“There will be a terrorist diaspora some time in the next two to five years 
like we’ve never seen before,” Comey said, particularly “up into Europe”.

His remarks come as the FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> is 
coming under sustained political pressure to expand its investigative focus on 
potential homegrown terrorists after it closed several preliminary inquiries, 
due to lack of pretext, on people who went on to commit attacks.

While losing its oil-rich territory in Iraq and its smuggling channels in 
Syria will diminish the group’s finances, Rasmussen noted that Isis’s major 
expenses lie in governing the approximately 6 million people residing in its 
caliphate, not funding operatives – let alone inspiring more, or loosely aiding 
those it inspires.

Jeh Johnson, the secretary of homeland security, told senators that his 
department was moving to a way of understanding different categories of 
domestic terrorism beyond those at one end of the spectrum which were clearly 
directed by a terrorist group like Isis, and another subset involving 
independent “lone wolf” instances of self-radicalization.

Californian man who spoke of becoming Isis martyr in Syria jailed for 30 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/californian-man-who-spoke-of-becoming-isis-martyr-in-syria-jailed-for-30-years>
Emerging recent patterns in terrorism have prompted an understanding of 
“terrorist-enabled attacks”, where perpetrators may draw on methods widely 
shared by jihadi groups. He also identified “terrorist-validated attacks”, 
where “a terrorist organization takes credit after the fact” for an assault 
which it approves of, but had no part in.

Comey extensively praised FBI agents and their partners in New York and New 
Jersey law enforcement for the rapidity with which a suspect in the 17-18 
September bombings wasidentified, arrested and charged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey>
, saying the close coordination was “unimaginable” 15 years ago. But two 
prominent legislators, including the Senate’s leading privacy advocate, grilled 
Comey about revelations that the FBI had closed preliminary investigations on
Orlando nightclub killer Omar Mateen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/omar-mateen-fbi-boston-marathon-tsarnaev>
 and New York/New Jerseydefendant Ahmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/20/father-ahmad-rahami-bombing-fbi-2014-video>
.

Rand Paul, the Kentucky Republican who lost a bid for the GOP presidential 
nomination to Donald Trump and a self-declared “stickler for probable cause”, 
chided the FBI for closing the preliminary inquiries while seeking new powers 
to obtain communications data on a lower evidentiary standard.

Comey, who pledged to forthrightly study and admit FBI mistakes, twice said 
Paul misunderstood the facts of the cases. The FBI has defended the closures 
for lacking a sufficient evidentiary basis at the time to sustain.

But Kelly Ayotte, a New Hampshire Republican, prompted Comey to concede that 
the FBI did not conduct a review of the Orlando killer’s social media postings, 
which were public and would not have required a warrant to peruse, particularly 
since Comey has for years expressed alarm about extremism on social media.

To combat the anticipated jihadi diaspora, the National Counterterrorism 
Center’s Rasmussen urged the US to overhaul its highly controversial 
watch-listing system for border and travel protection over the next decade. 
Though the US is “probably the most aggressive identity collectors of potential 
terrorists”, Rasmussen told the Senate panel, the system is vulnerable to false 
identities.

“It is still a name based system and it needs to transform into a biometric 
system,” Rasmussen said.
 