
Anonymous has launched another wave of hacking attacks against Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis), taking over social media 
accounts associated with the group and giving them an LGBT-flavoured makeover.

The loose hacking collective, which grew out of the infamous 4Chan forum in 
the late 2000s, announced its war on Isis in 2015,taking control of almost 100 
twitter accounts following the Charlie Hebdo attacks in Paris that year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/10/anonymous-claims-victory-over-jihadi-twitter-accounts-in-opisis>
.

Now, after the murder of 49 people in a gay club in Orlando, Florida, a hacker 
who goes by the name WauchulaGhost says he has taken control of more than 200 
accounts belonging to Isis supporters. This time, rather than simply lock the 
users out of the accounts or report them to Twitter, the cybervigilante has 
given the accounts a gay-friendly makeover.
WauchulaGhost (@WauchulaGhost) 
#Daesh <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Daesh?src=hash> in #Irag 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Irag?src=hash> @dygft9uy4 
<https://twitter.com/dygft9uy4> Still remembering those we lost. #Orlando 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Orlando?src=hash> #OpDaesh 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/OpDaesh?src=hash> #Anonymous 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Anonymous?src=hash> #GhostOfNoNation 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GhostOfNoNation?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/ZdxXL4y6Y6 <https://t.co/ZdxXL4y6Y6>
 <https://twitter.com/WauchulaGhost/status/743236586058489856> June 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/WauchulaGhost/status/743236586058489856> 
While some of the hacked accounts are now suspended by Twitter, three are 
still online, and apparently still under the control of WauchulaGhost.Speaking 
to CNN 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/06/16/technology/isis-hacker-porn-gay-pride/index.html>
, he explained his motivation: “You had all those innocent lives lost. I just 
felt there’s something I could do against the Islamic State to defend those 
people.”

To start with, he posted explicit gay porn as well as the rainbow flags, but 
dialled back after hearing from people who supported the idea but not the 
practice. “There was a few of us … that discovered a vulnerability,” he told 
CNN. “We thought, ‘Hey let’s go start taking their accounts … and humiliating 
them.’”

It remains unclear whether such actions help the wider fight against Isis 
online. Supporters of the group are already used to having to rapidly switch 
accounts as they get suspended by social networks, and have well-developed 
systems in place for sharing the names of new accounts with old followers. 
Often, the user is back shortly after with a new digit added to the end of 
their name.

It’s likely to be more useful than the last Anonymous operation to target 
Isis, however, whichinvolved spamming Isis-related hashtags 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/20/isis-internet-copyright-anonymous-terror>
 with videos of Rick Astley’s song Never Gonna Give You Up.
 