
When Oscar-winning Iranian film-maker Asghar Farhadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/27/in-praise-of-asghar-farhadi>
 spoke of the importance of recognising his country's glorious and essentially 
peaceful culture at a time of "war, intimidation and aggression" he might have 
wondered if anyone in Israel was listening. At the very least, film buffs in 
the Jewish nation seem to have got the message, because they areturning out in 
large numbers to watch Farhadi's best foreign film Academy Award winner A 
Separation 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/israels-prime-minister-hopes-his-country-wins-its-first-oscar-says-film-hits-home/2012/02/26/gIQA1l6sbR_story.html>
 at cinemas.

The film's fledgling box-office success in a country whose leaders are 
currently considering a pre-emptive strike on Iranian nuclear facilities is all 
the more remarkable becauseA Separation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142608/separation> was up against 
Israeli drama Footnote, a Talmudic scholar saga from film-maker Joseph Cedar. 
The film is being shown mostly at the seven Israeli sites owned by Lev Cinemas, 
whose CEO Guy Shani said all screenings were sold out on Friday and Saturday. 
"We are being helped a lot by the press in Israel," Shani told the Associated 
Press, adding that the threat of war between the two countries had helped to 
draw viewers.

Yair Raveh, a leading Israeli film critic who writes for the Pnai Plus 
entertainment magazine, said his countrymen were often surprised to note that 
Iranians did not seem all that different from themselves. "It's very well 
acted, exceptionally well written and very moving," he said of the film. 
"Ultimately you don't think about nuclear bombs or dictators threatening world 
peace. You see them driving cars and going to movies and they look exactly like 
us."

A Separation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-separation> centres on the 
imminent divorce of an upper-middle-class Iranian couple, one of whom wishes to 
emigrate due to the prevailing political conditions. Filmgoer Rina Brick, 70, 
said she was surprised to see that the Iranian bureaucrats portrayed in the 
film did not behave very differently to those in Israel.

"Our image of how Iran works is less democratic than we see here," she said. 
"The judge, the police, everyone behaves as if they are in a western country." 
Rivka Cohen, who leftIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> at age 15 
and is now 78, said she was surprised to note that "everyone had a fridge and a 
washing machine".

Israeli officials are eyeing a strike at Iran's nuclear facilities because the 
country is refusing to co-operate with a UN investigation into evidence that 
its scientists may have worked on designing a nuclear bomb. Tehran says its 
uranium enrichment program is for peaceful purposes and haswarned its rival 
against mounting an attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/25/iran-warns-israel-attack-nuclear>
.

Clips of Farhadi's acceptance speech were aired on Iranian state TV yesterday 
and the country's political leadership hailed the nation's first Oscar-winning 
film as a triumph overIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>, 
despite conservative figures close to the regime having previously criticised 
the film for insulting the Islamic republic. Hardliners have been concerned 
over the film's depiction of domestic turmoil, gender inequality and the desire 
of many Iranians to leave the country. In a programme broadcast in state-run 
television, writer Masoud Ferasati said: "The image of our society that A 
Separation depicts is the dirty picture westerners are wishing for."
 