
The Australian answer to George Bush is on electoral trial, so it's time to 
get all your Aussie mates down toAustralia House 
<http://www.uk.embassy.gov.au/lhlh/Election.html> this week where they can vote.
John Howard <https://www.theguardian.com/australia/story/0,,2191303,00.html> 
has supported the war in Iraq and would quite happily invade Iran or even 
Norway if Bush told him. He has famously played therace card 
<http://australianpolitics.com/foreign/tampa/01-09-03guardian.htm> at 
successive elections to stay in power. His environmental record sucks. The 
Murray-Darling river system isdrying up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia/story/0,,1941942,00.html> and even the 
breweries have been told to use recycled water to produce Australia's most 
famousexport 
<http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/news/national/drought-hurts-beer-industry/2007/11/14/1194766732596.html>
 after Kylie and Rolf Harris, the "tinnie". Yet despite the threat of global 
warming, Howard's government until recently has been fighting the Kyoto 
agreement tooth and nail.

In the complex Australian system with its state governments and its two-house 
federal system, smaller parties can gain seats here and there. TheGreens 
<http://greens.org.au/intro/> have four senators and are aiming for the balance 
of power. Their big issues include no war, the defence of trade unions, 
aboriginal rights, climate change and the forests.

Rainforest destruction gave birth to the global green parties. The first 
ecological political party, outside of William Morris's 1890s outfit the Social 
Democratic Federation, was theUnited Tasmania Group 
<http://www.tas.greens.org.au/>. It ran candidates to prevent rainforest 
destruction in Tasmania. Its most famous member was a doctor, Bob Brown, who 
today sits in the Australian senate as a Green. Back in 1972 when they fought 
their first election, who would have thought their example would have inspired 
the creation of green parties everywhere from Alaska toBermondsey 
<http://www.london-se1.co.uk/news/view/2825>, Beijing 
<http://www.peacehall.com/news/gb/english/2006/08/200608102252.shtml> and 
Brazil?

Sadly, the forest is still under threat. Both the governing rightwing 
coalition and the Labor opposition are keen to build apulp mill 
<http://www.gunnspulpmill.com.au/faqs.html> that would chew up the forests in 
Tasmania and create pollution. One would have thought that climate change might 
lead all parties to defend the rainforests, key carbon sinks that slow climate 
change, important sources of biodiversity and places of immense beauty. 
According toBrown 
<http://www.bobbrown.org.au/300_campaigns_sub.php?deptItemID=37>, the Gunns 
pulp mill would "log 200,000 hectares of Tasmania's wild forest and wildlife 
habitats ... And the mill will inject over 100 million tonnes of greenhouse 
gases into the global atmosphere accelerating climate change." The habitat of 
rare species including the Tasmanian wedge tail eagle, the giant freshwater 
crayfish, and the spotted tail quoll would all be under threat from the mill.

Most depressing is the defection of former Nuclear Disarmament party candidate 
and eco-warrior rock starPeter Garrett <http://www.petergarrett.com.au/> to the 
side of the non-angels. As would-be Labor environment minister he has been 
arguing that the pulp mill is a beautiful thing, a best-practice, 
environmentally sound job creation scheme. It's like Sting turning up as 
transport minister here and calling for new runway at Heathrow.

So get your Aussie mates down to Australia House. With the complex preference 
system they can vote for more than one party which makes the whole thing rather 
more interesting.

For more comment on the Australian elections click here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/australian_elections_2007>.
 