
They’re here. Sirens offering you something so sweet but luring you into 
certain danger. Hanging like a million dark temptations from treacherous boughs 
that wrestle with you as you steal their fruit, pricking you if they can. When 
you succumb fully to their seduction, you walk away from the scene of the crime 
with your murderous fingers stained purple.

That purple blackberry-picking stain on your fingers – so difficult to shift, 
persisting in the crevice between nail and nail fold, like ink from a leaking 
fountain pen – is the plant pigment anthocyanin (flower-blue in Greek). We’re 
attracted to the colour and that is its primary function in the blackberry – to 
mammals, this fruit looks good enough to eat. One taste confirms it, keeping 
you coming back for more. But it’s not the anthocyanin you taste – that 
compound is almost completely flavourless. There are about 150 other volatile 
compounds that give blackberries their flavour and they are also packed with 
fructose, to make sure they’re irresistible, to make sure they get eaten up. 
We’re not the only mammals who are partial to blackberries, far from it. Foxes 
and badgers will also gobble them up, helping to distribute the seeds, which 
survive the transit through the gut.

As well as tasting fantastic, blackberries are good for you. Anthocyanin isn’t 
just a pigment, it’s a flavonoid, a heroic antioxidant! The stuff of 
superfoods! Antioxidants have acquired an almost mythical status, but 
unfortunately very little anthocyanin actuallyreaches your bloodstream 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0891584906003595> when you 
eat blackberries. Like other flavonoids, it’s not well absorbed from the gut 
and it’s attacked by enzymes in the intestines and liver. Although it may be 
fundamentally true, at the level of atoms and basic molecules, that you are 
what you eat, we shouldn’t expect particular compounds to enter our bodies, 
unchanged in form and function. In fact, your guts and liver are designed to 
make that impossible for many compounds.

This doesn’t mean that blackberries and other flavonoid-rich foods aren’t 
beneficial. They seem to affect antioxidant levels in an unusual and unexpected 
way. After eating fruit, there’s an upsurge of urate-linked antioxidant 
capacity in the blood. This is odd because blackberries don’t contain urate or 
anything your body could convert into urate. Instead, the increased urate 
levels seem to be triggered by eating fructose. Along with that fructose, 
blackberries are also high in fibre, and full of good, old fashioned vitamin C, 
also an antioxidant, but one that is absorbed much more readily than flavonoids.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fautumn-blackberry-picking-human-plant-relationship-millennia-alice-roberts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440779049652%2F9e6fd15f-7b18-4477-825e-3068b4a4babe-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20grab%20your%20blackberry%20baskets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fautumn-blackberry-picking-human-plant-relationship-millennia-alice-roberts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20grab%20your%20blackberry%20baskets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fautumn-blackberry-picking-human-plant-relationship-millennia-alice-roberts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440779049652%2F9e6fd15f-7b18-4477-825e-3068b4a4babe-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Blackberries, freshly picked. Photograph: Christina Bollen/Alamy 
It seems that humans have been enjoying the taste and health benefits of 
blackberries for thousands of years. Gathered blackberries have been found at 
Neolithic sites, while a preserved iron age bog body, known asHaraldskaer Woman 
<http://archive.archaeology.org/online/features/bog/gunhild.html>, provides 
definite evidence of blackberry ingestion. The body, dating to the 5th century 
BC, was discovered in 1835 by peat workers in Jutland and is that of a 
middle-aged woman. Speculation over whether the body was that of Queen Gunnhild 
of Norway, said to have been drowned in a bog in the 10th century AD, were put 
to rest when radiocarbon dating produced the iron age date. Forensic analysis 
of the bog body in 2000, including examination of the preserved gut contents, 
revealed that Haraldskaer Woman, who may have been the victim of a ritual 
sacrifice, had eaten a last supper of millet and blackberries.

It seems reasonable to suspect that humans have been eating blackberries for 
as long as humans and blackberries have coexisted. So when did blackberries 
originate?

Blackberries belong to the genus Rubus, a particularly abundant branch of the 
Rosaceae – the rose family. Rubus as a genus includes hundreds of species, 
including blackberries, dewberries, raspberries and cloudberries. The 
blackberries themselves are overwhelmingly diverse. In Europe alone, there are 
748 different species. This incredible diversity has come about through the 
tendency of these plants to hybridise and to double up their sets of 
chromosomes, often as part of asexual reproduction. This makes it very 
difficult to work out when they first evolved.

Some researchers, comparing European and North American blackberries, have 
suggested a very ancient origin, going back even earlier than the Pleistocene 
epoch, which started about 2.6m years ago. Other researchers are more cautious, 
but still agree that blackberries probably originated well before the peak of 
the last ice age, about 20,000 years ago. Indeed, the repeated glaciations of 
the Pleistocene could have played akey role 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1055790315001037> in 
blackberry evolution in Europe. But then, plenty of new blackberry species have 
appeared since the end of the ice age.

As the ice melted, plants and animals began to recolonise a corner of 
north-western Europe that would eventually become an island as the sea levels 
rose. Among those colonising plants were brambles and among the animals were 
humans. Those hunter-gatherers must have quickly realised that there was a 
redeeming feature of brambles, as the nights began to draw in and the leaves to 
turn.

So it’s time to relive your stone age ancestry. Get out there and brave the 
brambles! Gorge yourself on those beautiful, bountiful blackberries. They’re 
wild, they’re free and they’re good for you.
 