
It will not, if there is any certainty left in the world, top the charts this 
Christmas. But what it lacks in party hit potential, it more than makes up for 
with its unique, if vaguely unsettling, brand of festive cheer.

To be fair, humans had very little hand in penning the song. Instead, 
scientists fed a Christmassy photograph into a computer and let it do its 
thing. A program analysed the image, whipped up some relevant lyrics, and then 
sang them to music it had composed along the way.


Known to its creators as “neural karaoke”, the project from the University of 
Toronto can take any digital photo and transform it into a computer-generated 
singalong. It is a whimsical demonstration of whatartificial intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/artificialintelligenceai> (AI) might do 
for us beyond the familiar: giving voice to chatbots, wiping billions off the 
stock market, and ultimately destroying the human race.


“We are used to thinking about AI for robotics and things like that. The 
question now is what can AI do for us?” said Raquel Urtasun, an associate 
professor in machine learning and computer vision at Toronto’s computer science 
lab. “You can imagine having an AI channel on Pandora or Spotify that generates 
music, or takes people’s pictures and sings about them,” adds her colleague, 
Sanja Fidler. “It’s about what can deep learning do these days to make life 
more fun?”


Neural karaoke emerged from a broader research effort to use computer programs 
to make music, write lyrics and even generate dance routines. Taking music 
creation as a starting point, Hang Chu, a PhD student at the lab, trained a 
neural network on 100 hours of online music. Once trained, the program can take 
a musical scale and melodic profile and produce a simple 120-beats-per-minute 
melody. It then adds chords and drums.

But computer-generated music was just the start. The Toronto team next taught 
the program how to dance. Fed with an hour of footage from the video gameJust 
Dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/20/just-dance-2014-game-review>
, the program tracked human poses and so learned to connect moves with music. 
Suitably trained, the program can make a digital stick figure dance to the 
music it has made. The results are more dad dancing than Travolta, but one 
cannot expect too much from a single one hour lesson.


Another hour of Just Dance tunes and 50 hours of song lyrics from the internet 
helped teach the program how to put words to music. Drawing on words that 
appeared at least four times in the dataset, the program built up a vocabulary 
of 3390 words, which the computer could then string together at a rate of one 
word per beat.


For the final step of the latest work, the program trained on a collection of 
pictures and their captions to learn how specific words can be linked to visual 
patterns and objects. When fed a fresh image, the program can compile some 
relevant lyrics and sing them using phonemes, or units of sound, linked to the 
words in its vocabulary. The system builds on previous work that could take a 
picture and generate lyrics in the style of Taylor Swift. Should the program 
choose words that it cannot say, it replaces them with an “oooh” sound.


In an early demonstration, Chu fed the program a Christmassy scene to see what 
kind of song it created. The result is certainly festive, not least the virtual 
singer whose tone is distinctly elf-like. Future updates of the program will 
bring in a greater number of instruments to create more complex songs, and even 
choose the best instruments for the picture.


While surely the most Christmassy, Chu’s track is not the most convincing 
computer-generated song. Earlier this year, researchers at Sony’s Computer 
Science Laboratory in Paris used AI to help create a Beatles-inspired song 
calledDaddy’s car <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LSHZ_b05W7o>. François 
Pachet, director of the lab, used the company’s Flow Machines software to study 
13,000 pieces of music from which is created a melody and harmonies. The French 
composer Benoît Carré then added lyrics and produced the final version of the 
track. A full album of Flow Machines AI music is due out soon.

Dr Urtasun said more advanced versions of the Toronto lab’s program might one 
day serve as a virtual coach for wannabe stars on X Factor, The Voice and 
America’s Got Talent. But before that, computer generated karaoke might find 
its way into home entertainment. “Instead of buying a karaoke machine with 
certain tracks on it, you can create your own karaoke at home by throwing in 
some interesting photos and inviting the machine to generate music for you,” 
said Fidler. “I think it has endless possibilities.”
 