
Beatrix Potter’s bucolic tales about bunny rabbits, hedgehogs and puddleducks 
will be celebrated across Britain this summer as the country marks 150 years 
since the writer and illustrator’s birth. But now an unexpected literary ally, 
the playwrightAlan Ayckbourn <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanayckbourn>, 
has signed up to help ensure that the darker side of Potter’s enduring 
imaginative world is not forgotten.

The revered dramatist is writing the lyrics for a new children’s show called 
Where’s Peter Rabbit? <http://www.hop-skip-jump.com/where-is-peter-rabbit/> 
that will star puppets, like the hit stage showsWar Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/17/national-theatre-to-end-war-horse-despite-runaway-succes>
 andThe Lion King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/04/lion-king-michael-billington-review>
, and he is aiming to avoid sugary sentiment as he tackles these favourites of 
the nursery bookshelf.

The two darkly creative minds of Ayckbourn and Potter are well-matched, 
according to Roger Glossop, who is devising and designing the show at his Lake 
District theatre. Ayckbourn, he argues, has the wicked sense of humour needed 
for handling Potter’s often rather brutal tales, and his satirical eye was 
drawn to the project byPotter’s unflinching vision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/dec/07/booksforchildrenandteenagers> of 
“nature, red in tooth and claw”, as much as by theenduring charm of Peter Rabbit
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/02/paws-for-thoughts-beatrix-potter-letter-to-young-fan-shares-peter-rabbit-plans>
, Jemima Puddleduck, Jeremy Fisher or Mrs Tiggy-Winkle.

“Her stories really are not all fluffy bunnies. I mean, Mr Tod, the fox in 
The Tale of Jemima Puddleduck, is one of the darker villains you will find 
anywhere in children’s literature,” he said. “It is a really foul piece and so, 
dramatically, that is terrific! We do wonder if some children in the audience 
may leave weeping, although we will certainly not try to scare them.”

The new show is based on five of Potter’s best-known stories and will be 
staged at The Old LaundryTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in 
Bowness-on-Windermere. Its producers then hope to take it on national tour. The 
production takes some of its inspiration from the successful use of puppetry 
seen recently in London’s West End, but its designs are closely based on 
Potter’s much-loved drawings.

Beatrix Potter's Peter Rabbit gets his own 50p coin – and he didn't have to 
steal it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/29/beatrix-potter-peter-rabbit-50p-coin>
“It will look very pretty, but we have taken our lead from The Lion King, in 
the way it brought animals to life on stage,” said Glossop. “Their team told us 
not to use puppeteers. They said instead we should use dancers and singers, 
because if they can do those things, then they can make the creatures do it 
too.”

Potter’s anniversary year has already seen the rediscovery of an unpublished 
story, as well as the prime ministerial gift of books as a diplomatic tool in 
Europe. Last week the Royal Mint also unveiled a new 50p coin bearing the image 
of Peter Rabbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/29/beatrix-potter-peter-rabbit-50p-coin>
. Now the producers ofWhere’s Peter Rabbit? plan to crown the celebrations with 
a show that comes with the blessing of Potter’s publishers, Warne.

“We will have special effects and projections, but we are doing this in a very 
traditional way, reproducing the watercolour illustrations from the books,” 
said Glossop.

“It is quite difficult, but generally you paint everything white first, as if 
it was her blank page, and then you paint on top of that.”

The production team have years of combined theatrical experience gained at 
Sheffield’s Crucible Theatre and atScarborough’s Stephen Joseph Theatre 
<https://www.sjt.uk.com/>, where Ayckbourn was director for 37 years, but 
several of them also helped put together the displays atThe World of Beatrix 
Potter Attraction <http://www.hop-skip-jump.com/>, next door to the theatre. 
The attraction is now one of the most popular tourist destinations in the 
region and celebrates its own 25th anniversary this summer.

At a production workshop session last week the prototype puppets were put 
through their paces. Mr Brock the badger, fromThe Tale of Mr Tod, emerged from 
the wings and proved charismatic even in skeletal form. His handler for the 
day, technician Caroline Dalton, said he will eventually have moving eyes and 
ears. “He has a fight scene with the fox, so he needs to be flexible and 
strong, and it was important for us that he would have this stooping capacity, 
because badgers do hold their heads very low. We are working it out, but the 
more you work with the creatures, the more you start to feel confident about 
making them move in the right way.”

The badger’s arch-enemy, Mr Tod, is already equipped with a snarling muzzle 
and a shifty blinking mechanism. His prey, Jemima, will fly above the audience 
and her flapping feet will tuck back underneath. “She can even preen herself,” 
said Dalton. The Aylesbury duck’s trademark red silk shawl will be made for her 
by Lucy Nye, who is kitting out all the puppets and colour-matching Potter’s 
vivid yet subtle palette. Even Kep the dog, who only makes a fleeting cameo 
appearance, is being constructed with care. Workshop guru Phil Swift has built 
his canine frame by bending tough bamboo sticks over steam from a kettle.

Lost Beatrix Potter story becomes bestseller months ahead of publication
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/27/lost-beatrix-potter-story-bestseller-the-tale-of-kitty-in-boots>
“This is what we believe will make the show, the fact that, not just the main 
character, but every creature that comes on will have that same kind of 
quality,” said Glossop. “Alan’s great interest here in Bowness is the fact that 
we built a theatre. He loves the Lake District and it is wonderful he is 
working with us on this. He is very enthusiastic about the language of the 
books.”

It is unusual to create a show in the wake of a tourist attraction, rather 
than the other way around, but Glossop and his wife Charlotte Scott, who set up 
the The World ofBeatrix Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/potter-beatrix> Attraction together, have 
the huge international appeal of Potter’s books to bank on. The tales are 
particularly popular in China. “Whatever you do in the theatre is going to be a 
leap of faith though,” said Glossop. “And it has been difficult to link the 
stories together. It would have been great to have Squirrel Nutkin in it too, 
but the idea is to tour the show if we can and add another two stories.”

Director and choreographer Sheila Carter has worked with Ayckbourn on many 
other plays, but has never directed puppets before. “It is a wonderful 
challenge. Bringing these nine major creatures to life on stage, with the help 
of a cast of five humans, is a great thing to do,” she said.

Ayckbourn has been writing the songs with musician Steve Edis, a composer who 
has worked on productions at the National Theatre and with the Royal 
Shakespeare Company and who was recommended for the Potter project by comedian 
Victoria Wood. “I sent over about 12 musical ideas to Alan and he came back to 
me on two of them,” said Edis. “Since then we have exchanged ideas and now have 
a few over-arching themes and two songs that will give a basis to the rest of 
the score. We are not going to sound like standard ‘musical theatre’, I hope, 
so we don’t have each character coming out and singing a song and I have tried 
to root the music in the landscape, so the mood is pastoral.”

Edis and Glossop are both surprised there has been no other recent show based 
on Potter’s characters. In 1992 the Royal Ballet created a show from a 1971 
dance film that has become a standard of the repertoire, and in the 1960s the 
composer Cyril Ornadel wrote songs for a successful series of dramatised 
recordings narrated by Vivien Leigh. Ten years ago London’s Unicorn Theatre 
also staged a small-scale production based on Potter’s stories, but without 
puppets or animal costumes.

The show opens at the Old Laundry Theatre on 27 June, and on 9 April the 
attraction is running aWhere Is Peter Rabbit? treasure trail in support of 
WaterAid <http://www.wateraid.org/uk>. Register at hop-skip-jump.com 
<http://www.hop-skip-jump.com/>.
 