
The chaotic and costly international response to the world's current financial 
disorder hasprompted <http://www.brettonwoods.org/news/?p=1059> Nicolas 
Sarkozy, Gordon Brown and German president Horst Köhler, a former head of the 
International Monetary Fund, to call for anew Bretton Woods conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/brettonwoods> in order to design a 
new global financial system. But such a demand depends on a clear understanding 
of what anew agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/nov/14/g20-summit-key-aims-imf> 
might provide.

It is easy to see the appeal of scrapping today's global financial 
architecture, because there is obviously much that is broken. The existing 
institutions were looking increasingly irrelevant in normal times, and 
ineffective in times of crisis. Although theIMF 
<http://www.oxfam.org/en/news/2008/pr080327_IMF_reform> delivered some gloomily 
accurate figures about the likely cost of the US housing fiasco, it played 
almost no role in addressing the current crisis. This was the first 
international financial crisis since theBretton Woods conference of 1944 
<http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ho/time/wwii/98681.htm> in which the Fund stood on 
the sidelines.

The major international actor, instead, has been the G7, a grouping dominated 
by medium-sized European states in which Asia's dynamic emerging economies – 
the current source of global savings – have no representation.

The Bretton Woods conference succeeded not because it assembled every state, 
or because the participants engaged in an extensive pow-wow.John Maynard Keynes 
<http://cepa.newschool.edu/het/profiles/keynes.htm>, an architect of Bretton 
Woods, believed that the true lesson of the failures of the Depression-era 
1930s lay precisely in the character of the large and chaotic 1933 London world 
economic conference. Keynes concluded that a really workable plan could be 
devised only at the insistence of "a single power or like-minded group of 
powers."

Keynes was basically right, but he should have added that it helps when one 
power can negotiate with one other power. In the past, the most effective 
financial diplomacy occurred bilaterally, between two powerful states that 
stood for different approaches to the international economy.

This was true of the preparations for the Bretton Woods meeting. Although 
there were 44 participating countries, only two really mattered, the UK and, 
above all, the US. The agreement was shaped by Anglo-American dialogue, with 
occasional mediation from France and Canada.

Bilateral talks subsequently remained the key to every major success of 
large-scale financial diplomacy. In the early 1970s, when thefixed 
exchange-rate regime <http://www.imf.org/external/about/histend.htm> came to an 
end, the IMF seemed to have outlived its function. Its articles of agreement 
were renegotiated by the US, which was looking for more flexibility, and 
France, which wanted something of the solidity and predictability of the old 
gold standard.

Later in the 1970s, European monetary relations were hopeless when France, 
Germany, and Britain tried to talk about them, but were straightened out when 
only France and Germany took part. In the mid-1980s, when wild exchange-rate 
swings produced calls for new trade protection measures, the US and Japan found 
a solution that involved exchange-rate stabilization.

So, what form should such bilateralism take today?

In terms of countries, the obvious new pair comprises the US, the world's 
largest debtor, andChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, its 
greatest saver. In terms of themes, the conference would have to solve a new 
type of problem: how states should deal with the large flows of capital that 
over the past four decades have been mediated by the private sector.

Two alternative models seemed to work until 2008. On one side was the American 
model, with a variety of regulated banks, lightly regulated investment banks, 
and largely unregulated hedge funds managing the capital flows. On the other 
side was the Chinese solution, with increasingly costly reserve management 
giving way to activist sovereign wealth funds looking for strategic 
participation in investments abroad.

Both approaches were flawed – and liable to produce political controversy. The 
American model failed because banks proved to be highly vulnerable to panic 
once it became clear that sophisticated new financial instruments had formed a 
haystack spiked with sharp, dangerous, and indigestible losses. And, 
inevitably, today's big bailouts have been followed by a politically fraught 
discussion of which banks were rescued, and whose political interests were 
served. Already, there is a ferocious debate aboutthe influence of Goldman Sachs
 <http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/15/business/15goldman.html> on the US 
Treasury. Likewise, the very large European bailouts (totaling as much as 20% 
of GDP in Germany) have produced controversies about the distribution of costs.

Meanwhile, the Chinese solution gave rise to nationalist fears that sovereign 
wealth funds might be abused to seize strategically vital businesses or whole 
sectors of an economy.

The original inspiration behind the creation of the IMF was that a largely 
automatic and rule-governed body would be a less politicised way of stabilizing 
markets and expectations. That remains true today: managing temporary stakes in 
banks in need of recapitalisation, on behalf of large providers of capital 
(such as the Asian surplus countries), would put a neutral, depoliticised 
buffer between states and private-sector institutions.

The IMF was originally conceived in 1944 in a world without major private 
capital flows, one in which states undertook almost all international 
transactions. Extending its mission to include some private-sector rescues 
would recognize the preponderant role that markets now play. At the same time, 
the involvement of a rule-bound international agency would minimise the 
political poison associated with bank recapitalisations and currency 
interventions.

In cooperation with Project Syndicate <http://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 
2008.
 