
An Italian student found dead in Cairo last week was killed by a violent blow 
to the base of the head after suffering other fractures, investigators in Rome 
have reportedly discovered.

Giulio Regeni died when a vertebra in his neck was fractured, according to 
autopsy results reported byAnsa <http://www.ansa.it/english/> news agency. The 
body of the 28-year-old,found on a Cairo road on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/italian-student-found-dead-egypt-giulio-regeni-torture>
, was also covered in abrasions and other injuries including fractures.

His body reportedly underwent a CAT scan and toxicology tests in an autopsy 
carried out immediately after its return to Rome on Saturday, Ansa said. 
Italian authorities have not independently confirmed the coroner’s findings.

Egypt must look into all reports of torture, not just the death of Giulio 
Regeni | Letter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/08/egypt-must-look-into-all-reports-of-torture-not-just-the-death-of-giulio-regeni>
A vigil is expected to be held for the PhD student in his home town of 
Fiumicello, north-east Italy, before his funeral on Tuesday. The return of 
Regeni’s body toItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> followed a 
gathering of mourners at the Italian embassy in Cairo, where friends left white 
gladioli, roses and candles.

Regeni’s disappearance on 25 January, on a day of heightened security as Egypt 
marked five years since the 2011 uprising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/25/egypt-revolution-five-years-omar-robert-hamilton>
, sparked fears that he was killed by Egypt’s security forces. One observer 
carried a sign reading “Those who killed Giulio are the same murderers who kill 
Egyptians”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fitalian-student-giulio-regeni-dead-cairo-killed-violent-blow-head%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2e111040b98b36e60c412c6e0a33d6905583b47%2F0_32_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italian%20student%20found%20dead%20in%20Cairo%20'killed%20by%20violent%20blow%20to%20the%20head'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fitalian-student-giulio-regeni-dead-cairo-killed-violent-blow-head%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italian%20student%20found%20dead%20in%20Cairo%20%27killed%20by%20violent%20blow%20to%20the%20head%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fitalian-student-giulio-regeni-dead-cairo-killed-violent-blow-head%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2e111040b98b36e60c412c6e0a33d6905583b47%2F0_32_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Giulio Regeni was found dead on a road in Cairo on Wednesday. Photograph: 
Twitter 
The autopsy in Rome followed another examination by Italian investigators in 
Cairo, at the Italian hospital in the Egyptian capital.

Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> has promised full cooperation 
with the Italian team that arrived in the country on Friday, although the 
Italians do not have access to all of Egypt’s investigation.

“The Italians were not participating in the autopsy report and no one from the 
Italian consulate was present during the autopsy,” said Shaaban el-Shamy, 
Egypt’s deputy minister of justice, who added it was standard procedure to not 
share certain aspects of the investigation.

“The Italian investigators are supposed to collaborate with the security 
apparatus in charge and with the prosecution but not with the morgue and the 
autopsy,” he explained. “This is their role to play, they have the right to do 
their own autopsy after they receive the corpse. They have not contacted the 
Egyptian morgue or the investigations team for their reports.”


The murder of my friend Giulio Regeni in Egypt was an attack on academic 
freedom | Neil Pyper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/06/murder-giulio-regeni-egypt-academic-freedom-students>
Questions over whether the Egyptian and Italian teams are running two parallel 
investigations extend into the Giza public prosecutor’s office, which is tasked 
with maintaining contact with lawyers from the Italian embassy in Cairo. 
Friends of Regeni, including a German and an Italian national, have been 
questioned by the office of the Giza public prosecutor, Ahmed Nagy, who 
emphasised that lawyers from the Italian embassy are given access to the 
office’s findings. “It is procedure to talk to the lawyers, they have the right 
to know everything,” he said.

Sources at the Italian embassy, which has declined to make a public statement 
on Regeni’s death, explained that while full cooperation is sought from 
Egyptian authorities, it cannot be forced.

Mourners who gathered at the Italian embassy on Saturday remembered Regeni as 
a scholar but also as a symbol of what they say is a widespread pattern of 
abuse by Egyptian security forces.

“I think we owe it to everyone to be clear how the police are in Egypt,” said 
the human rights activist Mona Seif. “The news of Egypt that reaches the 
international community looks at human rights violations and targeting people. 
But with the random way things are, it’s always possible to become a victim to 
accident and unnecessary detention. We need to talk about how living day to day 
is for those not with any political affiliation.”

A report by Egypt’s commission for rights and freedoms published in December 
counted that 340 people, or three each day, were forcibly disappeared by 
security forces between August and November 2015. The report also highlighted 
the frequent torture of detainees.
 