
Britain's Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent> judge Amanda 
Holden is to make her first foray into factual programming with a new ITV1 
series in which she will experience life as a country singer, Paris showgirl 
and stuntwoman.

The three-part Amanda Holden's Fantasy Lives will see the television star 
uncover the "hard work, day-to-day reality and grit that lies beneath the 
glamorous public face of each role" as well as meeting real pros and legendary 
figures.

Holden will work towards ultimately performing in each role as a singer in 
Nashville, in the heart of Hollywood's movie industry as a stuntwoman, and as a 
Parisian showgirl.

Holden said: "I am thrilled to be taking part in this, especially when I spend 
a lot of time judging others. I think it's important to keep putting myself out 
there to be judged myself.

"Each of these jobs looks impossibly romantic and glamorous from the outside, 
but they also look like they require enormous self-belief and passionate 
commitment. I'm very excited about this opportunity to experience them first 
hand and really gain a privileged insight into the lives of the people who do 
these jobs for a living – but I'm very nervous as well."

ITV controller of popular factual Jo Clinton-Davis, who commissioned the show 
with director of factual and daytime Alison Sharman, added: "Who better than 
Amanda to take us on an immersive journey into worlds full of glamour, 
entertainment, big characters, but also eye-opening realities?"

The series, a co-production between ITV Studios and Mammoth Screen, is due to 
air next year.

• To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk, email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020-3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020-3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 