
ITV chief executive Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier> has unveiled plans for the 
long-awaited pay version of the ITV Player, more than two years after the 
broadcaster first pledged to try and break into the micropayment market.

On Thursday Crozier said that ITV has just completed a successful trial of the 
ITV Pay Player in 5,000 homes andexpects to launch the service in the autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jul/26/itv-profits-down-almost-8percent>
.

Crozier said that the service would initially only launch on PCs, and that 
ITV's seven-day catch-up TV service would continue to remain free and contain 
ads.

He added that there will not be a subscription service, adding at least not at 
launch, and that users will be able to access 1,000 hours of archive TV and 
film content.

No detail was given on pricing, but ITV has opted for a rental service of "box 
sets" of shows as well as individual programmes. Rental content will not carry 
ad breaks.

The broadcaster first announced plans to launch what ITV Pay Player, then 
referred to as a micropayment system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/aug/03/itv-online-micropayments-project-canvas?INTCMP=SRCH>
, in August 2010. The first launch date was earmarked forthe fourth quarter 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/27/itv-to-launch-micropayments?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

The broadcaster also revealed on Thursday that the existing ITV Player has 
started to see a real boost in popularity. Traffic rose 20% year-on-year in the 
first half to 217m streams.

Crozier said that one of the most interesting statistics he has noticed in all 
of ITV's metrics is that 95% of the new growth in usage of the ITV Player is 
coming from mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets.

The increase in usage means more revenue from advertising with the ITV Player 
helping fuel a 24% increase in online, pay and interactive revenues to £47m in 
the first six months of 2012.

Pay revenues have grown thanks to programming content deals signed with Sky, 
LoveFilm and Netflix.

Crozier said that the bidding war between BSkyB and BT that fuelled a 71% 
increase in the cost of the Premier League TV rights, to £3bn over three years, 
would not result in price inflation in ITV's sports deals.

"We have done most of our deals for price deflation, we will save some £35m 
per annum on our main sports rights deals from 2013," he said. "The Premier 
League [inflation] was in truth a bit of a one-off."

ITV's two-year deal to continue broadcasting the FA Cup and England home 
games, including home qualifiers for the next World Cup in Brazil, was struck 
at a 30%-plus discount on the previous agreement.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 