
ITV staff are to ballot for strike action after being offered a “miserly” 
annual pay rise offer of 2%.

The broadcasting unions representing ITV staff argue that the below-inflation 
offer is unacceptable given the broadcaster is performing strongly and Adam 
Crozier, chief executive, waspaid £8.4m last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/14/itv-adam-crozier-pay-package-bonus-investors>
.

“ITV’s fortunes are on the up and the chief executive and other top brass at 
the company are able to pay themselves generous increases,” said Sue Harris, 
national broadcasting organiser at theNational Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists>. “But their 
loyal staff, who have worked through the lean years, are offered a miserly 2%.”

The unions said that the staff were originally offered a rise of 1.25%, which 
it said represented a pay cut given the Retail Price Index shows inflation of 
2.4%.

“The management just doesn’t get it,” said Harris. “Our members are struggling 
to pay their bills and transport costs on their present wages. ITV needs to 
come back with a better offer.”

The joint unions told ITV that members would be prepared to consider a 2.75% 
rise offer.

ITV’s pre-tax profits surged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/26/itv-profits-channel-5-bid> 30% 
to £435m and revenues grew a healthy 8% to £2.7bn last year.

“It is thanks to [staff] working harder, because of staff cuts and accepting 
poor pay deals, that ITV find itself in such a strong position,” said Harris.

ITV said the 2% offer was fair and that the company needed to keep a close eye 
on costs.

“We believe that the offer we have made is a fair one, reflecting our current 
circumstances and is consistent with recent pay awards agreed across the media 
sector and in UK private sector business,” said a spokesman for ITV.

“ITV continues to make good progress, but our focus on costs remains 
incredibly important across the business as we balance the need to continue to 
invest in growing the business, people and programming.”

ITV also said that on top of the 2% pay rise offer, eligible staff had been 
offered perks including a bonus and an extra day holiday.

“For those eligible colleagues earning £60,001 or above – unless covered by a 
collective agreement – the pay review process will be the same as last year, 
with any increases based on merit and subject to performance,” said the 
spokesman. “Eligible colleagues will also receive the maximum £1,200 bonus as 
well as an additional day’s holiday on 2 January.”

The broadcaster said it was disappointed the offer had been rejected, but that 
it would continue to have a “positive ongoing dialogue with our staff and 
unions during this time.”

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 