
ITV has been summoned to a meeting with media regulator Ofcom after an Alan 
Titchmarsh <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-titchmarsh> interview 
with Patsy Kensit turned into a Weight Watchers plug – the broadcaster's third 
such transgression in two years.

Former Emmerdale star Kensit, who is an ambassador for Weight Watchers, spent 
more than half of the five-minute interview talking about her weight and made 
several references to the weight loss programme.

ITV said the references were "brief and not unduly prominent" but Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> said the overall effect of the 
interview was to "promote and endorse WeightWatchers as an effective method of 
weight loss".

Titchmarsh introduced Kensit in his afternoon chatshow, broadcast on 14 
February, telling her: "There's nothing of you!" and "You are a bit of a shadow 
of your former self. Give us the sort of weight history then."

Kensit told Titchmarsh: "So I was doing a show called Emmerdale and a lot of 
the people at Yorkshire TV were – each week someone would come and they'd go to 
this WeightWatchers meeting. So I joined and it's an amazing diet."

She said Weight Watchers was the "one thing that worked. The weight comes off 
and it stays off", and twice referred to its "ProPoints" counting system.

But viewers were not told that Kensit is a paid Weight Watchers "weight loss 
ambassador".

Ofcom rules say products, services and trade marks must "not be promoted in 
programming" with "no undue prominence … given to a product, service or trade 
mark".

It is the third time ITV has breached broadcasting rules on promotional 
activity and unduly prominent references by guests.

Earlier this year ITV's Lorraine Kelly show, Kelly was censured 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/media/news/a456170/itvs-lorraine-criticised-for-letting-dannii-minogue-promote-milk-product.html>
 after singer and TV presenter Dannii Minogue extolled a brand of milk, A2 
Milk, that she is paid to promote.

In 2011, Ofcom took issue with another ITV show, This Morning, after 
references by Britain's Got Talent judge Amanda Holden to a group of law firms.

In both instances the celebrity guests had endorsement deals with the firms 
mentioned.

Following the Minogue ruling, Ofcom said it expected ITV to take further steps 
to ensure compliance in this area.

The regulator said: "In the light of this current latest case, Ofcom is 
requesting that ITV attends a meeting at Ofcom to discuss its compliance in 
this area."

Neither ITV nor anyone connected with the Alan Titchmarsh programme received 
any payment for the WeightWatchers references, which were not subject to any 
product placement arrangement.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 