
ITV plc <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ITV> today announced that it has 
agreed to acquire a controlling stake in Gurney Productions, a fast-growing 
producer of factual entertainment and reality programmes for leading US cable 
television networks.

ITV will pay $40m for a 61.5% stake in Gurney Productions, with a put-and -all 
option to buy the remaining 38.5% of the company. The put-and-call option could 
be exercised from three years after the initial deal and at the end of year 
five. Gurney Productions is a high-margin business with three quarters of its 
revenues coming from returnable series. The company's earnings before interest, 
tax and amortisation for 2012 is forecast to be at least $10m.

The acquisition marks a significant step forward in building a strong 
international content business, a key part of ITV's Transformation Plan. It 
will strengthen and complement ITV's existing position as a producer for major
US television <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/us-television> networks.

Gurney Productions, which was founded in 2005 by Scott and Deirdre Gurney, has 
become a leading independent producer of large-scale returning series for US 
cable networks. The company's portfolio includes Duck Dynasty – currently one 
of the biggest cable TV shows in the US.

Adam Crozier <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier>, chief executive 
of ITV, said: "Growing ITV Studios is a key part of our strategy to rebalance 
the group. Our studios business is already showing strong organic growth and 
the acquisition of Gurney is an important step forward as we continue to expand 
our international production capability.

"We see the US as a key creative market, and having a sizeable presence there 
is central to the expansion of our global content business. ITV Studios America 
has been growing revenues at around 20% for the last two years under the 
leadership of Paul Buccieri. Gurney is a great company with terrific programme 
brands, which will add scale to our already successful US business.

"Over the last seven years, the team at Gurney has built a strong and growing 
pipeline of high-end factual entertainment and reality programmes and I'm 
absolutely delighted to welcome Scott and Deirdre to the ITV fold, where we 
believe the business can continue to develop and thrive."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 