
When Simon Cowell sat down to thrash out a new deal to keep ratings magnets 
The X Factor and Britain's Got Talent at ITV for three more years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/18/itv-x-factor-britains-got-talent-cowell>
, it is a pretty safe bet the broadcaster's negotiating team weren't moved to 
remind him of his place providing "lowest common denominator" programming.

The statement, made by ITV chairman Archie Norman at a Lords communications 
committee hearing on advertising regulation yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/nov/02/itv-adam-crozier-archie-norman>, 
seems derogatory to the mass-market viewer base ITV so assiduously courts and 
commercially-non sensical.

Norman – and fellow ITV senior execs Adam Crozier and Carolyn Fairbairn – 
bemoaned the strictures of contract rights renewal (CRR), the regime governing 
airtime sales deals that effectively punishes ITV1 commercially if its share of 
audience drops versus the market, for sucking the broadcaster into a "ratings 
rat race". This in turn has caused the whole schedule to suffer from a lack of 
diverse programming. At least that is the theory promoted by the ITV trio 
yesterday.

Yet with ITV looking at a rosy 16% year-on-year increase in TV ad revenue, 
thanks in large part to The X Factor's clockwork delivery of 10 million-plus 
viewers triggering rates of about £150,000 per 30-second ad spot, it would seem 
that management is decrying the goose that lays the golden egg.

A raised eyebrow perhaps at Channel 4 HQ, which is in need of a ratings winner 
to replace Big Brother, or even Richard Desmond, who flippantly suggested he 
would be more than happy to take The X Factor on for Channel 5?

While it is true that CRR has punished ITV, and that less-economical 
programming such as arts, drama and news has suffered, it seems bizarre that 
management would consider that ITV1 ratings stalwarts such as Coronation 
Street, Emmerdale and I'm A Celebrity might be offered as evidence of a failure 
in the schedule.
 