
Simon Cowell's Red or Black? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/red-or-black> will only return if the 
gameshow's format is overhauled, ITV's chief programmer said in answer to a 
question to Jonathan Ross in front of an audience of advertisers.

Peter Fincham <https://www.theguardian.com/media/peter-fincham>, ITV's 
director of television, said he had not even decided whether to recommission 
the show in an interview at the commercial broadcaster's star-studded "2012 
upfronts" designed to showcase programming for the new year.

Ross was interviewing Fincham in a chatshow-style format – and decided that 
his first question would be about Red or Black?, which despite considerable 
hype received a mixed reception from audiences and industry observers alike 
when it was aired seven nights in a row in September.

Fincham said "I haven't made that decision yet" when asked by Ross whether Red 
or Black? will return next year. "It is a big show… the sort of thing ITV 
should be doing on a Saturday night. [It's a show I] want to make some changes 
to … I'm nearly there, but not quite ready yet."

The show attracted more than 4 million viewers a night on average, a solid 
performance under normal circumstances, but hardly the levels that ITV 
executives would have expected from a high-budget Cowell show fronted by its 
two biggest presenters,Anthony McPartlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin> and Declan Donnelly (Ant 
and Dec).

The format of Red or Black?, which gave contestants the chance to win £1m by 
guessing either red or black to the outcome of a series of celebrity-fronted 
challenges, has come in for some criticism. Claudia Rosencrantz, the former 
controller of entertainment at ITV,ordered a pilot of the same show eight years 
ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/sep/09/itv-shelved-red-or-black-pilot?INTCMP=SRCH>
 but canned it because she believed audiences wouldn't like a format requiring 
"no skill".

ITV's 2012 upfronts were held at London Television Centre on the South Bank, 
with comedian Keith Lemon, The Only Way is Essex star Mark Wright and X Factor 
judge Louis Walsh among those in attendance. The audience – Britain's major 
media buyers – were shown Julian Fellowes' upcoming Titantic and the new series 
of female detective programme Scott & Bailey and live performances from Pixie 
Lott and Rebecca Ferguson.

Fincham admitted that Red or Black? had received a "sightly bumpy ride", 
although he was probably referring to the controversy surroundinga former 
criminal winning £1m 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/tv/3794435/1m-Red-Or-Black-winner-Nathan-Hageman-jailed-for-brutal-attack.html>
 and several other contestantsbeing pulled after background checks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/sep/07/red-or-black-removes-contestants?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
.

However, the audience levels of the show, less than half that of successful 
Cowell stablemates such as Britain's Got Talent and X Factor, arguably 
indicates that it needs to be rejigged if the broadcaster is to achieve 
ambitions of turning IT into a mega franchise it can sell overseas.

Cowell has previously said he wants to take the show, which is co-produced by 
his production company Syco and ITV Studios,"around the world" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/may/03/simon-cowell-gameshow-red-or-black>
.

It is thought that ITV is considering options for a new-look Red or Black? 
that include running it just one night a week.

"The feeling is it might come back as a big Saturday night show but it's a 
question of how you work that logistically and make it work if it's just once a 
week," said a source who worked on Red or Black?. "It's a big expensive show."

The series, which like other Cowell efforts was filmed in an arena, is thought 
to be one ITV's most expensive productions per episode.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 