
That Kevin Lygo would leave Channel 4, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/30/kevin-lygo-channel-4-itv> once 
he had lost to David Abraham in the chief executive stakes, was a virtual 
certainty. Any lingering doubts would have been dispelled byAbraham's very 
public repudiation of the deal he fashioned to bring Jonathan Ross back to C4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/19/jonathan-ross-channel-4>. But is 
Lygo's move to run ITV Studios a good one for ITV – or him?

On the ITV side, the problem with in-house production often appears 
intractable. In theory, there is a virtuous commercial circle, with programming 
created and owned in-house, performing well on ITV, then making megabucks when 
it is sold around the world. I say "in theory" because, with a few, relatively 
minor exceptions, ITV has proved incapable of making it happen.

And it is not as if executives haven't been trying. "Profitable content" has 
been at the heart of ITV's corporate strategy ever since it became one company 
back in 2003. Charles Allen tried it, Michael Grade tried it, and nowArchie 
Norman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> and Adam Crozier are 
trying it. But tackling the problem will mean reversing an important long-term 
trend. ITV Productions' share of ITV's network commissioning has dropped from 
nearly 70% at the time of the Carlton/Granada merger to just 47% a couple of 
months ago. Put simply, too many of ITV's hits are made (and ultimately owned) 
by other people. On the upside, those programmes (think The X Factor, Britain's 
Got Talent etc) have helped to improve ITV's on-air performance and ad income. 
On the downside, you can't have a credible "profitable content" growth strategy 
if you don't own the content. But that tension – between producers incentivised 
to build their content business and broadcasters strapped to the wheel of 
maximising on-air performance – has proved impossible to resolve.

So is Lygo the man to do it? That he has an outstanding and deserved creative 
reputation is not in dispute. However, for the past decade he has been a 
commissioner rather than a producer. And that switch from buyer to seller, from 
potentate to supplicant, is notoriously difficult. What's more, the man he will 
have to sell to, ITV's director of television,Peter Fincham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/peter-fincham>, used to sell programmes to 
Lygo when at Talkback, since when he's been in competition with him at BBC1 and 
ITV. There is also speculation that when C4 was looking for its last chief 
executive, Fincham was in the frame but not favoured by Lygo who, as its 
programme director, didn't fancy having him as a boss.

So now the tables are turned, much will depend on what kind of relationship 
they can forge. Norman and Crozier will be keen for two such talented creatives 
to hit it off, in the hope they will be able to fix ITV's structural production 
problem. In essence, Lygo will have to deliver programme ideas that are as good 
as anything ITV can get from outside; no doubt he'll be given cash to try to 
reverse the flow of key production talent into the independent sector. And 
improving economic circumstances mean that, unlike his predecessor, Crozier 
will have some financial cover for such investments – they can be made without 
seriously damaging the company's bottom line and incurring shareholders' wrath.

But there's the rub. The temptation to pressure ITV commissioners to favour 
in-house ideas will be hard to resist. But the minute that results in a 
less than optimal on-air performance, investors will get nervous. Rebuilding 
ITV as an integrated broadcaster/producer with a meaningful 
"profitable content" proposition, even if it's possible at all, will take time. 
Quite possibly more time than the new top team atITV plc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ITV> have got. And then there's how Lygo 
reacts to Fincham turning down his favourite idea …
 