
ITV chief executive Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier> was awarded more than £3m in 
cash and share awards for 2011, a year in which his takehome pay rose by a 
fifth compared with 2010.

Crozier received an initial £1.52m in cash and pension contributions, 
including a bonus of £634,000, on a base salary of £798,000, according to ITV's 
annual report.

That compared with the £1.12m he took home in 2010 from the date of his 
surprise appointment at the helm of the X Factor broadcaster on 26 April.

ITV said that had he worked for the full year, his cash and pension 
contributions would have amounted to £1.27m, meaning his basic package was 
worth 20% more in 2011. The broadcaster added it would raising his base salary 
2.5% in 2012 to £818,000.

Crozier also received several share-based awards. ITV's annual report said 
that he had achieved 88.26% of his maximum potential bonus. As well as the 
£634,000 cash award, he received additional shares worth £634,082 as part of 
ITV's deferred share award plan.

He was also awarded 1.06m shares as a long-term performance award, worth 
£935,000 at ITV's current share price. These too will vest in March 2014.

Overall, Crozier took home pay and was awarded or released shares worth a 
total of £3.1m in 2011.

Crozier was also paid £53,000 as a non-executive director at Debenhams.

ITV produced a 14% increase in pre-tax profits to £327m, and has largely 
stablised during Crozier's tenure. During the year, its share price fell 
slightly, by 3.95p.

The ITV chief executive also recieved some awards during 2011 that dated back 
to previously awarded bonuses. A total of 397,272 shares were released to 
Crozier in April and October last year as part of his "golden hello". At 
Thursday's share price of 88p the shares, which Crozier still holds, are worth 
£349,599.

The chief executive was also awarded 552,628 shares in 2011 – his deferred 
share bonus from 2010. These are theoretically worth £486,312 at ITV's current 
share price, although these do not vest until March 2014.

He also holds 4.12m shares as a "nil-cost option award", worth £3.62m, which 
cannot vest until 2013 at the earliest. He currently holds a personal stake in 
ITV of 291,139 shares, worth £256,202 at current prices.

Archie Norman, the ITV chairman, was paid a £300,000 fee and 800,000 shares 
were released to him during 2011. Norman was awarded a total of 1.2m shares as 
a one-off "golden hello" when he joined on 17 March 2010.

The 800,000 that have been released are currently worth £704,000. Norman holds 
971,584 shares in ITV, currently worth £855,000.

The total takehome remuneration for all ITV directors was £2.96m in 2011, 
compared with £3.65m in 2010.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 