
“I’m a friend first, boss second. Probably an entertainer third,” David Brent 
once said. Hopefully,Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier> didn’t take any tips from 
Brent before the boss of ITV tried to sweet-talk Entertainment One (eOne) into 
accepting a £1.03bn takeover proposal.

The star of The Office features in the new film, David Brent, Life on the 
Road, which is released this month and is being distributed by eOne.

Film distribution isn’t really ITV’s bag but that has not stopped it from 
tabling a £1.03bn “proposal” to buy eOne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/peppa-pig-owner-entertainment-one-rejects-itv-1bn-takeover-approach>
. The “proposal” has been unanimously rejected by the eOne board, which said in 
a statement that it “fundamentally undervalues the company and its prospects”.

The word “proposal” is important because it helps ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> and eOne to avoid the Takeover Panel 
triggering a four-week deadline for the saga to be resolved. The Takeover Panel 
has not covered itself in glory here. Rumours of ITV’s interest in eOne have 
been allowed to rumble on for months without any official comment.

The deal may not happen. ITV’s 236p per share offer may represent a 19% 
premium to eOne’s closing share price on Monday, the day before the proposal 
but it needs to be increased if the company is to secure a deal.

A year ago, shares in eOne were trading at well over 300p. Investors became 
unsettled by a refinancing of its debt and a £200m rights issue to increase its 
stake in the company that produces Peppa Pig to more than 85%. CPP, the 
Canadian pension fund, now owns almost 20% of eOne after buying in last 
September at about 269p. It is unlikely to accept a loss on its investment so 
quickly and it has a seat on the board of the company, so its views are 
influential.

Peppa Pig is the company’s most famous asset – certainly in the UK – and it 
generates more than $1bn (£769m) in annual revenues. An acquisition of the 
production arm of eOne would make sense for ITV as it steps up its strategy of 
buying content with international growth potential and bringing TV studios 
in-house. eOne also owns a majority stake in the Mark Gordon Company, producer 
of the US dramas Grey’s Anatomy and Ray Donovan.

Adam Crozier pursues international vision for ITV with acquisitions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/10/crozier-pursues-international-vision-for-itv-with-acquisitions>
eOne is much more than TV production though 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/02/peppa-pig-owner-entertainment-one-disappoints-the-market>
. In the year to 31 March, £553m of its £803m revenues were from the film 
business, which can be notoriously volatile and relies upon a handful of titles 
becoming blockbusters. Indeed, the growth of its TV business and a decline in 
film meant that the latter accounted for less than half of eOne’s underlying 
profits in the last year.

The size of the film distribution business – which has enjoyed a hit in Steven 
Spielberg’s BFG – means that it is not a straightforward decision for ITV to 
increase its offer.

eOne will give ITV a further foothold in TV production, diversification into 
the US and films, and experience of how to monetise a popular programme such as 
Peppa Pig into lucrative merchandise and toy sales. But City insiders expect 
ITV to take its time before making another move. ITV must be careful not to pay 
much beyond its existing offer, given the mixed bag it would be taking on. 
Shares in eOne settled at 236.99p on Wednesday night, just above the offer 
price, suggesting that ITV might not have to go much further to win over 
shareholders.

On firmer ground

The Olympics in Rio de Janeiro brings back fond memories of London 2012 for 
many people in the UK. Not forG4S <https://www.theguardian.com/business/g4s>, 
however. The company was dragged into a crisis just days before the 2012 
Olympics after failing to recruit enough security staff for the Games, which 
lead to the Army being called in.

Interviewing Nick Buckles, then chief executive of G4S, at the height of the 
crisis was extraordinary. Buckles looked and spoke like a man who had could not 
comprehend what had happened.

Unsurprisingly, he was gone as chief executive within a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/may/21/g4s-nick-buckles-quits>. G4S 
had become too big for him, sprawling over 125 countries and hundreds of 
thousands of workers.Other scandals <https://www.theguardian.com/business/g4s> 
have emerged too.

Four years on from London 2012, Ashley Almanza, Buckles’ successor, is still 
rebuilding the world’s biggest security company. G4S on Wednesday reported a 3% 
rise in half-year revenues and a 44% rise in pre-tax profits to £115m.

The company’s share price is well down on the peak of the Buckles era and it is
still embroiled in controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/g4s-security-firm-orlando-attack-omar-mateen>
, but at least G4S is on firmer ground.
 