
ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> has reported double-digit 
growth in TV ad revenue in the third quarter, and expects its production arm to 
finish the year strongly thanks to shows including I'ma Celebrity and a new 
drama on Lord Lucan.

The broadcaster said TV ad revenues grew 11% in the third quarter, helped in 
part due to a "soft" comparison with last year as advertisers stayed away while 
the BBC's coverage of the London Olympics dominated the nation's viewing.

ITV said TV ad revenue grew 8% in October and is forecasting November to be up 
4% and December up 1%. The figures exclude TV sponsorship revenues.

ITV Studios, the production arm responsible for shows including Hell's Kitchen 
and Coronation Street, has continued its revitalisation with revenues for the 
nine months to the end of September up 11% to £55m.

Adam Crozier <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier>, the ITV chief 
executive, said the production division would have a "strong fourth quarter", 
due in part to a schedule of delivering shows for airing in the final months of 
the year.

 ITV Studios fourth quarter will benefit from delivering the latest series of 
I'm a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here, whichbegan its 13th series at the weekend 
with record viewing figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/18/im-a-celebrity-ratings>, as well 
as shows for international markets such as Hell's Kitchen in the US and 
Guinness World Records.

However, the broadcaster pointed out that ITV Studios' growth has come 
primarily from buying firms such as Graham Norton's So Television, Big Talk, 
which makes Rev for the BBC, as well as films including Simon Pegg and Edgar 
Wright's The World's End, and Gurney, the US producer behind reality shows 
including Duck Dynasty.

"Our ongoing investment in ITV Studios continues to bear fruit," said Crozier. 
"We're confident of a strong performance over the full year – both organically 
and from our recent acquisitions – underpinned by a delivery schedule which 
this year is weighted to the fourth quarter".

ITV said its studio operation will grow by about 5% on an organic basis, 
stripping out the effect of acquisitions.

The broadcaster's online, pay and interactive revenues grew by 17% year on 
year in the nine months to the end of September, with requests to view TV 
programmes on the ITV Player up 16% to 401m.

"We continue to make good progress with our strategy of growing and 
strengthening ITV both creatively and commercially, and all parts of the 
business are performing well," said Crozier.

Crozier said ITV will increase its cost savings from £20m to £25m this year.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 