
Behind the showbiz hullaballoo of ITV’s annual showcase for advertisers at the 
London Palladium, the company’s chief executive,Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier>, is facing his stiffest test 
since successfully leading the broadcaster out of the previous recession after 
taking the helm in 2010.


The red carpet event last Thursday came as Brexit jitters left ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> facing its worst run-up to Christmas 
for advertising revenue since 2008.

Crozier has spent the six years since the most recent major advertising 
recession investing more than £1bn in building an international TV production 
powerhouse to steel the broadcaster against just such a downturn.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea58afad26d8e6a5f353cf23561b2329e17ee707%2F0_186_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ITV%20Studios%3A%20is%20the%20glitter%20coming%20off%20broadcaster's%20hit%20factory%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ITV%20Studios%3A%20is%20the%20glitter%20coming%20off%20broadcaster%27s%20hit%20factory%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea58afad26d8e6a5f353cf23561b2329e17ee707%2F0_186_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Tom Jones was one of those who attended the ITV gala. Photograph: Dave J 
Hogan/Getty Images 
However, investors are starting to question whether ITV Studios – which makes 
and sells shows including Victoria, Mr Selfridge, Come Dine with Me and 
Coronation Street – is starting to lose its glitter.

Investors took fright when ITV Studios reported a 9% fall in organic revenues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/itv-revenues-advertisers-fourth-quarter>
, which excludes therevenue from recent acquisitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/10/crozier-pursues-international-vision-for-itv-with-acquisitions>
 such as The Voice maker Talpa Media, and Poldark andParade’s End maker Mammoth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/01/poldark-producer-bought-by-itv>, 
for the first nine months of the year.


This followed a 34% decline in revenues at its US production operation in the 
first half of the year. The US has been Crozier’s main market for international 
expansion, with hundreds of millions of pounds spent buying the makers of shows 
including Duck Dynasty, Pawn Stars and Cake Boss.

ITV prompted further concern by saying profit growth at ITV Studios, which has 
increased from £91m in 2009 to an expected £250m this year, will flatline in 
2017.


ITV sees almost £2.5bn wiped from stock market value after Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/27/itv-sees-almost-25bn-wiped-from-stock-market-value-after-brexit>
ITV, which took the unusual step of organising a call with analysts to 
reassure investors, brushed off concerns by blaming factors including the 
“lumpy” nature of broadcasters’ timing of when to air shows. For example, 
Hell’s Kitchen, ITV’s biggest global franchise judged by the number of 
countries to which it has been sold, is not airing this year, but has two 
series scheduled in 2017.

Sarah Simon, an analyst at Berenberg, said of ITV’s need to organise a special 
call: “It is a bit of a giveaway [that there really is an issue] if you feel it 
needs to be discussed. The pitch about [expanding] ITV Studios in the beginning 
was that there is structural growth, a demand for high-quality content, and 
that it is not cyclical like advertising. People who thought this was a steady 
growth business need to revise expectations and expect volatility.”


Crozier has spent £1.2bn acquiring 15 production companies, a figure that 
could rise to nearly £2bn by 2021 if the former owners reach their earn-out 
targets, triggering further payments.

Crozier said ITV Studios had experienced a blip, and new and returning dramas 
would help fuel a return to organic revenue growth next year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a4c6deab44a633fcac21cfd48e44627f29b5d50%2F0_959_1998_1198%2F1998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ITV%20Studios%3A%20is%20the%20glitter%20coming%20off%20broadcaster's%20hit%20factory%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ITV%20Studios%3A%20is%20the%20glitter%20coming%20off%20broadcaster%27s%20hit%20factory%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a4c6deab44a633fcac21cfd48e44627f29b5d50%2F0_959_1998_1198%2F1998.jpg>
 The cast of The Only Way is Essex also attended. Photograph: David M 
Benett/Getty Images 
“We remain very confident in the outlook for ITV Studios,” he told analysts 
earlier this month. “We’ve got a really good, strong pipeline of new and 
returning dramas.”

He told investors that profit would be flat in 2017 as ITV Studios focused on 
major investment in finding new hit shows.

“We do think it is the right thing to do to invest in our studios business,” 
he said. “I don’t think we would be doing the right thing for the business if 
we didn’t continue to invest in that long-term success. That’s absolutely the 
right thing for us to do.”

ITV cuts 120 jobs as Brexit uncertainty slows UK TV ad market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/itv-cuts-120-jobs-brexit-uncertainty-uk-television-advertising-market>
Investment in ITV Studios has been the most successful part of Crozier’s 
three-pronged diversification plan.

Online and pay revenues, such as through video advertising and Sky pay-TV 
channel Encore, have more than doubled to £188m in the past five years, but 
still account for only 6% of ITV’s £3bn-plus total revenues.

A senior executive at a rival TV company said the ITV Studios strategy may 
have peaked and its foray into the US market had not yet worked out.

Despite the huge investment in the US, at least 80% of ITV’s total revenues 
come from the UK, and up to 70% of these are from advertising.

“The general view is that it has been a great short-term strategy,” the 
executive said. “They wanted a transformational story and to say they increased 
profits. No doubt it worked and drove share price. The problem is they seem to 
have overpaid for some assets in the UK, and especially the US.”

A wider issue facing ITV, and all traditional broadcasters, is the rise of the 
deep-pocketed digital upstarts.

Netflix, which has a $7bn (£5.6bn) TV and film content budget next year, is 
investing heavily in shows such asroyal drama The Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/29/tax-breaks-and-talent-fuel-uks-creative-industry-boom>
, its first UK production, which cost an average of more than £5m per episode.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7ef77355b8c3f0f13d7a69e63af872193f8d520%2F0_200_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ITV%20Studios%3A%20is%20the%20glitter%20coming%20off%20broadcaster's%20hit%20factory%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ITV%20Studios%3A%20is%20the%20glitter%20coming%20off%20broadcaster%27s%20hit%20factory%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7ef77355b8c3f0f13d7a69e63af872193f8d520%2F0_200_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Jenna Coleman and Tom Hughes in ITV’s top-flight drama Victoria. Photograph: 
ITV 
Amazon’s signing of the former Top Gear presenters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/30/top-gear-clarkson-hammond-may-amazon-deal-bbc>
 to make three series of therecently launched The Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/28/the-grand-tour-viewing-figures-are-a-mystery-to-us-say-shows-stars>
 has a reported £160m price tag.

The more budget-conscious ITV, which spends about £1bn per year on programming,
spends closer to £1m an episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/29/tax-breaks-and-talent-fuel-uks-creative-industry-boom>
 for a select few top-flight dramas, such as Victoria.


ITV’s share price has climbed from 55p when Crozier was appointed in January 
2010 to 280p in 2015.

However, ITV has wobbled in the past year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/itv-cuts-120-jobs-brexit-uncertainty-uk-television-advertising-market>
 and, exacerbated by the economic fallout from the EU referendum, the 
broadcaster’s share price has fallen by one-third to less than 170p.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdaad5cc055b3a095fa94e5463e747eda91b420f4%2F0_0_2427_1457%2F2427.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ITV%20Studios%3A%20is%20the%20glitter%20coming%20off%20broadcaster's%20hit%20factory%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ITV%20Studios%3A%20is%20the%20glitter%20coming%20off%20broadcaster%27s%20hit%20factory%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fitv-studios-production-advertising-market-slowing-growth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdaad5cc055b3a095fa94e5463e747eda91b420f4%2F0_0_2427_1457%2F2427.jpg>
 Adam Crozier has led ITV since April 2010. Photograph: Micha Theiner/City 
AM/Rex Features 
In September, Crozier sold £1m of shares at £2 apiece, a move investors took a 
dim view of, sending shares tumbling.


Alex DeGroote, an analyst at Peel Hunt, said: “Directors selling is very 
rarely viewed as a positive, because nobody knows the company’s prospects 
better than executive management.”


DeGroote questioned whether the ITV Studios stumble, and the uncertain 
economic environment andfall in the value of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/brexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch>
 following the Brexit vote, could derail Crozier’s plan and make the 
broadcaster a takeover target.


“This was a very sure-footed management team that has executed seamlessly on 
the recovery story since 2009,” he said. “But Brexit has changed the rules of 
engagement. Working through the course of the year, I have become progressively 
more disappointed in the ITV story.

“With the pound so weak, you won’t get a better chance to buy if you are a 
dollar buyer. If people aren’t looking at it now, they never will be.”


ITV Studios’ biggest global hits

1. Hell’s Kitchen: 196 countries

2. The Voice: 180 

3. Victoria: 155 

4. Poldark: 154 

5. Endeavour: 152
 