
Iva Bittová <http://www.bittova.com/> cuts a glamorous figure. Reclining on a 
sofa resplendent in a yellow dress she has knitted herself, she greets the 
Guardian with a throaty "Hello darling!" Her voice is one of the many 
extraordinary things about the Czech singer and violinist. Bittová prefers to 
sing unamplified, incorporating chirps, yodels and kittenish yowls. She ranges 
freely across musical boundaries, from the traditional folk she grew up with to 
art rock and into classical music. At the Adelaide festival, with LA string 
players theCalder Quartet <http://calderquartet.com/>, she is set to perform 
works by Bartók and Janáček besides her own compositions.

As for her violin, as well as play it in the conventional manner, Bittová 
likes to strum it banjo-style, or pluck it with any object to hand. It all adds 
up to a highly theatrical performance – which makes sense given that Bittová 
used to be an actor. Her last film, Želary 
<http://movies.nytimes.com/2004/09/17/movies/17ZELA.html?_r=0>, was nominated 
for an Oscar, making Bittová so famous in the Czech Republic that she needed to 
get away from the fans who'd mob her in the street. "I was too isolated in the 
Czech Republic – too famous because of the last movie," she explains.

After performing in an opera, Don Juan in Prague 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/12/15/arts/music/15juan.html>, in Rhinebeck, 
upstate New York, Bittová decided to move there with the younger of her two 
sons. "I found a little house in the woods. It's such a peaceful place. I can 
practice any time and I'm in the middle of nature."

It involves a lot of travel – she's only in Australia for two days – but 
Bittová accepts it as part of the deal. "It's really important not to hate 
those things because I have to go to the people, I have to sing live because I 
always immediately get back the energy. Sometimes I don't feel strong enough 
but the audience helps me to say 'OK, Iva - you're in good shape' or 'You have 
to do something different' – this dialect is very important. I'm not an artist 
who can just sit in a studio and make recordings – I need people to feel all 
those secret things."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZEZg3TX1k_g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZEZg3TX1k_g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZEZg3TX1k_g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Her shows always involve a lot of improvisation. "I go onstage and immediately 
I have to feel the space and the energy. My intuition works very well. Then I 
have to be ready to open my dialogue and sometimes something unexpected just 
comes." It comes off a bedrock of a lot of violin practice, however - Bittová 
says she isn't keen to make another film as it distracts her from playing.

She grew up Bruntál in what was then Czechoslovakia, and identifies as Moravian
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moravia> rather than Czech. "Bohemia has more 
brass band music and Moravia has more strings and cimbalom – it's more soft and 
melodic sound." She grew up under communism, but the state allowed her to play 
overseas: "I was quite lucky because the official government people were not 
sure any time what my music means." Bittová never overtly criticised the state, 
though she says her music expressed resistance. "I think in my music and art 
protest goes through the sound and music, not through the lyrics, so I never 
had such a big problem."

After the Velvet revolution <http://archiv.radio.cz/history/history15.html> 
Vaclav Havel invited her to play the Prague castle, and the pair became 
friends. "Such a smart, humble person," she says. "He was unique and special 
and everybody liked him so, so much – he got such a huge respect [from the 
Czech people]. When he died I realised there is no respect on the air any more. 
Now it's worse and worse – the whole political situation is corrupting very 
badly."

So will Bittová stay in America? She says that Rhinebeck that it won't be her 
final destination – though she's not tempted by Australia as "it's so far 
away". But for now she's content, within striking distance of the avant garde 
musicians she wants to collaborate with (and vice versa), and near the 
institution where her son is studying piano and composition - "he's really 
talented," she says proudly. In the winter she likes to sit by the fire, listen 
to music and knit things like that extraordinary dress.

"I like handicraft and cooking very much and I like to work with my hands," 
says Bittová. "This dress was my first very complicated pattern. I just learned 
it and I'm happy I know now how to do it. All your thinking goes into your work 
– here are a lot of secret things." She clutches the dress.

So has she ever considered playing the violin with a knitting needle or two? 
"No! Hey, it would be good! I like the Japanese style which is very thin on one 
side and bigger on the other so it makes for better hitting," says Bittová – 
improvising to the last.

• This article was amended on 15 March 2013. The original said Bittová was 
famous in Czechosolavkia - this should have readCzech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic>. Cymbal should have read 
cimbalom, which is a dulcimer-like instrument, and the spelling of "overseas" 
was corrected.
 