
Listen carefully and from 200 yards you may well be able to hear the creak of 
old bones. This is also the distance they tend to hit it off the tee. Tomorrow 
morning we find out for sure when Jack Nicklaus, 70, joins his old sparring 
partnerArnold Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer>, 80, to 
hit the first tee shots as honorary starters at Augusta National.

This is either quirky and quaint and rather charming or it is another example 
of instinctive American smarm and sentimentality. Either way, someone will have 
to lift Jack and Arnie out of their beds before dawn for them to ignite this 
Masters with a couple of groaning drives shortly after dawn's first light at 
precisely 7.40am local time.

Palmer has been doing this on his own for the past three years. Nicklaus, now 
five years retired from the game and reluctant to even watch it on TV, has 
always politely refused any request to play the role of a ceremonial golfer but 
his pal has felt lonely on that tee and so when he asked his eternal rival to 
give him a break and join him in this ritual Nicklaus did not have the heart to 
turn him down.

When they stand there tomorrow morning here in Georgia these two men may be 
diminished physically by age, wear and tear but they are still golfing 
colossuses, two Americans who between them helped hugely to create the modern 
game by their talents, charisma and respect for its core traditions of honesty 
and self-regulation.

They will, of course, josh in that Holden Caulfield, towel-flicking way that 
Americans of a certain age love to do. It will be affectionate, rib-tickling 
stuff but it will carry within it the remainder of the deep, alpha-male rivalry 
they used to enjoy when the world was younger and a fresh-faced Nicklaus was 
tilting at Palmer's long-established windmill.

"When Arnold asked me to join him, I thought: 'Well, I have been out of the 
game for five years now, so why not?' I didn't want to do it earlier for a few 
reasons and one of them was that I wanted to give Arnold his time out there. He 
has done that a while now so, yeah, it'll be good to join him. We'll belt it, 
oh, 150 yards off the tee and have some fun," Nicklaus says.

The greatest, happily married golfer the world has ever known will not, 
however, be happily travelling to St Andrews this year to play in the four-hole 
Champions' Challenge to be staged on the last practice day at the Old Course. 
For Jack this would be a stretch too far. "If the Royal Bank of Scotland [with 
which he has a contract] want me to come and do work then yes. Am I going on my 
own to play four holes at St Andrews? No."

Why should he? Nicklaus's farewell to British golf in 2005 at the old town was 
as emotional as it gets, his walk up the final fairway encouraging playing 
partner Tom Watson to dissolve into tears. "I had to tell Tom to pull himself 
together, that he was still in the tournament while I was going home," Nicklaus 
says.

There will be no tears tomorrow morning. Just a few achey-groans and some 
overdeveloped laughter at whatever they choose to say to an adoring public 
gathered around the tee. Then they just hit the damn things and walk back into 
the clubhouse for some scrambled eggs and bacon. These days the honorary 
starters do not even walk after their balls. "And that's a relief," Nicklaus 
says. "It means we can hit it wherever and not worry about it."

He is mostly correct in this analysis of the situation except there are 
lawsuits to consider. A few years ago a very old Sam Snead miscued his drive so 
badly it pinged straight into the spectacles a man was wearing not far away. 
Worse, Snead couldn't follow the flight of his ball well enough to see what had 
happened. Some of us were not sure the dear, old boy even knew where he was, 
never mind what he was doing â€“ although we were probably being a tad harsh.

What is for sure is that this honorary starter lark began in 1963. Nobody can 
remember exactly why. Jock Hutchison and Fred McLeod were the first to give it 
a go and were picked because they had each won the only other pro event to be 
staged here, the Senior PGA Championship. Since then Byron Nelson, Gene 
Sarazen, Ken Venturi and Snead have done the honours.

Now it is the Jack and Arnie show and a flip back to a more innocent era. 
Anybody want to bet on Tiger being asked to do it in 30 years' time? Thought 
not.
 