
Jack O’Connell has been cast as Alexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen> in a film about the 
high-flying fashion designer.

Why we’re all still mad about Alexander McQueen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/08/why-mad-again-about-alexander-mcqueen-nick-waplington-savage-beauty>
The actor – best known for his roles in Unbroken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/18/unbroken-review-angelina-jolie-louie-zamperini>
,’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/09/71-review-yann-demange-belfast-troubles>
71 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/09/71-review-yann-demange-belfast-troubles>
 and the TV show Skins – will bedirected by Andrew Haigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/45-years-director-andrew-haigh-alexander-mcqueen-biopic-fashion-designer>
 (45 Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/27/45-years-review-tom-courtenay-and-charlotte-rampling-superb-as-couple-freshly-possessed-by-the-past>
). The film, which does not yet have a title, is being adapted fromAndrew 
Wilson’s book Blood Beneath the Skin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/22/gods-and-kings-alexander-mcqueen-john-galliano-dana-thomas-beneath-the-skin-andrew-wilson-brutal-bio>
.

McQueen rose to fame with controversial early collections, which led to a 
reputationas “the hooligan of English fashion” 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/life/fashion/article1754366.ece>, before he 
spent five years as chief designer at Givenchy.

The film will focus on McQueen’s preparations for his 2009 autumn/winter 
collection, Horn of Plenty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/08/why-mad-again-about-alexander-mcqueen-nick-waplington-savage-beauty>
, a retrospective that was inspired by his career. It would also be his 
penultimate collection;he killed himself in February 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/11/alexander-mcqueen-dies-fashion-designer>
.

Jack O’Connell: ‘My world just got much bigger’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/07/jack-oconnell-my-world-just-got-bigger-unbroken>
“In 2009, Alexander McQueen put on one of his greatest shows,” distributors 
Pathe said <http://www.patheinternational.com/en/fiche.php?id_film=843>, “an 
extravagantly beautiful retrospective of his designs. It was a show that he 
dedicated to his mother and one in which he tried to make sense of his life and 
art.”

“The film explores McQueen’s creative process in the six months leading up to 
the show, the laughter that came easily with his family and friends, and the 
pressure that came with the relentless demands of the fashion industry. The 
film is a celebration of a visionary genius whose designs transcended fashion 
to become art.”

The biopic is expected to begin shooting in spring.
 