
With World Cup qualification already beyond Wales, a trip to Azerbaijan on 
Saturday week might seem like a meaningless fixture but don't expect Jack 
Collison to agree. The game in Baku should see theWest Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> midfielder represent Wales 
in a competitive international for the first time and, as a result, will bring 
an end to the fears that Collison could be tempted to defect to England, the 
country of his birth.

Wales have just seen one of their promising youngsters switch allegiances, 
with the Middlesbrough defender Rhys Williams pledging his future to Australia 
despite making 10 appearances for Brian Flynn's Under-21 side. Under Fifa 
rules, Collison would be free to do the same, as the three senior caps he has 
collected hitherto have all come in friendlies, but the 20-year-old, who 
qualifies forWales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> through his 
grandfather, insists that he has no intention of turning his back on his 
adopted country.

"The Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> game will 
put an end to the speculation," said Collison, who joked that "the Welsh 
contingent" at Upton Park, which includes James Collins and Danny Gabbidon, 
would never have forgiven him if he had opted for England instead. "I haven't 
thought about it much but a lot of people have brought it up. Hopefully I'll be 
selected and put an end to it. All my mum's side are very proud that I chose to 
play for Wales and so am I, to be honest."

How England came to allow Collison to slip through the net is something of a 
mystery although it might prove to be a costly oversight. He broke through at 
Upton Park at a time when Freddie Sears' progress was picked up by the England 
youth set-up, yet it was not until Flynn turned up at West Ham's training 
ground to offer Under-21 football with Wales that any international interest 
surfaced. Does he regret not waiting to see if England would have come calling? 
"No, not all. I was very proud to grab the opportunity to play for Wales and I 
haven't looked back since."

That much has been obvious at West Ham where Collison's talent has flourished 
under Gianfranco Zola. Having been on the verge of a loan move to Peterborough 
earlier in the season, he went on to make 20 Premier League appearances at 
Upton Park and finished the campaign picking up West Ham's young player of the 
year award. The new manager has clearly been a huge influence behind his 
emergence.

"Obviously playing under someone like Zola, anyone who loves football will 
appreciate what he has brought to the game," acknowledged Collison, who was 
speaking at an event organised by the official sponsor of the Wales team, 
Nationwide. "It's a great opportunity for a young player like me to learn from 
one of the best ever to play in the Premiership. He's so enthusiastic and he 
gives you confidence and belief in your ability."

Collison's next target is to "cement a place in John Toshack's team" â€“ 
something that he will have a chance to do before the Azerbaijan fixture, with 
Wales taking on Estonia in a friendly on Friday. Toshack has signalled his 
intention to welcome in a new era by selecting a youthful squad and Collison, 
who was a key figure in the Under-21 side who were unfortunate to miss out on 
this summer's European Championship after a narrow defeat to England in the 
play-offs, believes all the foundations are in place to build a successful 
senior team for the future.

"There are a lot of young players I have played with and I know all about 
their ability, and I'm hoping they're going to get the opportunity to show a 
few other people what they're about," said Collison, whose partnership with 
Aaron Ramsey in central midfield looks particularly promising. "We are all 
going to look to progress as individuals and as a team and look to really take 
Wales places in the future. We all want to work hard and, who knows, in a few 
years' time we could have a very successful side here."
 