
A farewell to the King turned somber when Jack Nicklaus, his voice cracking as 
a large tear formed in his left eye, urged the elite and the everyman to 
remember howArnold Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer> 
touched their lives and “please don’t forget why.”

“I hurt like you hurt,” Nicklaus said. “You don’t lose a friend of 60 years 
and not feel an enormous loss.”

Ryder Cup frenzy leaves crowds in focus as golf faces price of popularity | 
Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/rory-mcilory-american-galleries-ryder-cup>
The service Tuesday at Saint Vincent College in Palmer’s hometown was filled 
with just as much laughter and warmth from stories of the most significant 
figure in modern golf. Nearly 1,000 golf dignitaries from around the world, 
referred to by former LPGA Commissioner Charlie Mechem as the “elite battalion 
of Arnie’s Army,” crammed into the basilica.

Some 4,000 others headed to remote sites across the college to watch. Long 
lines of traffic formed two hours before the service began.

Palmer died on 25 September in Pittsburgh at age 87 as he was preparing for 
heart surgery. His family had a private funeral Thursday and asked that a 
public service be held after the Ryder Cup so no one would be left out.

“We were looking down at the air strip and the fog just suddenly lifted,” 
Ernie Els said after landing in one of several private jets that descended on 
Arnold Palmer Regional Airport in Latrobe. “This is a beautiful day. We’ve all 
met different people in life. He was a man who didn’t change. It didn’t matter 
if you cut the grass or you were a president. He was the same with everybody. 
He was just ... he was the man.”

Palmer won 62 times on the PGA Tour, including seven major championships. He 
inspired the modern version of the Grand Slam by going over to the British Open 
and making it important in the eyes of Americans again. He was a captain twice 
in the Ryder Cup, and the gold trophy the Americans won Sunday at Hazeltine sat 
on a table for guests to see as they took their seats.

But this service was more about the lives Palmer touched than the tournaments 
he won.

In the large portrait at the front of the stage, Palmer wasn’t holding a golf 
club or a trophy. It was just the King and that insouciant grin that made 
everyone feel like they were friends, even if they had never met.

“Have there been better golfers? Perhaps, but not many. Has anyone done more 
for the game? No one has come even close,” former R&A chief Peter Dawson said. 
“Is there a finer human being? I haven’t met one yet.”

Ryder Cup captain Davis Love III, Phil Mickelson and a few other members of 
the US team were there. So was the generation before them, Tom Watson and 
Curtis Strange, Lee Trevino and Mark O’Meara. Dozens of others were there, 
along with the heads of every major golf organization. All of them alternately 
smiled and wiped away the occasional tear.

PGA Tour Commissioner Tim Finchem said he had known Palmer since 1957 Finchem 
was 10 that year because “when you saw him play, it was the same thing as 
meeting him.” He said Palmer brought so many people to golf because of his 
attacking style, his television appeal and how he carried himself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Farnold-palmer-memorial-service-jack-nicklaus-golf-news%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91f25f8636831902f9b69de5d1448d337d894d31%2F31_82_2697_1618%2F2697.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jack%20Nicklaus%20gives%20touching%20speech%20at%20Arnold%20Palmer%20memorial%20service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Farnold-palmer-memorial-service-jack-nicklaus-golf-news%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jack%20Nicklaus%20gives%20touching%20speech%20at%20Arnold%20Palmer%20memorial%20service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Farnold-palmer-memorial-service-jack-nicklaus-golf-news%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91f25f8636831902f9b69de5d1448d337d894d31%2F31_82_2697_1618%2F2697.jpg>
 Jack Nicklaus at the memorial service. Photograph: ddp USA/REX/Shutterstock 
“He had this other thing,” Finchem said. “It was the incredible ability to 
make you feel good not just about him, but about yourself. I was amazed by how 
people reacted to him. He took energy from that and turned right around and 
gave it back.”

Mechem, the former LPGA commissioner who became one of Palmer’s closest 
advisers, set the tone for the service by asking the crowd to remember the 
image of Palmer walking up the 18th fairway, hitching up his pants and giving a 
thumbs-up. Still, a touch of sadness was inevitable.

“There’s an old saying that there are no irreplaceable people,” Mechem said, 
his voice cracking toward the end of the ceremony. “Whoever made that line 
didn’t know Arnold Palmer. There will never be another.”

Among the more poignant tributes was Palmer’s grandson, Sam Saunders, who 
plays on the PGA Tour.

“There wasn’t a big difference between the man you saw on TV and the man we 
knew at home,” Saunders said.

Saunders grew up calling him “Dumpy” because that’s what his older sister said 
when trying to call him “Grumpy.” The name stuck. That’s how Saunders had 
Palmer listed in his phone, and he used that number more times than he could 
remember.

The last call was a week ago Sunday at 4.10pm, shortly before Palmer died.

“He answered on the first ring. He was in the hospital preparing for surgery 
the next morning,” Saunders said. “He told me to take care of my babies, my 
entire family. I intend to do that and make him proud. I told him I loved him. 
He told me he loved me back. That was the last thing we said to each other, and 
I will cherish that the rest of my life. And I’ll take the best piece of advice 
he gave me, to talk less and listen more.”

Palmer’s co-pilot, Pete Luster, flew Palmer’s plane over Saint Vincent College 
for nearly an hour before the service. The crowd gathered outside the basilica 
when it was over to watch Luster fly overhead and tip the wing.

He made one more pass in the plane tail number N1AP and then soared upward 
until it disappeared behind a large, white cloud.

Higher. Faster. That’s how Palmer used to fly, that’s how he used to play. 
That’s how he lived.

“He was the king of our sport,” Nicklaus said. “And he always will be.” 
 