
A review of Jamal Mahjoub <http://www.jamalmahjoub.com/>'s first novel, 
Navigation of a Rainmaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/politics/9780435906764/navigation-of-a-rainmaker>
, suggested it had "the bones of a knowing thriller". More than 20 years and 
seven books later, all of which picked up decent reviews but few sales, Mahjoub 
finally took note. Or rather his alter ego,Parker Bilal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/parker-bilal>, did. Last year, 
he wrote his first thriller,The Golden Scales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9781408824894/the-golden-scales-a-makana-mystery>
, about a Sudanese private detective living in Cairo; his second thriller,
Dogstar Rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9781408827857/dogstar-rising>
, is published this month, with a further eight instalments planned.

There is a long tradition of literary writers turning to crime under an alias: 
Cecil Day-Lewis <http://www.cday-lewis.co.uk/> wrote as Nicholas Blake, John 
Banville <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnbanville> doubles as Benjamin 
Black andJulian Barnes <https://www.theguardian.com/books/julianbarnes> as Dan 
Kavanagh. But there is also a long tradition of crime writing being viewed as 
these novelists' guilty pleasure. Not so for Mahjoub.

"There's far less shame about it now," he says. "There's a big market for 
well-written thrillers. Literary fiction is in a twilight world, where no one 
knows how to judge it or what works. There's a fatigue: no one really gets it 
any more. Most of it goes unread. Crime has an audience, so it allows me to 
write. It's a pressure valve to release stories that would otherwise go untold."

Mahjoub's alter ego was a conscious rebranding exercise, rather than a 
distancing technique. The name Parker Bilal is a homage to his grandmother, who 
fed him thrillers when he was a child growing up in Khartoum. "My father was 
Sudanese, my mother from Bradford," he explains. "Her mother was obsessed with 
crime writing: her tiny flat was piled high with thrillers, and she used to 
send me packages of books out to Sudan. I swept up everything she sent:John 
Creasey <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Creasey>, Alistair Maclean 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alistair_MacLean>, Desmond Bagley 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desmond_Bagley>. Between the wars, she had 
married a German man. The surname Gerlach was never going to work in Britain in 
the 1930s, so they adopted Parker. Bilal is a tribute to my father's 
grandfather, a river-boat driver on the Nile."

It took longer for Mahjoub to hit on the character his detective protagonist, 
Makana. He wrote three thrillers, but none reached a public beyond a close 
circle of critical friends. The first was set in Scandinavia (he lived in 
Copenhagen for a while); the second was about an adventurer in Mali; and the 
third featured a woman detective in Barcelona, where he now lives. "In 
hindsight," he laughs, "you could say I rather missed the boat. These were all 
written before women detectives and Scandinavian noir became mainstream withThe 
Killing <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-killing>, so I might have 
cashed in. But none of them felt right, so they got left in my desk drawer."

Makana was born of personal experience. Mahjoub's father set up an 
English-language newspaper in Khartoum, a forum for the largely non-Muslim 
south of the country, but in 1989, while out of the country, he was warned he 
would be imprisoned if he returned to Sudan. He and his wife settled in Cairo, 
part of an exiled community who would never really be accepted in their new 
country. As a hinterland for a fictional detective, with an outsider's 
perspective on society, it could hardly be bettered.

Cairo is almost a character in its own right in the Makana stories. "I was 
fascinated when I visited my parents there," Mahjoub says. "It was immediately 
apparent that all the ingredients for a revolution were in place, with the 
inequality and state repression. It felt like France must have felt before the 
French Revolution. And yet the revolution never came. I was in Cairo several 
months beforeMubarak was toppled in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arab-and-middle-east-protests>, and even 
then there was no real sense that revolution was imminent."

The first Makana novel was set in 1998; Dogstar Rising unfolds in the months 
preceding the attacks on the World Trade Centre in 2001. The next eight will 
take Makana up to the 2011 revolution. Why not beyond? "It's mainly instinct," 
Mahjoub says. "It's the sequence of events leading up to the revolution that 
really interests me. The revolution itself was the moment Egypt passed through 
the mirror. What is happening now is a variation on what happened before, with 
the establishment managing to split the left. It's more a situation for 
journalists and bloggers than a novelist."

There's also the small matter of pragmatism. "Look," he laughs, "I'm always 
contradicting myself, so you don't want to take anything I say as fact. But 
it's important to have a plan, and 10 novels over a set period felt workable. 
I've just finished the third, and I've sketched out the plots of four and five. 
But I still want to find time to write as Jamal. I've got a non-fiction book 
about Sudan in the pipeline."

Having taken five years to write the first Makana book, the second took five 
months, and the third just three. "It took time to understand the structure of 
thriller writing. I had to learn to rein in flights of literary fancy. As 
Jamal, I could start with a single idea or character and the writing would be a 
process of finding out what happens to them. As Parker, the plot has to be much 
more directed – much more of my time is now spent planning.

"It's a very different experience, so I've had to get to know my other 
persona. I've found myself wondering what Parker would wear. In Germany, he's 
more real than Jamal. On an author tour there, I was booked into every hotel as 
Herr Bilal. And my wife says Parker is actually a great deal nicer. I rather 
hope not, because that must mean I'm a nightmare. But when I'm writing a Makana 
novel, I'm living him round the clock. I dream about him. I don't want to go 
out, I don't want to talk to anyone … I'm a real pain in the neck."

Any chance Parker will take over as his main persona? Will he find himself 
wandering into bookshops and hiding all the Jamal Mahjoubs in the wrong 
sections at the back? "There's no chance of that," he grins. "Jamal's are 
already hidden away at the back anyway."
 