
Every so often, synchronised waves of happiness lasting a little under 10 
seconds roll over Jamaica. And the island's hardships and tribulations, the 
grind and the gun, seem to soften and gently sigh. That is the spell Jamaica's 
most popular sport, athletics, can cast. Even the effect is as short-lived as a 
party trick.

Now, though, the spell risks being broken. When one of the country's most 
popular athletes, the reigning world 200 metres champion Veronica 
Campbell-Brown, was suspended last month after failing a drug test for a banned 
diuretic it was like a bolo punch to the nation's stomach. But to have five 
athletes – includingAsafa Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell>
, the former 100m world record holder – test positive is the equivalent of 
being repeatedly hit over the head.

As Andre Lowe, the Jamaica Gleaner writer who broke the story, said: "Jamaica 
is in shock. There is a great sense of disbelief.Athletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> has become the nation's sport in 
the past 10 years. Now people are grappling for an explanation and answers."

They are not the only ones. Whenever there is a positive drugs test it can be 
looked at two ways: that it shows that the system is working and the cheats are 
being exposed, or that the authorities are merely catching a handful of fish in 
a vast ocean.

In Powell's case – and that of Sherone Simpson, his training partner at the 
MVP (Maximising Velocity and Power) track club – there may be a third 
explanation: that they have unwittingly taken an illegal substance in a 
supplement they thought was clean. There are suggestions that they were 
provided with supplements by the Canadian trainer Chris Xuereb which they 
believed were "organic" and therefore OK.

A spokeswoman for Powell told the Guardian that the athlete's camp had 
arranged a search warrant with police to raid Xuereb's room and contacted the 
World Anti-Doping Agency to ensure that any supplements taken away for testing 
would be done so without contamination.

Even so, the fact that it is Powell – a god-fearing son of a clergyman who has 
been vehemently opposed to drugs in the past – who is in the spotlight is a 
shock to most Jamaicans. "He calls himself 'Jamaica's golden baby' and it's 
quite accurate," says Lowe. "Even though Usain Bolt is certainly the bigger 
star internationally, back home there is a sentiment and attachment to Asafa. 
Many people believe that he is the person who took Jamaica to the next level 
and started the dominance. He is probably the most loved Jamaican athlete."

Meanwhile the positive tests are adding up. On Monday the Olympic discus 
thrower Allison Randall became the third athlete to confirm a positive drugs 
test from the Jamaican trials in June. Two more names will follow in the coming 
days. The question is, how deeply does the country want to stir the pot and 
throw out what it finds?

The Jamaican athletics association president, Dr Warren Blake, insists the 
country is as strong-willed on tackling doping as any other. "We are redoubling 
our efforts and the results stand for themselves," he said. "People are being 
banned. If it means we have to erase some of the past records then we will. All 
these test results shows the world that you can go around trusting our 
athletes. They are among the most tested athletes in track and field."

In the past, criticisms of Jamaican athletes were seen as attacks on the 
nation's psyche and pride. But that is changing. Following Campbell-Brown's 
positive test, the Gleaner produced a withering editorial demanding the Jamaica 
Anti-Doping Commission (Jadco) do more.

"That Jamaica, five years ago, passed legislation to bring Jadco into 
existence was a declaration of the island's support for the fight against 
cheating in sports and a willingness to hold its own athletes to account," it 
wrote. "That is further underlined by the J$63.4m [£415,000] allocated to Jadco 
to do its work this fiscal year, in the face of the government's fiscal crisis 
and the IMF programme that demands economic austerity.

"What Jadco has, so far, failed to do is provide statistical analyses of its 
testing programme, generally, and say how often Jamaica's elite athletes are 
tested. Nor has it provided statistical comparisons between its efforts and 
other anti-doping agencies. Such data cannot be hard to collate. Jadco must do 
it as a matter of urgency, prepared to fix any gaps its findings might reveal. 
There would be no shame in that."

When the Guardian asked Dr Herb Elliot, the Jadco chairman, whether he knew 
how many out-of-competition tests had taken place in 2013 he insisted he did, 
but would not release the figures because, "I don't want our athletes to know 
whether it's 400 or 500 or whatever."

But sceptics believe the figure is nowhere near the numbers Elliot suggests, 
and that his lack of transparency suggests that words are not matched by 
actions. Elliot, though, disagrees.

"I know what we are doing is what is sensible," he added. "We are a small 
country. A poor country. It is very expensive to do tests but we did about 80 
tests in our championships. The largest part of our programme is not testing, 
it is education. We have instructed our athletes to only take what is FDA [Food 
and Drug Administration]-approved in the US. The supplement industry is in a 
bad shape. There is no regulation there. And the label doesn't always reflect 
the contents."

There is a danger of generalisation when we talk of Jamaica. We have to 
remember that positive tests have come from different camps and athletes in 
different countries.

"We should not be quick to form conclusions that they knowingly take 
substances," warned Lowe. "I have spoken to quite a few athletes and it is 
getting to the point where they are going to be afraid to drink water. It is 
difficult for them."

But surely not that difficult. There is a simple solution: put your faith in 
hard work and genetics – not the lure of the magical potion.
 