
Sherone Simpson, one of two Jamaican sprinters who tested positive for a 
banned substance last year, will appear on Tuesday before a disciplinary panel 
of her country's anti-doping commission at the start of a two-day hearing.

Simpson, an Olympic 4x100m relay silver medallist at London 2012, and the 
former 100m world-record holderAsafa Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell> tested positive for the banned 
stimulant oxilofrine during the Jamaican Championships in June, along with 
three other athletes from the island.

The discus throwers Allison Randall and Traves Smikle, and the high-jumper 
Demar Robinson, who also tested positive for banned products last year, had 
their cases heard in December at the Jamaica Conference Centre in Kingston. 
Simpson's hearing, which will be accessible to the public and media, will also 
be heard at the venue.

Powell, who was forced to miss last year's world championships, as did 
Simpson, blamed his positive test on nutritional supplements and will attend a 
two-day hearing starting on 14 January.

The spate of hearings follow a controversial year for Jamaica athletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/15/jamaica-asafa-powell-positive-tests>
, which included the claim from the former head of the Jamaica anti-doping 
commission, Renee Anne Shirley, that the organisation had "never carried out a 
blood test".

In May, the two-times Olympic 200m champion Veronica Campbell-Brown tested 
positive for a banned diuretic at the Jamaica International Invitation and was 
suspended for five months pending a national disciplinary committee review, 
from which she received a reprimand.

Oxilofrine, a stimulant used to boost the body's ability to burn fat, helps 
athletes improve their power-to-weight ratio with more lean muscle and less 
fat, and so increase their speed.
 