
I meet James Schamus the morning the Oscar nominations are announced, news of 
which he received with mixed emotions: cheering for the success ofDallas Buyers 
Club <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0790636/>, a film he stewarded as head of 
Focus Pictures, and which garnered six nominations; and swallowing the somewhat 
bitter pill of it coming three months after he was unceremoniously fired. 
"We're going out with a bang." He grins.

We are in a Dominican restaurant around the corner from Schamus's office in 
New York, which he hired after leaving Focus. For the first time in almost 25 
years, the 54-year-old is answering his own phone and has a staff of zero. 
Renting the office, which his creative partner,Ang Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anglee>, helped him find, was an attempt to 
avoid falling into a post-redundancy slump and becoming "that guy in his 
pyjamas at noon". Some chance.

Schamus's parallel career, as an Oscar-nominated screenwriter, was waiting for 
him to pick it up once again, and he has been announced as the chair of the 
Berlin film festival this year, which, he jokes, he will be able to enjoy for 
the first time, relieved as he is of the need to buy anything. (That now falls 
to his successor,Peter Schlessel, whose appointment by NBC-Universal has been 
widely interpreted as a move to make Focus more strenuously mainstream 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/sean-penn-fired-focus-ceo-645210>.)

If you've loved a film in the last 15 years, chances are it was made by 
Schamus at Focus:Brokeback Mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/108296/brokeback.mountain>, Lost in 
Translation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96936/lost.in.translation>, 
Burn After Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/aug/27/venicefilmfestival.coenbrothers1>,
Atonement <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/sep/07/romance.keiraknightley>,
Milk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/22/milk-film-review-gus-van-sant-sean-penn>
,The Pianist <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/jan/24/artsfeatures6>, 
The Constant Gardener <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/nov/11/3> and 
Tinker, Tailer, Soldier, Spy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/15/tinker-tailor-soldier-spy-film-review>
 were all Focus pictures – smart, stylish, funny, and often made with a greater 
eye on the international than the US market. Schamus ran the place with a 
shrewd combination of good taste and minimal snobbery. "I don't know why 
everyone thinks the high part and the low part of the brow are the only good 
parts," he says. "When did the middle get to be the bad brow? It's like, 'Oh, 
that's so bourgeois!' Let me put this in perspective: we don't really like 
miserable poverty, and we don't really like gigantic, asshole-ish 1% creephood. 
I think we're actually for the middle class. So make sure the middle class 
actually has some interesting stuff to think about."

It is bald statements like these that have led Schamus to have an unusually 
high profile for a studio head. He is discreet about individuals, but scornful 
about large swaths of the industry he works for and the absurdities it indulges 
in, among them theOscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>. "Hollywood, 
basically – what's the polite word for shitting? Defecates hundreds of millions 
of dollars, all so that everyone can chase after the little blue ribbon. The 
economics are insane. If you do the math, very few films get what's known as 
the Oscar bump."
 Bill Murray and Scarlett Johansson in Lost in Translation, produced by James 
Schamus. Photograph: Focus/Sportsphoto/Allstar 
Doing the math is what he likes to do. Schamus sees himself primarily as a 
"marketing guy", a casual term for the kind of string theory you need to read 
and play the world movie markets. Focus succeeded, he says, thanks to 
micro-marketing. The key to making money is in niche demographics – and, in 
this context, niche can mean whole continents outside America. "You can take 
the data and throw up a map of the world and see where, for example, family 
movies are big: northern Europe. Action movies: Middle East, zones in Asia. 
Sci-fi/fantasy: Russia."

Another bonus, over the years, has been his disposition. "I'm an eternal 
pessimist," says Schamus, "which is why I stayed in business, I think. 
Only two, three or four movies a year will make a $20m profit. So, you'd better 
plan on getting your ass kicked pretty regularly. Because if you plan 
on success every time, you're out of business."

His collaboration with Ang Lee has resulted in 11 films, from The Ice Storm, 
which Schamus adapted for the screen from Rick Moody's novel, to Crouching 
Tiger, Hidden Dragon, Brokeback Mountain (the most successful Focus film of all 
time) and the period Shanghai spy movie,Lust, Caution 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0808357/>, which has been the subject of more 
scrutiny in China than almost any film ever made. It is Schamus's favourite of 
Lee's films, " the most rigorous and uncompromising," he says, "and it was 
perversely fun to see how it played out culturally in different territories. 
Here, the New York Times was like, 'Oh, it starts with a really boring mah jong 
scene.'"

That opening scene, in which the heroine is shown playing mah jong, has, in 
China, been parsed for hidden purpose with the kind of zeal a western audience 
will bring to David Lynch. "The continuity person almost needed to be 
hospitalised – 2,000 continuity photos, because every single tile tells 
a story. The entire game had been plotted out, and we covered it from six or 
seven angles. What plays out in that six minutes is an epic, literary, 
philosophical, political, sexual narrative – a mind-boggling storm of thought."

The biggest mystery, perhaps, is how Schamus, who grew up in southern 
California, was able to write the script of a movie likeLust, Caution, a 
Mandarin-language film <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CizN-DvGhrc> (his script 
was translated from the English) depicting a culture which he can only approach 
from the outside. As he says, drily, "What do I know from mah jong?" It's 
a question of trust and compatibility. "Working with Ang – I would say it's like
Donald Rumsfeld's 'unknown unknown' <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiPe1OiKQuk>
. I have to live knowing that I don't know what I don't know, but somehow make 
that function. I don't pretend to be the expert, but I'm feeding into a mental 
and emotional machinery that is able to mobilise and use that stuff."
 Heath Ledger and Jake Gyllenhaal in Brokeback Mountain. Photograph: 
Focus/Sportsphoto/Allstar 
In 2003, he produced the movie Hulk, which Lee directed, a perfect example of 
Schamus's credo: that you don't get anywhere in the film business by being too 
precious. It amuses Schamus to watch even the loftiest film critics being 
forced to engage with "Giganto-Turd III, made by the most despicable, 
cretinous, money-grubbing, horrible dimwits". And afterwards having to admit 
that they have been entertained by whatever summer blockbuster it is that 
they've seen.

Two years ago, in partnership with Universal, Focus bought 50 Shades of Grey, 
a literary phenomenon that fascinates Schamus. "The discourse around the book 
was: 'I couldn't put it down, it was terribly written.' Nobody says that about 
Dean Koontz. In general, the trope is gendered. If it is badly written, boring, 
and repetitive, it is at least in good historical company.Samuel Richardson was 
basically writing 50 Shades of Grey. At the end of Pamela, she actually marries 
the guy who's been trying to rape her the whole book 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pamela;_or,_Virtue_Rewarded>. And the discourse 
around that book was: 'These are perverse sexual fantasies for idle women.' 
Not even well written."

Schamus has a Phd in English Literature and spent his entire 20s in full-time 
education at Berkeley. He opted to write a dissertation on the Danish 
film-maker Carl Theodor Dreyer, and left California for New York in order to 
work on it, where he also started writing screenplays. To his astonishment, 
there was some buzz around his early efforts, and he was invited back to 
California for studio meetings, all of which were cancelled – along with his 
nascent career – by a writers' strike. Looking back, he says, that was probably 
a good thing. He might never have gone into producing, and the boy-wonder 
screenwriter wouldn't have been a good life for him. Why? Because he might have 
turned into Joe Eszterhas?

"There is that concern. Because I gain weight very easily." He recalls, with a 
shudder, a Vanity Fair Hollywood issue devoted to screenwriters. "It was so 
traumatising, that photograph. It was someone's Beverly Hills backyard and it's 
25 guys, all with my build, but slightly more degenerated. Flannel shirts, 
jeans. They're all in the most macho poses, thumbs hooked in their belts. They 
all make, by my standards, fabulous amounts of money. And they all looked 
completely pissed off. They're neurotic and miserable. The job is ego-crushing. 
It's a gigantic ass-kick to the soul."

He pauses.

"That said, I love the challenge of Hollywood screenwriting. Love it. Give me 
a rewrite job on a popcorn movie – I love that stuff."
 