
James Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamescameron> has defeated a 
lawsuit from a visual effects consultant who claimed the Oscar-winning 
film-maker stole his ideas for his multibillion-dollar blockbuster Avatar.

Judge Margaret Morrow ruled last week 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/james-cameron-wins-avatar-theft-418142>
 that Cameron and his Lightstorm Entertainment company were not responsible for 
compensating Gerald Morawski, who had claimed he met the film-maker in 1991 to 
discuss ideas for a film similar to the 2009 box office megalith, because they 
had proved beyond doubt that Avatar was an entirely original creation.

Morawski's suit is the latest of a number of legal cases against Cameron, most 
of which the director ofTitanic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/35417/titanic> and Terminator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/88018/terminator> has quietly gone 
about defeating. The plaintiff's case was given more credit than most because 
he proved he did meet Cameron and his team in 1991, allegedly to discuss a 
project titled Guardians of Eden about an epic struggle between evil mining 
interests and an indigenous extraterrestrial tribe living in harmony with its 
rainforest environment. The makers of Avatar issued a45-page sworn declaration 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/121606203/James-Cameron-Avatar-Affidavate> detailing 
how Cameron independently came up with the ideas and themes for his film, 
including hints about its two forthcoming sequels.

In a 33-page judgment <http://www.scribd.com/doc/124001146/Avatar-ruling> in 
the central California US district court, after considering the case for more 
than a year, Morrow ruled: "Upon reviewing Cameron's earlier works, it is 
evident that each element of Avatar that was allegedly taken from Guardians of 
Eden was independently created by Cameron prior to his meetings with Morawski. 
[Therefore] Morawski cannot demonstrate that he suffered damage as the result 
of misappropriation of his ideas or that he incurred costs in reliance on 
defendants' promise."

Cameron still has at least one case outstanding before he can finally lay the 
legal situation surrounding Avatar's inception to rest. He is being sued by 
writer Eric Ryder, who claims he wrote a story titled KRZ 2068 in 1999 that 
centred on the corporate colonisation of a distant planet. Ryder, whose case is 
being heard in the Los Angeles superior court, says he worked on the project 
for two years at Lightstorm's request. Cameron says he never met the writer and 
once again asserts his entirely independent creation ofAvatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avatar>.
 