
James Cameron's forthcoming Avatar sequels will feature underwater motion 
capture,according to Jon Landau, producer, along with Cameron, of the 
record-breaking first film 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/04/avatar-2-underwater-performance-capture-vfx-rhythm-hues/>
.

Speaking at a technology in cinema conference, Landau said the Oscar-winning 
director proposed to make use of the process "because we can simulate it 
visually but can't simulate it experientially for them". Cameron has previously 
hinted at the possibility of exploring the oceans of Pandora, the forest moon 
setting for his 2009 3D box-office hit, in future films.

"We want to take advantage of the technologies brilliant people are putting 
out to make the next two movies even more emotionally engaging and visually 
tantalising, and to really wrap up the story arc of our two main characters," 
Landau said on Sunday in a keynote speech at the 2013 NAB Technology Summit on 
Cinema in Las Vegas. He described the process as "performance capture in water".

Cameron previously said he would shoot Avatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avatar> parts two and three back to back and 
release the films in December 2014 and 2015 respectively, though that timeline 
has begun to look optimistic. There is also talk of a fourth film that may 
manifest as a prequel.

The film-maker has also hinted that the second film may take place on another 
planet in the same solar system as Pandora. He said in 2011 that characters 
which survived the first film "get to be in the second film, at least in some 
form". Some of the money made by the sequels will be donated to environmental 
causes.

Avatar is the highest-grossing film of all time 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/>, having taken $2.782bn worldwide.
 