
Avatar director James Cameron has hit out at Hollywood's dependence on 3D 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/behind-screen/james-cameron-says-man-steel-581707>
 and suggested that two of the year's highest-grossing films so far,Iron Man 3 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146938/iron-man-3> and Man of Steel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148371/man-of-steel>, did not need to use 
the format.

Cameron, whose 2009 box-office hit Avatar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/131170/avatar> opened the floodgates for 
movies using the effect, told a forum in Mexico City that Hollywood was "not 
using 3D properly".

"[It's] one thing [to shoot] in 3D and another to convert to 3D," he said at 
the Tag DF art, design and technology conference. "Studios were simply trying 
"to make money," he added, by "pushing3D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3d> to directors who are not 
comfortable or do not like 3D".

Cameron continued: "Man of Steel, Iron Man 3 and all those movies should not 
necessarily be in 3D. If you spend $150m on visual effects, the film is already 
going to be spectacular, perfect."

The fascination for 3D appears to have diminished in recent years as studios 
have chosen to "tack on" the effect in postproduction, rather than shoot in 
stereoscope – as Cameron did with his $2.7bn-grossing (£1.8bn) science fiction 
fantasy. However, while revenues from 3D screenings have fallen in the US, the 
format remains popular in much of the rest of the world.

Cameron, who is now working on sequels to Avatar, revealed that he will follow 
them up in 2017 with his long-planned adaptation of thecyberpunk manga comic 
Battle Angel 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/james-cameron-will-begin-battle-581809>
. The original 1990 Yukito Kishiro series centres on an amnesiac cyborg 
discovered in a local dump who becomes a crime-fighter and extreme sports 
celebrity.
 