
If five songs you had co-written with Adele didn’t make it on to her latest 
multimillion-selling album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/01/adele-soars-back-to-the-top-of-the-charts-after-glastonbury-set>
, you might feel like you’d been handed the winning lottery ticket and then 
watched helplessly as a gust of wind blew it away forever. But if you’d written 
the “game-changing” hit for the most successful boyband on the planet as well 
as one of the biggest radio hits of 2016, among many others, the pain of 
missing out on the Adele millions might be cushioned somewhat.

Jamie Scott, a 32-year-old songwriter and producer from Surrey, could be seen 
as the Fixer for top 40 radio. His fingerprints, melodies and chord 
progressions are all over some of the biggest hits of recent years for acts 
such as One Direction,Justin Bieber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/justin-bieber>, Little Mix and Jessie Ware. 


How to write a banger for Beyoncé
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/02/how-to-write-a-banger-for-beyonce>
“I just love to write songs that will connect,” he says. “For anyone who’s not 
trying to write number ones, I don’t understand that.” His is a story of why 
endurance and persistence are essential in the music business – even if your 
career seems only to consist of blind alleys at the start.

He says his mother was “an amazing singer” who also got him started on guitar 
while the only radio in his house was local radio station Capital Gold, which 
goes some way to explaining his formative influences. He says he was 12 before 
he heard a contemporary song – Crossroads by Bon Jovi – and that awoke him to 
modern music just as Britpop was exploding. At that time, he was also facing a 
career crossroads, having to pick between tennis – he was so good he was 
playing at national and county level – and music, with him spending his 
lunchtimes in the music room working out songs on piano.

“With the tennis playing, I was at quite a high level,” he says. “But it was 
not what I wanted to do for the rest of my life. It was just too much hard 
work.”

At 17, he walked out of school to try to make it as a performer as part of a 
duo with a friend (key influence: Turin Brakes). “I went to my parents and I 
just broke down,” he recalls. “I told them this is what I wanted to do, that I 
had been writing lyrics in economics lessons and I had been playing the piano 
every day when everyone else was out playing.”

I had been writing lyrics in economics lessons

His dad gave him a deadline of 18 months to make it; if he didn’t, he would 
have to get a job. A few near misses with record labels followed but he was 
eventually signed to publisher Windswept Pacific in 2001 when he was 19, off 
the back of one song. But labels were only interested in him as a solo act and 
so he had to split the group with his friend.

He has the look and style of a pop singer – lantern jaw, tidy beard, black 
T-shirt – but it was behind the scenes rather than on stage where he would make 
his name. After a difficult period signed to Sony in the UK, he asked them to 
let him go and he switched to Polydor to release a new album he had written. 
Fame and fortune did not follow. “It feels like to me in my own artist career 
that I have been in the wrong place at the wrong time for most of that time,” 
he says. “But as a writer I have been in the right place at the right time.”

Writing for others is where he was to really find his feet. “I would like to 
think that I am one of the main writers in the UK that labels look to send 
up-and-coming artists to help break their careers,” he says. “That is hopefully 
a given with my track record and who I am working with.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fjamie-scott-song-writing-adele-justin-bieber%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb96dca66a8564a60c23c0059750e09f84e7cb9e7%2F0_97_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%20Scott%3A%20the%20songwriting%20'fixer'%20for%20everyone%20from%20Adele%20to%20Justin%20Bieber&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fjamie-scott-song-writing-adele-justin-bieber%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%20Scott%3A%20the%20songwriting%20%27fixer%27%20for%20everyone%20from%20Adele%20to%20Justin%20Bieber&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fjamie-scott-song-writing-adele-justin-bieber%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb96dca66a8564a60c23c0059750e09f84e7cb9e7%2F0_97_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Jamie Scott performs in concert at Austin360. Photograph: Rick Kern/WireImage 
Sometimes he has to explain to acts that writing with an eye on the charts is 
nothing to be ashamed of. “Why? Why don’t you want to? Don’t you want 10 
million people streaming your music next month? Don’t you want that? Isn’t that 
what you want to do? I’m not saying that they should write a bad song, but we 
should get to something that they think is amazing and that I think is amazing.”

It is refreshing in an age of faux-humility and humblebragging in pop to hear 
someone speak so bluntly about wanting to write huge songs that go to number 
one. There is no sense of arrogance or entitlement with Scott; he just long ago 
realised that he wants to write number ones and that he has an innate knack for 
it. So, rather than tie himself in knots searching for some nebulous sense of 
credibility, he just gets on with it.

“That’s the endgame for when I go into the studio with someone,” he says. 
“Whatever happens, we need to state that this is on the global level and that 
we need to write the best music of next year. It’s not just about what’s cool. 
I want to write classic modern pop songs.”

Speaking of which, he was one of the many writers that Adele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> tried out for her most recent album. 
She approached him and they worked on “four or five” songs in his studio. “She 
opens her mouth and you understand why everything is what it is,” he says. 
“Just an amazing artist. Five or six years ago I would have gone into that 
session and I would have been scared. ‘Oh my God I need to make this count.’ 
But you suddenly wake up, maybe with a bit of success under your belt or maybe 
your first number one, and you feel pretty relaxed in who you are as a writer. 
I do my thing and if it doesn’t work out, it doesn’t work out.”

Did he feel under pressure to write what people would presume was an 
Adele-type song? “Not at all. I just wrote exactly how I would normally. I just 
got on the piano and she started singing. And when she’s singing it becomes an 
Adele song. It was like a normal session.”

Asked what song of his he is most proud of, he instantly says One Direction’s 
Story of My Life. “Because we changed the game for them,” he argues. “In the 
history of all boybands, they are usually on the way down [by the third album]. 
With that song I feel like we lifted them to another level.”

The Millennial Whoop: the melodic hook that’s taken over pop music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/shortcuts/2016/aug/30/millennial-whoop-pop-music>
He says almost all of his songs are written with the artists that will record 
it, but in the case of Cold Water it sat collecting dust for months before they 
were approached to have Major Lazer, Justin Bieber and MØ record it. It was 
written by chance when he was in New York with American producer Benny Blanco, 
who invited Ed Sheeran to the studio.

“It was really hot and his air conditioning wasn’t working,” he says. “We were 
there sweating. Ed came and we had a bit of food and he suggested we try and 
write something. He came up with these chords and we wrote this song called 
Cold Water,” he says. “I think there was another artist that we had in mind to 
write it for but we just ended up writing it anyway. A year later I got a call 
from my manager saying that [producer] Diplo had heard it and loved it and they 
maybe wanted to get Justin Bieber on it.”

He says he tries to limit the people he writes with and cannot work in the 
style, as outlined in John Seabrook’s book The Song Machine, where huge teams 
of writers are assigned parts of songs – the bridge, the pre-chorus, the 
topline – and they are snapped together after the fact like the toy inside a 
Kinder egg. “I am basically the complete opposite of that,” he says. “I have no 
problem with it, but I just don’t work very well like that.”

“You can’t fool the public,” he stresses. “That is one thing you can’t do now. 
You can’t fool the public into making something a hit. The public will make 
great pop songs hits. They will do it themselves.”
 