
My wife, Jane Wade, who has died aged 76, was an enthusiastic and influential 
champion of vernacular architecture, and took a particular interest in the 
preservation of British farm buildings.

While she was teaching at the Canterbury School of Architecture 
<http://cantarch.com/> in the 1970s, she wrote and edited the respected series 
of publications Traditional Kent Buildings. That project led her to direct the
Kent Farmstead Survey 
<http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/a2a/records.aspx?cat=051-cc_5-2&cid=1-8#1-8>
, which recorded the details of hundreds of historic farm buildings in the 
county.

Then her inquiring mind, allied to a love of landscape, pushed her in other 
directions. After the great storm of 1987 she surveyed parks as a consultant to 
English Heritage and went on to restore many of them, including those in Kent 
at Benenden school, Cobham Hall and Goodnestone Park.

For many years Jane was a guardian of the Society for the Protection of 
Ancient Buildings <https://www.spab.org.uk/>, a body founded by William Morris 
to save historic and listed buildings from decay, demolition and destruction. 
She was also a council member of the Architectural Association and a founding 
member of theHistoric Farm Buildings Group <http://www.hfbg.org.uk/>. But her 
horizons were never restricted to the UK: she was involved inEuropa Nostra 
<http://www.europanostra.org/>, an organisation that aims to safeguard Europe's 
cultural heritage, and she advised on postwar reconstruction in Croatia and 
Bosnia.

Jane, who was born in Swansea, had initially studied sculpture at Nottingham 
School of Art in the late 1950s, then trained as a teacher at London 
University, eventually leaving for the US in 1961 to take a fine arts master's 
degree at Philadelphia University. In all likelihood she would have won the 
sculpture prize there, but she was told it would be awarded instead to a male 
rival on the basis that "a man needs to be able to support a wife, a woman can 
find a husband". No wonder she became a lifelong feminist.

In Philadelphia Jane met her first husband, the architect Anthony Wade, and in 
the mid-1960s they returned to England, where he designed the first college at 
the newUniversity of Kent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofkent>. Her subsequent work 
on vernacular architecture was consistent with her belief that everyone should 
have the means to live a decent life, that society should become more not less 
equal, and that we should care for the environment by preserving and creating 
beauty.

Always popular, she retained friends from her schooldays, from art school and 
university, and from the many countries she visited for work and leisure.

Jane is survived by her children Rebecca and Amyas from her first marriage, 
her stepchildren Emma and Nick, and eight grandchildren.
 