
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> must ban sexually abusive 
images of children in manga comics, despite claims that such a move would 
threaten freedom of expression, the UN’s special envoy onchild protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/childprotection> has said.

Maud de Boer-Buquicchio praised Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>
 for passing a law last year that banned the possession of abusive images of 
children, but said it contained loopholes that allowed exploitation to continue.

“When it comes to particular, extreme child pornographic content, manga should 
be banned,” De Boer-Buquicchio said at the end of a week-long visit to Japan.

The UN’s special rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and 
child pornography, acknowledged that artists and publishers faced difficulty in 
“finding the right balance” between artistic freedoms and the need to protect 
children. “I accept that the freedom of expression argument should prevail when 
it comes to adult pornography.”

Japan bans possession of child abuse images but law excludes anime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/18/japan-bans-possession-child-abuse-images-excludes-comics-video-games-anime>
In June 2014, Japan banned the possession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/18/japan-bans-possession-child-abuse-images-excludes-comics-video-games-anime>
 of child sexual abuse imagery after years of delay, but disappointed 
campaigners by not including themultibillion-yen market 
<http://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2015-01-23/japanese-manga-book-market-rises-to-record-282-billion-yen/.83614>
 in manga comics, animated films and video games.

There was a grace period of a year to comply, but lawbreakers now face prison 
terms of up to a year and fines of up to 1m yen (£5,500).

Previously, Japan had been the only G7 country where it was legal to own 
videos, photographs and other imagery depicting sexual crimes against children, 
provided there was no intention to sell them or post them on the internet.

Japan’s inaction prompted criticism from overseas, with humantrafficking.org  
<http://humantrafficking.org/countries/japan>describing the country as “an 
international hub for the production and trafficking of child pornography”.

Among the actual images of children not covered by the new law are photographs 
of children in skimpy outfits but with their genitalia concealed. The material 
is easily available in DVD and photo book form in Tokyo.

“All these are obviously lucrative businesses. What is worrying is that there 
is a trend which seems to be socially accepted and tolerated,” De 
Boer-Buquicchio said.

According to Japanese police, the number of under-18s who featured in sexually 
abusive images rose to a record high of 383 in the first half of this year, up 
58 from the year before. Action was taken against 659 people in 831 cases, the 
highest numbers since twice-yearly records began in 2000, according to a 
preliminary report issued by the national police agency last month. About 90% 
of the victims were female, including 60 who were of elementary school age or 
younger.

Manga <https://www.theguardian.com/books/manga> artists and publishers have 
long resisted government attempts to ban certain images, labelling it an attack 
on freedom of expression. Dan Kanemitsu, a manga translator, accused de 
Boer-Buquicchio of “mixing reality with fiction”, adding that there was a 
difference between abusive images featuring actual children and depictions of 
childlike characters in manga.

“There is no such thing as manga and anime child pornography,” he said. “Child 
pornography entails the involvement of children, and we must confront it for 
that reason. [De Boer-Buquicchio] meant sexualised depictions of childish 
looking characters in manga and anime. Many male and female artists in Japan 
draw characters in an art style that looks childish to western eyes. Therefore 
it is a rejection of an art style popular in Japan.”

Kanemitsu said he did not believe Japan’s resistance to expanding the ban to 
include manga would damage its international image. “I think many people will 
see the logic of protecting free speech, as long as no actual people are 
harmed,” he said.

But Japanese campaigners said they would increase pressure on the government 
to tighten the law. “Materials of children under 18 that were clearly created 
for the purpose of fulfilling sexual excitement should be regulated as child 
pornography,” Shihoko Fujiwara, head of the nonprofit organisation Lighthouse, 
told Agence France-Presse.

She pointed out that DVDs showing half-naked children were still widely 
available, adding: “We should teach children about sexual crimes at schools.
 