
Zdeno Chara scored the equalizing goal on a power play with under three 
minutes remaining in regulation before Jarome Iginla had the lone goal in a 
shootout to rally theBoston Bruins past the Anaheim Ducks 3-2 on Thursday.

Carl Soderberg scored his first NHL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> 
goal and Tuukka Rask made 21 saves for the Bruins, who mustered only one shot 
on goal in the first period. They never sustained much of an offensive attack 
but still managed to snap a two-game skid.

Devante Smith-Pelly scored less than two minutes into the game, Mathieu 
Perreault had a goal and an assist and Jonas Hiller stopped 21 shots for the 
Ducks. But they went none for four on the power play, dropping the league's 
worst unit to 7.3% (four for 55).

Henrik Lundqvist made 29 saves in his 47th NHL shutout as the New York Rangers 
won their second straight game and first at home with a 2-0 victory over the 
lowlyBuffalo Sabres.

Lundqvist made a late third-period save with the top of his helmet, deflecting 
the puck into the crowd, and then robbed Marcus Foligno with 1:20 remaining. 
Derick Brassard scored a power-play goal in the first period, and Chris Kreider 
netted his second in two games in the middle period to give Lundqvist the only 
offense he would need to post his third win and second shutout this season.

At Glendale, Arizona, Mikkel Boedker scored the lone shootout goal in the 
fifth round to lift thePhoenix Coyotes over the Nashville Predators 5-4. Thomas 
Greiss made 36 saves and stopped all five shootout attempts for the Coyotes, 
who rallied from a 3-0 deficit.

Jordan Szwarz scored his first NHL goal and Derek Morris and Shane Doan also 
scored for Phoenix, which has points in 10 of its past 11 games. David Legwand 
had a goal and two assists all in the first period and Matt Hendricks, Eric 
Nystrom and Paul Gaustad also scored for the Predators.
 