
"It was extremely hot, we were extremely busy, too busy, and we didn't have 
enough resources – be that manpower, be that equipment – to do what we were 
asked to do."

This evidence to the inquest, from Lieutenant Colonel Stuart Cattermull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/sep/16/jason-smith-inquest-iraq-heatstroke-death>
, Jason Smith's commanding officer in Iraq, summed up the intense frustration, 
and on occasion real anger, among British soldiers of all ranks at the failure 
to prepare them properly for the aftermath of the invasion of Iraq in 2003.

That failure is likely to be a dominant theme in the report of the Chilcot 
inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the invasion which is expected 
finally to be published by the end of the year. So sensitive is theMinistry of 
Defence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> still about the 
whole subject that reports it commissioned from senior officers into "lessons 
learned" from Iraq remain suppressed.

"We had asked for more manpower but we had a mission to do and we were going 
to do it the best we knew with the resources available," Cattermull, a major at 
the time, told the Smith inquest. He added: "My best resource available, as 
ever, were my soldiers, who never let me down."

One officer referred to a stadium where his soldiers were encamped in 
south-east Iraq, about seven miles (12km) away from Camp Abu Naji in Al-Amarah, 
as "an unbearable, hot, dusty, hellhole". He said his men were forced to drink 
water mixed with sugar and salt in front of officers to halt dehydration after 
numerous heat injuries.

Air-conditioning equipment arrived at the stadium two days after Smith died. 
"It was hard, very hard indeed. Things were not right," said Cattermull.

The lack of preparation for Iraq is a recurring theme in inquests but also in 
evidence given by British soldiers to theAl-Sweady  
<http://www.alsweadyinquiry.org/>inquiry into allegations – hotly denied by the 
MoD and the troops concerned – that they murdered and abused Iraqis after a 
fierce gunfight near Camp Abu Naji in May 2004. Witness after witness have said 
how they received little or no training or advice about what they could expect 
in Iraq.

As equipment, including lightly armoured Snatch Land Rovers designed for 
Northern Ireland, proved vulnerable to mines and improvised explosive devices 
(IEDs), defence ministers promised to order more robust vehicles. But 
bureaucracy and institutional reluctance to spend money meant they took a very 
long coming.

Other inquests showed that the MoD – or ministers – had not learned these 
lessons by the time that thousands of British troops were sent to Helmand 
province in southernAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> 
in 2006.

And MoD lawyers were extremely slow to recognise the legal obligations to 
protect soldiers notably, but not only, under theHuman Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act>. The supreme court ruled 
earlier this year that relatives could sue for negligence and claim damages 
from the MoD on the grounds that soldiers were not properly protected under the 
ministry's duty of care.
 