
Silicon Valley <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> 
billionaire Peter Thiel should not be ousted from Facebook’s board for his 
political views, Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos has said, even though he believes Donald 
Trump’s actions “erode democracy”.

Speaking at the Vanity Fair New Establishment Summit in San Francisco, the 
entrepreneur described how the Republicanpresidential candidate had attacked 
him on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/13/amazon-getting-away-with-on-tax-says-donald-trump>
, making allegations that he bought the Washington Post to exert political 
power and avoid paying taxes.

“My first instinct was to take it very lightly,” said Bezos, explaining how he 
responded to Trump using the humorous hashtag #SendDonaldToSpace. “I have a 
rocket company so the capability is there.”
Jeff Bezos (@JeffBezos) 
Finally trashed by @realDonaldTrump <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump>. 
Will still reserve him a seat on the Blue Origin rocket.#sendDonaldtospace 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/sendDonaldtospace?src=hash> https://t.co/9OypFoxZk3
 <https://t.co/9OypFoxZk3>
 <https://twitter.com/JeffBezos/status/674008204838199297> December 7, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/JeffBezos/status/674008204838199297> 
However, after subsequent attacks Bezos took Trump’s challenge more seriously. 
“We live in an amazing country where we are allowed to criticize and scrutinize 
our elected leaders. In other countries you may go to jail or – worse – just 
disappear.”

“The appropriate thing for a presidential candidate is to say ‘I’m running for 
the highest office in the most important country in the world, please 
scrutinize me.’ That’s not what we’ve seen.”

Instead, Trump has been lashing out at the media and critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/17/man-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims>
, riskingfreedom of speech and democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/23/first-thiel-now-the-trumps-how-billionaires-threaten-free-speech>
. “He’s not justgoing after the media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/23/first-thiel-now-the-trumps-how-billionaires-threaten-free-speech>
, but threatening retribution to people who scrutinize him. He’s also saying he 
may not givea graceful concession speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-us-election-result>
 if he loses the election. That erodes our democracy around the edges. He’s 
also saying he mightlock up his opponent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/debate-donald-trump-threatens-to-jail-hillary-clinton>
. These aren’t appropriate behaviors.”

Despite viewing Trump as an inappropriate presidential candidate, Bezos 
supportedMark Zuckerberg’s decision to keep Thiel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/19/peter-thiel-support-donald-trump-mark-zuckerberg>
 on the Facebook board. There was public outcry for Zuckerberg to remove Thiel 
whenhe donated $1.25m to the Trump campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/18/donald-trump-peter-thiel-support-facebook>
 after several women came forward criticizing Trump of sexual assault.

The man who cried rigged: the problem with Trump’s election claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/17/man-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims>
“Peter Thiel is a contrarian, first and foremost. You just have to remember 
that contrarians are usually wrong,” Bezos said.

“Conventional wisdom is usually right, but you get big wins as a contrarian. 
When they are right it’s usually a gigantic win. I’m not against contrarians. 
Amazon’s most important bets have been counter-intuitive. When we launched 
Amazon Web Services all the incumbents thought we were crazy. But when being a 
contrarian you are probably going to be wrong.”

Bezos said that if Thiel was on his board he would not ask him to leave. “We 
don’t want to live in a country where you can’t associate with people with 
wildly different opinions from anyone else. It’s way too divisive to say if you 
have this political opinion you can’t sit on my board.”

Bezos also outlined his vision for his space company Blue Origin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/08/jeff-bezos-blue-origin-humans-in-space>
, which has beencarrying out tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/05/milestone-for-blue-origin-as-test-of-emergency-escape-system-declared-success>
 of its reusable space vehicle over the last few weeks.

He said he wants to create the infrastructure that allows others to create 
businesses in space, just as the internet infrastructure allowed people to 
build businesses in cyberspace.

The hypocrisy of Facebook's silence on Peter Thiel's support for Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/18/donald-trump-peter-thiel-support-facebook>
“I want to build the heavy lifting infrastructure that allows for the dynamic 
entrepreneurial explosion of thousands of companies in space that I have 
witnessed over the last 21 years on the internet,” he said.

He described how Amazon.com could not have launched as a 10-person company 
without the logistics infrastructure of delivery services like USPS and FedEx, 
or credit card payment systems of the phone network that was repurposed for the 
internet.

“In space today, that’s impossible. On the internet today, two kids in their 
dorm room can reinvent an industry, but they can’t do anything interesting in 
space.”

“I am using my Amazon winnings to create a new piece of heavy lifting 
infrastructure to allow low-cost access to space,” he said.

“Nobody predicted Snapchat. You can’t predict what amazing entrepreneurs can 
do in space. But I know if I can give them low-cost access to space some 
brilliant 22-year-old will figure it out.”
 