
Jennifer Jason Leigh has said it more than once, over a three-decade career in 
acting, that she doesn’t scheme, or plan ahead – that she “isn’t a careerist”. 
The 53-year-old says it today, sitting in the bar of a hotel in New York. “I’m 
not great at judging a career. Or planning one.” It would sound like 
thesp-talk, the sort of thing established actors say to help us imagine them 
cool and fallible, were Leigh not so obviously guileless, with a history to 
back up what she says. Her CV is wild: like the inky passport of a student 
who’s been InterRailing on gut, shambling upon great things, then oversleeping 
stops, ending up in sidings.

In person Leigh is soft-voiced, a floor-starer, with kinked blond hair that 
hangs down over her cheeks. She wears loafers, leather trousers, a dark jumper 
and a colourful patchwork scarf. Curled up on a sofa, she tells a story about 
how, not so long ago, she was going through a quiet patch, professionally. She 
took work on a French cartoon series, voicing the part of a plucky cowgirl in 
French. “I thought it might be lucrative,” says Leigh. “It was not lucrative. 
Anyway I got fired after 10 episodes, replaced by a French actress.” In the 
years since, Leigh says, there haven’t been a lot of screen jobs that she has 
been proud of – not until this winter, when she’ll star in the new Quentin 
Tarantino film,The Hateful Eight <http://thehatefuleight.com/>, as well as in 
the new Charlie Kaufman film,Anomalisa 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DT6QJaS2a-U>.

This is huge, I say. “Insane! The two best movies I’ve made in a decade,” she 
says, “coming out right next to each other.” But this seems to be how things 
work for Leigh, who in her own words “has been around for ever”.

She is admirably unbitter about the lack of awards she has accumulated. Back 
in the early 1990s, when the Hollywood magazine Movieline ran anintroductory 
profile 
<http://movieline.com/1992/09/01/jennifer-jason-leigh-quick-change-artist/> on 
the actor,the cover line was bold 
<http://thumbs1.ebaystatic.com/d/l225/m/mPNMXfjpAOVuldDW2CfdYfg.jpg>: “Future 
Oscar Winner, Jennifer Jason Leigh.” The actor giggles, genuinely tickled, when 
reminded of this. Her Oscar has never come, not even a nomination. At the 
ceremony in 1996 – when Leigh might have got a nod for the drama Georgia, in 
which she played a forlorn alcoholic – Meryl Streep went about backstage, 
grabbing at least one mutual acquaintance to say:“Jennifer should be here!” 
<http://www.metroactive.com/papers/sonoma/04.04.96/georgia-9614.html> Again, 
Leigh giggles. “Meryl’s sweet.”

She talks about her pleasure at being asked to audition for Tarantino’s 
Hateful Eight. The film, out in the UK this month after a December release in 
the US, is set in Wyoming shortly after the civil war. Among the warring gang 
of desperados who make up the titular Hatefuls, Tarantino needed someone to 
play a convict called Daisy Domergue, wild-haired, foul-mouthed. “She’s a 
pepper, ain’t she?” it is said of Daisy, in the opening scene. Tarantino 
required an actor who could do pepper.

They met for dinner, and reminisced about the Cannes film festival in 1994. 
Tarantino had been there with Pulp Fiction, Leigh with a biopic,Mrs Parker And 
The Vicious Circle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jun/26/mrs-parker-and-the-vicious-circle-dorothy-parker-reel-history>
, as well as a Coen Brothers movie, The Hudsucker Proxy. These were theonly two 
American movies up against Pulp Fiction 
<http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/archives/1994/inCompetition.html> for the 
Palme d’Or, and Leigh was starring in both. Tarantino took note. “He told me 
that when he was coming up, I was one of the actresses he paid to go to the 
movies to see. Hearing that was a big deal. I don’t look back and think, ‘Oh! 
There was a time!’ But it’s nice to know that that old work can still mean 
something.”

Leigh is clearly dismayed by the tendency in Hollywood to consider actors as 
having a sell-by date. “And this is something that makes Quentin different from 
most directors,” she says. “He doesn’t just look at the last three movies 
you’ve made. The last three years of your career. He was quoting lines from a 
movie I made when I was, like, 23. He can look at me and see that I’m still 
that person who gave that performance... Not to compare an actor to a painter, 
but you can go through different phases and still be the same artist, y’know?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjennifer-jason-leigh-this-precipice-many-times-hateful-eight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b30ba7597d4a51a89cd84b92451880f67e6f6a6%2F76_10_3104_1863%2F3104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jennifer%20Jason%20Leigh%3A%20%E2%80%98I've%20been%20at%20this%20precipice%20so%20many%20times'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjennifer-jason-leigh-this-precipice-many-times-hateful-eight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jennifer%20Jason%20Leigh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%27ve%20been%20at%20this%20precipice%20so%20many%20times%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjennifer-jason-leigh-this-precipice-many-times-hateful-eight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b30ba7597d4a51a89cd84b92451880f67e6f6a6%2F76_10_3104_1863%2F3104.jpg>
 In Single White Female with Bridget Fonda, 1992. Photograph: Snap/REX 
From the start, Tarantino has been a great one for reviving the standing of 
forgotten or under-appreciated actors: John Travolta in Pulp Fiction, Daryl 
Hannah in the Kill Bill series. Just about all of his movies have one – the 
apparent Rehab Project. Did Leigh interpret anything patronising in his 
interest in her?

“No! I felt grateful and lucky. It’s a really fun part – and you just don’t 
come across those. Forget about age. Forget about male or female. Forget about 
anything. You just don’t come across fun so much. And Quentin writes like 
nobody’s business. So no, I didn’t, uh…”

Leigh thinks for a moment.

“I can imagine other people thinking it. Like, ‘Oh, that’s so nice for 
[Jennifer]. It could be a breakthrough for her again.’ For me it’s all about 
the joy of the doing.”

British bookmakers, not a bunch to risk their money, have Leigh down as a good 
bet for an Oscar nomination 
<http://www.oddschecker.com/awards/oscars/best-supporting-actress> for The 
Hateful Eight. “That’s nice,” she says, learning this. She points out that 
Charlie Kaufman’s film Anomalisa, a stop-motion animation to which she has lent 
her voice, has been a part of the possible-Oscar conversation, too. (Anomalisa, 
out in the US this month, won’t be released in Britain until March.) “It’s all 
nice.”

Only nice? “You know what? Honestly? I’ve been at this precipice, like, so 
many times.”

Leigh was here with Last Exit To Brooklyn (1989), in which she played a 
troubled prostitute and received rave reviews. And with Georgia, for which her 
co-star, Mare Winningham, was nominated for an Oscar instead of Leigh, and 
afterwards sounded frankly embarrassed about the fact. (“In my mind 
[Jennifer’s] will always be the greatest performance of [1995], and a lot of 
other people thought so, too.”)

Leigh continues, “So I kind of just let myself think: ‘That’s nice.’ Awards 
are lovely. I’m not going to say: ‘Awards! Who needs them?’ It feels nice to 
get them. And they look pretty. But I don’t… There are a lot of people who are 
locked [to be nominated] and, you know, if I listed all of them, some would 
make the list. And some not.”

Quentin is different from most directors. He doesn't just look at the last 
three movies you've made

For those who are serious about their statue, the campaigning work becomes 
full-time around Christmas. No doubt Leigh has damaged her chances in the past 
by being a reluctant lobbyist. “If you knew what actors did to get nominated,”
she once said <http://nymag.com/nymetro/arts/theater/15247/index1.html>, “it 
would make you shit your pants.”

Will she hit the campaign trail for her work in The Hateful Eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hateful-eight>? If she was asked to, she 
would. “You know why? I really feel like this movie could be The Last Great 
Thing.” She’s 53, but Leigh refers to herself once or twice as a veteran, and 
seems to imply she won’t have all that many more decades left to wait for the 
first-class parts to be offered. “I certainly feel like we were all a part of 
something magnificent. So you want to give it everything that you can. I have a 
great movie...Two great movies, because I think Anomalisa is groundbreaking and 
poignant and beautiful... Two great movies that, when my kid is old enough – 
which will be many, many, many years from now – he will be able to see. And I 
hope be proud. I’m proud of them. And that’s really nice to be able to say at 
53.”

When not on location, much of The Hateful Eight was shot in a small studio in 
LA, not far from the home Leigh shares with her five-year-old son, Rohmer. 
(Rohmer’s father is the American director Noah Baumbach, Leigh’s former 
husband.) Mother and son would spend a lot of time pootling around behind the 
scenes together. Field trips, Leigh calls them.

“I’d take Rohmer to the makeup trailer and explain about prosthetics. ‘This is 
the silicone rubber’ – it was for a little cut on my face, y’know? He was 
transfixed. But still. It’s a little off-putting for a kid. There’s a scene in 
which my nose is broken, swollen – again, done by prosthetic. He didnot like 
kissing me when I had that on. He would ask before visiting the set, ‘Will you 
have the nose? Or not the nose?’” Between scenes the two of them would ride 
around the lot on scooters. “Mine’s silver,” Leigh says. “His is blue.”

She grew up around movies herself. Leigh’s father, Vic Morrow, was an actor; 
her mother, Barbara Turner, to whom Leigh is still very close, is a 
screenwriter. The actor once said she knew how to judge the quality of a script 
because she’d grown up reading drafts of her mum’s work. “I trust her,” Leigh 
says now. “She’s always been symbolic to me of what a woman can do in her life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjennifer-jason-leigh-this-precipice-many-times-hateful-eight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f80b952496489dd988297e8ca5d03ba5324842d%2F500_46_4053_6083%2F4053.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jennifer%20Jason%20Leigh%3A%20%E2%80%98I've%20been%20at%20this%20precipice%20so%20many%20times'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjennifer-jason-leigh-this-precipice-many-times-hateful-eight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jennifer%20Jason%20Leigh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%27ve%20been%20at%20this%20precipice%20so%20many%20times%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjennifer-jason-leigh-this-precipice-many-times-hateful-eight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f80b952496489dd988297e8ca5d03ba5324842d%2F500_46_4053_6083%2F4053.jpg>
 Before playing a phone-sex operator in Short Cuts, Leigh spent time in 
phone-sex offices. ‘I read the call logs and recognised the names – directors, 
two people I know personally.’ Photograph: Steve Schofield for the Guardian 
Mother and daughter disagreed, however, about Fast Times At Ridgemont High 
(1982), Leigh’s first big film. “Mom said she didn’t respond to the script. I 
remember she was blowdrying her hair when she told me. It really cut me to the 
quick!” Leigh trusted her gut and took the part anyway, going on to play a prim 
Ridgemont High student called Stacy. The film was a smash, launching careers as 
if out of a Gatling gun – those of Sean Penn, Forest Whitaker, Nicolas Cage, 
the director Amy Heckerling, the writer Cameron Crowe. It took a few years 
before Leigh established a name of her own, though, post-Ridgemont. Last Exit 
To Brooklyn, in 1989, won attention. Miami Blues, a year later, “was the first 
movie I made where I felt like there was no scene I fucked up,” she recalls.

By this point Leigh was already entrenched in the lifetime habit of deep and 
time-consuming prep for parts. She’d imagine herself into the heads of 
characters and write diaries. Cast as a blind girl in an early horror movie, 
Eyes Of A Stranger (1981), Leigh spent time between scenes brushing up on her 
braille. She geared up to play a stalker obsessed with Bridget Fonda’s 
character in Single White Female (1992) by wallpapering her dressing room with 
pictures of her co-star, as well as spraying a prop dildo with mint flavouring 
between takes when filming the infamous blowjob scene. Before playing a 
phone-sex operator in Robert Altman’sShort Cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,544570,00.html>
 (1993), Leigh spent time in phone-sex offices.

Awards are lovely. I’m not going to say: ‘Awards! Who needs them?’ It feels 
nice to get them. And they look pretty

“A bunch of them,” she remembers. “I read the logs and recognised names. There 
were directors in there. Two people I knew personally. Their credit card 
numbers. How often they called. Preferences!”

Did she ever take a call?

“No. That would have been crossing the line.”

So there was a line?

“There was a line.”

Things that didn’t cross the line: turning herself into a chainsmoker before 
Dolores Claiborne (1995), or letting Alan Cumming punch her for real during a 
fight they filmed for The Anniversary Party (2001).

Looking back, have these preparations ever come to look excessive to her – 
silly even? “Not really. It’s just all exploration. I never endangered myself. 
I never forced my mode of working on anyone else. Everyone has their own way to 
get to it.” If ever she was cast to play a mother, before she was a mother for 
real, she says she used to think of her love for her dog. These days she thinks 
of Rohmer. “You can use that, that love – it’s so huge.”

Leigh began dating Rohmer’s father Noah Baumbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/noah-baumbach> in 2001, the pair introduced 
by amutual friend <http://nymag.com/movies/filmfestivals/newyork/2007/38026/>. 
They married in 2005, the year they started making a film calledMargot At The 
Wedding <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/02/comedy.drama> together. A 
drama that Baumbach directed from his own script, with Nicole Kidman, Jack 
Black and Leigh cast in the central roles, Margot was a wonderfully twisted 
story of inter-family resentment. Leigh played a well-meaning and occasionally 
irresponsible parent, about to have a second child. For the role – as a way to 
get to it – she drew on the fact that she and Baumbach were gearing up to 
become parents themselves. “I was just about [trying to get] pregnant then. So 
it was easy to have maternal feelings.”

Rohmer was born a few years later. By then the couple had collaborated on 
another film,Greenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jun/10/greenberg-review>, the story of a 
depressed carpenter, played by Ben Stiller, who begins a relationship with a 
younger woman, played byGreta Gerwig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/greta-gerwig>. Leigh had a small but 
significant role as Stiller’s ex, and she shared a writing credit with 
Baumbach. A perfectly pitched film, Greenberg was one of the best dramas of 
2010.

Leigh has not rewatched it. “I haven’t revisited those movies. I think they’re 
both good movies. Y’know, I enjoyed the process of making them...”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjennifer-jason-leigh-this-precipice-many-times-hateful-eight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76f808ffd9157ce75e37b99a9ccff9c4bc59f051%2F7_250_2010_1206%2F2010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jennifer%20Jason%20Leigh%3A%20%E2%80%98I've%20been%20at%20this%20precipice%20so%20many%20times'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjennifer-jason-leigh-this-precipice-many-times-hateful-eight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jennifer%20Jason%20Leigh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%27ve%20been%20at%20this%20precipice%20so%20many%20times%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjennifer-jason-leigh-this-precipice-many-times-hateful-eight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76f808ffd9157ce75e37b99a9ccff9c4bc59f051%2F7_250_2010_1206%2F2010.jpg>
 With former husband Noah Baumbach: ‘I’d just got married when I first read 
Anomalisa. By the time I made the film, I was a single mum.’ Photograph: 
Startraks Photo/REX 
Her marriage to Baumbach ended at around the time of Greenberg’s release, and 
he has since been in a relationship with Gerwig. Ina joint interview 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/04/29/happiness-4> published in the New 
Yorker, Baumbach and Gerwig insisted their romance began after his marriage was 
over. The new couple have gone on to collaborate on more movies, two since 
Greenberg. Meanwhile, documentation relating to Baumbach and Leigh’s divorce 
has been uploaded to several gossip and celebrity websites.

Leigh, understandably, is not eager to discuss this side of her life. “I don’t 
think it’s that important for people to know.” She says of Baumbach: “We 
co-parent really well.” Asked if she’s started seeing anybody since, she puts 
out a finger, polite, firm: enough. “That I don’t want to talk about.”

What she will say is that Anomalisa has served as a strange sort of frame 
around the upheaval. Kaufman wrote the script for Anomalisa more than a decade 
ago. He always had Leigh in mind for the part of Lisa, a woman from Ohio who is 
lonely, eager to be loved, but spirited – optimistic. In the story, Lisa has a 
short, sudden romance with an older British man called Michael. Back in 2005, 
Kaufman arranged for Leigh and the British actor David Thewlis to perform 
Anomalisa as a play. The small-scale productionran for two nights 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2005/sep/16/entertainment/et-ear16> at a student 
theatre in LA. After that, Kaufman put the script away, eventually reviving it 
a couple of years ago and beginning the process of turning it into an animated 
film.

He asked Leigh to play Lisa again. Seven or eight years, and a lot of life had 
gone by in that time. “I’d just got married the first time we didAnomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa>,” Leigh recalls. “And by the 
second time I was alone, raising my son as a single mom. And… life had shifted. 
Like, under my feet, without my knowledge, suddenly – this big change.”

Lisa is such a lovelorn figure. Did the changes in Leigh’s situation alter her 
approach to the character? “I don’t know,” she says. “Lisa is so beautifully 
written, there’s just no way to fuck her up. But I guess I understand her in a 
very deep way.” She leaves it there.

As long ago as 1992 – in that old article, in fact, that had Leigh down as a 
future Oscar winner – she outlined to the magazine how she hoped her future 
would pan out. “I want to spend my entire life,” she said back then, “staying 
out of those who-fucked-who maps of the world... My ideal life would be to play 
all these great characters, and disappear.”

How well does Leigh think she’s done on this?

“I think pretty well, actually,” she says.

• The Hateful Eight is released on 8 January.
 