
It was an extraordinarily bruising day but Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> was just about still 
standing as Labour leader as he addressed thousands of supporters in Parliament 
Square on Monday evening.

He had just come from a brutal meeting of his parliamentary party, where MP 
after MP called on him to step down, some shouting and some close to tears.

They had trailed into a meeting room in the Palace of Westminster for 6pm on 
Monday with sombre faces, while a pack of up to 100 journalists waited outside 
flanked by police and door staff.


Corbyn began by calling for party unity and making clear that he would not be 
standing down. Several of his supporters spoke up to back his formation of a 
new shadow cabinet, after a wave of 40 resignations from his top team over the 
course of Sunday and Monday.

But then came the onslaught from Labour MPs including many who had never 
publicly attacked him before. Robert Flello, a low-profile and previously 
uncritical backbencher, was the first to demand that he go. “For your sake, but 
most importantly for the people who need aLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government, do the decent thing,” 
he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fcorbyn-coup-shadow-cabinet-members-resign-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shadow%20cabinet%20members%20resign%20in%20Labour%20'coup'%20against%20Corbyn%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fcorbyn-coup-shadow-cabinet-members-resign-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shadow%20cabinet%20members%20resign%20in%20Labour%20%27coup%27%20against%20Corbyn%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fcorbyn-coup-shadow-cabinet-members-resign-video&media=>
Shadow cabinet members resign in Labour ‘coup’ against Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/26/corbyn-coup-shadow-cabinet-members-resign-video>
The calls kept coming, with Clive Efford saying: “Search inside yourself and 
ask if the electorate really think you are a prime minister because I don’t 
really think you are.”


Another intervention came from Helen Goodman, who said: “Much as I like you on 
a personal level, you can’t offer leadership.”

Chris Matheson was cheered for saying he had won a swing seat from the Tories, 
unlike Barry Gardiner, the newly appointed shadow energy minister, who was 
booed for trying to defend Corbyn.

MPs also shouted at the leader that he should deal with concerns of Ian Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ian-murray>, who resigned as shadow 
Scotland secretary on Sunday. Murray urged the leader to “call off the dogs” in 
reference to Momentum members protesting outside his constituency office.

Corbyn said he had called out abusive behaviour but MPs shouted: “They’re 
outside,” in reference to the gathered crowd.

Brexit live: Labour MPs to hold no-confidence vote in Jeremy Corbyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/27/brexit-live-george-osborne-economy-corbyn-shadow-cabinet>
But the biggest cheer of the evening came for Alan Johnson’s intervention, as 
the leader of Labour’s remain campaign criticised Corbyn’s failure to throw his 
full weight behind the effort to stay in the EU. Johnson said he took 
responsibility and Corbyn should share in that.

Unmoved by the weight of criticism, Corbyn summed up in front of his furious 
party, making it clear he intended to carry on with his new team.

The meeting broke up for MPs to vote, but afterwards several were openly 
briefing against Corbyn in the corridor outside about the usually private 
meeting. Others stormed off saying they were too angry to talk.

Bryant said it was a “battle for the soul of the Labour party. The writing on 
the wall is eight metres high and if he can’t see it he needs to go to 
Specsavers,” he added.

Another Labour MP, Ian Austin, said it was not just the usual suspects calling 
for Corbyn to go. “The overwhelming number of speakers were critical of Jeremy 
and saying he should stand down,” he added. “I’ve never seen anything like it. 
It’s a big moment for the Labour party.”

Waiting across the corridor with a briefing of their own were two Labour 
spokesmen, who acknowledged most of the speakers were hostile but took issue 
with the idea that the majority of MPs were against him.

“He is not going to concede to a corridor coup or backroom deal that tries to 
pressure him out. It is all about whispering corridors, meeting together and 
people resigning from the appointed posts,” he said.


Jeremy Corbyn to face no-confidence vote as Labour rebellion builds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/jeremy-corbyn-no-confidence-vote-labour-rebellion>
Tensions were running high as another aide made clear: “There is one way if 
people want to change the leadership of the Labour party, that is to get the 
names to stand a candidate and mount a challenge and have an election.Jeremy 
will be a candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/labour-resignations-continue-as-mps-try-to-force-out-jeremy-corbyn>
. This is irrelevant. All the resignations are a sideshow. If people have 
confidence they can win a leadership election, they can mount that challenge. 
If they are avoiding that, maybe they don’t have that confidence.”

The huddle of aides and journalists only broke up as Corbyn’s spokesman, Kevin 
Slocombe, was confronted by John Woodcock, Labour MP for Barrow and a serial 
rebel.

“It is extraordinary you stand and slag us off to the media, while we’re 
supposed to have a private meeting. You were saying it in front of all these 
people, this won’t be the end of it,” Woodcock said. “You are an unelected 
official, standing outside, briefing the media, giving a highly distorted 
account.”

It was a dramatic culmination of tensions after the past few days had seen the 
Labour leader sack his foreign secretary, Hilary Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/hilary-benn-revolt-jeremy-corbyn>
, for plotting a coup and 20 further resignations by shadow cabinet ministers 
who no longer had confidence in him.

Corbyn was holding firm against the rebels on Sunday night, saying he would 
fight as a candidate in any leadership election to replace him.

But things were about to get significantly worse. The steady stream of 
resignations over the course of Monday led one MP to compare Corbyn’s task to 
trying to fill a bath without a plug.


Undeterred, the Labour party press office sent out an email early in the 
morning announcing the promotion of Emily Thornberry to shadow foreign 
secretary andDiane Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/diane-abbott> 
to shadow health secretary, plus a raft of other loyalists – many only elected 
a year ago – to key jobs.


Corbyn had just left his home surrounded by journalists and police for a 
meeting withTom Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tom-watson>, the 
deputy leader, who was widely expected to apply pressure for him to go.

This took place at 9am and differing accounts began to emerge. On the leader’s 
side, it was described as cordial and calm, with no hint that Corbyn should 
resign. Watson’s camp agreed that the deputy leader had stopped short of 
calling for his head but claimed he had informed Corbyn that the party did not 
have confidence in his leadership.

All eyes were now on a few senior shadow cabinet ministers who had not yet 
shown their hands but were considered potential leadership challengers.

Rumours abounded that Lisa Nandy, the shadow energy secretary, was being set 
up as the rival candidate. But she soon released a joint letter with Owen 
Smith, the shadow work and pensions secretary, saying that they were stepping 
down and calling for Watson to be caretaker leader. They were joined byNia 
Griffith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nia-griffith>, Kate Green, John 
Healey – all considered on the soft left of the party and previously part of 
the “make it work brigade” who were willing to give Corbyn’s leadership a 
chance.

The group had met Corbyn together on Monday morning claiming that they wanted 
to make it work but felt compelled to resign after it became clear the leader 
was unable to form an inclusive shadow cabinet. According to one source at the 
meeting, the MPs were angered thatJohn McDonnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>, the shadow chancellor, 
“barged in” and started answering questions addressed to Corbyn himself.

Labour crisis: the most powerful lines from shadow cabinet resignations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/most-powerful-lines-labour-shadow-cabinet-resignations>
The damage kept coming as Chris Bryant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chris-bryant>, who had resigned as shadow 
leader of the House of Commons, revealed that Corbyn had refused to confirm 
that he voted to remain in the EU, saying it was not the issue at hand. This 
was dismissed as an attempt to destabilise the party by those close to Corbyn.

Within the hour, Angela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, the shadow business 
secretary and her sister Maria, the shadow secretary for culture, media and 
sport, had also gone. Angela then gave a teary interview to the BBC’s World at 
One programme expressing her sorrow at having to resign in such circumstances.

“With deep regret, and after nine months of trying to make it work, I have 
today resigned from the shadow cabinet,” she said.

Corbyn’s allies had by now conceded that another leadership election was 
likely in which he goes head to head with another candidate. But a row over 
whether he will need nominations from colleagues was brewing, as the rival 
sides both believe they have legal advice supporting their case.

Despite the drama, there was still business to be carried out in the House of 
Commons but Clive Lewis, the newly appointed shadow defence secretary, was on 
his way back from Glastonbury festival and Thornberry had to step in to cover 
her old brief at defence questions.


Meanwhile, Luciana Berger, the shadow mental health secretary and candidate to 
be Labour’s Liverpool mayoral candidate, was the last in a spate of shadow 
cabinet resignations at 2.18pm, but more junior ones followed from Jack Dromey 
to Keir Starmer. That left justRosie Winterton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/rosie-winterton>, the chief whip, and 
Jonathan Ashworth, a shadow cabinet office minister, undeclared about their 
positions.

In the face of continuing turmoil, the Labour leader headed to the House of 
Commons to tackle Cameron at the despatch box, as the outgoing prime minister 
explained the timetable for dealing with Brexit.


Corbyn spoke to heckles of “resign” from his own side, and taunts from the 
green benches opposite.Dennis Skinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dennis-skinner>, the veteran Labour MP 
for Bolsover, shook the leader of the opposition’s hand as he entered the 
chamber and made a “V” sign at other backbenchers.

Jeremy Corbyn addresses supporters amid Labour party resignations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/jeremy-corbyn-addresses-supporters-amid-labour-party-resignations>
The Labour leader paid no heed to the shouts, except to claim that the 
“country will thank neither the benches in front nor those behind for indulging 
in internal factional manoeuvring at this time”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fjeremy-corbyns-the-only-person-who-can-beat-boris-a-labour-supporter-at-the-rally-outside-parliament&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Corbyn's%20the%20only%20person%20who%20can%20beat%20Boris'%3A%20Labour%20members%20rally%20outside%20parliament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fjeremy-corbyns-the-only-person-who-can-beat-boris-a-labour-supporter-at-the-rally-outside-parliament>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Corbyn%27s%20the%20only%20person%20who%20can%20beat%20Boris%27%3A%20Labour%20members%20rally%20outside%20parliament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fjeremy-corbyns-the-only-person-who-can-beat-boris-a-labour-supporter-at-the-rally-outside-parliament&media=>
‘Corbyn’s the only person who can beat Boris’: Labour members rally outside 
parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/jun/28/jeremy-corbyns-the-only-person-who-can-beat-boris-a-labour-supporter-at-the-rally-outside-parliament>
This was the leadership’s consistent message to the MPs and then again to the 
huge rally of supporters in Parliament Square.

To chants of “Corbyn, Corbyn, Corbyn”, John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, 
told the rally from a stage: “Let me make it absolutely clear, Jeremy Corbyn is 
not resigning.”

Corbyn himself appeared just minutes later, telling the crowd he is going 
nowhere.

But on Tuesday he will face a motion of no confidence by secret ballot and any 
leadership challenger will soon have to come out of the shadows.
 