
Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour party leader, is to accept a new role as 
vice-president of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament as figures show asharp 
upturn in support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/16/campaign-nuclear-disarmament-cnd-membership-surge-jeremy-corbyn>
 for the organisation.

Corbyn, who is currently vice-chair of CND, will accept the position during a 
two-day conference in London on Saturday. His acceptance of the role underlines 
his opposition to nuclear weapons in the face of criticism from within the 
shadow cabinet.

The Labour leader has long opposed nuclear weapons and said last month that he 
would tell defence chiefs never to use theTrident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident> nuclear weapons system if he became 
prime minister.

His appointment highlights the conflict between Corbyn and senior members of 
the shadow cabinet on the issue of nuclear weapons. The shadow foreign 
secretary, Hilary Benn, believes that Britain needs a “continuous at-sea 
deterrent”. He and several other shadow ministers including the deputy leader,
Tom Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tom-watson>, believe that 
supporting the renewal of Trident is essential to convince voters that Labour 
can be trusted with the nation’s security.

Kate Hudson, general secretary of the CND <http://www.cnduk.org/>, welcomed 
the move and said the conference would be the most important gathering of 
anti-nuclear activists in a generation.

“[The] conference takes place at a moment when, for the first time in a 
generation, the opportunity not to replace Trident collides with a massive 
popular upsurge against the criminal waste and sheer anachronism of nuclear 
weapons,” she said.

“Austerity has led many more to question the need to spend £100bn on replacing 
a nuclear weapons system that doesn’t tackle the real security threats we face. 
Terrorism, climate change, pandemics and cyberwarfare require a fresh approach.”

CND has seen a big increase in support since Corbyn launched his election 
campaign. The organisation was attracting about 30 new members a month in June 
but now has a sign-up rate of more than 200 a month.

A spokesman said the support was still gathering pace, with more than 100 new 
members joining in the last seven days and thousands of non-paying supporters 
signing up since the summer.

Corbyn’s longstanding opposition to nuclear weapons has provoked criticism 
from within the parliamentary Labour party since hebecame leader last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/12/jeremy-corbyn-wins-labour-party-leadership-election>
. After he said he would not authorise the use of nuclear weapons if he were 
prime minister, the shadow defence secretary, Maria Eagle,described his 
comments as “unhelpful” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/30/labour-split-on-defence-grows-as-eagle-criticises-corbyn-over-trident>
. Two leading unions also expressed their opposition to Corbyn’s anti-nuclear 
stance.

But his supporters say the rise in support for the CND shows how Corbyn’s 
victory is energising politics beyond Westminster, from anti-nuclear to 
anti-austerity campaigns.

The former London mayor Ken Livingstone said: “After the years of the 
Thatcher/Blair tyranny, I think people realise that they can have an influence 
in politics again; it is worth getting involved, whether it is environmental 
groups, CND or theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party,” 
he said.

Corbyn is due to speak at a closed session of the CND conference on Saturday. 
Senior figures from theGreen party <https://www.greenparty.org.uk/>, and the 
Scottish National party <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/snp>’s defence 
spokesman, Brendan O’Hara, will also attend the event.

Hudson said the growing party political support, combined with the increase in 
new members and supporters, would make it hard for the government to prevent a 
genuine debate overTrident <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident>.

“In Scotland, a majority voted for the anti-Trident SNP; the new leader of the 
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party firmly opposes 
nuclear weapons and is facilitating a national policy debate in his own party. 
The Lib Dems will oppose like-for-like replacement. The Green surge represents 
further opposition ... The government will find it increasingly hard to claim 
it is acting in the national interest if it cannot garner cross-party support 
for Trident and when it is at odds with growing public opposition.”

The UK has four Trident ballistic missile submarines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/defence-and-security-blog/2015/may/06/no-matter-the-election-result-trident-is-here-to-stay>
, and a final decision about whether to replace them is due to be taken in 
2016. Previously both the Labour and Tory leaderships were committed to 
replacing the fleet, a project that is likely to cost well over £100bn over its 
30-year lifespan. But now Corbyn has committed Labour to a review of its 
Trident policy, to be headed by Eagle.


Hudson welcomed Labour’s stance and said the anti-nuclear campaign would 
continue to gather momentum in the coming months. “Our own organisation has 
experienced its own surge in membership and we’re preparing for a major national
Stop Trident demo 
<http://cnduk.org/get-involved/events/item/2282-stop-trident-national-demo> 
ahead of the parliamentary decision in 2016,” she said.
 