
The first episode of Amazon’s The Grand Tour starring Jeremy Clarkson, James 
May and Richard Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/11/jeremy-clarksons-amazon-show-grand-tour-top-gear>
 will be released on 18 November.

In a departure for Amazon’s original shows, The Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-grand-tour> will see a new 
episode released every Friday for 12 weeks, rather than all at once as with 
most shows.

It will only be available to Amazon Prime Video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/lovefilm> subscribers, restricting its total 
UK audience to a fraction of those who tuned in to Top Gear when it was 
presented by the trio on BBC2. However, Amazon is hoping the series will draw 
in new subscribers globally.

Top Gear cast change due to 'perfect storm', says former producer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/24/top-gear-cast-change-perfect-storm-former-producer>
The debut show will feature studio scenes shot in a tent in California, which 
will be recorded later this month.

At the Edinburgh International Television Festival last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/24/top-gear-cast-change-perfect-storm-former-producer>
 former Top Gear executive producer Andy Wilman, who left for Amazon with 
Clarkson May and Hammond, revealed that 90% of the location filming had been 
completed.

He showed an extended montage featuring Clarkson driving through a location 
from Game of Thrones, May shooting an assault rifle out of the rear window of a 
car driven by Clarkson, and Hammond waking up in a dune buggy being flown 
beneath a helicopter.

A launch video also features a helicopter and the castle from Game of Thrones.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoK0lkrtYvVs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoK0lkrtYvVs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoK0lkrtYvVs&media=>
 Amazon’s trailer for The Grand Tour which will launch on 18 November. 
Amazon Prime Video EU vice-president Jay Marine said: “Customers have been 
desperate to find out when they can watch their favourite team back on screen, 
so we are very excited to announce the launch date of one of the most globally 
anticipated shows of 2016.”

“The guys have been having a blast filming the show around the world and we 
can’t wait for fans to see it weekly from 18 November.”
 