
Jeremy Paxman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremy-paxman> won the battle 
of the leader interviews with his Newsnight successor Evan Davis after the 
former Today presenter’s encounter with David Cameron was watched by fewer than 
2 million viewers on BBC1.


The second of BBC1’s leader interviews series had 1.8 million viewers, a 10% 
share, from 7.30pm on Wednesday, behind the 2.6 million (11.7%) who saw 
Paxman’s interrogation of Cameron in Channel 4’s Cameron & Miliband, the Battle 
for Number 10 last month.


The Channel 4 programme, which was also shown on Sky News and the BBC News 
channel, giving it a total audience of 3.2 million, benefitted from being the 
first of the pre-election party leader programmes.

Plus, it was broadcast live with questions put by members of a studio 
audience. Davis also had the misfortune of going up against ITV’s Coronation 
Street last night.


But Cameron was not as much of a draw as Davis’ opening interview with Lib Dem 
leader Nick Clegg on Tuesday, which had just over 2 million viewers, a 10.2% 
share.


Paxman pulls in more than 3 million for Cameron and Miliband grilling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/27/paxman-pulls-in-nearly-3-million-for-cameron-and-miliband-grilling>
Neither Cameron nor Clegg will take part in BBC1’s so-called “challenger” 
debate tonight, with Miliband due to appear alongside Scottish National Party 
leader Nicola Sturgeon, Ukip’s Nigel Farage, Leanne Wood (Plaid Cymru) and 
Green Party leader Natalie Bennett (Green Party).


Puppets the pick of ITV’s new bunch


ITV’s new satirical comedy show Newzoids, drawing inevitable comparisons with 
Spitting Image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/11/itv-puppet-show-newzoids-politicians-celebrities-spitting-image>
, was the best performer of ITV’s three new series with 3.7 million viewers, an 
18.1% share from 9pm.


Newzoids review – no Spitting Image, but a step in the right direction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/16/newzoids-review-no-spitting-image>
It did rather better than Amanda Holden’s celebrity pet adoption show Give A 
Pet A Home, watched by 2.8 million viewers (14.7%) from 8pm, and its new 
maternity ward sitcom The Delivery Man, from Green Wing creator Victoria Pile, 
which had 2.6 million viewers (13.2%) from 9.30pm.


Spike spikes with Police Interceptors Unleashed


The UK incarnation of MTV and Channel 5 owner Viacom’s Spike TV launched with 
an average audience of 89,000 viewers, a 0.67% share, across the night, peaking 
with 137,000 viewers for Police Interceptors Unleashed (0.7%) at 8pm.


The launch night also included the first Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> (it will be showing the 
whole lot, for the first time on free-to-air TV in the UK) watched by 97,000 
viewers, a 1.2% share.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD-G8weg2Ndg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD-G8weg2Ndg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD-G8weg2Ndg&media=>
It beat rival free-to-air offerings including ITVBe, with a 0.44% share, and 
UKTV’s Drama (0.6%) and pay-TV channels including Sky Living, which had a 0.66% 
share of the audience across the night, and Sky Atlantic (0.33%).

 