
Jeremy Renner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeremy-renner> strides into 
the hotel room, shakes my hand (“Hey buddy”) and winces. It’s the air 
conditioning. Too cold. He goes over to the window and opens it. The curtains 
billow. Too breezy. While the publicist fixes the temperature, Renner sits down 
opposite me, crossing his arms and legs to keep himself warm. A good room, he 
says, is one where you would feel happy strolling around naked. A place in 
which to literally hang out. “That’s the idea. You’ve got to feel at ease.” 
Does this room fit the bill? He gazes around. “It might be a little big for my 
taste. I like a boutiquey feel. I go with emotion and instinct. How do we give 
each room its own beautiful energy? You might like a dual-colour couch and 
bright curtains. That’s fine. Me, I like these ones here. Something more 
muted.” He indicates the taupe curtains. It strikes me that I am being 
instructed in the principles of interior design by one of the Avengers.

Captain America: Civil War review – an aspartame rush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/20/captain-america-civil-war-review-an-aspartame-rush>
He is wearing a baseball hat, leather jacket, jeans and Chelsea boots. 
Prescription glasses dangle from the neck of his sweatshirt and his face is 
evenly tanned. At 45, he is part pug, part prettyboy; it is this mutability 
that makes him such an effective character actor. Yes, he has triple franchise 
commitments. InMarvel’s Avengers films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-avengers>, he is Clint Barton, AKA 
Hawkeye, the layperson with no superpowers to speak of, just top-notch archery 
skills. There’s the Bourne series, which he took over from Matt Damon, before
Damon decided to return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/22/jason-bourne-trailer-things-we-learned-matt-damon-julia-stiles>
. (One Bourne producer has promised that a sequel to Renner’sThe Bourne Legacy  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/09/the-bourne-legacy-review>is still 
on the cards.) And he was in the last twoMission: Impossible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/30/mission-impossible-rogue-nation-review>
 films. “I know they’re talking about coming round again and my answer is 
always ‘yes’”.

But blockbusters only tell part of the story. He is a double Oscar nominee – 
the first for his career-changing performance as a bomb disposal expert inThe 
Hurt Locker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/28/the-hurt-locker-review>, the 
second for playing a volatile thug inThe Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/26/the-town-film-review>. He has 
never blanched at a challenge or displayed actorly vanity. He raped a child in
The Heart Is Deceitful Above All Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/jul/15/4>, sexually harassed 
Charlize Theron inNorth Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/feb/03/3> and deflected the romantic 
attentions of a pubescent girl inTwelve and Holding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/nov/12/drama.philipfrench>. For an 
illustration of exactly how diverse his appeal is, try this: he turned down an 
invitation to join a boyband in the early 90s; 10 years later, he played the 
serial killerJeffrey Dahmer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kf0bhz5CUC8>. Even 
as Dahmer, he was oddly endearing, able to alter his appearance with the 
tiniest adjustment of emphasis behind the eyes. In some parts of the movie, he 
was like a delicate angel, in others a baby-faced gargoyle with chip-pan hair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fjeremy-renner-acting-gave-me-the-freedom-to-feel-rage-or-sadness-in-a-safe-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F785667a2e2a700d43295c2ce1d5dfebec003c431%2F0_326_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Renner%3A%20%E2%80%98Acting%20gave%20me%20the%20freedom%20to%20feel%20rage%20or%20sadness%20in%20a%20safe%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fjeremy-renner-acting-gave-me-the-freedom-to-feel-rage-or-sadness-in-a-safe-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Renner%3A%20%E2%80%98Acting%20gave%20me%20the%20freedom%20to%20feel%20rage%20or%20sadness%20in%20a%20safe%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fjeremy-renner-acting-gave-me-the-freedom-to-feel-rage-or-sadness-in-a-safe-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F785667a2e2a700d43295c2ce1d5dfebec003c431%2F0_326_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 As Hawkeye, with Captain America (Chris Evans) and Black Widow (Scarlett 
Johansson) in The Avengers Assemble . 
We have met to discuss his latest – brief – outing as Hawkeye in Captain 
America: Civil War <https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-civil-war>
. “That’s sorta the journey of our characters. Sometimes you’re in it more than 
others.” He got a heftier slice of the pie inAvengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>, which showed the 
gang chilling on Hawkeye’s farm. It was like a superhero soap opera, and all 
the lovelier for it. “Oh, that stuff was great,” he agrees. “I loved that 
wonderful, awkward moment with all the superheroes sitting in his living room 
in the farmhouse.”

Renner is open about his dissatisfaction with the first Avengers movie, in 
which he spent most of his screentime as one of Loki’s hypnotised minions. 
“That was my first chance getting to play the character and I wasn’t really 
getting to play him at all. ‘Hi, my name’s Clint – bzzzzzzzzz.’” He goes 
crosseyed and mimes falling under a spell. “It was frustrating. I don’t even 
know at that point how the guy walks and talks, ’cos he got turned into this 
other dude. Joss [Whedon] was really apologetic. He had an impossible task 
trying to fit all those characters into one movie. I’m glad I got to find the 
character next time around.”

He insists it wouldn’t be in his nature to keep shtum about his frustrations. 
“I command excellence from everybody around me. If you’re passive, nothing 
improves. It’s the squeaky wheel thing. If you don’t talk about something, 
nothing changes, nothing gets done. ‘Oh hi, everything’s cool, I’m really happy 
with just being an extra here!’ Well, actually I’m not. Use me if you’re gonna 
use me. If not, recast me. It’s nothing specifically to do with Marvel or 
Mission: Impossible in particular, it’s how I feel in general. If you have a 
nice car and you don’t get it out of first gear, then what’s the point? You may 
as well just go get a Prius.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fjeremy-renner-acting-gave-me-the-freedom-to-feel-rage-or-sadness-in-a-safe-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6551bc334d5c308734ed46ca3ab33a501ef93448%2F60_0_3375_2025%2F3375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Renner%3A%20%E2%80%98Acting%20gave%20me%20the%20freedom%20to%20feel%20rage%20or%20sadness%20in%20a%20safe%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fjeremy-renner-acting-gave-me-the-freedom-to-feel-rage-or-sadness-in-a-safe-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Renner%3A%20%E2%80%98Acting%20gave%20me%20the%20freedom%20to%20feel%20rage%20or%20sadness%20in%20a%20safe%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fjeremy-renner-acting-gave-me-the-freedom-to-feel-rage-or-sadness-in-a-safe-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6551bc334d5c308734ed46ca3ab33a501ef93448%2F60_0_3375_2025%2F3375.jpg>
 The Hurt Locker. Photograph: AP 
These days he is careful to vary his acting diet so it isn’t all tentpole 
movies. Should you have an eight-figure sum handy, he might even sell you 
a lavishly renovated house. He moonlights as a real-estate developer, hence all 
the chit-chat about interior design. With his business partner and fellow actor 
Kristoffer Winters, he has been “flipping” houses (buying them, often living in 
them while doing them up, then selling them) for about 15 years. He queries my 
suggestion that he made a $17m (£11.7m) profit on one property. “Let’s see, 
that was a $7m purchase and we sold it for $24m. But there were investors and 
various costs so ...” Either way, I think we can agree that it’s 
a nice sideline.

And it has helped pay for extravagances at his own home, such as a lagoon with 
a dive bridge and waterfall. Who needs their own lagoon for goodness sake? 
“Dude, it’s amazing! I designed it myself. I was faxing and emailing the plans 
back home from Italy.” He wasn’t born with this eye for design. “Coming from no 
money in this smalltown middle-of-nowhere place, my only access to nice 
locations has been through travelling for jobs over the last 25 years.”

Renner grew up in Modesto, California, the oldest of five siblings. His 
parents divorced when he was 10. (In recent years, his father, who ran a 
bowling alley when Renner was a kid, has had two more children. The actor’s 
youngest sibling is three years old – the same age as his own daughter, Ava.) 
He got into acting as a way of managing his emotions. “It was therapeutic. The 
stage was a safe place for me as a man with a lot of feelings inside which I 
had not exposed before. Where I’m from, it would have been unacceptable – 
people would have told me I was a crybaby. So, I held everything in. Playing 
characters gave me the freedom to have all those feelings, that rage or 
sadness, in a safe way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fjeremy-renner-acting-gave-me-the-freedom-to-feel-rage-or-sadness-in-a-safe-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe72a2638a148cd9839d8371ace322ceb68d7959f%2F0_150_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Renner%3A%20%E2%80%98Acting%20gave%20me%20the%20freedom%20to%20feel%20rage%20or%20sadness%20in%20a%20safe%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fjeremy-renner-acting-gave-me-the-freedom-to-feel-rage-or-sadness-in-a-safe-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Renner%3A%20%E2%80%98Acting%20gave%20me%20the%20freedom%20to%20feel%20rage%20or%20sadness%20in%20a%20safe%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fjeremy-renner-acting-gave-me-the-freedom-to-feel-rage-or-sadness-in-a-safe-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe72a2638a148cd9839d8371ace322ceb68d7959f%2F0_150_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 With Ben Affleck in The Town. Photograph: Allstar/WARNER BROS. 
After playing criminals in training exercises at Modesto’s police academy, he 
moved to Los Angeles in the early 90s. Within a year, he was fifth-billed inthe 
comedy National Lampoon’s Senior Trip <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>. He 
was 23. Peering through his blond, curtained fringe, he delivered lines such as 
“That chick needs to get laid!” in a stoner’s sleep-talking drawl. “Oh man! 
That was a huge thing for me. I was nervous as all heck. I remember jumping and 
screaming when they told me I got the part. I was kissing the dirty old carpet. 
They said: ‘You’re going to Toronto!’ I was, like: ‘Awesome! Where’s Toronto?’”

It was around this time that Winters met Renner when they worked on a TV show 
together. “Basically, we’ve been brothers ever since,” Winters tells me by 
phone. “We do everything together.” They have been roommates many times over 
the years, but he refuses to be drawn on Renner’s bad habits. “He doesn’t have 
any.” So, he’s never even put down a coffee cup without a coaster? “Nope. 
Never.” He thinks the key to Renner’s appeal is inscrutability. “There’s a 
mystery to Jeremy. It’s like you don’t know if the food needs more salt or if 
he’s trying to poison you. He’s drawn toward unexpected choices – 99% of people 
would read a line of dialogue one way. He’ll come up with the twist.”

David Jacobson, who wrote and directed Dahmer, recalls an actor of uncommon 
focus and vividness. “He had this visible inner life, which a lot of actors 
don’t have,” he says. “You could see instantly there was something going on 
emotionally and mentally. It’s what makes him so fascinating to watch. He made 
Dahmer someone the audience might empathise with on some level.” That film was 
crucial in Renner’s development. “It was a milestone for me,” he says. And it 
gave notice of the level of moral complexity he was willing to undertake. 
Indeed, it was seeing Dahmer that convinced Kathryn Bigelow to cast him in The
Hurt Locker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hurt-locker>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fcaptain-america-civil-war-marvel-chris-evans-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Captain%20America's%20Chris%20Evans%20on%20realism%20in%20the%20superhero%20genre%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fcaptain-america-civil-war-marvel-chris-evans-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Captain%20America%27s%20Chris%20Evans%20on%20realism%20in%20the%20superhero%20genre%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fcaptain-america-civil-war-marvel-chris-evans-video-interview&media=>
Captain America’s Chris Evans on realism in the superhero genre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/27/captain-america-civil-war-marvel-chris-evans-video-interview>
But playing a serial killer took its toll. “Jeremy used to go shopping in 
character at the supermarket,” says Jacobson. “After the movie opened, he told 
me thatCarmen Electra <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/mar/22/1> had run 
away from him after seeing it. He accused me of ruining his sex life!” Renner 
found it hard to shake off the role. “It really screwed me up. I couldn’t go to 
a bar alone without experiencing anxiety.” He still can’t, although these days 
it’s for a different reason. “Now I got people coming at me all the time. They 
want a picture and I’m sat there with spaghetti coming outta my mouth.”

Asked what he would like to see more of in his friend’s career, Winters 
doesn’t miss a beat. “His sense of humour. Jeremy is always playing the rapist, 
the murderer, the scumbag, but he’s actually wickedly funny. I think he’ll turn 
into one of the greatest character actors of our time. I don’t know how much 
longer he’ll wear the superhero tights, you know? But he will be around for 
ever. It’s more whether he’ll want to keep acting.”

Renner sounds several equivocal notes during our conversation regarding the 
sort of long-distance work that separates him from his daughter. An ugly and 
protracted custody battle with his ex-wife seems only to have intensified his 
determination to stay home. Like Hawkeye, he just wants to get back to the 
farm. Or, in his case, the lagoon. “I’m producing movies so that I can stay 
with my child,” he says. One such example isThe Founder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/21/michael-keaton-the-founder-mcdonalds-ray-kroc-trailer>
, starring Michael Keaton as the man who started McDonald’s. Renner has also 
made an album, although he’s not sure whether to release it. “It’s about my 
personal life and I’m pretty tight-lipped about all that. They’re very 
emotional songs.”

That reminds me. He never did spill the beans about which boyband it was that 
he turned down. “No, I didn’t,” he chuckles. Well, he’s 10 years older than 
Justin Timberlake, so it can’t be*N Sync 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/20/backstreet-boys-n-sync-zombie-western>
. I feel I am within an inch of outing Jeremy Renner as a Backstreet Boy. Will 
he confirm? He won’t answer, but his laughter gets more raucous and gravelly as 
he stands up and throws an arm around my shoulder. I tell him I’d better not 
read the scoop in another paper. “I promise you won’t, man,” he says as he 
leaves. “I give you my word.” His rattling laugh sounds like bones in a tumble 
drier as he disappears down the hall. I believe him.

• Captain America: Civil War is released in the UK on 29 April
 