
Geraldine “Jerry” Emmett was born in 1914, before women had the right to vote. 
On Tuesday night, the 102-year-old honorary chairwoman of the Arizona 
Democratic delegation helped cast a ballot to sendHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> on her way as the first 
female candidate from a major party in a presidential election.

Clinton was formally nominated as the Democratic candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/hillary-clinton-presidential-nomination-democratic-convention>
 after a roll call of the states in the Philadelphia arena. And in a tender 
moment, the centenarian joined her state’s 85-member delegation, which split 51 
for Clinton and 34 for her Democratic rival, the Vermont senator Bernie Sanders.


Bill Clinton makes powerful case for Hillary in personal speech at the DNC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/bill-clinton-democration-convention-speech-hillary-clinton>
“I’m Ruben Gallego from Arizona, the beautiful state, the natural state. We’re 
proud to say that we’re the home state of Cesar Chavez, home state of many 
native tribes, home state of electing some of the first women leaders in this 
country,” the congressman said. “And I am proud to be joined here by Jerry 
Emmett, age 102. Madame Secretary,Arizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> casts 34 votes for Senator 
Sanders.”


Gallego handed the microphone to Emmett, who leant forward with a wide grin.


“And 51 votes for the next president of the United States of America, Hillary 
Rodham Clinton,” she said, as the crowd erupted in cheers.


Emmett, the star of the Arizona delegation and a lifelong Democrat, was six 
years old when women earned the right to vote in the US and remembers the 
moment when her mother cast the first vote of her life.


“We all walked out in the middle of the street and cheered, like they’re 
cheering here – because my mother was going to get to have a say,” Emmetttold 
USA Today 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2016/07/26/born-before-women-could-vote-az-centenarian-reports-delegates-clinton/87592894/>
. “That was something.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fjerry-emmett-hillary-clinton-supporter-centernarian-arizona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94a305722326535f5344c2f0f9bad79091f6c3a6%2F0_286_3840_2303%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jerry%20Emmett%3A%20Hillary%20Clinton's%20enthusiastic%20102-year-old%20supporter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fjerry-emmett-hillary-clinton-supporter-centernarian-arizona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jerry%20Emmett%3A%20Hillary%20Clinton%27s%20enthusiastic%20102-year-old%20supporter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fjerry-emmett-hillary-clinton-supporter-centernarian-arizona%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94a305722326535f5344c2f0f9bad79091f6c3a6%2F0_286_3840_2303%2F3840.jpg>
 John Goodie escorts Jerry Emmett, a Hillary Clinton supporter, to her seat 
before Clinton arrives to speak at a campaign event at Carl Hayden Community 
High School in Phoenix on 21 March 2016. Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
Emmett has attended several conventions and has served as an official delegate 
in the past, though this year she is an honorary delegate. Clinton won the 
Arizona Democratic primary, held on 22 March. Political experts are eyeing the 
traditionally conservative southwest state as one that might lean towards the 
Democratic candidate in an election year if the Latino electorate turns 
forcefully against the Republican nominee, Donald Trump.


Emmett met Hillary Clinton earlier this year when the former secretary of 
state campaigned in Phoenix, she told thePhoenix New Times 
<http://www.phoenixnewtimes.com/news/meet-jerry-emmett-arizonas-102-year-old-honorary-delegate-to-the-democratic-national-convention-8472872>
 during an interview at her home in Prescott, Arizona. They posed together for 
a picture, with Emmett holding a sign that read “Centenarian for Hillary”. 
Clinton held a sign that read “101 years young and voting for Hillary”.


“I surely didn’t plan to live past 100 years old,” she told the New Times. 
“When I did, and I saw all these things that were happening, it was like I had 
a shot in the arm.”

 