
From across the park, a low-pitched, adolescent chant starts up: “Jess-EE! 
Jesse-Eisen-BERG!”

“Ooh, no,” Jesse Eisenberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jesse-eisenberg> 
says, dipping his head. The 32-year-old actor, a New Yorker most of his life, 
is living in London at the moment whilehe appears in a West End show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/12/the-spoils-jesse-eisenberg-observer-review>
. On a thickly warm afternoon, we wander into a park in east London that seems 
ideally deserted until a local school clears out for the day, sending a dozen 
teenagers our way. Quickly they recognise Eisenberg, from the spring blockbuster
Batman v Superman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2>, in which 
he played the villain Lex Luthor, as well as 2010’sThe Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-social-network>, in which he put in an 
Oscar-nominated performance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_6U0bsy98Is> as 
Facebook founderMark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>. They heckle with 
glee: “Jess-EE! Face-BOOK! Super-MAN!”

Eisenberg quickens his pace along a path heading towards a wooded area. “Maybe 
if we just keep walking?” he wonders. “Maybe if I don’t respond to my own 
name?” But the chanting gets louder and, glancing back, we see the kids have 
begun to follow. “Ooh, no.”

Eisenberg is also a writer. He has a book of short stories to his name, many 
of themfirst published in the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/jesse-eisenberg>, and he has written and 
starred in a trio of plays, the latest of which, The Spoils, has brought him to 
London. Without wanting to malign either profession, Eisenberg is perhaps more 
obviously a writer, in terms of his manner and appearance, than an actor. He 
speaks rapidly, mutteringly, in great long paragraphs full of observation and 
introspection and drollery and doubt, generally frowning at the floor while he 
does so. He’s bony, hunched, handsome in an undernourished-looking way – 
inconsistently shaved, today, and wearing a faded T-shirt that he keeps 
skittishly tucking into his jeans, then tugging loose again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa40428ac3ba7592e1841c6df9b067f3f0c6f9e5%2F0_1035_2832_3221%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God!%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God%21%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa40428ac3ba7592e1841c6df9b067f3f0c6f9e5%2F0_1035_2832_3221%2F2832.jpg>
 As Mark Zuckerberg in The Social Network. Photograph: Merrick Morton 
Tuck. Untuck. I recognise the gesture, I tell Eisenberg, as we walk. He was 
doing it on stage last night in The Spoils, portraying the twitchy protagonist 
Ben, a wealthy, idle Manhattanite who slowly alienates his friends by being 
socially ungovernable. “Oh-oh-oh this?” Eisenberg says, tucking in the T-shirt 
again, then untucking it. “Oh! The shirt’s too long, maybe, I don’t know.”

As an actor, he has a Dustin Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dustinhoffman>-like repertoire of tics (lip 
flutters, fingertip taps, muttered half-laughs) that he uses to hint at his 
characters’ internal disorder. At a screening of Eisenberg’s new film,Now You 
See Me 2 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JzZh8kJJwe4>, a sequel to the 2013 
action-comedy about a gang of adventuring magicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/04/now-you-see-me-review>, I spotted 
a new addition to the repertoire. Eisenberg, playing the gang’s token neurotic, 
kept convulsively squeezing his sides with his hands, like someone operating a 
bicycle pump. I’m surprised, I tell him, to see these gestures carry over into 
real life.

I find plays unsustainably consuming. I worry from the moment I wake up. The 
only calm in my day is after it’s over

“I guess we all do… things,” Eisenberg says, lamely. Unsatisfied with this 
answer, he continues: “I’m in the spirit of The Spoils, I guess. I have one 
foot inside my character. This is an unusual day for me.” He means being 
outdoors, scurrying along a tree-lined path trying to evade a pack of junior 
stalkers. Curtain up on tonight’s performance is a few hours away. “So normally 
I’d be sitting at home right now,” he says. “Kind of doing nothing, but 
thinking about the show.”

Is that healthy? “It’s not. We’re only doing a short run of The Spoils for 
that reason. Because I find doing plays totally consuming, in ways that don’t 
feel sustainable. I worry about the show from the moment I wake up. The only 
calm I have in my day is after it’s over.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d4eb9fe2057dc46b1c6cfd2be2614470375f75f%2F0_0_4921_3280%2F4921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God!%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God%21%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d4eb9fe2057dc46b1c6cfd2be2614470375f75f%2F0_0_4921_3280%2F4921.jpg>
 In Now You See Me 2. Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
When I ask how long that calm tends to last, Eisenberg calculates for a moment 
and says: “Maybe 10 minutes?”

Before we meet, I expect to feel a degree of affinity with Eisenberg. We’re 
both Jews, inveterate mumblers, the same age and, despite a difference in 
height, similar in appearance. (The first thing Eisenberg says, when we shake 
hands, is, “You’re like me. But stretched.”) As it turns out, it takes a 
half-hour of disorienting conversation before I can get any sort of handle on 
his strange rhythms of speech, his spiralling patterns of thought.

He has a tendency to subject his words to instant examination, sometimes 
offering an overlaying commentary on statements just made. On worrying about 
his play: “I probably do this, unconsciously, in an attempt to create meaning 
in a show I’ve already done 100 times.” And on worrying about things such as 
this: “I don’t think Igain much from being able to describe my own unconscious 
needs manifesting consciously – that’s probably not necessary. I don’t think 
humans were doing that when they were hunting.” He calls all this “articulating 
my meta-experience”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d0d6620b188072056545b68672d77b00751b321%2F0_0_4368_2902%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God!%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God%21%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d0d6620b188072056545b68672d77b00751b321%2F0_0_4368_2902%2F4368.jpg>
 With Ellen Page in Woody Allen’s To Rome With Love. Photograph: Snap 
Stills/Rex/Shutterstock 
It isn’t always clear when Eisenberg is teasing and when he’s not. If his 
mannerisms are evocative of Hoffman, his chat is moreWoody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen>, a wry, tireless patter, the 
world a quarter amusing and three-quarters appalling. His jokes rely as much on 
tone and context as content, and as such are easily missed. When the warmth of 
the summer afternoon suddenly breaks, for instance, and an absurdly heavy 
rainstorm soaks him through, Eisenberg gasps: “What’s going tohappen to us?” 
When we make for the nearest tree, sheltering under it, the actor looks at me 
and says, “If this was a movie, we would kiss.” When the teenagers who have 
been patiently trailing us take cover under a tree of their own, he eyes them 
and mutters: “I feel like we’re going to beaccosted. I feel like we’re going to 
beattacked.”

I ask what he was like, at their age. He frowns. “The best moment of my 
childhood was when my friend told me I was ‘as funny as Steve Urkel’. [Urkel was
a character in the US sitcom Family Matters. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UYqybsp2snw>] I’m serious. Because until then 
I never thought of myself as funny. I thought of my older sister as funny. It 
was, like, the first time anybody validated that for me.”

His father is a sociology professor, his mother teaches dance, and used to 
take bookings as a professional clown. Jesse, with older sister Kerri and 
younger sister Hallie Kate, grew up artsy, first in New York and then in New 
Jersey. Kerri acted from a young age in Broadway theatre, and Jesse did, too. 
For a while, he was an understudy in A Christmas Carol and later had a small 
part in aTennessee Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tennesseewilliams> play. “And I was not 
good inany of it. I was just there because my sister was doing it, and I wanted 
to be with her.”

He wasn’t doing so well in mainstream education at the time. Eisenberg never 
fitted in at junior school,he once told an interviewer at the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2010/05/17/cycling>, and for a period 
refused to go.He later told GQ magazine 
<http://www.gq.com/story/jesse-eisenberg-gq-august-2011> that, as a 
seven-year-old boy, he “cried every day” in class. Things got better when he 
transferred to a school in Manhattan that specialised in the performing arts. 
“Acting school was a safe environment,” he says now.

Though he does not name any condition more specific than “anxiety” in 
conversation with me, Eisenberg has in the past spoken about his treatment for 
obsessive compulsive disorder. (“I’m on a strong regimen of pills,”he said in 
2009 <http://movieline.com/2009/09/30/jesse-eisenberg/3/>.) His better short 
stories play around with characters in therapy, or in therapy-like situations.
In one story 
<http://www.newyorker.com/humor/daily-shouts/my-nephew-has-some-questions>, an 
uncle is pushed to greater self-understanding by a young nephew who asks one 
question: “Why?”In another 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/03/18/marv-albert-is-my-therapist>, a 
patient visits a therapist who talks only in sports cliches.Eisenberg once 
suggested <http://movieline.com/2009/09/30/jesse-eisenberg/> that he gravitated 
towards playing anxious characters because he couldn’t be sure he’d come over 
any other way on set. “I need to stay busy,” he tells me. “Otherwise I go a 
little nutty.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b29e7295452bf82f79025fa4aaf7ca6376969cb%2F0_0_3152_2263%2F3152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God!%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God%21%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b29e7295452bf82f79025fa4aaf7ca6376969cb%2F0_0_3152_2263%2F3152.jpg>
 With Anna Paquin in The Squid And The Whale. Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Happily, he has been in work since he was 16 and cast in TV sitcom Get Real 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0212662/>. At 18, he sold his first screenplay to 
a Hollywood studio. (The movie, “a shallow but well-crafted commercial comedy”, 
as Eisenberg describes it, was never made.) That year, 2002, he appeared in an 
indie film calledRoger Dodger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_Film_of_the_week/0,4267,1018695,00.html>
, in which he impressed as a naive, virginal youth who was tutored in the ways 
of picking up women by an older lothario. In 2005, when Eisenberg was in his 
early 20s, he came to wider attention as the excruciatingly precocious Walt, 
teenage son of divorcing parents inNoah Baumbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/noah-baumbach>’s muted comedy-drama The Squid 
And The Whale <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/apr/07/2>. Both these 
characters, force-marched into maturity by the reckless adults in their lives, 
were pitiable, but Eisenberg made room to explore their callowness and 
unpleasantness, too.

When was the first time he thinks he got it right, I ask – really nailed it as 
an actor? “Uh. Uh. Uh.” Eisenberg stamps his feet, considering carefully. 
“Well, I did this movie once, calledHoly Rollers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/07/holy-rollers-review>. It was 
about a Hassidic Jewish kid who becomes a drug dealer…”

Holy Rollers was released in 2010, so Eisenberg has briskly written off about 
a decade of screen work: not only Roger Dodger and The Squid And The Whale, but
Adventureland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/11/adventureland-film-review> 
(2009), a strange and brilliant indie in which he played a young amusement park 
employee. Eisenberg explains: “Holy Rollers was the first time I felt like I 
was acting formyself. Not the people that hired me.” He isn’t sure he did 
anything really special as an actor again (“working at my creative best”) until 
he was inRichard Ayoade <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-ayoade>’s 
dramaThe Double 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/03/the-double-review-richard-ayoade>
, in 2013, cast in a double role as identical-seeming office workers, Simon and 
James, who chase the same woman, played byMia Wasikowska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mia-wasikowska>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb98864bbba5396ab831050cda3cb2e9b9c7f0951%2F0_0_2390_1600%2F2390.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God!%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God%21%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb98864bbba5396ab831050cda3cb2e9b9c7f0951%2F0_0_2390_1600%2F2390.jpg>
 With Kristen Stewart in Adventureland. Photograph: Allstar/Miramax/Sportsphoto 
What about The Social Network? His performance as Zuckerberg was so 
persuasive, I thought, that it’s now hard to think of the reclusive Facebook 
founder without elements of Eisenberg’s fictional portrait coming to mind: the 
constant, robotic misunderstandings with friends and colleagues; the moment 
when his glassy-eyed belligerence finally gives way to fear as he’s violently 
confronted by a co-founder. I agree with the New Yorker’s critical take:“an 
indelible performance” 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/06/02/disconnected-man>; but not so 
special to Eisenberg?

“The Social Network was just a bigger movie,” he says, “with more specific 
expectations. And so, as an actor, you’re more conscious of those expectations, 
and it necessarily feels less personal. Even if it’s of a high quality, which 
of course that was, you just feel like it’s impossible to have that real 
connection.”

When he was cast as the sinister technologist Lex Luthor in the new Superman 
movie,an announcement made back in 2014 
<http://screenrant.com/batman-vs-superman-jesse-eisenberg-lex-luthor-jeremy-irons-alfred/>
, fans might have had his stellar work as a sinister technologist in The Social 
Network in mind. They responded warmly to the appointment. Expectations ran 
high for months, but when Batman v Superman was released this March, it proved 
a distressing mess: overlong, charmless, with Eisenberg’s role not much more 
glorifying than anyone else’s. Something had gone wrong in his performance, I 
thought. Where his Zuckerberg was brilliantly shifty, his Luthor seemed only 
smarmy, annoying instead of dramatically aggravating. Though Batman v Superman 
wound up making a lot of money,critics absolutely hated it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2016/mar/29/most-savage-batman-v-superman-dawn-justice-reviews>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d7c957ef9d22b1a832889bea7bc2c91778bae6a%2F0_0_4883_3250%2F4883.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God!%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God%21%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d7c957ef9d22b1a832889bea7bc2c91778bae6a%2F0_0_4883_3250%2F4883.jpg>
 In Batman V Superman. Photograph: Clay Enos/Warner Bros 
Eisenberg tells me he didn’t read the reviews or the surrounding commentary. 
But he must have been vaguely aware of the kicking the film took?

“Uh, that film, I succeeded and failed in that film years before it came out.” 
Eisenberg means during production, when he was shooting his scenes. “At the end 
of the day, if I felt like I accomplished what I wanted to accomplish with that 
character, then it’s a success.” One of his co-stars,Jeremy Irons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeremy-irons>, recently acknowledged Batman v 
Superman wasn’t up to much 
<http://comicbook.com/dc/2016/05/29/jeremy-irons-says-batman-v-superman-deserved-kicking-it-got-from/>
. Whether from a greater sense of diplomacy, or an acknowledged tendency to be 
self-absorbed, Eisenberg takes a more personalised view. “Why would I worry,” 
he wonders, “about the specific gripes people have with something I do that is 
for myself?” He says that the only critic he cares to listen to is himself. 
“What other person looks to a consensus for how to do their job?”

He hasn’t watched any of his movies since 2007. ‘I realised it was 
unnecessary. The curiosity is outweighed by terror’

I say a lot of people do. “Well, that’s unfortunate.”

Eisenberg agrees there’s a measure of self-protection in his way of thinking. 
Some years ago, he was in an independent movie calledThe Living Wake 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0489212/>. It had a perfect script; filming was 
thrilling and satisfying; then he saw himselfin the trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vPDWddS6ftw> and thought, “Oh, shit, I’ve 
ruined it.” Eisenberg didn’t watch the final version on its release in 2007 and 
hasn’t watched any finished movie he’s been in since. “I realised I didn’t have 
to. That it was a totally unnecessary part of the experience.”

Is he really not curious? “The curiosity,” Eisenberg says, “is outweighed by 
my terror.”

Still trapped under the tree, with the rain not letting up yet, we discuss 
other matters. Brexit (he’s intrigued, particularly by the immigration debate, 
the flavour of which he recognises from home). American basketball (he’s 
devoted). At one point, he idly wonders why the kids who have been following us 
all afternoon are “wearing little suits” – in New York that would usually 
indicate they go to a private school, which they don’t – and then he describes 
how his parents drilled into him and his siblings the outsize importance of 
social causes. “It was totally understood, growing up, that we should support 
people who are struggling. This was not debatable – in my family, no one talked 
about, you know, the value of lower taxes. We talked about the value of 
education, of social security, of universal healthcare.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06ad0bc15a86a316a45f7099b79b7dc2302faa49%2F0_100_1238_1520%2F1238.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God!%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God%21%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06ad0bc15a86a316a45f7099b79b7dc2302faa49%2F0_100_1238_1520%2F1238.jpg>
 ‘If this was a movie, we would kiss.’ Photograph: Kate Peters for the 
Guardian. Grooming: Mira H at facepro.co.uk using Erborian skincare 
Was it a strange choice, in that case, to pursue a career in entertainment, 
rather than something more tangibly useful? Eisenberg points out that, just 
before coming to the West End, he spent four months volunteering at a domestic 
violence shelter in Bloomington, Indiana. While there, he collaborated on a 
fundraising campaign with the University of Indiana and raised $500,000, enough 
to pay off the shelter’s mortgage. “I would say this is a very clear example of 
using entertainment, or at least using a by-product of entertainment, in this 
case public notoriety, for something that’s more directly related to social 
justice.”

Why that particular shelter? Why Bloomington? “I was there for, like, personal 
reasons. For reasons I don’t want to bring up in an interview.”

This statement, of course, proves too enigmatic to ignore, so afterwards I do 
a bit of investigative Googling. When the Indiana Daily Studentwrote about 
Eisenberg’s work at the shelter in April 
<http://www.idsnews.com/article/2016/04/fundraiser-winners-meet-eisenberg>, it 
described charity worker Anna Strout, whose mother is executive director of the 
shelter, as Eisenberg’s girlfriend. The two were a couple in their 20s; in 
2011, Eisenberg told an American magazine thatStrout was the only woman he’d 
ever been on a date with 
<http://www.seventeen.com/celebrity/interviews/a15725/jesse-eisenberg-30-minutes-or-less/>
. In 2013, they appeared to have separated, and Eisenberg was pictured on dates 
with his The Double co-star, Mia Wasikowska. For a couple of years, the two 
were photographed every so often in cafes and airports, but neither actor ever 
confirmed or denied the relationship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6dcc854cc1a5ef31ba28d557c8bee882a2f70c8%2F0_0_3504_2336%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God!%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God%21%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6dcc854cc1a5ef31ba28d557c8bee882a2f70c8%2F0_0_3504_2336%2F3504.jpg>
 In American Ultra. Photograph: Allstar/Lionsgate 
I ask what it was like, as a socially uneasy individual at the best of times, 
to be subjected to paparazzi attention during that period. Eisenberg grimaces, 
shrugs. He compares it to the fact his dad teaches at a college campus that’s 
five hours from the family home. “Jarring, but it means he gets to do this 
thing he loves. The moment I complain about the totally disproportionate 
relationship between the wonderful perks I get [as a public figure] and the 
minor inconveniences that I’m tasked with encountering, is the moment I hope 
somebody slaps me in the face.”

Take being interviewed, Eisenberg says. “The whole context of what we’re doing 
right now is vain for me. But all of our lives have unusual circumstances. And 
you learn to live with those circumstances.”

Without warning, he twists his head in my direction and tumbles out a long, 
messy question of his own. “When I’m talking to you, and I can sometimes see 
your reactions, and I’m trying to gauge your reactions, do you look at me and 
think, ‘God! What an indulgent prick’? Or do you look at me and think, ‘This 
guy is smart and he thinks about what he does’? I ask because I wonder how I
sound. Because nobody ever tells me to shut up.”

I say I think it must be tiring, being him.

He sniffs a laugh. “I know my circumstances are the luckiest circumstances 
that have existed since, y’know, the dawn of civilisation. I recognise that in 
an intellectual way. I just still put a lot of pressure on myself. When I think 
about the kind of luck I have, of not only being born in America, but being 
able to do the things that I want to do, it feels pretty stupid to feel 
anxiety.” He tugs at his T-shirt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c55c56d226ba1b19f6799a644c37e7b55120613%2F232_41_1570_3083%2F1570.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God!%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jesse%20Eisenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98Do%20you%20look%20at%20me%20and%20think%2C%20God%21%20What%20an%20indulgent%20prick%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjesse-eisenberg-interview-film-social-network-superman-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c55c56d226ba1b19f6799a644c37e7b55120613%2F232_41_1570_3083%2F1570.jpg>
 With his The Double co-star Mia Wasikowska. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
The heavy rain has started to ease. The schoolkids, inching closer, dashing 
from tree to tree, now step into the drizzle for a bolder approach. “So the 
kids are coming,” Eisenberg says. He reminds himself, at the last minute, to be 
nice (“I should be nice”). Then he turns to face them. The scene that follows 
is a little strange at first and, in the end, rather lovely.

“Oh, hi, hi, hi,” he says, bombarding the arriving group with questions before 
they can say anything. “You made it over here? You literally followed me? Don’t 
you have things to do? What are your lives like? Do you want to come underneath 
here? You go to school here? Were you walking home? Where does everybody live? 
Around here? Do you like it?”

For a moment, the kids are silent, dumbstruck. What are our lives like? Then, 
all at once, they respond with giant smiles and cries of, “Oh my days!” and 
they surround Eisenberg to shout brassy questions of their own. For 10 minutes, 
under dripping shrubbery, the kids and the movie star interrogate each other. 
What are you doing in London not Hollywood? (“I don’t know!”) Why are you all 
wearing funny little suits? (“We don’t know!”) Can you really get out of 
handcuffs like the magician in Now You See Me? (“Yes! Don’t try it.”) Who’s the 
best at drama? (“Me! Me! Me!”) They discuss Brecht, whom the kids have been 
studying. They discuss Hitler, same. One of the boys, hovering near the back 
with a basketball in hand, says to Eisenberg, “Sorry for following you around. 
Sorry if we made you feel weird.”

He replies, simply: “I always feel weird. This is no different.”

• Now You See Me 2 is released on 4 July. The Spoils runs at Trafalgar 
Studios, London SW1, until 13 August. Buy tickets fromtheguardianboxoffice.com  
<http://www.theguardianboxoffice.com/tickets/the-spoils>or call on 0330 333 
6906.
 