
“I have an 11-year-old son – of course I play Minecraft,” JK Rowling tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/jk_rowling/status/557189704744177664> on Monday, after 
counting the world-conquering world-building online game as one of her 
distractions from writing, along with books for research and 24-hour news. 
There’s a long tradition of other authors turning to a variety of such games – 
mostly as light relief from their vocation, but also sometimes finding writerly 
inspiration.

Here are just a few other famous literary gamers. Do add further examples 
below.


Chess – Vladimir Nabokov


The Russian grandmaster of prose played chess regularly with his wife Véra, 
but is not said to have been such a brilliant player. However, his 1971 book 
Poems and Problems counts as something of a literary one-off, including 18 
signature problems alongside the verse 
<http://en.chessbase.com/post/nabokov-poems-and-problems>. Chess featured 
prominently in some of his fiction, too: The Defence follows Aleksandr 
Ivanovich Luzhin, a troubled and introverted boy who takes up chess and quickly 
rises to grandmaster. He is unable to beat the Italian ace Turati, however, 
triggering thoughts that his life is a strange sort of chess game, noticing the 
repetition of “moves” and “plays” in everyday existence. He soon realises that 
he must leave the game – climbing out a window and falling to his death. 
Nabokov’s Luzhin suffered checkmate in the most fundamental sense: a fatal 
existential confusion of life and games.

Nabokov wrote of the game: “Chess problems demand from the composer the same 
virtues that characterise all worthwhile art: originality, invention, 
conciseness, harmony, complexity and splendid insincerity.”

Snooker - AS Byatt <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asbyatt> 

It’s perhaps not quite so intimately bound up with her art, but AS Byatt has 
long been an avid fan of snooker. Part of this is for purely aesthetic reasons 
– she admires “the movement of round balls, and the shifting lines of force and 
energy made by the players’ movements”. The other central attraction is the 
dramatic tension embedded in the game: “There is a story, and the end is really 
unknown until it comes.” The passion has yet to show itself in her fiction, but 
who knows if there will be some pivotal tricky kisses in future.


Darts - Martin Amis
 Time’s arrows .. Martin Amis with press images of Keith Deller. From the BBC 
Timeshift documentary Bullseyes and Beer: When Darts Hit Britain. Photograph: 
BBC 
Martin Amis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis> made aspiring darts 
professional and petty criminal Keith Talent the star of his 1989 novel London 
Fields. In his creation of Keith, Amis is reported to have been inspired by 
Keith Deller, who won his only world darts title at the precocious age of 23 in 
1983. Amis later interviewed Deller for the Observer some five years after his 
astounding victory – which he was unable to repeat - writing that “There is no 
cave deeper or darker than darts.”


Table tennis - Howard Jacobson

“The return of social table tennis feels like a reversion to an earlier time,” 
Booker winnerHoward Jacobson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/howard-jacobson>
 has written. His 1999 novel The Mighty Walzer depicts the 1950s Jewish 
Manchester that Jacobson grew up in, and draws heavily on his own prowess as a 
junior table-tennis champion. Jacobson used to play with leather-bound classic 
books to practise his table-tennis technique when growing up: “I think I played 
with Wuthering Heights, probably, and then I thought I’d be even better when it 
came to playing with a bat.”


Video games – Naomi Alderman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/naomi-alderman>

The author of Disobedience and The Liar’s Gospel writes a gaming column for 
the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/series/the-gaming-column-with-naomi-alderman>
. In one of her columns, she writes that gamingcan influence players’ whole 
outlook on life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/13/gaming-column-video-games-reflecting-life>
: “If all the world’s a game, it’s more playful and more goal-oriented, less 
important but more filled with personal meaning. Now, where’s the Shakespeare 
of game-making to write about it?” Does she have that ambition herself? She 
authors games, and was the lead writer on Zombies, Run! She hasn’t yet written 
literary fiction about them, but has said in interviews that her knowledge of 
how games work has been helpful when composing action scenes.

Poker – Al Alvarez 
 Poker poet ... Al Alvarez with a hand of cards. Photograph: Martin 
Argles/Guardian 
For poet Alavarez – also a famously authoritative poetry editor of the 
Observer in the 50s and 60s – poker is rather more than recreation. Poetry is 
not really a way to make living, but if you’re good – and Alvarez is a demon 
player – poker is. He’s written a number of books about the game, to most 
acclaim inThe Biggest Game in Town 
<http://us.macmillan.com/thebiggestgameintown/alalvarez>. But he has also made 
a good living turning the cards himself, a formidable enough player to state 
that the game is only gambling if you’re a poor player.


First-person shooters – Alex Garland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alex-garland> 


The novelist, screenwriter and film director is a big fan of the first-person 
shooter video game BioShock, loosely based on Ayn Rand’ 
self-interest-championing philosophy of objectivism as outlined in her novels 
Atlas Shrugged and The Fountainhead. Ashe told Edge 
<http://www.edge-online.com/features/alex-garland-my-favourite-game/>, “The 
imagery was really stunning and the set-up was really pure and simple, and 
there were all these unexpected things … It presented you with moral choices 
that you had to make that felt like really ethical decisions”.



 