
A protracted – and amicable – discussion with the chair umpire about a line 
call did no more than delay the inevitable for Mardy Fish, althoughJo-Wilfried 
Tsonga <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jo-wilfried-tsonga> did his best to 
help him with a litany of errors en route to a victory that turned into a 
stroll. The Frenchman won 7-6, 6-1 in an hour and 29 minutes.

As bodies gasp and groan on the practice courts around the O2 Arena at this 
climax to the ATP's 11-month odyssey, good money is drawn to those players 
still standing without the aid of a physiotherapist. Tsonga, a delicate flower 
at times in the past, is among the healthy; Fish, who crashed twice in 
consecutive tournaments before arriving at his first World Tour Finals, is not.

He was not visibly inconvenienced, especially in a competitive first set that 
went to a tie-break – the third in five singles matches so far, indicating, 
perhaps, the evenness of the competition among the world's best eight players, 
or the rigours of the season, about which some of them complain vociferously.

Neither could hold serve in the first three games, before they found some sort 
of coherence in their shot-making, but Tsonga mostly looked the more 
threatening. He blasted six aces past Fish and took three in return, although 
his first-serve percentage, 48, was pretty miserable at this level.

Fish never got going in the second set and, at one point, bent double to look 
more closely at his feet. He has carried injuries in most other parts but those 
seemed to be holding up. Having lost to Rafael Nadal in a three-set struggle on 
Sunday, he will have to muster all his enthusiasm to complete his round-robin 
of matches in good spirits, against the defending champion, Roger Federer, on 
Thursday.

Tsonga, who lost to Federer in the opening match on Sunday, is at least on the 
scoreboard and his last match of the opening joust is against Nadal.
 