
The experience of New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> preparing to more 
than double its refugee intake in response to the Syrian crisis will convince 
people that refugees can benefit Australia, Peter Shergold has said.


The former secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, who is 
now the NSW coordinator general for refugee resettlement, told Guardian 
Australia the state was expecting to resettle 6,000 ofthe 12,000 extra Syrian 
refugees Australia promised in September to resettle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/09/australia-to-accept-an-extra-12000-syrian-refugees-and-will-join-us-led-air-strikes>
.

Dear Australia: a Guardian video series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/jul/14/dear-australia-guardian-video-series>
He said in addition to spending $146m over four years on health and education 
the state government would help refugees find work, which was a current 
weakness in support services.

Shergold said of the country’s total annual refugee intake of 13,750, New 
South Wales now takes about 4,500 a year. The 6,000 Syrians expected this 
financial year would increase the state’s intake to about 10,500.

He said job support services were “the weakest part of the services that are 
provided at the moment” to refugees and the state’s program would complement 
the commonwealth job scheme, Job Active.

He said Job Active had “only a few members who have particular expertise in 
refugee services” and NSW would take a different approach by partnering with 
business.

“I think the most exciting story is that we’re trying to do something quite 
different with employment,” he said. “Australia actually does a very good job 
with settlement services when refugees first arrive.

“The challenge we have is helping with the fact they want to get into 
employment and set up their own businesses.”

Shergold said NSW would set up a one-stop shop to work out refugees’ work 
experience, level of English and skills and coordinate with employers across 
industry sectors to find them work.

He said 10 to 20 major employers had already signed on to provide employment 
opportunities or work experience, including AMP, Harvey Norman and Australia 
Post.

“My aim is to meet with refugees, work out what a realistic path into 
employment is for them and use a network of supportive businesses to help them 
into work. “We’re looking at probably four or five thousand people seeking help 
to move into labour market. We can do this. This is not overwhelming, as long 
as we are prepared.”

Asked about comments by the Western Australian premier, Colin Barnett, that 
his state would welcome refugee families, andaccommodate them if more were 
accepted by the federal government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/18/wa-premier-says-children-in-detention-unacceptable-welcomes-refugee-families>
, Shergold said he would not comment on commonwealth refugee policy. But he 
said the Baird government’s active role welcoming refugees into NSW was both a 
challenge and a “great opportunity”.

“If we can show in NSW that we can respond effectively to this increase in the 
number of refugees, I’m hoping people will see it’s a positive not just for 
Australia ... but that refugees, with half a chance, will very quickly 
contribute to society. In a way it shows you can help them get on their feet.”

Australia confirms Manus Island immigration detention centre will close
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/17/manus-island-detention-centre-to-close-australia-and-papua-new-guinea-agree>
The issue of Australia’s refugee intake was highly controversial during the 
federal election. In May the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, hit out at the 
theGreens’ policy for increasing the refugee intake to 50,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/16/australian-refugees-greens-to-propose-increasing-intake-to-50000-a-year>
, sayingmany refugees would not be numerate or literate and would take 
Australian jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/peter-dutton-says-illiterate-refugees-would-be-taking-australian-jobs>
.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, defended the remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/peter-dutton-demonised-by-labor-over-refugee-remarks-says-malcolm-turnbull>
 by saying the immigration minister was merely pointing out the Greens had not 
given thought to how services for refugees would be paid for and how they would 
be integrated into Australian society.

Labor proposed a policy of increasing of the humanitarian intake of refugees 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/politics/refugee-policy-divides-labor-conference/news-story/c35bda184faf92e61a850d82eb754aef>
 from 13,750 to 27,000 by 2025.

Barnett’s comments follow publication by Guardian Australia of more than 2,000 
leaked incident reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
 from Nauru and the announcement on Wednesday thatthe Manus Island detention 
centre is to be closed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/17/manus-island-detention-centre-to-close-australia-and-papua-new-guinea-agree>
.

In the year to 30 June just 600 Syrians were resettled in NSW as part of the 
special intake.
 