
Johnston Press chief executive Ashley Highfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield> has warned that the number 
of full-time journalists working across the group’s local titles will fall from 
its current figure of about 1,000.

“The economics of this business means we will end up with fewer full-time 
journalists on our books,” Highfield told theDigital Media Strategies 
<http://www.digital-media-strategies.co.uk/> conference in London. “What you 
end up with is a much more fluid model with contributors producing a larger 
percentage of the newspaper.

“That’s not something we can duck. The economics of the digital world are 
going to mean our businesses can grow, not just survive but grow, but we need 
to go about things in a different way.

“It doesn’t mean the front of the book or the quality of editorial oversight 
will be diminished.”

Highfield said Johnston Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press> is aiming to increase the 
proportion of its revenue from digital advertising to about 23% in 2015, up 
from 17% in the current financial year.

He said the group was headed towards a point at which digital ad revenue was 
growing four times faster than print declines.

Johnston Press publishes more than 250 local newspapers, including the 
Yorkshire Post and Sunderland Echo, as well as Scottish national title the 
Scotsman and 195 local news and ecommerce sites.

Johnston press recently joined Local World and Newsquest in pooling online ad 
inventory across more than 800 regional titles in a project called 1XL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/19/johnston-press-newsquest-local-world-1xl-facebook-microsoft-google>
. It has also invested in offering local businesses a set of marketing services 
incorporating ads on its sites and in papers, as well as help planning digital 
advertising such as buying keyword ads on Google.


Highfield reiterated his call for the BBC to work with the regional press by 
sharing content with regional publishers and using their content to boost its 
local coverage, rather than “parking their tanks on our lawn” using their own 
local sites.

“We’re not asking for as state subsidy … not asking for it to be exclusively 
available to us,” he said. “The BBC that produces great content could reach a 
much larger audience if they worked through regional publishers.”
 