
As I write, Johnston Press <https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press> 
is enjoying a 3% boost in its share price. Not that it means too much because 
it amounts to a fraction of a penny, giving the newspaper publisher a market 
capitalisation of just £8.9m.

This comes ahead of a meeting tomorrow between Johnston Press’s chairman, Ian 
Russell, and the activist investor fund,Crystal Amber 
<http://crystalamber.com/home>.

According to a report in the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/09/10/pressure-mounts-on-johnston-press-as-activist-seeks-showdown/>
, Crystal Amber will wait until after the meeting before deciding whether to 
agitate for change at the company.

The fund, which holds a 3.3% stake in Johnston Press, has seen the value of 
its investment tumble as the company’s shares have fallen over the course of 
the past 12 months.

If Crystal Amber is not placated by Russell he and chief executive Ashley 
Highfield <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield> would be facing a 
formidable opponent. It has had a successful track record of forcing strategic 
changes at other companies.

Johnston Press’s major problem is a debt burden of £140m at a time of falling 
advertising revenue and declining print circulations at its 200-plus titles, 
which includeThe Scotsman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/the-scotsman>, and 
the Yorkshire Post.

Much of its hopes appear to be pinned on its £24m acquisition in April this 
year of thei <https://www.theguardian.com/media/i> newspaper. Since it took 
over, circulation of the daily has risen from 270,000 to 297,453 (in July).

How this will have a positive effect the company’s bottom line is unclear, a 
point likely to be made by Crystal Amber.

At its half-year results in August, Johnston Press disclosed that it had 
written down the value of it titles by £217m, and last month it was revealed 
that the companymay buy back its debt at a heavy discount 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/aug/15/johnston-press-may-buy-back-debt-to-ease-its-financial-headache>
.

Last month, the Financial Times reported 
<https://www.ft.com/content/7551befa-63a7-11e6-8310-ecf0bddad227> that Moody’s 
had downgraded bonds in Johnston Press to the third lowest possible ranking and 
changed its outlook on the ratings from stable to negative.


Moody’s said at the time that its decision was a direct response to the “worse 
than expected weakening in Johnston Press’ performance” in the first half of 
2016.


Highfield is seeking to sell off some of the publisher’s local titles and last 
monthcompleted the sale of its Isle of Man group  
<http://www.johnstonpress.co.uk/investors/news/sale-isle-man-newspapers-limited>
to Tindle Newspapers for £4.25m.

 “This disposal is further progress in executing our divestment strategy,” 
Highfield said.
 