
Johnston Press is expanding its presence in Northern Ireland by launching a 
digital title,BelfastVibe <http://www.belfastvibe.com/>, aimed at a young 
audience, the so-called millennials, aged from 18 to 35.

The company will also publish a related free weekly - a magazine-style paper - 
also called BelfastVibe, which will contain content drawn from the site. The 
first issue will be available on 9 April.

In Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, Johnston 
publishes the Belfast NewsLetter, a daily, as well as the bi-weekly Derry 
Journal, plus a dozen paid-for weeklies and some free titles, including the 
Belfast News.

According to a press release, BelfastVibe is “intended to bring the city’s 
multiple and diverse voices, influences and interests together and capture the 
pulse ofBelfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> life”.

To that end, the site will “cover a combination of trending news, viral 
content feeds, ‘street life’ and general lifestyle topics, as well as the 
latest celebrity and sports stories”.

Almost a third of Northern Ireland’s 1.8m population live in and around 
Belfast. And a large proportion of them, numbering some 130,000, are within the 
20-34 age group.


Johnston’s Belfast-based executive, Warren Butcher, described the city as “a 
lively, bustling metropolis, rich in culture and energy”. He said: “We want 
BelfastVibe to reflect that by speaking to the city’s millennials about the 
things that are most important to them”.

Ashley Highfield <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield>, 
Johnston’s chief executive, said the launch follows “extensive market research 
on how millennials want local news and information”.

As Mark Sweney reports, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/25/johnston-press-posts-pre-tax-loss-of-239m>
 Johnston Press has posted a pre-tax loss of £23.9m for 2014, with total 
revenues dropping by 4.4%, but digital revenues rising.
 