
John McCain and Marco Rubio have sealed a night of comebacks for the political 
establishment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/30/marco-rubio-john-mccain-florida-arizona-senate-primaries-chances>
 with the senators seeing off primary challenges to secure the Republican 
nominations for crucial senate races in Arizona and Florida.


Facing tougher opposition from Democrats in November, the two big-name 
national figures who once had eyes on the White House are instead on the 
frontline of their party’s battle to hold on to power in theUS Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-senate>.

The first of many? Marco Rubio denies he has plans for second presidential bid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/26/marco-rubio-senate-reelection-second-presidential-campaign>
A similar night of consolidation for the Democratic mainstream means Rubio 
will face the Florida congressman Patrick Murphy, who comfortably beat off his 
party’s leftwing challenger Alan Grayson on Tuesday night. McCain needs to beat 
Ann Kirkpatrick, who won herArizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> senate primary unopposed for the 
Democrats.

Both incumbent Republican senators have an uneasy relationship with Donald 
Trump, whom they felt obliged to endorse as the party’s presidential nominee. 
He may face more vocal criticism from them now their primary battles are over.

McCain in particular was seen as vulnerable to a populist challenge by Kelli 
Ward in Arizona, but was comfortably ahead by 55 to 35 percentage points when 
the Republican primary result was called shortly before 9pm local time.

Rubio launched his political comeback earlier on Tuesday night with a decisive 
victory in theFlorida <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> primary 
setting up a more winnable battle with Democrats, one that could determine 
control of the US Senate in November.

 Despite announcing his decision to seek re-election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/22/marco-rubio-re-election-florida-senate-seat>
 only two months ago, the freshman senator saw off a challenge from 
Trump-supporting real estate developer Carlos Beruff to win the Republican 
nomination by a comfortable 72 percentage points to 18.

 Previously Rubio had announced his retirement from politics after losing his 
home state to Trump by some 20 points in the presidential primary election. He 
was persuaded to change his mind as Republican leaders in Washington sensed 
that the Senate race in the state could prove pivotal.

 “This has been an unusual road back here with you tonight. As you know, after 
my race ended in March for the presidency I was prepared to become a private 
citizen,” Rubio told supporters after the result. “But I just couldn’t be at 
peace with the idea that we were going to not just potentially lose the Senate 
seat but lose the balance of power in the Senate at this critical moment in our 
nation’s history.”

 The Associated Press also projected that congressman Murphy had won the 
Democratic primary in the state by a margin of 59 to 18 percentage points.

 It sets up a tight race with Rubio in November, who is now narrow favorite to 
hold the state and could prevent Democrats netting the four seats nationwide 
they may need to swing control of the US Senate.

 Murphy saw off a lackluster challenge from Grayson, who was badly damaged by 
domestic abuse allegations 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/alan-grayson-wife-florida-226090> and 
reacted angrily 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/alan-grayson-politico-reporter-226219> 
to inquiries into his background.

 It was a disappointing night overall for the progressive wing of the 
Democratic party, which had also hoped to unseat former Democratic National 
Committee chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz after she was seen to take sides 
against Bernie Sanders in the presidential race.

 Sanders endorsed anti-establishment candidate Tim Canova in the 23rd House 
district around Miami, but he lost to Wasserman Schulz by nearly 14 percentage 
points.

 Canova, who did not receive much direct support from Sanders 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/08/canova-revolution-bernie-sanders-debbie-wasserman-schultz/497807/>
, hinted at a possible concession as soon as the polls closed,telling supporters
 <https://twitter.com/Tim_Canova/status/770759017702580225>: “No matter what 
happens we should all be proud of what we’ve accomplished in a short period of 
time.”

 In another Florida House primary, the incumbent Democratic congresswoman 
Corrine Brown lost the party nomination following an indictment on fraud 
charges.

But it is Rubio’s strong comeback against anti-establishment forces within the 
Republican party that is likely to be the most memorable feature of the Florida 
primary.

 Beruff, a real estate developer who self-funded the campaign in a similar 
vein to Trump, had attacked Rubio for missing votes during his presidential 
campaign, not being anti-immigration enough and failing to wholeheartedly 
support Trump as the party’s eventual nominee.

Similarly, Ward blasted McCain for being soft on immigration and too old to 
seek his sixth term as senator of the increasingly diverse state.

In Arizona the other big local news was the victory of controversial 
immigration control champion Sheriff Joe Arpaio in his primary.
 