
I am not alone in viewing Trinity Mirror’s decision to set audience targets 
for journalists working in its Midlands division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jun/10/one-trinity-mirror-sentence-that-spells-the-death-knell-of-journalism>
, as misguided because of its likelihood in encouraging clickbait journalism.

Ashley Highfield, chief executive of one of TM’s rival regional publishers, 
Johnston Press,told the Independent’s Adam Sherwin 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/the-media-column-despite-a-torrid-decade-for-the-regional-press-are-we-about-to-witness-a-renaissance-10335144.html>
:

“My worry would be that judging an individual journalist by page views would 
tend to produce the creation of ‘clickbait’ stories and listicles. I’ve no 
problem with whatBuzzFeed <https://www.theguardian.com/media/buzzfeed> does, 
but that’s not us.

If a deeply important piece of investigative journalism doesn’t generate the 
same number of hits as our biggest viral story of the year – the opening of a 
cat café in Edinburgh – that’s fine by me”.

For the opposite point of view, see this blogpost 
<https://davidhiggerson.wordpress.com/2015/06/11/why-audience-targets-can-be-good-for-journalism/>
 by David Higgerson, Trinity Mirror’s digital publishing director (and my take 
on his postis here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jun/15/why-trinity-mirrors-paper-of-record-memo-was-wrong-part-2>
).

Highfield: why the regional press should collaborate

Ironically, Highfield’s criticism of the Trinity Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> initiative came on the day 
he called for regional press groups to bury their traditional rivalries and 
collaborate.

In addressing a Society of Editors’ seminar in Manchester, he said publishers 
should consider sharing content. Rather than compete with each other, they need 
to fight together against the “real enemy”, such as Google,Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> and BuzzFeed.

He suggested that the industry could launch new niche websites based around 
themed content pooled from all their local sites. For example, “why not pool 
all regional press football coverage into one endevaour?”


Titles in his own group that had once competed against each other for scoops, 
such as the Yorkshire Post and Sheffield Star, were now working together.


“Many journalists tied to their desks, sometimes unknowingly working on the 
same press releases as their colleagues in nearby offices, is neither 
productive nor fulfilling”, he said.

As for scoop journalism, that’s history. “We can break a story online”, he 
said, “but our real value comes in the insight we add, and the way we amplify 
the story...

“Being best at what we do, but doing it together, is the only way to succeed”.

Building on his theme, Highfield continued: “Together we can capture 
significant economies of scale. We can innovate and transform. We can build an 
infrastructure which reaches every corner of the UK.

“We are not rivals. We are not competitors. Most of our titles operate in 
non-competitive markets. Our competition isGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, Facebook, RightMove, Gumtree 
et al”.
 