
At the moment, I am trying to avoid thinking about John Cage. And instead, I 
find myself thinking about Ant & Dec. In 2009, the musicians Steve Beresford 
and Tania Chen asked me to supply the spoken part for a performance of
Indeterminacy <http://www.lcdf.org/indeterminacy/>, by the postwar avant-garde 
giant John Cage. My shelves creak with music, but I didn't know any Cage, 
beyond Sonic Youth's interpretation of his pieceSix 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEEV4bIXv5s> on their Goodbye 20th Century 
album. As ever, I access the Temple of Culture by the tradesmen's entrance.

Highbrow musicologists would scoff at this lowbrow lead in to Cage's oeuvre. 
But, in her 1975 tome Sword of Wisdom, the celebrated mysticIthell Colquhoun 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ithell_Colquhoun> recalls discovering the Order 
of the Golden Dawn 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hermetic_Order_of_the_Golden_Dawn> in 1923 as "a 
schoolgirl sitting on a lavatory-seat and leaning forward to see into the 
depths of an osier basket lined with newspapers", specifically an occult expose 
from the Daily Express. In a piece of synchronicity worthy of Cage, I 
discovered this while reading Sword of Wisdom on my toilet, near to which 
I keep all my occult books, as I find they have laxative properties.

Cage's Indeterminacy is currently available as a cardboard box of 90 cards of 
90 stories of different lengths, and a leaflet of instructions: "Read the 
stories aloud, with or without accompaniment, paced so that each takes one 
minute. A stop-watch or watch with a second hand will help keep time. Read all 
90 stories in order or select a smaller number, using chance procedures or 
not." Beresford and Chen elect to improvise onprepared pianos 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prepared_piano> and found objects while I read 
Cage's stories in random order, and we all do our best to ignore each other, an 
approach that has made all the eight performances we have given in the last two 
years unique, though it's inappropriate to take any personal pride in this, as 
we are merely Cage's zombie puppets.

Indeterminacy's instructions advise reading "conversationally, naturally, and 
neutrally. Cage's own reading is resolutely undramatic." Early in this ongoing 
project (we have a three-date "tour of London" next week, for example), 
I resolved to find out as little about Cage as I could, so that I didn't 
"interpret" the stories, or do an impression of what I imagined his performance 
would be like. I didn't even check the pronunciations of any of the place 
names, people, or the many species of mushroom mentioned in the stories, 
assuming my ignorance exemplified Cageian chance procedure. But suddenly, like 
a delusional believer seeing affirming signs wherever he looks – images of 
Jesus on burned toast, the face of David Icke in a soiled nappy – I was 
encountering Cage everywhere.

When we performed in Bexhill-on-Sea, the pavilion hosted a Cage exhibition, 
which I walked through cowed, following Beresford's calves to the restaurant 
for the hearty meal he insists on consuming before so much as looking at a 
table of children's toys and vintage melodicas. The trombonist Alan Tomlinson, 
who is performingCage's Solo for Sliding Trombone 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2diY6wC1Xs4> alongside us, told me Cage sought 
comedy brass advice from Spike Jones and His City Slickers, suggesting, if not 
something so common as a sense of humour, then at least a sense of the absurd. 
After an Indeterminacy in Bristol, the Welsh magusCarlton B Morgan 
<http://www.facebook.com/clarkgwent> told me he overheard Cage discussing 
garlic bread in a Pizza Hut in Huddersfield in 1989. And at a party last week, 
the punk film-makerGraham Bendel <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graham_Bendel> 
not only told me he had once invited Cage to dinner, but did an unsolicited 
impression of him, sounding like a macrobiotic Woody Allen, insisting he could 
only eat "beans and pulses, just beans and pulses if you don't mind, boys".

None of this was remotely helpful. Then I remembered. In 2001, I was invited 
by ITV to pitch Ant and Dec a sitcom idea. I suggested the pair should play 
bickering lighthouse keepers on a lonely rock. Each week a supply boat, rowed 
by Cat Deeley, would deliver a different MacGuffin, an object to drive that 
show's plot. But the Byker boys chose instead to pilot a remake of Whatever 
Happened to the Likely Lads, specifically the episode No Hiding Place, in which 
they try to avoid hearing the results of a soon to be televised football match. 
In the shadow of Cage, I find myself wondering if it is too late to pitchAnt 
and Dec <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> a new sitcom.

In Anthony M and Declan D: New Departures, the duo play freelance interpreters 
of time-based art pieces, who live in a lighthouse on a lonely rock. In the 
pilot episode, Queer Silence, they are commissioned to perform Cage's 
Indeterminacy and spend the days prior to the event avoiding forming an opinion 
about the composer, a decision threatened by Cat Deeley, who rows around the 
island doing an impression of Cage through a megaphone. "Beans and pulses, just 
beans and pulses if you don't mind, boys."

When I sit down next to Beresford and Chen next week with my cards and my 
clock, I will block Bendel's Woody Allen voice, and Morgan's garlic bread, and 
think instead of Ant and Dec, two voids meeting in empty oblivion, bulldozers 
of negative space, leaving my mind clear for Indeterminacy. Eleven years later, 
that failed sitcom pitch belatedly has a higher purpose. But if the boys are 
interested, the offer remains open.

Indeterminacy is at London's Battersea Arts Centre 
<http://www.bac.org.uk/whats-on/john-cage-indeterminacy/> on 23 September, 
Kings Place 
<http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/whats-on-book-tickets/music/john-cage-indeterminacy>
 on 24 September andCafé Oto <http://www.cafeoto.co.uk/> on 25 September.
 