
The chief executive of Johnston Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnstonpress> has criticised BBC news 
chief James Harding for “peddling inaccurate information” and accused the 
corporation of trying to park a tank on the lawn of every local newspaper.

Ashley Highfield <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield>, a former 
BBC executive, called on the corporation to help the local press by making the 
entirety of its regional content available to its commercial rivals.

'Local media can deliver in a way the BBC never can' – full text of Johnston 
Press CEO's letter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/05/local-media-can-deliver-bbc-johnston-press-ashley-highfield-letter>
Highfield was responding to Harding’s 41-page report on the future of news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/28/bbc-world-service-cuts-uk-global-soft-power>
, published last week, in which the former Times editor said local journalism 
was “one of the biggest market failures in news in the last decade”. Highfield 
said the report contained “inflammatory language”.

Rather than provide more local news, as Harding’s report concluded, Highfield 
said theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> should back out of the 
“hyper-local” arena and help local newspapers by giving away a “great big 
bucket of content”, from video to weather forecasts, for free.

Highfield, in an open letter published on MediaGuardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/05/local-media-can-deliver-bbc-johnston-press-ashley-highfield-letter>
, said he was not sure what depressed him most about the BBC report: “The 
inflammatory language used, the misguided sentiment behind it, or the fact that 
the BBC intends parking a tank on every local lawn and offering its version of 
hyper local news controlled from London W1A.

“It is somewhat baffling that the BBC has become obsessed by the spoils of 
hyper-local news, particularly now, when their focus should be on everything 
but (with thesmall matter of the charter renewal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/03/bbc-trust-chair-government-political-interference-rona-fairhead>
 to consider),” said Highfield.


“The BBC needs to focus on what it’s brilliant at – creating world-class 
content – and stop trying to be all things to all people. The BBC sets the 
standard for national and international news. They simply don’t have the 
resources to be brilliant at everything.”
 James Harding. Photograph: Carl Court/AFP/Getty Images 
Highfield took issue with Harding’s assertion that the local press, which has 
seen more than 100 print titles close and thousands of jobs lost since the 
downturn in 2008, was failing to hold local power to account.

A number of Johnston Press <https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press> 
titles have closed in that period, a fact highlighted by Harding in his report.

Highfield responded: “We’ve not folded a single paid-for title in the three 
years I’ve been at Johnston Press. Moving a title online is simply not the same 
as closure and this seems a disappointingly analogue view from the BBC.

“And moving a daily to a weekly does not signal an end to daily news and daily 
publishing.”

Highfield said the BBC should open up all of its content, where relevant, to 
local and regional publishers free of charge, properly attributed to the BBC.

“They can keep their regional brands – Look North, BBC North West et al, but 
close their underperforming local websites and work with us, rather than 
against us, as we become their local media distribution partner and fully 
utilise our own, highly trafficked, rapidly growing, hyper-local sites.

“We’ll give proper attribution to that content, whichever medium we publish it 
in, whilst ensuring we keep our own local voice.

“This way, plurality of voice is maintained. In return the BBC can focus on 
being innovative whilst fulfilling its duty of delivering great education, 
information, and entertainment.”

A spokesman for BBC News said: “James Harding is a strong supporter of local 
journalism and has repeatedly stressed his commitment to helping it flourish. 
He was simply restating the importance of high quality local journalism to a 
public service broadcaster.

“Over the past year the BBC has started pilot schemes to share stories with 
local papers and to link through to newspaper websites from BBC Local Live 
pages. We have promised to improve attribution of stories which originate in 
local papers and agreed to a formal audit of how many BBC website stories 
originate in the local press. We have suggested other news organisations might 
consider covering such things as sport and courts for the BBC, we have hosted 
an industry event on data journalism and we are exploring joint ventures in 
local areas during the General Election campaign.

“The Future of News report was designed to stimulate debate. BBC News remains 
committed to maintaining a close dialogue with local newspapers. We believe a 
thriving local news business benefits the BBC and that a thriving regional BBC 
operation can benefit the local news business.”

 * Read the full BBC future of news report here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/resources/idt-bbb9e158-4a1b-43c7-8b3b-9651938d4d6a>

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <https://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 