
Three Hours after Marriage by Alexander Pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/alexander-pope>, John Gay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/john-gay> and John Arbuthnot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/john-arbuthnot> This satirical 
play by Pope and his friends mocks the 18th-century "virtuoso" and collector of 
natural "curiosities" Dr John Woodward, who appears as Dr Fossile. Surrounded 
by his treasured specimens, Fossile is naturally doomed to be bamboozled by the 
worldly Plotwell.

A Pair of Blue Eyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9781853262777/a-pair-of-blue-eyes>
by Thomas Hardy Henry Knight is clinging desperately to a Cornish cliff, with 
the waves beating hundreds of feet below. As he contemplates his imminent death 
he notices, right by his face, "an imbedded fossil, standing forth in low 
relief from the rock. It was a creature with eyes". It is a trilobite.

In Memoriam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780393979268/in-memoriam> 
by Alfred Lord TennysonFossils are for Tennyson the evidence of Nature's 
terrifying carelessness. "From scarped cliff and quarried stone / She cries 'A 
thousand types are gone: I care for nothing, all shall go'". Charles Lyell's
Principles of Geology had sapped his faith in the divine plenitude of Creation.

Father and Son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780199539116/father-and-son>
by Edmund GosseGosse's story is based on his memories of his own father, a 
famous and largely self-taught zoologist who was also a devout Christian. He 
claimed that God had placed fossils on the Earth when He created it. When his 
book is derided he is incredulous.

Ballet Shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780141334424/ballet-shoes>
by Noel Streatfeild Pauline, Petrova and Posy Fossil are all foundlings, who 
have been discovered as babies by enthusiastic paleontologist Great-Uncle 
Matthew on his globe-trotting adventures. Each has been sent home to his 
great-niece, Sylvia. They have been named "Fossil" in honour of the object of 
all his travel and study.

The French Lieutenant's Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099478331/the-french-lieutenants-woman>
by John Fowles Charles Smithson is a Darwinian and amateur geologist who has 
come to Lyme Regis, "armed with his wedge hammers and his collecting-sack", to 
hunt for fossils. He is out searching for relics of theechinoderm, or 
pertrified sea-urchin, when he encounters Sarah Woodruff, the fascinating 
fallen woman of the title, and is smitten.

Possession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099503927/possession> 
by AS Byatt Byatt gives her Victorian poets/lovers – Randolph Ash and 
Christabel LaMotte – the educated enthusiasms of the age, which naturally 
include fossil collection. They go off on a clandestine romantic holiday to the 
North Yorkshire coast where they hunt for fossils. In his letters to his wife 
Randolph mentions the jet he finds on sale in Whitby, and how "ancient ammonite 
worms find new lives as polished brooches". He does not mention purchasing such 
things for his mistress.

"Fossil Gathering" by Peter Porter "Armed with hammers, we move along the 
cliff / Whose blue wall keeps a million million deaths". On a school outing, 
the children cheerfully chip and collect, in jam jars, but the "blind eyes of 
Belemnites" tell them something chilling: "That every living thing ascends from 
slime / To selfhood, and in dying finds a face".

Oscar and Lucinda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780571244171/oscar-and-lucinda>
by Peter Carey The first part of this novel draws on Gosse's Father and Son, 
depicting Oscar and his father Theophilus as members of a fundamentalist sect 
in Devon, and also devoted naturalists. Oscar's father collects and classifies 
fossils, determined to use them to disprove the Darwinian account of evolution. 
He thinks God has put fossils into the rocks to show his own power.

Remarkable Creatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-fiction/9780007178384/remarkable-creatures>
by Tracey ChevalierChevalier's historical novel tells the story of Mary Anning 
from Lyme Regis, who found and extracted the first intact skeleton of a 
prehistoric dolphin-like creature, an icthyosaurus, in the cliffs near the 
town. Entirely self-taught, she becomes the most important paleontologist of 
her day.

• Tell us about your favourite fossils in literature and your ideas for future 
subjects
 