
Johnny Depp <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/johnnydepp> has signed up to star 
in a sequel to the 2010 $1bn fantasy blockbuster Alice in Wonderland,reports 
Deadline 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/07/johnny-depp-finalizing-alice-in-wonderland-2/>.

Depp, who only last week agreed to play Charlie Mortdecai 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jul/11/johnny-depp-charlie-mortdecai> in a 
film based on Kyril Bonfiglioli's books about the eccentric and debonair 
English art dealer, will once again portray the Mad Hatter in Hollywood's 
latest riff on the classic Lewis Carroll tale. The Muppets' James Bobin will 
take over from Depp's regular collaboratorTim Burton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/timburton> in the director's chair.

Burton's Alice in Wonderland film was itself a pseudo-sequel to Carroll's 1865 
novel, although it also incorporated elements of the English writer's 1871 
follow-up, Through the Looking Glass. Burton's film saw a 19-year-old Alice 
(Mia Wasikowska) return to Wonderland 13 years after her previous visit. It is 
not known how the storyline for Bobin's sequel is expected to unfold, or 
whether Wasikowksa, now 23, might return.

The Disney iteration of Alice in Wonderland sparked the current trend for 
live-action fantasy follow-ups to classic children's fantasy fare, which saw 
The Wizard of Oz prequel,Oz the Great and Powerful 
<http://www.disney.co.uk/oz-the-great-and-powerful>, take the box office by 
storm earlier this year. It is expected to yield similar results for the 
upcoming Maleficent (a revisionist take on Sleeping Beauty, starring Angelina 
Jolie as the titular wicked queen) and Cinderella (a new version of the story 
directed by Kenneth Branagh and starring Lily James and Cate Blanchett).

Despite being one of the highest-paid actors in Hollywood 
<http://www.forbes.com/pictures/mfl45khmg/johnny-depp-26/>, Depp is currently 
experiencing a trough in box office clout and critical acclaim. His most recent 
films, this year'sThe Lone Ranger 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146454/the-lone-ranger> and last year's 
Dark Shadows <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146520/dark-shadows>, have 
both disappointed. The actor's decision to play Native American sidekick Tonto, 
complete with outrageous face paint and a dead crow by way of a hat, has been 
criticised by US reviewers for unbalancing The Lone Ranger. In 2014, Depp is 
due to return to more familiar ground as Captain Jack Sparrow in a fifth film 
in the ever-popular Pirates of the Caribbean series.
 