
John Bercow, the Speaker of the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>, has suggested that 
parliamentary colleagues including a Conservative cabinet minister were to 
blame for the situation that led to the appointment of a new Commons clerk 
being terminated.

In an interview on the Today programme on BBC Radio 4 on Friday, Bercow 
singled outAndrew Lansley <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley>, 
the former leader of the Commons, and Sir Robert Rogers, the former clerk, as 
traditionalists whose opposition to reform resulted in a flawed selection 
process.

He also confirmed that Carol Mills, the Australian parliamentary official who 
was about to be confirmed as the new clerk when the appointment process was 
suspended in September, will not stand again. The clerk, the most powerful 
Commons official, enforces the rules when the government and opposition tussle 
over making law.

Mills had a limited knowledge of parliamentary procedure. A committee to 
investigate the role of the clerk said her appointment should be terminated. 
Bercow was accused of trying to further his modernising agenda.

He said the Mills appointment went wrong because colleagues, including Lansley 
and Rogers, did not accept his advice to reform the role of clerk. “The 
selection committee was expected to recruit both a first class parliamentary 
proceduralist and a top flight chief executive in one. I argued to colleagues, 
including the then leader of the House [Lansley] and the outgoing clerk 
[Rogers], that the roles, common-sensibly, didn’t hang happily together and 
should be split. But that advice and request were rejected.”
 