
"What Is Life?" by John Clare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/23/john-clare-poetry> Clare, an 
agricultural labourer, asked this big question in his poem – and came up with 
an unconsoling answer. "A mist retreating from the morning sun, / A busy, 
bustling, still-repeated dream". It's all "a bubble on the stream".

Miss or Mrs? by Wilkie Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781406583007/miss-or-mrs-dodo-press>
 This Victorian novella was a Christmas bestseller. Fifteen-year-old Natalie 
Graybrooke is engaged to middle-aged Richard Turlington (who is after her 
fortune), and in love with her cousin Launcelot Linzie. When Turlington 
discovers their secret marriage (thus the title) he plots to murder Natalie's 
trusting father, but is himself killed when his own revolver misfires.

Is He Popenjoy? by Anthony Trollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/11/anthonytrollope> You have to 
read the book to get the point of this terrific title. The evil Marquis of 
Brotherton returns from Italy with a wife and child (Lord Popenjoy) and evicts 
his mother and siblings from the ancestral home. The title refers to the 
novel-long struggle over the identity of the rightful heir.

What's Become of Waring? by Anthony Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781933382609/whats-become-of-waring>
Taken from the first line of a poem by Robert Browning, this title refers to a 
highly reclusive bestselling author, TT Waring. The nameless narrator, who 
works for Waring's publisher, is told at a séance that Waring is in fact dead. 
We eventually discover the truth of this, and the efforts to produce a 
respectful biography of Waring uncover the full extent of his fraudulence.

Why Didn't They Ask Evans? by Agatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9780007354603/why-didnt-they-ask-evans>
Apparently Christie happened on the title when a family member exclaimed this 
question in exasperation as he came to the end of a whodunit. In Christie's 
novel they are the last words of a dying man discovered at the foot of a cliff. 
Christie plays with the reader's expectations about the kind of person who 
might be called "Evans".

Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? by Edward Albee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/stage/9780099285694/whos-afraid-of-virginia-woolf>
 George and Martha, an American academic and his wife, entertain Nick and 
Honey, a new professor at a New England college and his wife. As the booze 
flows, George and Martha make the younger couple participants in a game of 
marital humiliation. Martha, mocking academic folly, sings the title.

May We Borrow Your Husband? by Graham Greene 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/02/20/specials/greene-borrow.html> The title 
of Greene's short story is the question that honeymooning Poppy keeps being 
asked by two charming gay interior designers who are sharing the same hotel in 
the South of France. The world-weary narrator recognises that Poppy's husband 
is really gay, and will go on being thus "borrowed" in the years to come.

Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? by Philip K Dick 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk:80/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780575094185>
 In a world after nuclear war, humans and animals are poisoned by fallout. 
Humans have made android animals to remind them of life on Earth before the 
cataclysm. Synthetic humans, lacking only the capacity for empathy, labour on 
Mars, but some escape and bounty hunter Rick Deckard (who is the owner of an 
electric sheep) is given the task of "retiring" them.

How Far Can You Go? by David Lodge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780140057461/how-far-can-you-go>
Lodge's comic novel follows a group of young Roman Catholics from their student 
days in the 1950s, across the increasingly permissive couple of decades that 
follow. The title satirically connects the sexual desires and anxieties that 
preoccupy them to the loosening of religious dogma.

If Not Now, When? by Primo Levi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141183909/if-not-now-when>
 Levi's title is taken from a rabbinical passage beginning "If I am not for 
myself, who will be for me?" and urging the person of faith to act. It fits his 
story of Jewish partisans fighting the Germans after the invasion of the Soviet 
Union. Mendel, the protagonist, sees his family annihilated but fights his way 
to freedom in postwar Italy.

• Don't forget to add your suggestions for next week's topic
 