
Regional publisher Johnston Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press> is planning to buy back some 
of its heavy debt pile at a steep discount.

The company, led by chief executive Ashley Highfield, is hoping to take 
advantage of fears that it will struggle to repay £220m in bonds due in 2019,
according to sources cited by the Sunday Telegraph. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/08/13/struggling-johnston-press-aims-to-cut-debt-pile-with-discount-bo/>

It is understood that Highfield plans to use the proceeds from the sale of 
titles it no longer regards as part of its core business in order to buy back 
the bonds, which are now trading at a discount of around 40p in the pound.

Although it would be regarded as a controversial move, and could well have a 
negative impact on credit ratings, it would help to reduce the company’s debt 
burden and, in effect, give Highfield some breathing space as he seeks to turn 
around the publisher’s fortunes.

Optimistically, Johnston Press could realise as much as £40m from the sales of 
local newspapers. It is also cutting costs through closures and title mergers.

Currently, with its share price lingering around the 10.5p mark, the company’s 
market capitalisation is little more than £11m.

As with other regional newspaper publishers, it has suffered from declining 
circulation across its 280 titles and falling advertising sales. Audiences have 
moved online, but digital income has not come close to matching newsprint 
revenues. Economic uncertainty following the Brexit vote has also contributed 
to difficulties.

Highfield acquired the Independent’s daily spin-off title, i 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/i>, in the hope that he could increase its 
sale and thereby generate more advertising sales. He has achieved the former. 
The jury is out on the latter.



A spokesman for Johnston Press declined to comment on the possibility of a 
bonds buy-back.

 