
Sir Robert Clayton This real-life banker from 17th-century London makes a 
guest appearance in Daniel Defoe'sRoxana, where he befriends the courtesan 
anti-heroine, arranges a massive mortgage for her and arranges the prudential 
investment of her ill-gotten riches. Is he good or bad?

Mr Lorry Jarvis Lorry, trusted employee of Tellson's Bank, is that rare 
creature in English literature: a good banker. At the beginning of Dickens'sA 
Tale of Two Cities he travels to Paris to rescue Monsieur Manette, made mad by 
his years in the Bastille. Later he returns to Paris to rescue Darnay from 
murderous revolutionaries.

Bulstrode Nicholas Bulstrode is the Mr Big of George Eliot's Middlemarch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9781853262371/middlemarch>
, a wealthy provincial banker on whose good will every local gentleman seems to 
depend. He wields his influence moralistically, for he is a severe Methodist â€“ 
but of course he has a shady past. He is being blackmailed by a former 
associate, and takes desperate measures to get rid of him.

Augustus Melmotte In Anthony Trollope's The Way We Live Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9781853262555/the-way-we-live-now>
, Melmotte arrives in London from France with a huge amount of money and a 
dubious reputation. "He could make or mar any company by buying or selling 
stock, and could make money dear or cheap as he pleased." Spendthrift and 
bankrupt British aristocrats rush to win his favour, but will abandon him as 
soon as his fortunes turn.

Torvald Helmer In Ibsen's A Doll's House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/stage/9781848375918/a-dolls-house>
, Nora's husband has just been appointed vice-president of the local bank. It 
sounds a good position, but this is a play about the dangers of borrowed money 
and forged bonds. Nora has contracted debts and drags her husband into the 
vortex of her financial deceptions. She is being blackmailed, and Torvald fears 
disgrace. He escapes this fate, but loses his wife.

Mr Banks In the Mary Poppins books written by PL Travers (the daughter of a 
bank manager), the pater familias of Jane, Michael, and baby twins John and 
Barbara, is Mr Banks, who works at the Bank of England. "While he was there he 
sat on a large chair in front of a large desk and made money." But he is 
thoroughly benign.

Patrick Bateman We never quite find out what New York investment banker 
Bateman actually does at work as, in Bret Easton Ellis'sAmerican Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330448017/american-psycho>
, he tells us only about what he is wearing, which restaurants he is going to 
and how beautiful his business card is. And of course the details of his serial 
killings. But then this is what bankers are really like.

Lord Kessler A man of exquisite taste and uncertain sexuality, Kessler owns a 
stately home not far from London but commutes into town to run his own bank, in 
Alan Hollinghurst'sThe Line of Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330483216/the-line-of-beauty>
. This banker turns wealth into elegance and suggests that banking is only for 
men of the deepest subtlety.

Humphry Wellwood In AS Byatt's The Children's Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099535454/the-childrens-book>
, the Wellwoods are a clan of bohemian bankers at the end of the 19th century. 
Humphry is a Fabian who works for the Bank of England but writes articles under 
the pseudonym of the March Hare, criticising banking practices. His moral 
earnestness is entirely illusory: he is a sexual experimenter who seduces his 
wife's sister.

Sir Harry Trevelyan-Tubal In Justin Cartwright's Other People's Money 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408803882>
, Sir Harry is the head of Tubal & Co, a merchant bank founded in the 17th 
century. Despite his horde of impressionist paintings, he is in financial 
trouble and has to be rescued by his resourceful son, Julian. Will he save the 
day by flogging the ailing bank to American magnate Cy Mannheim? By crook, 
perhaps.
 