
"On Seeing the Elgin Marbles for the First Time" 
<http://www.online-literature.com/donne/485/> by John Keats
The poet wanders into the British Museum and is transported by those statues 
from the Parthenon. These "wonders" bring a strange mix of emotions, "a most 
dizzy pain, / That mingles Grecian grandeur with the rude / Wasting of old 
time".

"Julia Bride <http://www.henryjames.org.uk/juliab/home.htm>" by Henry James
James's story opens on the steps of the Metropolitan Museum, where Julia 
Bride's suitor, Basil French, parts from her, leaving her worried. Will he dump 
her when he finds out about her mother's two divorces? Back in the museum, she 
meets her mother's second ex-husband and tries to recruit him to clear her 
reputation.

"In the British Museum <http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/in-the-british-museum/>
" by Thomas Hardy
Hardy's poem has two speakers. The first wonders at a fellow visitor to the 
museum, who is staring at a fragment of an old pillar. This person then speaks, 
declaring himself "a labouring man", who is amazed by what he finds. He has the 
religious devotion that the educated man lacks, and is seized by the thought 
that the stone once echoed the voice of St Paul.

The Catcher in the Rye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780241950432/the-catcher-in-the-rye>
 by JD Salinger
Holden Caufield visits the Natural History Museum in New York, remembering 
class trips of the past. The museum is a place of suspended animation: birds 
hang from the ceilings as if frozen in mid-flight. He may have changed utterly 
since previous visits, but the models are always the same.

"Museums and Women" by John Updike
Updike's story features a man who has always associated museum visits with his 
attachment to women – from his mother, to the girl with whom he shared school 
trips, to his wife, whom he met in a university museum. When he has an affair, 
it is with a woman who works in a museum, and they visit the Frick and the 
Guggenheim together.

The Subtle Knife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780439944670/the-subtle-knife>
by Philip Pullman
Transported into our world, Lyra goes into the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford, 
where she examines trepanned skulls. A pleasant-seeming old man discusses the 
skulls with her. But it is the scheming Lord Boreal, and she is unwise to 
accept his offer of a lift to north Oxford …

The Murder Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9780141044491/the-murder-room>
by PD James
A perfect, suitably gothic, scene for murder, the Dupayne is small, 
family-owned museum on the edge of Hampstead Heath, threatened with closure. It 
is devoted to memorabilia of England between the wars. Its "murder room" is 
devoted to the most famous murders of the period, and soon characters are being 
bumped off in ways that echo some of these cases.

Scorpia Rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781406310498/scorpia-rising>
by Anthony Horowitz
"The man in the black cashmere coat entered the British Museum just before 
five o'clock." It is Zeljan Kurst, the head of the evil Scorpia organisation. 
He is meeting a dying Greek billionaire, who wants him to purloin the Elgin 
Marbles. Can Alex Rider stop him?

The Children's Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099535454/the-childrens-book>
by AS Byatt
The novel opens in the South Kensington Museum (soon to be the V&A) in the 
1890s. Phillip Warren, a young runaway, is discovered camping out in the 
basement and sketching the museum's treasures. He is taken under the wing of 
Prosper Cain, the keeper of precious metals, and introduced to a new world of 
Edwardian bohemians and artists, a culture dedicate to preserving beauty.

Kraken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330492324/kraken> by 
China Miéville
In the slightly fictional British Museum of Natural History, museum curator 
Billy Harrow is giving a tour of his domain, the climax of which is a giant 
squid preserved in formalin. But it's been stolen. Billy sets out to recover 
his prize exhibit, encountering in his investigation a religious sect that 
worships squids.
 