
Public Image Ltd are set to tour and record a new album in 2011, John Lydon 
has revealed. Three months after thedeath of his stepdaughter, the Slits' Ari Up
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/21/ari-up-slits-dies-48>, Lydon is 
also considering reuniting the Sex Pistols – and even recording new material. 
"If [the Pistols] want me to go out on tour with them I'm happy to oblige," he 
said, "until three weeks later when I'm not."

Lydon last talked about a PiL comeback album in the spring of 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/mar/16/pil-us-tour-john-lydon>, saying 
it depended on the success of a US tour. But everything changed with the death 
of Ari Up. "It hurt us greatly,"Lydon told Stereogum 
<http://stereogum.com/610041/progress-report-john-lydon/franchises/progress-report/>
, referring to himself and his wife, Nora Forster. "I don't like to go on about 
death, but ... it's been a very difficult time. I would have been recording 
with PiL but after that happened ... there's just no way I could have gone into 
a recording studio ... Ari was [my wife's] only daughter. I just can't leave 
her alone with the grief right now ... I have to come to grips with all that 
and start working again when I'm good and ready. I hope people can respect 
that."

Despite this request for patience, Lydon intimated that new PiL material and 
tour dates are forthcoming. He has also been considering other projects and 
raised the possibility of writing new material with the band that gave him his 
start. "Because I've been able to get PiL back together – and because I've 
really been in a songwriting mode – I can now look back on the Pistols and 
imagine writing with them, too," he said. "I wouldn't have been able to think 
about that if I hadn't gotten the PiL thing going again. [But] for me, there 
wouldn't be a PiL if it weren't for them lads in the Pistols, so I feel 
responsive to their needs. That's how it is."

Lydon is currently promoting Mr Rotten's Scrapbook 
<http://www.concertlive.co.uk/mrrottensscrapbook/>, a collection of anecdotes, 
photographs and other material from Lydon's 40-year career.
 