
Johnston Press <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnstonpress> has 
reported an 11.5% fall in revenue to £135.8m and a £6m loss in the first half 
of the year, but said that an economic “ripple-out effect” is helping to drive 
a recovery at the newspaper group.

The regional publisher said that on an underlying basis – stripping out 
exceptional items such as the impact of the sale of titles in Ireland and 
cancellation of a printing contract with News UK – total revenues fell just 
4.3%.

This is an improvement over the 5.3% fall in the first half of 2013.

On an underlying basis, pre tax profits tripled to £6m, with operating profits 
up 3.6% to £28.3m.

“The economy is continuing to improve and the ripple-out effect from London 
and the south east is beginning to show in the numbers in Scotland, Yorkshire 
and Northern Ireland,” saidAshley Highfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield>, chief executive of 
Johnston Press. “There is a real momentum gathering pace within the group.”

Total advertising revenues fell 5% to £84.9m in the first half, again an 
improvement over an 8.1% fall reported in the same period last year. Print ad 
revenues fell 9% to £70.8m. Circulation revenues fell 4.4% to £39.7m.

The focus on growing digital advertising revenues is paying off, with a 23.4% 
rise to £14.1m to account for just over 10% of total revenues.

The company said digital audiences across its newspaper portfolio have grown 
almost 40% year on year to 15.9m unique users per month. In June, mobile and 
tablet users accounted for 46% of all traffic.

The publisher also said it had made “solid” progress on the key objectives to 
stem the decline in revenue, accelerate digital income growth and return to 
operating profit growth to enable the continued pay down of the sizeable debt 
burden.

Net debt was slashed from £306m to £181.6m year on year, following a capital 
refinancing plan that raised £225m through a bond issue and £140m through a 
rights issue. This has reduced annual interest payments from £36m to around 
£20m.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 