
Joshua Oppenheimer <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joshua-oppenheimer>, 
Michael Palin, Sigur Rós and Michael Nyman are just some of the names who will 
feature in this year’s Sheffield Doc/Fest line-up.

The festival, which runs from 5-10 June, will feature 150 screenings of short 
and feature-length documentaries. The opening night will feature two special 
screenings: the UK premiere ofThe Look of Silence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-look-of-silence>, Joshua Oppenheimer’s 
companion piece to The Act of Killing and the world premiere of Icelandic 
director Benedikt Erlingsson’s The Greatest Shows on Earth: A Century of 
Funfairs, Circuses and Carnivals, with a score by Georg Hólm and Orri Páll 
Dýrason of Sigur Rós.

Counter-documentaries: when subjects of investigation go on the attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/04/counter-documentaries-louis-theroux-church-of-scientology>
Michael Nyman’s War Work: 8 Songs with Film will also receive its UK premiere, 
featuring live music from theMichael Nyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/michael-nyman> Band. The film is a 
collection of archive footage and first world war era musical motifs.

A tribute for the late Albert Maysles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/albert-maysles> will include the UK premiere 
of his final film Iris as well as screenings of his classic docs Grey Gardens 
and Meet Marlon Brando.

A Sinner in Mecca: gay film-maker on 'a hajj of defiance'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/05/a-sinner-in-mecca-gay-filmmaker-on-a-hajj-of-defiance>
The festival will close with Monty Python: The Meaning of Live, a look at the 
careers of theMonty Python <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/monty-python> 
team which will be followed by a conversation with Michael Palin and directors 
Roger Graef and James Rogan.

Other films featured over the six days include Parvez Sharma’s A Sinner in 
Mecca, about the experience of a gay Muslim, Sundance Grand Jury Prize-winning 
film The Russian Woodpecker, about the search for truth in Chernobyl and the 
international premiere of The Hunting Ground, which focuses on sexual assault 
at American university campuses.
 