
The Avengers: Age of Ultron was by no means a failure for Marvel, grossing 
$1.4bn worldwide in 2015. But at the time of its release, reviews were 
generally more lukewarm than for its predecessor, The Avengers. Its 
writer/director Joss Whedon didn’t help matters byadmitting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/18/joss-whedon-avengers-age-of-ultron>
 to being burnt out by the experience of completing the project, and openly
criticizing 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2015/05/joss-whedon-fight-marvel-studio> 
Marvel’s final cut. In turn, his actions put a downer on the blockbuster.

Joss Whedon: ‘Making The Avengers is tough. I may die…’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/18/joss-whedon-avengers-age-of-ultron>
Whedon appeared to be in better spirits on Monday night at the Tribeca film 
festival, speaking on a directors series panel moderated byMark Ruffalo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-ruffalo>, who plays the current 
incarnation of the Hulk in the hit film series.

Prompted to reflect on The Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron> by Ruffalo, who 
told the audience he begged Whedon to do “Avengers 3 and 4, Hulk 3 and Thor 3” 
to no avail, Whedon said he’s ultimately “very proud” of the film, but admitted 
he didn’t meet his own expectations in the making of it.

Whedon also addressed his earlier negative comments, which he made during 
Ultron’s press tour.

The director said: “I was so beaten down by the process. Some of that was 
conflicting with Marvel, which is inevitable and a lot of that was about my own 
work and I was also exhausted, and we right away went and did publicity. I 
created the narrative – wherein I’m not quite accomplished at – and people just 
ran with: ‘Well it’s OK, it could be better, but it’s not Joss’s fault.’ I 
think that did a disservice to the movie, and to the studio and to myself.

“The things about it that are wrong frustrate me enormously,” Whedon 
continued, “but I got to make an absurdly personal movie about humanity and 
what it means in a very esoteric and bizarre ways for hundreds of millions of 
dollars. The fact that Marvel gave me that opportunity twice is so bonkers and 
beautiful and the fact that I come off as a miserable failure is also bonkers, 
but not in a cute way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fjoss-whedon-avengers-age-of-ultron-mark-ruffalo-tribeca%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a6f2bfcdb43a0bb2a57266b25a7c3bae9189b1%2F0_108_1539_923%2F1539.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joss%20Whedon%3A%20'I%20was%20beaten%20down%20by%20making%20The%20Avengers%3A%20Age%20of%20Ultron'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fjoss-whedon-avengers-age-of-ultron-mark-ruffalo-tribeca%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joss%20Whedon%3A%20%27I%20was%20beaten%20down%20by%20making%20The%20Avengers%3A%20Age%20of%20Ultron%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fjoss-whedon-avengers-age-of-ultron-mark-ruffalo-tribeca%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a6f2bfcdb43a0bb2a57266b25a7c3bae9189b1%2F0_108_1539_923%2F1539.jpg>
 Avengers: Age of Ultron: ‘An absurdly personal movie about humanity and what 
it means.’ Photograph: Allstar/Marvel Studios 
Immediately after the Age of Ultron blowout, Whedon told Ruffalo that he “took 
a two-week vacation for the first time in 25 years”. “I set out to accomplish 
nothing.”

Whedon’s back now, penning a follow-up project he stayed mum on except for 
saying that it’s “super good” and a “definite departure” from the superhero 
universe, while adding that the ending made him cry in public.

Avengers: Age of Ultron director Joss Whedon quits Twitter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/05/avengers-age-of-ultron-director-joss-whedon-quits-twitter>
“I wrote all the way through the end of the movie and was crying so hard in 
public that the restaurant closed,” Whedon recalled. “The valet guy came to me 
and then just turned around and went away without even talking to me … I’m a 
shy sort of fellow, I don’t like to make a spectacle of myself, [but] I had to 
take off my shirt and blow my nose because they had taken away all the napkins. 
I couldn’t stand up, I couldn’t stop writing. I got a car, luckily somebody 
else was driving, and kept crying for about 20 more minutes.”


The Buffy the Vampire Slayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/may/03/buffy-the-vampire-slayer-boxset>
 creator also said he got close to writing a full Broadway musical last year, 
but scrapped the work after seeing Hamilton, the recent Pulitzer prizewinner 
for drama. “I’ll get back to that, as soon as I stop listening to [the 
soundtrack for] Hamilton – in 2021,” Whedon joked.

Elsewhere during the talk, Ruffalo praised Whedon for creating strong female 
characters over the years, citing The Avengers’ Black Widow and Buffy as 
examples.

“Everything I write is about power and helplessness and somebody being 
helpless and their journey to power,” Whedon said in response. “Why is my 
avatar an adolescent girl with super powers? I still don’t really know.”
 