
The well-known social media journalist Matthew Keys has been found guilty of 
conspiring with the hacking group Anonymous to break into theLos Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> Times’ website and alter a 
story.


Reuters editor accused of helping Anonymous hack LA Times site
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/mar/14/reuters-matthew-keys-indicted-anonymous>
Keys, 28, of Vacaville, was convicted of giving the group the login 
credentials to the Tribune Company’s computer system. The company owns theLos 
Angeles Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/los-angeles-times>, Chicago 
Tribune, Baltimore Sun and other media companies.

He had been fired by Tribune-owned Fox affiliate KTXL-TV in Sacramento two 
months before the website was hacked. Federal prosecutors in Sacramento say he 
wanted payback. He was fired by the Reuters news agency after charges were 
filed in 2013.

Prosecutors say a hacker used the login information Keys posted in a chat room 
to gain access to computers and alter a December 2010 story. They say Keys 
encouraged the hacking and praised the results.

His attorneys contended any alteration was a relatively harmless prank that 
did not merit charges carrying a maximum penalty of up to 10 years in federal 
prison. As a first-time offender, prosecutors say, Keys will face far less time 
at his 20 January sentencing.

Tor Ekeland, one of the defense attorneys, said in an email Keys would appeal 
but did not comment further.

US attorney Benjamin Wagner said in a statement: “Although this case has drawn 
attention because of Matthew Keys’s employment in the news media, this was 
simply a case about a disgruntled employee who used his technical skills to 
taunt and torment his former employer.”


 Court documents say the hacking cost Tribune nearly $18,000 for the 333 hours 
employees spent responding to the hack. But Keys’s attorneys said restoring the 
original headline, byline and first paragraphs of the story took less than an 
hour and the cost fell below the $5,000 loss required to make the violation a 
felony.
 