
A judge today dismissed the drug conspiracy convictions against the late Anna 
Nicole Smith's boyfriend and lawyer, Howard Stern, and her psychiatrist, 
allowing only one conviction to remain against the physician while reducing it 
to a misdemeanour.

Superior court judge Robert Perry found Stern never intended to defraud when 
he used his name and others to protect Smith's privacy while obtaining 
prescriptions for her.

Perry also found that psychiatrist Khristine Eroshevich was acting out of 
concern for Smith, citing her long career and service to the community in 
deciding to sentence her to no more than a year's probation and a $100 (Â£65) 
fine for obtaining one Vicodin prescription under a false name.

The ruling marked the denouement of a long-running drama centring on Smith's 
troubled life, which was documented on reality TV, in tabloids and in trial 
testimony.

Smith also made headlines in a continuing $300m court fight with the estate of 
her oil tycoon husband.

Perry had said in September that he saw weaknesses in the prosecution case but 
felt he had to let the jury decide most of the charges. He said that, in the 
past, he had changed verdicts when he did not agree with them.

At that time, he dismissed two charges against Stern.

"I don't think there's evidence that a layperson knows it's illegal to write a 
prescription in another name for a celebrity," the judge said, noting that 
Stern is not a doctor.

Jurors handed a total acquittal to Dr Sandeep Kapoor, Smith's primary 
physician. But they convicted Stern and Eroshevich of conspiring to violate the 
false name statute to obtain pain killers for the former Playboy model. 
Eroshevich also was convicted of obtaining Vicodin by fraud.

Kapoor came to court for the sentencing of his former co-defendants. "I'm here 
to support them. This was four years of my life, and today is finally closure," 
he said.

The case was launched last year amid much fanfare by the then California 
attorney general and now governer, Jerry Brown, who denounced the defendants as 
conspirators in over-prescribing prescription drugs to Smith, whom he called "a 
known addict". He accused the defendants of being lured by Hollywood glamour.

After a three-week preliminary hearing and a nine-week trial, jurors 
essentially rejected those claims and convicted on few of the 11 charges. 
Witnesses said Smith was not an addict but a woman struggling with chronic pain.

This week, prosecutors advocated sentencing both defendants to five years of 
supervised probation and 300 hours each of community service, with Stern 
working for Caltrans, California's highway maintenance department.

They suggested Eroshevich's community service be directed by the California 
Medical Board and that each defendant pay a $5,000 fine.

Their sentencing memo also asked that Eroshevich, 63, be barred from 
prescribing controlled substances, which would severely limit her ability to 
continue practicing medicine.

Her lawyer argued she had already lost her reputation and much of her 
practice, and nothing would be gained from further pillorying of her.

Both Eroshevich and Stern, 41, could have lost their professional licenses if 
their convictions had stood.

Stern had been Smith's lawyer, manager, lover and friend since they met in 
2001. His lawyer argued that Smith was the love of his life and he would never 
do anything to harm her.

Eroshevich was described as a caring doctor and friend who flew to Smith's 
side in the Bahamas after the modelh's son died of a drug overdose and she went 
into an emotional decline.

Smith died from a drug overdose in 2007. The death was ruled an accident, and 
the California defendants were not charged with causing her death.
 