
A Manhattan judge has refused a request by public defenders on behalf of 
suspected New York and New Jersey bomberAhmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> to schedule his first 
court appearance to face federal charges.


Judge Gabriel W Gorenstein said on Wednesday night that while an arrested 
person must appear before the court “without unnecessary delay”, he agreed with 
government claims that Rahami was currently being held under state charges and 
did not yet need to appear in court.

Rahami, 28, remains in the hospital in Newark, New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>, recovering from injuries 
sustained in a shootout with police during his arrest on Monday. Public 
defenders had suggested he might make his first court appearance from his 
hospital bed.

But Gorenstein said there was no evidence to contradict government claims that 
he has not been arrested on federal charges, and is still being held on state 
charges; therefore he does not have to immediately appear before a federal 
court, the judge said.

New York and New Jersey bombings: who is suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings>
On Tuesday, federal authorities charged Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey>
 with bombing, property destruction and the use of weapons of mass destruction 
regardingthe bombing in Chelsea on Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-city-blind-home-chelsea-bombing-selis-manor>
 that injured 31 people, as well as pipe bombs plantedin Seaside Park, New 
Jersey, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/17/pipe-bomb-jersey-shore-5km-run-us-marines>
 on Saturday and in Elizabeth, New Jersey, on Sunday night.

In a new interview, Rahami’s father, Mohammad Rahami, offered more information 
on what he told the FBI when he contacted them in 2014 to share his concerns 
about his son’s interest in terrorism, following a domestic incident in which 
the younger Rahami stabbed his brother.

“I told the FBI to keep an eye on him,” Mohammad Rahami told the New York Times
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/23/nyregion/ahmad-khan-rahami-bombing.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=first-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
. “They said, ‘Is he a terrorist?’ I said: ‘I don’t know. I can’t guarantee you 
100% if he is a terrorist. I don’t know which groups he is in. I can’t tell 
you.’”

But he did share with the FBI the specific behaviors that concerned him. 

“The way he speaks, his videos, when I see these things that he listens to, 
for example, al-Qaida, Taliban, he watches their videos, their poetry,” he said 
he told authorities.


Rahami’s wife, Asia Bibi Rahami, flew into New York from Dubai on Wednesday 
night to speak with authorities about her husband. Asia Rahami is a Pakistani 
national who reportedly wed Rahami during his 2014 visit to Pakistan. It was an 
arranged marriage,reported CBS 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/new-york-city-bombing-suspect-cased-chelsea-explosion/>
, who said she is working with investigators and is not considered a suspect.


When Rahami returned from Pakistan after marrying Asia, customs officials 
flagged him and put him through secondary screening,reported the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/22/nyregion/new-york-new-jersey-bombing.html?emc=edit_th_20160922&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67239970>
. After concerns over his travel history, which included a trip to Turkey in 
2014 when authorities were concerned about foreigners heading there to fight in 
Syria, customs officials contacted the National Targeting Center, a federal 
agency that examines potential threats,said the Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/22/nyregion/new-york-new-jersey-bombing.html?emc=edit_th_20160922&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67239970>
.

A US official told the Guardian on Tuesday that Rahami was not on any US 
watchlists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-new-york-judge-blocks-federal-charges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa431ffa14233e1259aa1756c0dd05bbbebd913c1%2F59_0_1757_1054%2F1757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Judge%20blocks%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20from%20appearing%20in%20court%20on%20federal%20charges&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-new-york-judge-blocks-federal-charges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Judge%20blocks%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20from%20appearing%20in%20court%20on%20federal%20charges&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-new-york-judge-blocks-federal-charges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa431ffa14233e1259aa1756c0dd05bbbebd913c1%2F59_0_1757_1054%2F1757.jpg>
 In his journal, Rahami fumed that the US government was slaughtering Muslim 
holy warriors and alluded to plans for revenge. Photograph: AP 
The blood-stained notebook found with Rahami echoes the ideas raised by Isis 
spokesman Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, according to the Times. Adnani had called on 
followers unable to join the fight in Syria to take up their own arms and 
commit violence at home.

On one page of his notebook, Rahami wrote:

“back to Sham [a name used for Syria] … … Guidance come / Sheikh Anwar / 
Brother Adnani / Dawla. Said it clearly attack The Kuffar in their backyard.”

Authorities view this as a reference to Adnani’s speech in May to commit 
pro-Isis attacks against western citizens in their home countries.

Police began their pursuit of of Rahami on Sunday, after the bombs in New York 
and New Jersey on Saturday,explained CBS 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/new-york-city-bombing-suspect-cased-chelsea-explosion/>
. They feared Rahami was trying to escape in a car, and stopped the car near 
the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, which runs from Staten Island to Brooklyn, on 
Sunday night. But it was a false alarm: the five people in the car were related 
to Rahami, but he was not in the car himself.

Meanwhile the FBI continued to search for two men who found a second, 
unexploded pressure cooker device that prosecutors say Rahami left in a piece 
of luggage in Chelsea on Saturday night.

The two men, who took the bag but left the improvised bomb on the street, are 
not suspects, officials said, but investigators want to interview them as 
witnesses.

“They’re not in any jeopardy of being arrested,” Jim Watters, chief of the New 
York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> police department’s 
counter-terrorism unit, said on Wednesday. “We have no reason to believe 
they’re connected.”

Prosecutors said surveillance video shows Rahami rolling a suitcase down the 
street, then abandoning it on the sidewalk where that second device was found.

A few minutes later, two men pass by the luggage and appear to admire it, 
police said. They then remove a pressure cooker from the luggage, leave the 
pressure cooker on the sidewalk and walk away with the luggage.

“I think they were more interested in the bag, not what they were taking out,” 
Watters said, adding that they were “very, very lucky” the bomb didn’t explode.

The attacks in New York and New Jersey were the latest in a series in the US 
inspired by Islamic militant groups including al-Qaida andIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>.

A pair of ethnic Chechen brothers killed three people and injured more than 
260 others at the Boston marathon in 2013 with homemade pressure-cooker bombs 
similar to those used in this weekend’s attacks.

Reuters and the Associated Press contributed to this report
 