
A federal judge has recommended that Arizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> sheriff Joe Arpaio, a leading 
ally of Republican nominee Donald Trump, face criminal charges of contempt of 
court for ignoring orders in a racial profiling case that found that he 
violated Latinos’ civil rights.

District judge Murray Snow wrote in a ruling on Friday that another judge 
would have the final decision regarding whether to charge Arpaio with contempt 
for hisillegal immigration patrols 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/25/us/federal-judge-finds-violations-of-rights-by-sheriff-joe-arpaio.html>
, which he continued for months after Snow ordered them stopped.

Images from US Border Patrol facility reveal harsh conditions for immigrants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/18/us-border-patrol-facility-images-tucson-arizona>
Snow also said there was probable cause to believe that Arpaio intentionally 
failed to turn over records that he had promised, under oath, to give to the 
court.

The records were from a secret investigation that Arpaio’s foes say focused on 
Snow in an attempt to discredit him. The sheriff has vigorously insisted that 
he didn’t investigate Snow, and that the inquiry was instead about widespread 
identity theft.

The judge also found there was probable cause to believe Arpaio’s deputy, 
Jerry Sheridan, and others violated orders in concealing nearly 1,500 IDs in an 
internal investigation into whether officers pocketed items from people during 
traffic stops.

“Sheriff Arpaio and Chief Deputy Sheridan have a history of obfuscation and 
subversion of this Court’s orders that is as old as this case and did not stop 
after they themselves became the subjects of civil contempt,” Snow wrote.

The order moves the six-term sheriff’s contempt case from civil court to 
criminal court. Snow will continue to preside over the profiling case as he 
presses the sheriff’s office to make policy changes to prevent future racial 
profiling.

Calls to the sheriff’s office and Sheridan’s attorney were not immediately 
returned Friday evening.

But in a court filing last month, Arpaio attorney Mel McDonald said the 
sheriff regretted the mistakes that led to the civil contempt violations, and 
that Arpaio had made significant strides in complying with court-ordered 
changes imposed on his office.

The case would be prosecuted either by the US attorney’s office or an attorney 
appointed by the court.

In May, the judge found Arpaio, Sheridan and two other sheriff’s employees in 
civil contempt of court for violating three orders within the nearly 
nine-year-old profiling case. Arpaio and Sheridan were previously found to have 
made several intentional misstatements of facts last year during their contempt 
hearings.

Sheriff Joe Arpaio fights bestiality with Craigslist stings: ‘This is my 
crusade’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/20/arizona-sheriff-joe-arpaio-beastiality-video-craigslist-trump>
Three years ago, the sheriff’s office was found to have racially profiled 
Latinos in regular traffic and immigration patrols. The judge imposed a series 
of changes aimed at guarding against profiling.

Arpaio, 84, is seeking a seventh term this year and built his political 
reputation on pushing the bounds of local immigration enforcement, making 
inmates wear pink underwear, jailing them in tents despite triple-digit summer 
heat and waging an aggressivecampaign against bestiality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/20/arizona-sheriff-joe-arpaio-beastiality-video-craigslist-trump>
.

The sheriff has re-emerged as a national figure thanks to his outspoken 
support for Donald Trump, who has loudly supported Arpaio’s strident 
anti-immigration philosophy. Arpaio spoke on behalf of Trump at the Republican 
national convention in July, and the Republican nominee, who hascalled Mexicans 
“rapists” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
 and promised a wall on the southern border, often tells rallies: “I love 
Sheriff Joe.”
 