
Australia still hasn’t learned not to make jokes about low-lying islands and 
climate change, the foreign minister of the Marshall Islands has said, 
referring to foreign minister Julie Bishop’s mocking comments last week about 
claims that one of theMarshall Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marshall-islands> was already submerged.


Island nations urge Turnbull to echo Obama's climate change leadership
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/02/island-nations-urge-turnbull-to-echo-obamas-climate-change-leadership>
Bishop arrives in Paris on Sunday to lead Australia’s negotiating effort for 
the final week of the summit and Tony de Brum said he would need to have an 
exchange to “sort out” the issue with her.

“Australia has still not learned they should not mess with the islands and 
make jokes about the islands and climate change,” de Brum told journalists.

Bishop mocked her Labor counterpart, Tanya Plibersek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tanya-plibersek>, in parliament 
last week for claiming the island of Eneko had “disappeared” due to rising sea 
levels when in fact it was a “beautiful and accessible beach getaway”.

“You can rent a bungalow for $50 a night. It is in good condition, we’re told. 
There are houses, lawns, gardens, there is a toilet block and there are picnic 
tables,” Bishop said.

 It subsequently emerged that Plibersek’s transcript had misnamed the island, 
and that she had been referring to a different island, called Anebok, which had 
disappeared.

“The spelling of Anebok and Eneko is very close and the Australians haven’t 
spoken English for years and probably don’t know how to pronounce those names 
properly because that is what the whole section was about,” de Brum said.

“One island has disappeared, we didn’t go to that island because it is 
disappeared. We went to where it used to be, took pictures and went to the 
other island where the press conference was broadcast from the Marshalls. So I 
am sure when Minister Bishop arrives tomorrow we will have a chance to sort 
that out.”

The US president, Barack Obama, recognised the importance and special concerns 
of the low lying states in a meeting on the sidelines of the Paris conference 
on Tuesday with leaders from Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, St Lucia, Barbados 
and Papua New Guinea.

Speaking after the meeting, Obama described himself as “an island boy”, 
referring to his childhood on Hawaii, and urged the conference to listen to 
their concerns.

“Their population are amongst the most vulnerable to the ravages of climate 
change ... Some of their nations could disappear entirely and as weather 
patterns change, we might deal with tens of millions of climate refugees in the
Asia Pacific <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific> region,” he said.

He said Paris summit must “serve the interests of the most vulnerable” as well 
as the most powerful.

Peter Dutton jokes with Tony Abbott about rising sea levels in Pacific nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/11/peter-dutton-jokes-with-tony-abbott-about-rising-sea-levels-in-pacific-nations>
Australia has backed the island states’ demands that the Paris agreement 
include a call for global warming to be limited to 1.5 degrees, in line with 
the latest science, as well as its overall 2 degrees goal. In fact the 
commitments made by all countries in Paris would result in warming of at least 
2.7 degrees, if all countries do what they are promising.

The agreement is seeking to institute regular reviews to try to increase the 
ambition of national commitments over time.

Speaking to Guardian Australia in Paris earlier in the week, the opposition 
leader, Bill Shorten, accused Bishop of having a “Peter Dutton moment” –a 
reference to the immigration minister’s joke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/11/peter-dutton-jokes-with-tony-abbott-about-rising-sea-levels-in-pacific-nations>
 – picked up on a boom mic – about rising sea levels in the Pacific.

“Her comments makes Australia look stupid. The Pacific islands see Australia 
as a big brother andJulie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop> is treating their 
concerns as a political football,” he said.
 