
WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> could make a second Senate 
bid at the Western Australian election, as the electoral commission declared a 
new result that looks likely to be appealed in the high court.

The recount found that 1375 ballot papers had gone missing for the new count, 
which saw Greens senator Scott Ludlam and Sports party candidate Wayne 
Dropulich the winners of the final two seats.

The high court, sitting as the court of disputed returns, could order a new 
election be held.

It's unclear whether any new poll would be restricted to the same parties and 
candidates that contested the September 7 federal election, or if the regular 
procedure for nominations would occur.

Assange contested a Victorian Senate spot for his WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> party in September and attracted 
almost 41,700 primary votes out of 3.5 million.

But the WikiLeaks lead candidate in WA, Gerry Georgatos, says Assange would 
head the party's ticket instead if a new election was held.

This would allow West Australians to "remedy the injustice of Julian Assange 
not being elected to the Senate" in the Victorian contest.

 "If a fresh election is called for, the WikiLeaks party will contest the 
election and we will accept the will of the people, not the mistakes of the 
AEC," Mr Georgatos said in a statement on Monday.

"The imperative is for Julian Assange to reach our Senate and to renew 
democracy, to break down the narrow corridor of political discourse that are we 
mired within."

Assange has been in the Ecuadorian embassy since June 2012 after seeking 
refuge there to avoid extradition to Sweden for questioning on allegations of 
sexual misconduct.

He had feared the Swedish proceedings could result in him be extradited to the 
US, where there has been uproar over the decision by WikiLeaks to publish 
highly sensitive government cables and documents.
 