
People often ask writers, “where do you get your ideas?” And the answer is: we 
steal them from our children…

One night, I was reading the most boring children’s book in the long history 
of the world to my daughter, Sophy (who was six at the time). I won’t tell you 
who wrote it, because

A) I don’t want to embarrass them, and

B) the book was so brain-wipingly boring, I have forgotten the writer’s name.

Anyway, it was a picture book about a nice, friendly, perfectly boring rabbit 
and a nice, friendly, perfectly boring bear.

What happened in the book?

NOTHING!

At one point, a third friendly, boring animal arrived, just to give the 
illustrator something new to draw (she must have been getting bored too).

The new animal didn’t do anything either, and it was so boring I can’t even 
remember what it was.

You couldn’t tell any of the animals apart: they all talked the same, and 
acted the same, and were nice and friendly to each other, until the book ended, 
or the reader died of boredom, whichever came first.

There was no conflict; no drama; no STORY. All the animals were polite, 
well-behaved, and perfect. They had nothing to learn, and nowhere to go. No 
problem to solve.

Now, I am not nice, friendly, and perfect. My daughter is not nice, friendly, 
and perfect. Nobody I know is nice, friendly, and perfect. Everyone I know is 
complicated and sometimes nice and sometimes nasty and sometimes friendly and 
sometimes angry and sometimes sulky and sometimes funny and sometimes stupid 
and sometimes clever and always interesting.

And no animal I know is nice, friendly and perfect. How boring would THAT be? 
Animals wee on the carpet sometimes, and sniff each other’s bottoms ALL the 
time, and chew the furniture. And that’s just our pet cat, Aífe. (If you don’t 
keep her litter tray clean, she will deliberately poo in your shoe.) And wild 
animals… are even wilder than that! What is the point of having bears and 
rabbits in your story if they aren’t WILD, and doing the crazy, surprising, and 
often rather rude things real bears and rabbits do?

So my daughter and I started talking about how terrible the book was, and 
about how it could be better.

“What if the new animal that arrived was a wolf?” said my daughter. “And then 
the wolf could chase the rabbit!”

“Exactly!!!” I said, sitting up in bed. “Then you have a story!”

And so my daughter and I rebelled against the world’s most boring bedtime 
story, and started to write a better one. We threw ideas back and forth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff962dac84e24669883f664d6457937a1584e77fb%2F0_0_1020_715%2F1020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff962dac84e24669883f664d6457937a1584e77fb%2F0_0_1020_715%2F1020.jpg>
 Jim Field: ‘I was lucky enough to visit Yosemite National Park and Kings 
Canyon in California a couple of years ago, both are utterly incredible places 
and it was great to have the opportunity to put pencil to paper and try and 
capture these beautiful landscapes for this book.’ Photograph: Jim Field 
“What if the rabbit was grumpy and unfriendly and didn’t like the bear?”

“Great! And what if the rabbit doesn’t help the bear build a snowman? What if 
the rabbit is jealous, and tries to build his own bigger, better snowman?”

“Great! And what if the rabbit steals the bear’s food!”

I realised that our story was about ten million billion times better than the 
book we had read. So, when Sophy was asleep, I stayed up late, and wrote it all 
down…

The next night, I read it to Sophy as her bedtime story. She enjoyed it 
enormously, but, of course, it wasn’t perfect (because nothing is perfect, 
especially the very rough first try at a story). And so she told me which bits 
she liked (“Great!”), and which bits she didn’t like (“Boring!”), and I went 
away and rewrote it again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F966b31ccbb8cb250700dae2fae164818c9828770%2F0_0_800_1240%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F966b31ccbb8cb250700dae2fae164818c9828770%2F0_0_800_1240%2F800.jpg>
 Jim Field: ‘This was the rabbit design that “stuck”, it captured his grumpy 
qualities and it felt like he had plenty of scope for further 
characterisation.’ Photograph: Jim Field 
But of course it took AN INCREDIBLY LONG TIME to get from our rough and 
scruffy bedtime story to the finished book (Rabbit’s Bad Habits <>, which was 
finally published this year withJim Field <http://jimfield.co.uk/Rabbit-Bear>’s 
amazing pictures). I had to get the story as good as I could get it, before my 
agent could look for a publisher, and get an award-winning, genius illustrator 
like Jim to bring it to life. And that took a couple ofyears, because I did it 
in my spare time. I was good at writingnovels 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/jude-in-london.html> (and plays, and poems, 
and things like the ending to Minecraft, which I wrote for Notch): but I was 
still learning to write children’s books.

And I wanted to do something quite hard: to combine the charm and humour and 
complicated, funny, interesting characters of Winnie the Pooh with the weird, 
different-kind-of-interesting, real-life facts of David Attenborough’s wildlife 
documentaries. Because in the real world, wolves try to eat rabbits. And 
rabbits have somevery surprising habits…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F770c1f322dbf511184bf9faa367c3947aedd1124%2F0_0_800_800%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F770c1f322dbf511184bf9faa367c3947aedd1124%2F0_0_800_800%2F800.jpg>
 Jim Field: ‘Rabbit was really much easier to design, Bear went through many 
more stages. Bear was originally a male and it was a suggestion by the team at 
Hodder to change him to a her. An excellent move as it really changed the 
dynamics of the whole book in a more positive way.’ Photograph: Jim Field 
 If I could combine the two – David Attenborough meets Winnie the Pooh! – that 
would be something new, I thought. And, as I writer, I always want to try 
something new. To have a challenge. To solve a problem. Because solving 
difficult problems is the fun part of life. And so I did a lot of research on 
rabbits, and bears, and wolves…

 I wrote, and rewrote, Rabbit’s Bad Habits, over many, many drafts. Every 
couple of drafts, I’d try it out again on Sophy. She laughed at the good bits, 
frowned at the bad bits, and, at one point (while I was reading her the latest 
version of a funny scene), burst into tears.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb783acfda9396afa5d7fd6b61d08b81fab5093c7%2F0_0_800_1075%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb783acfda9396afa5d7fd6b61d08b81fab5093c7%2F0_0_800_1075%2F800.jpg>
 Jim Field: ‘Julian suggested making Bear more of a mother character, actually 
his description was more “a Big Mumma” so I made her bigger boned and rounded 
the design more than the previous bears.’ Photograph: Jim Field 
 “What’s wrong?” I asked, worried.

 “You’ve taken out…” she sobbed, “…my favourite line!”

 She was quite right, I realised; and so I put it back in. (It’s the line, 
spoken by Wolf, “I’m sick of my dinner running away from me at forty miles an 
hour.”)

 Now, THAT’S a passionate and committed editor…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b1bc4ebf769e12402bca36e8f1adedc1c55833c%2F0_0_800_523%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b1bc4ebf769e12402bca36e8f1adedc1c55833c%2F0_0_800_523%2F800.jpg>
 Jim Field: ‘I then developed this character sheet which was really useful to 
keep the character consistent throughout the book. It’s important to refer back 
to the design sheet as you find the character shifts and changes when you draw 
it lots of times. It was also very useful for the size reference of Rabbit and 
Bear.’ Photograph: Jim Field 
And, finally – with her help – I think I found a way to combine Winnie the 
Pooh, and wildlife documentaries. Certainly, the book is getting more five star 
reviews than anything I’ve ever written. I think readers can tell how much 
thought, and time, and love, went into it.

 And that’s why I dedicated Rabbit’s Bad Habits to my daughter. It’s not 
because I’m nice and friendly and perfect: it’s not because she is nice and 
friendly and perfect (though she is my favourite person on earth): It’s because 
I got her to doloads of unpaid work on the book, and stole all her ideas.

 Writers, like animals, are complicated and interesting, and NOT ALWAYS NICE…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50764a5f8fd421bfb15417d40e9339c7b41715c2%2F0_0_1592_2203%2F1592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Gough%3A%20I%20wanted%20to%20mash%20up%20Winnie%20the%20Pooh%20and%20David%20Attenborough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjulian-gough-i-wanted-to-mash-up-winnie-the-pooh-and-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50764a5f8fd421bfb15417d40e9339c7b41715c2%2F0_0_1592_2203%2F1592.jpg>
Buy Rabbit and Bear: Rabbit’s Bad Habits 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/360512/>, by Julian 
Gough and illustrated by Jim Field, at the Guardian bookshop.
 