
The winner: Jurassic World

After a fairly disappointing year at the box office last year, industry 
commentators promised 2015 would be a lot better, thanks to the presence of 
three surefire blockbusters:Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>, Star Wars: The 
Force Awakens <https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> and 
Spectre <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre>. All of these looked likely 
contenders for $1bn (£650m) global.

There were plenty of people, too, who had high commercial hopes for Jurassic 
World <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world>, pointing to Guardians 
of the Galaxy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy>’s 
Chris Pratt toplining a much loved franchise revival that could play to kids 
and the grown-ups who remembered the original film. Others focused more on the 
long delay since 2001’s Jurassic Park III, that film’s rather lowly reputation 
with audiences, and the fact that the novelty of CGI creatures on screen has 
diminished.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review Jurassic World 
Is Jurassic World sexist? Assessing the film's key females of the species
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jun/10/is-jurassic-world-sexist-assessing-the-films-key-females-of-the-species>
However, everybody failed to predict just how gigantic Jurassic World would 
turn out to be. In the UK, it has begun with £16.84m, plus £2.51m in Thursday 
previews. That compares with £14.42m plus £3.60m for Avengers: Age of Ultron – 
previously the biggest debut of 2015. Even if the previews are combined, 
Jurassic beats Ultron, (£19.35m against £18.02m). In other words, a risky 
revival of a declining franchise has beaten a sure-thing sequel to Marvel’s 
biggest hit. (The earlierAvengers Assemble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/26/avengers-assemble-review> grossed 
£51.9m in the UK.)

What happens next remains to be seen, but Age of Ultron proved rather 
front-loaded because Avengers fans rushed out to see it on opening weekend, and 
numbers quickly dwindled. Jurassic World similarly boasts a see-it first 
factor, but probably not such an intense one. The appeal feels broader – unlike 
Ultron, you don’t need to be already invested in the world to engage with the 
film. And the fact that Tomorrowland: A World Beyond fell harder (down 61%) 
than any other film in the top 10 suggests thatJurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world> is pulling in the family 
audience.

The success of Jurassic World brings yet more cheer to distributor Universal, 
which has already performed better this year than many expected, withFifty 
Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/11/fifty-shades-of-grey-review> 
(£35.0m),Fast & Furious 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/02/fast-and-furious-7-review-diesel-statham>
 (£38.5m) and Pitch Perfect 2 (£16.8m). In 2014, the studio’s biggest hits here 
wereThe Wolf of Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/wolf-of-wall-street-review> 
(£22.7m) andBad Neighbours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/02/bad-neighbours-review-zac-efron-seth-rogen>
 (£16.0m). Next up for Universal areMinions 
<http://www.minionsmovie.com/minions.html> and Ted 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jan/29/ted-2-first-trailer-can-you-bear-it-without-mila-kunis>
. With Fifty Shades of Grey, Fast & Furious 7 and now Jurassic World, Universal 
is the first UK distributor to deliver three £10m-plus openings in the same 
year.

Jurassic World record: dinosaur reboot scores monstrous $511.8m on debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/15/jurassic-world-record-dinosaur-reboot-scores-monstrous-5118m-on-debut>
Jurassic World’s three-day debut is the fourth biggest ever in the UK, behind 
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/07/harry-potter-deathly-hallows-part-2-review>
 (£23.67m),Skyfall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/25/skyfall-review>
 (£20.22m) andHarry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/nov/11/harry-potter-deathy-hallows-review>
 (£18.31m). Including previews, it’s the fifth biggest debut, but that’s a less 
meaningful comparison because the number of preview days can vary wildly.

Jurassic World helped the UK weekend box office overall to its best result 
since November 2012, when the market was led by thefinal Twilight film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/14/twilight-saga-breaking-dawn-part-2-review>
 and Skyfall.

The chasing pack
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fspy-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433422139503%2FKP_261369_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spy%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fspy-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spy%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fspy-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433422139503%2FKP_261369_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review Spy 
Despite Indominus Rex and pals stomping their way into the nation’s 
multiplexes, the rest of the field held up reasonably well. Weather may be a 
factor: it was less sunny than it had been the previous weekend. Among wide 
releases, the strongest hold in the top 10 was delivered bySpy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spy> (down 34%), a film that offered a clear 
alternative to summer action blockbusters.Pitch Perfect 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pitch-perfect-2> and Mad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road> switched places again, 
with victory going to the Barden Bellas this time. But a stronger performance 
on weekdays last week sees Fury Road narrow the gap overall, and the road 
warriors are now just £317,000 behind Pitch Perfect 2.

The film event: Secret Cinema
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fjurassic-world-box-office-spectre-star-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434450846308%2F88de5f43-43b3-4d12-a7d9-150971b4075a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20success%20drives%20monster%20audiences%20before%20Spectre%20and%20Star%20Wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fjurassic-world-box-office-spectre-star-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20success%20drives%20monster%20audiences%20before%20Spectre%20and%20Star%20Wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fjurassic-world-box-office-spectre-star-wars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434450846308%2F88de5f43-43b3-4d12-a7d9-150971b4075a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Play time ... Secret Cinema: The Empire Strikes Back. Photograph: Paul J 
Cochrane/Secret Cinema 
Secret Cinema: The Empire Strikes Back review - the force is weak with this one
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/12/secret-cinema-the-empire-strikes-back-review-the-force-is-weak-with-this-one>
The second week of play for Secret Cinema’s presentation of The Empire Strikes 
Back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/12/secret-cinema-the-empire-strikes-back-review-the-force-is-weak-with-this-one>
 sees the event add another £362,000, for a 10-day total of £666,000. This 
time, Secret Cinema has a run of 100 play dates, so the event could be on 
course for a total gross of £6.7m. Word of mouth will play a big factor in 
sustaining bookings throughout the epic run. Ticket sales may benefit from the 
start of the school summer holiday in mid-July, bringing a bigger family 
audience into play on weekdays.

Last year, Secret Cinema’s Back to the Future ran for only 20 dates, spread 
out over five weeks but at a bigger-capacity venue, grossing £3.37m. Running 
costs will be higher this time around, with performers and a huge technical 
team employed for the 17-week run. Over the three-day weekend, takings of 
£262,000 for The Empire Strikes Back are 5% up on the same period for the 
opening session, which augurs well.

The live event: La Bohème
 Beautifully impulsive … Anna Netrebko and Joseph Calleja in the Royal Opera 
House’s production of La Bohème. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
For fans of high culture, the big cinema event last week was the Royal Opera 
House’s performance of La Bohème, transmitted to arthouse cinemas and upscale 
multiplexes last Wednesday. A few encore screenings at the weekend boost the 
tally to a nifty £600,000 so far.

The arthouse alternatives
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Flondon-road-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434040501521%2FKP_271006_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20Road%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Flondon-road-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20Road%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Flondon-road-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434040501521%2FKP_271006_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review London Road 
London Road review – gripping, macabre verbatim musical about real-life serial 
murders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/11/london-road-film-review-gripping-macabre-verbatim-musical>
Landing in the top 10 a place behind Secret Cinema is London Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/london-road>, adapted from the innovative 
National Theatre stage musical. The opening gross is buoyed by a special event 
last Tuesday at the Brixton Ritzy, which was beamed to 270 cinemas. Director 
Rufus Norris, playwright/screenwriter Alecky Blythe and actress Anita Dobson 
all participated. London Road played at a more modest 37 cinemas for its 
regular release. Total gross is £216,000 so far.

The Look of Silence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-look-of-silence> – 
Joshua Oppenheimer’s documentary follow-up to Bafta winnerThe Act of Killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/14/act-of-killing-review> – also 
took the event route, beamed on Sunday from the new Picturehouse Central in 
London to 91 cinemas, with a Q&A hosted by Louis Theroux. For the regular 
release, Look of Silence is playing in 29 cinemas. Total so far is £53,000

The future
 Hello boys ... the Entourage posse. Photograph: Everett/Rex Shutterstock 
Thanks to the arrival of Jurassic World, takings are an impressive 166% up on 
the previous weekend, and a stellar 240% up on the equivalent frame from 2014, 
when the start of World Cup football saw a very weak field of new releases. For 
the previous three weekends, box-office has been down on the year-ago 
equivalent sessions, but this trend has now been spectacularly reversed, and 
should continue in this direction for a while. Having said that, UK 
distributors are giving Jurassic World some breathing room, with the coming 
weekend seeing the arrival of relatively middling contendersEntourage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/entourage>, Nicholas Sparks adaptation The 
Longest Ride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/07/the-longest-ride-first-look-review-nicholas-sparks>
, and Ian McKellen as a retired Sherlock Holmes inMr Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mr-holmes>. Event cinema presentations 
include Julie Taymor’s production of A Midsummer Night’s Dream (pre-filmed) and 
Take That Live from the O2.

UK top 10, 12-14 June

1. Jurassic World <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world>, 
£19,350,727 from 605 sites (new)

2. Spy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spy>, £1,549,756 from 532 sites. 
Total: £5,549,333

3. San Andreas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/san-andreas>, £844,397 from 
478 sites. Total: £9,915,841

4. Insidious: Chapter 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/04/insidious-chapter-3-review-solidly-made-effective-horror-sequel>
, £692,560 from 432 sites. Total: £2,836,965

5. Pitch Perfect 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pitch-perfect-2>, 
£411,269 from 475 sites. Total: £16,800,925

6. Mad Max: Fury Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>, 
£397,541 from 374 sites. Total: £16,483,914

7. Secret Cinema: The Empire Strikes Back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/12/secret-cinema-the-empire-strikes-back-review-the-force-is-weak-with-this-one>
, £261,525 from one site. Total: £666,340

8. London Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/london-road>, £216,223 from 
37 sites (new)

9. Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>, £162,446 from 
267 sites. Total: £48,075,500

10. Tomorrowland: The World Beyond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/24/tomorrowland-a-world-beyond-review-gorgeous-flawed-utopia>
, £121,847 from 341 sites. Total: £4,971,372

Other openers

Hamari Adhuri Kahani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/15/hamari-adhuri-kahani-review-laughable-melodrama-unworthy-of-swooning>
, £87,709 from 51 sites

The Look of Silence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-look-of-silence>, 
£52,600 from 92 sites

Gascoigne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/04/gascoigne-review-heartening-but-cursory-documentary-of-troubled-footballer>
, £47,455 (including £46,135 previews) from three sites

Queen and Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/04/queen-and-country-review-spivs-soldiers-and-sentiment>
, £32,405 (including £4,839 previews) from 49 sites

Romeo Juliet <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4446258/?ref_=nv_sr_1>, £20,702 from 
11 sites

West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/11/west-film-review-cold-war-drama>, 
£9,232 (including £846 previews) from 15 sites

Freaks, £8,677 (including £7,892 previews) from five sites (rerelease)

The Misfits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/11/the-misfits-film-review-marilyn-monroe-clark-gable>
, £6,606 from seven sites (rerelease)

Let Us Prey, £1,780 from 10 sites

Unhallowed Ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/11/unhallowed-ground-film-review-brit-teen-horror>
, £152 from 1 site

• Thanks to Rentrak <https://twitter.com/Rentrak_UK>
 