
It was not so long ago that Hollywood observers were talking about a creative 
crisis in the US film industry, with 2014’s North American box office total 
having plunged to 2009 levels amid an ever-increasing proliferation of sequels, 
remakes, reboots and adaptations of pre-existing novels, comic books and video 
games. If the hope was that studios might finally wake up to the idea that 
filmgoers do not want to see endless Robocop, Sin City and Jack Ryan movies 
(new iterations of which were all among last year’s notable Hollywood bombs) 
then the sight ofJurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world> careering to a T-Rex sized 
$511m total this weekend may be cause for reflection.

Box office boosting word of mouth buzz may be limited in the long run by the 
movie’s failure to pick up superlative reviews, though a70 per cent “fresh” 
rating on Rotten Tomatoes <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/jurassic_world/> is 
nothing to be sniffed at. But Colin Trevorrow’s film still looks well on course 
to be the year’s third $1bn movie at the global box office.

How Jurassic World tore the box office limb from limb
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2015/jun/15/how-jurassic-world-tore-the-box-office-limb-from-limb>
The world record opening is just the latest sign that 2015 could be a banner 
year for studios, with Avengers: Age of Ultron and Furious 7 having taken close 
to $3bn between them and shoo-ins such as Star Wars: The Force Awakens, The 
Hunger Games: Catching Fire part two and James Bond adventure Spectre still to 
come. The annual global box office is already at $4.8bn,the best figures of the 
decade so far at this stage of the calendar 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/?view2=ytdcompare&view=releasedate&p=.htm>.

The downside is that very little of this barnstorming success has been 
delivered by original material. The past few months have seen the Wachowskis’ 
Jupiter Ascending, Brad Bird’s Tomorrowland and Neill Blomkamp’s Chappie 
stumbling into cinemas (though the latter only cost $49m). And recent history 
suggests we’re unlikely to see a shift in the zeitgeist any time soon. All 25 
of thetop-performing films of the 21st century 
<http://www.imdb.com/list/ls059204437/> have been based in some way on a 
pre-existing property (though Frozen might just get a pass because Hans 
Christian Andersen’s The Snow Queen was only partially purloined for Disney’s 
rousing 2013 animated adventure musical.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Jurassic World - video review 
Instead of taking risks on untried material, cinemas will soon be ushering in 
Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, a new Captain America movie (Civil War) 
which by all accounts will be an Avengers film in all but name, and new JK 
Rowling-penned Harry Potter universe film Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find 
Them. And that’s not to mention the torrent of almost 20 comic book movie epics 
fromDisney-owned Marvel Studios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/30/superhero-comic-book-movies-cinemas>
 andWarner/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/13/warner-bros-announce-dc-comics-superhero-films>
 due between now and 2019, at least a half dozen of which will surely hit 
Avengers levels of success.

Jurassic World record: dinosaur reboot scores monstrous $511.8m on debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/15/jurassic-world-record-dinosaur-reboot-scores-monstrous-5118m-on-debut>
What’s fascinating (in a depressing sort of way) about Jurassic World’s 
rampage through the multiplexes is the way Hollywood has refused to give up on 
a franchise that was once guaranteed to have ’em queuing round the block. 
Despite a pair of insipid sequels, Universal has managed to lure cinemagoers 
back with the promise of more of the same. The movie has a younger, sexier star 
(Chris Pratt) than any of the previous films, but borrows plot twists galore 
from its predecessors and even throws in an unlikely central romance in true 
Hollywood fashion. No jumping of the Mosasaur here, especially when you 
consider that plans for the fourth film in the seriesoriginally focused on 
freaky genetically-modified human-dino hybrids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/oct/12/jurassic-park-iv-half-human>
. But it’s an entertaining enough popcorn movie, best viewed in 3D on the big 
screen, and unlikely to disappoint all but the most discerning of cineastes.

Universal managed to get its marketing for the movie so right that there was a 
sense before Jurassic World opened that the movie was going to be 
well-reviewed. In fact, it seems to have been given something of a free ride by 
critics: the movie’s faults are there for all to see, but reviewers seem to 
have found themselves caught up with filmgoers in a whirlwind of Spielbergian 
nostalgia.

All of this bodes extremely well for Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>, which is also harking 
back to earlier movies and memories of snaking cinema queues longer than a 
Sarlacc’s digestive tract. And surely it is only a matter of time before 
Universal lets another Jaws movie loose on the cinemagoing public: there are 
plenty of film lovers out there who were not even born at the time 1987’s Jaws: 
The Revenge hit the big screen, let alone around to catch its more illustrious 
predecessor.

Jurassic World review – Chris Pratt runs riot in upgraded dino-disaster movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/10/jurassic-world-review-chris-pratt-steven-spielberg-dinosaur-movie>
In fact, the failure of later movies in both Spielberg-created movie sagas, 
and the success of Jurassic World, shows how much Hollywood has learned when it 
comes to making sure its franchises deliver. There will be turkeys to come over 
the coming months and years, but don’t expect to find them amongst the more 
obvious candidates. Johnny Depp’s fortunes might appear to have taken a turn 
for the worse following the failure of The Lone Ranger and Mortdecai to set 
tills a-ringing, but few would bet against Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men 
Tell No Tales restoring him to the top of the box office tree in 2017. 
Likewise, Will Smith has suffered more than his fair share of critical 
brickbats in recent times, but put him back in bad boy action adventure mode in 
upcoming supervillain comic book tale Suicide Squad and the fans will come 
roaring back.

Is Jurassic World sexist? Assessing the film's key females of the species
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jun/10/is-jurassic-world-sexist-assessing-the-films-key-females-of-the-species>
All of this may not augur well for the revival of 70s-era Hollywood boldness 
any time soon, but it does at least mean that the 80s and 90s era of 
cheaply-produced sequels to iconic movies ought to be moving into the rear 
view. Studios are increasingly aware that only strong writing and imaginative 
direction can help guarantee financial success, which is why it spent the best 
part of a decade making sure Jurassic World passed muster. When you’re stricken 
with crippling sequelitis, it’s even more vital that your big beasts roar.
 