
Jurassic World has overtaken Fast and Furious 7 to become the biggest-grossing 
film so far in 2015 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2015&p=.htm> at 
the worldwide box-office.

The dinosaur-theme-park thriller directed by Colin Trevorrow has now banked 
$1.513bn, overtaking Furious 7 which stalled at $1.512bn when it was released 
earlier this year. Third in the list isAvengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron> which came in at 
$1.39bn.

Jurassic World has recorded the best global performance since 2012’s The 
Avengers, which took $1.515bn, and is likely to overhaul it as it is still 
pulling in large audiences in the US and elsewhere. This would place Jurassic 
World at number 3 inthe list of all-time box office grossing films worldwide 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/> – but it still has a long way to 
go to catch up with Titanic, which achieved $2.19bn in 1997, and Avatar, which 
recorded $2.79bn in 2009.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Jurassic World - video review 
The majority of Jurassic World’s takings have come in North America, with 
$611.23m so far. However, almost 60% of its gross has come from non-American 
sources, including $228.7m in China and $88.7m in the UK and Ireland. This 
underscores the continuing importance of international markets for Hollywood 
films, although Jurassic World’s non-American percentage falls well short of 
Fast and Furious 7 (76%) and Avengers: Age of Ultron (67%).

Hollywood rebels: why directors are trashing their own films’ trailers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/jurassic-world-terminator-genisys-trailers-outcry>
Jurassic World’s results have also been a key feature of the record-breaking 
performance of its parent company Universal,which reached worldwide takings of 
$5bn in the shortest time any studio has so far managed it 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/universal-crosses-5-billion-worldwide-box-office-2015-1201543005/>
. Jurassic World may be its most successful film, but it has also been 
bolstered by hits such as Furious 7, as well as Fifty Shades of Grey, Pitch 
Perfect 2 and, most recently, Minions.

Jurassic World’s performance is all the more remarkable considering industry 
expectations for the film’s box office were not especially optimistic, with
analysts largely taken by surprise 
<http://deadline.com/2015/06/jurassic-world-all-time-box-office-opening-record-tracking-social-media-1201443293/>
 by Jurassic World’s stunning opening-weekend figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/15/jurassic-world-record-dinosaur-reboot-scores-monstrous-5118m-on-debut>
, when it raced to a global total of $5118m (including $204.6m in the US).
 