
The winner: Jurassic World

After its giant opening of £16.84m (plus previews), you’d expect Jurassic World
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/10/jurassic-world-review-chris-pratt-steven-spielberg-dinosaur-movie>
 to take a big tumble in its second session – that’s the typical pattern, 
especially for a franchise picture. So Universal should be delighted with a 
drop of 34%, the smallest decline of any film in the top 10 exceptSecret 
Cinema’s Empire Strikes Back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/12/secret-cinema-the-empire-strikes-back-review-the-force-is-weak-with-this-one>
 event.

Jurassic World review – Chris Pratt runs riot in upgraded dino-disaster movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/10/jurassic-world-review-chris-pratt-steven-spielberg-dinosaur-movie>
Jurassic World’s three-day opening number was the fourth biggest of all time, 
behind the final twoHarry Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter> 
films andSkyfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/23/skyfall-highest-grossing-film-uk-box-office>
. But the dinosaur picture is already exhibiting stronger legs than Potter: 
second-weekend takings of £11.13m are ahead of the second frames of both those 
Harry Potter films, and behind only Skyfall’s second session. In other words, 
Jurassic World is only the second film ever to score £10m-plus in its second 
weekend of UK release.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Jurassic World - video review 
With £38.52m so far, after just 11 days of play, Jurassic World is exceeded in 
total box-office by only one of 2014’s releases:The Hobbit: The Battle of the 
Five Armies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/11/the-hobbit-the-battle-of-the-five-armies-review-packs-a-punch>
 (lifetime: £41.26m). Adding Monday’s takings into its tally, Jurassic World is 
now at £39.69m, and will soon sail past the Hobbit film. So far, the 
top-grossing release of 2015 isAvengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/21/avengers-age-of-ultron-review-film-joss-whedon-exhilarating>
, with £48.23m. Jurassic World looks likely to reach that total by the end of 
the weekend.

Audiences in raptor: Jurassic World hits billion-dollar milestone in record 
time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/23/audiences-in-raptor-jurassic-world-hits-billion-dollar-milestone-in-record-time>
Jurassic World is the third £30m-plus UK grosser this year for Universal, 
joiningFifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/11/fifty-shades-of-grey-review> 
(£35.0m) andFast & Furious 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/27/fast-furious-7-becomes-fifth-biggest-film-of-all-time>
 (£38.5m). Disney achieved the same feat with a trio of 2013 releases,Iron Man 3
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/22/iron-man-3-review>, Monsters 
University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/11/monsters-university-review> and 
Frozen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/05/frozen-review>, although 
Frozen had yet to pass the £30m barrier by the end of the calendar year. 
Universal is, in fact, highly likely to score a fourth £30m-plus hit this year, 
with its Despicable Me spinoffMinions <http://www.minionsmovie.com/minions.html>
.

The event: Take That Live
 Taken that money ... Take That Live Photograph: Andrew Whitton/PR 
From a single showtime on Friday, Take That Live took more money than any of 
the big new releases did over the whole weekend. In fact, its £965,000 takings 
from 421 cinemas were exceeded at the weekend only byJurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world>.

The Take That number is the best ever for a live music event at UK cinemas, 
ahead of André Rieu’s Maastricht concert last July (£852,000; £957,000 
including encore showings, and Westlife’s farewell gig in 2012 (£571,000; 
£573,000 including encores).Take That 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/take-that> Live is still behind One 
Direction: Where We Are, which boasts a cumulative total of £1.03m. However, 
this pre-filmed concert played at multiple showtimes when it opened last 
October, so the comparison is not quite apt.

Take That review – charm offensive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/03/take-that-hydro-glasgow-observer-review>
In terms of event cinema overall, the big hitters remain theatrical 
performances such as the National Theatre’s War Horse (£2.93m total) and 
Frankenstein (£2.44m).

The new wide releases

Three films with brand-name cachet were released at the weekend, targeting a 
diverse set of audiences. On paper,Entourage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/18/entourage-review-smug-unfunny-la-bromance>
, based on the hit HBO show, appeared to be the most commercially sturdy of the 
trio.The Longest Ride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/18/the-longest-ride-review-unbearably-syrupy-romance>
, adapted from a Nicholas Sparks book, looked likely to connect with audiences 
that have shown up for the author’s previous romantic melodramas.Mr Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/18/mr-holmes-review-peter-bradshaw-film-of-the-week-ian-mckellen>
, starring Ian McKellen, had the advantage of strong recognition and affection 
for the popular literary sleuth.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fentourage-the-movie-cast-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434543464783%2FKP_299280_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Entourage%3A%20The%20Movie%20cast%3A%20'Lighten%20up!%20It's%20not%20Citizen%20Kane'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fentourage-the-movie-cast-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Entourage%3A%20The%20Movie%20cast%3A%20%27Lighten%20up%21%20It%27s%20not%20Citizen%20Kane%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fentourage-the-movie-cast-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434543464783%2FKP_299280_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Entourage cast: ‘Lighten up! It’s not Citizen Kane’ – video interview 
Now that the numbers are in, McKellen will be delighted to have seen off the 
challenge of both theEntourage <https://www.theguardian.com/film/entourage> 
crew and Sparks, with a debut of £741,000. The film offered a different twist 
on Sherlock than presented by the Guy Ritchie/Robert Downey Jr films and by 
TV’s Benedict Cumberbatch vehicle, and looked likely to appeal to a broad, 
older audience that is not well served by the current cinema offer.

Not counting ensemble films in the X-Men, Lord of the Rings and Hobbit 
franchises, this is the first lead film role for McKellen since 2004’sEmile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/may/20/features>, which more or less 
evaporated on contact with cinemas. McKellen also had leading roles in a pair 
of 1999 releases, Apt Pupil and Gods and Monsters. Mr Holmes is already ahead 
of the combined lifetime grosses of both these films.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fmr-holmes-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434720751162%2FKP_301662_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Holmes%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fmr-holmes-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr%20Holmes%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fmr-holmes-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434720751162%2FKP_301662_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Mr Holmes – video review 
Entourage lands with a disappointing £633,000, which will not encourage 
further big-screen exploits for Ari and the boys. (In fairness, its screen 
average is slightly better than Mr Holmes, due a high cinema count for the 
latter.) The Longest Ride begins with £419,000, which is down on the debut of 
the last Sparks adaptation,The Best of Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/16/the-best-of-me-review-james-marsden-michelle-monaghan>
 (£488,000 plus previews of £149,000). Before that, 2013’sSafe Haven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/28/safe-haven-review> kicked off 
with £812,000, andThe Lucky One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/03/the-lucky-one-review> with 
£830,000 plus previews of £329,000. The Longest Ride is the 10th film adapted 
from a Sparks book, and UK cinema audiences are evidently showing fatigue.

The film event: Secret Cinema
 Forceful presence ... Secret Cinema’s The Empire Strikes Back Photograph: 
Paul J Cochrane 
Secret Cinema’s The Empire Strikes Back rose 5% in its second frame, with 
takings of £262,000, and now rises another 9% in its third, with box-office 
this time of £285,000. After 16 days of play, the event has grossed £1.05m. 
Secret Cinema is one sixth of the way through its 100-date run, and at the 
current pace looks on track to gross £6.6m. Of course, early adopters might be 
boosting attendance at this stage of the run. On the other hand, the coming 
school summer holiday might see attendance rise, especially on weekdays.Secret 
Cinema’s Back to the Future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/secret-cinema-back-to-the-future-olympic-park>
 grossed £3.37m last year.

Admissions update

Admissions figures (actual number of tickets sold) are now in for May, 
recording a negligible 0.5% increase on the same month last year. For the first 
five months of the year, admissions are a healthy 7% up on the same period from 
2014. That number looks likely to rise when June is included, given the current 
strong performance of Jurassic World. Cinema owners were disappointed with 
admissions in 2014, 5% down on 2013 and an alarming 9% down on 2012. The 
industry is looking for a big rise this time, given results achieved so far and 
the titles yet to come in 2015, notablyStar Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> and Spectre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre>.

The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fslow-west-michael-fassbender-western-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433844316901%2FKP_267277_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slow%20West%3A%20Michael%20Fassbender%20goes%20western%20-%20video%20clip&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fslow-west-michael-fassbender-western-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slow%20West%3A%20Michael%20Fassbender%20goes%20western%20-%20video%20clip&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fslow-west-michael-fassbender-western-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433844316901%2FKP_267277_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Slow West: Michael Fassbender goes western - video clip 
With no blockbusters arriving last Friday, takings are 25% down on the 
previous frame, but that strong Jurassic World second-session performance sees 
the market overall a healthy 93% up on the equivalent frame from 2014, whenThe 
Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/19/fault-in-our-stars-review-john-green>
 arrived as counter-programming to World Cup football. The healthy run looks 
set to continue with the release on Friday of Minions, which has been 
performing ahead of the Despicable Me movies in territories released so far. 
Also in the mix:Salma Hayek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/04/salma-hayek-feminist-women-the-prophet-interview>
 in action thriller Everly, Michael Fassbender in indie westernSlow West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/28/sundance-2015-review-slow-west-fassbender-psychedelic-western>
, and Peter Bogdanovich screwball comedyShe’s Funny That Way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/29/shes-funny-that-way-bogdanovich-is-back-but-the-laughs-arent-review>
. But let’s be realistic, it’s all about the dinosaurs again and those 
banana-coloured, pill-shaped, Esperanto-babbling, villain-serving urchins.

Top 10 films, 19-21 June

1. Jurassic World <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world>, 
£11,133,912 from 614 sites. Total: £38,522,331

2. Take That Live, £965,000 from 421 sites (new)

3. Spy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spy>, £922,399 from 464 sites. Total: 
£7,376,203

4. Mr Holmes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mr-holmes>, £741,080 from 489 
sites (new)

5. Entourage <https://www.theguardian.com/film/entourage>, £632,754 from 402 
sites (new)

6. San Andreas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/san-andreas>, £443,028 from 
400 sites. Total: £10,742,136

7. The Longest Ride <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-longest-ride>, 
£419,047 from 397 sites (new)

8. Insidious: Chapter 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/04/insidious-chapter-3-review-solidly-made-effective-horror-sequel>
, £289,492 from 362 sites. Total: £3,536,345

9. Secret Cinema: The Empire Strikes Back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/12/secret-cinema-the-empire-strikes-back-review-the-force-is-weak-with-this-one>
, £284,590 from one site. Total: £1,054,865

10. Mad Max: Fury Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>, 
£215,091 from 231 sites. Total: £16,955,183

Other openers

ABCD2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/22/abcd-2-review-any-body-can-dance-remo-d-souza>
, £114,868 from 45 sites

Accidental Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/18/accidental-love-review-abandoned-political-comedy-pointlessly-revived>
, £31,518 from 20 sites

Premam <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4679210/>, £22,261 from 21 sites

A Midsummer Night’s Dream: New York 2014, £14,631 from 46 sites

Les Combattants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/18/love-at-first-fight-review-thomas-cailley-les-combattants>
, £11,106 from 18 sites

The Long Good Friday <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-long-good-friday>, 
£9,172 from 21 sites

Eli, £6,407 from 13 sites

The Burning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/18/the-burning-review-gael-garcia-bernal-takes-on-bad-guys-and-jaguars>
, £3,613 from seven sites

Natural Resistance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/18/natural-resistance-review-rebels-and-refuseniks-of-viticulture>
, £396 from one site

• Thanks to Rentrak <https://twitter.com/Rentrak_UK>
 