
If you are raising a child on planet Earth, Justin Bieber is a name with which 
you will no doubt be familiar. Whether you love or hate him and his music, his
recent visit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/14/justin-bieber-anne-frank-belieber>
 to Anne Frank's house has generated plenty of media coverage.

Aside from recently keeping fans waiting way past their collective bedtimes 
and tantrum thresholds for a concert at London's O2, Bieber also raised the 
concerns of animal rights activists by apparently smuggling hispet monkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/03/justin-bieber-monkey-business> 
into Germany. From the earliest times of celebrity adulation, from theRudolph 
Valentino days <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rudolph_Valentino> through to now, 
the song remains the same. Where the stars go, so does the media.

The issue around awareness-raising is often deemed to be the sole preserve of 
solemn experts speaking with educated intensity on the topic at hand. But 
academics speaking out of their own and everyone else's comfort zone isn't 
always to be advised â€“ as anyone whosaw David Starkey on Newsnight 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-14513517> will fist-bitingly remember.

The visit by Bieber meant that the issue of the Holocaust spread exponentially 
through the demographic of his fans. Aninterview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/mar/27/angelina-jolie-william-hague-war>
 with UN ambassadors Angelina Jolie and William Hague (some bloke in 
government, apparently) proved that sometimes the glittering crumbs that fall 
from the golden table of celebrity do so with merit on an overlooked issue. As 
the Dutch journalist Robert Chesal said on Radio 5 live today: "There are 
probably millions of beliebers Googling Anne Frank now and that's a good 
thing." Grey-haired academics are worthy and notable, but do they speak to 
young people as effectively?

In fact, irrespective of our age, aren't we all enmeshed in celebrity culture 
to such an extent that it can open, even slightly, the sternest of implacably 
closed minds? There is a curious and necessary symbiotic relationship between 
charity issues and celebrity. Many who work in the third sector may grit their 
teeth when a reality TV or pop star speaks in a well-intentioned but somewhat 
uneducated way on crucial issues like disability for example; but I've always 
felt that speaking only to those who already understand is self-defeating. 
Those who bemoan "self-interested" celebrities embracing causes have a point. 
But while they may spark more than a little ire, they also raise a lot of money 
and promote information. The side issue is that they also provide a platform 
for debate.

I confess to feeling furious when I suspect darker motives for championing an 
issue. Nobody likes to be used, but there is nothing to suggest that this is 
the case here. In Bieber's case, he simply doesn't need to create press 
opportunities. He is already a globally recognised 19-year-old. Guy Kawasaki, 
who worked for Steve Jobs,cites <http://www.entrepreneur.com/video/219941> 
Bieber's team as being unparalleled in terms of marketing their brand. Through 
strategic planning, they have generated a fanbase and brand that remains 
unrivalled.

Although his words on the Anne Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-frank> House guestbook can undeniably 
be described as self-centred, they do remind us all that Anne was just 15 when 
she died in Bergen Belsen. So the fact that the most famously free teenager in 
the world visited the attic space of the most famously hidden teenager contains 
an added poignancy.

At the end of the day, Bieber's slip highlights the issue of remembrance to an 
audience who need to learn about it. I imagine that Anne would have approved.
 