
When you wriggle, she wriggles too. That’s the freaky premise behind Azealia 
Banks’s new “webcam-driven interactive film” which launched last week. Mapping 
your movements on to a virtual Azealia, themusic video for her single Wallace 
<http://wallace.azealiabanks.com/> treats your computer screen like a mirror, 
but instead of seeing yourself, you see her.

Although there’s some pleasure to be squeezed out of trying to make Azealia 
blink incessantly like she’s got some dust stuck on her retina, the clip – in 
conjunction with Google Chrome – comes off like a vanity experiment that says 
nothing. It detracts from the music and seems spooky simply for spooky’s sake; 
a three-minute distraction while you wait for your Twitter feed to refresh.

Interactive videos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/nov/22/top-five-interactive-videos-bob-dylan>
 allege to be a new and effective way of engaging with fans. But while music 
videos were originally directed with one-way TV transmission in mind, our 
everyday smart devices are built for two-way interaction, and this has clearly 
proved a difficult gap to bridge.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Gu28S1S64A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Gu28S1S64A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Gu28S1S64A&media=>
Just look at Jack White <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jack-white>, 
another artist who’s opted for a bold, blog-worthy gimmick (presumably to help 
move thoseguacamole recipe stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/feb/09/jack-white-stripes-guacamole-recipe-perfect-avocado>
 to the bottom of search engines). His recent “audiovisual experience” forThat 
Black Bat Licorice <http://jackwhiteiii.com/media/thatblackbatlicorice/> allows 
you to flip between three videos that roll simultaneously. It’s an effective 
time waster, but also another depthless attempt to compensate for the 
lacklustre choice of single.

A more worthwhile big-budget affair was Chris Milk’s 2010 video for Arcade 
Fire’s We Used To Wait <http://www.thewildernessdowntown.com/>, which 
incorporated Google Street View. It allowed viewers to relive their 
disenchanted teendom as the visuals tailored themselves to their specific 
neighbourhoods. But it still appeared rather limp and corporate; like the 
Wallace video, it was built only to show off the abilities of a Google browser.

Such videos have also masked more insidious intentions. Enter Iggy Azalea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/iggy-azalea> with the “world’s first 
shoppable music video” back in 2012, forI Think She Ready 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8uH0TfkLN3w>. It offered a nightmarish vision 
of our consumer-driven future, in which you can hover your mouse over items of 
clothing and click through to purchase. It’s pretty tawdry, and that’s just 
Iggy’s taste in clothes, but at least there’s an idea at work.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8uH0TfkLN3w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8uH0TfkLN3w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8uH0TfkLN3w&media=>
More admirable in the face of new technologies are those artists who continue 
to use video traditionally and still break new ground. Björk’s surrealLionsong 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MWHpoJT3qK4> and Sia’s immaculately 
choreographedChandelier <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2vjPBrBU-TM> are 
exemplary in the way that they channel the songs’ sentiments through the raw 
power of the body. Hefty budgets aren’t always necessary, either: Tim and 
Barry’s £80 video forSkepta’s That’s Not Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dyONbqggasY> won them a Mobo, while Beyoncé’s 
selfie stick-aided 7/11 video was also cheap but iconic.

Videos like these forgo the added futuristic dimension, but I guarantee 
they’ll stay with you long after your lunch break.
 