
A familiar groan of despair was emitted by the nation when this year's 
Eurovision <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eurovision> contestants 
were unveiled yesterday. Brian Harvey, Liz Mclarnon, Big Brovaz; all the 
popstars currently not in mid-comeback have lined up for the public vote, each 
hoping to be the next entrant to triumph over the vicious political voting 
which sunk Daz Sampson to a lowly 19th (it was still about Iraq, you know).

Alongside this joyless lot, however, is ex Darkness singer Justin Hawkins, 
entering the contest with an unknown female companion by the name of Beverlei 
Brown. Hawkins, now sporting a feathered fringe, will duet with Brown on the 
self-penned track They Just Don't Make 'Em Like They Used To (catchy). The 
Sun's Vicky Newton reports that the "flamboyant" singer has beaten his demons, 
namely a Â£1,000 a week cocaine habit, and he is now back and completely vice 
free: "I'm clean and sober and I have been for seven months now. I've also 
given up smoking."

Newton gives her backing the shrieking one, not least of which because Hawkins 
promised: "Vote Hawkins and Brown and the catsuit will be resurrected for the 
finals." Yeah, yeah, big talk, but it's still not Morrissey, is it?

You know what these rappers are like; always flashing their jewellery, 
boasting about the bounce on their suspension, comparing various bitches. But 
Akon's self-aggrandising has gotten a little out of hand, resulting in a rumour 
on the rumour mill that the man's a polygamist. The Konvicted artist claims the 
all this talk of several wives was a joke that got out of hand, and is now 
attempting damage limitation because of the controversy it's causing (although 
it's more likely his one wife, mother of his three children, is the real reason 
for his sudden panic).

"There was a big rumour about me having many wives," said Akon, while he was 
in Toronto this week. "It started off as a joke and it got serious. And then I 
was just running with it to see how far it'd go."Akon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/akon> subsequently revealed that while he 
was innocent of his own rumourising, his dad - jazz percussionist and devote 
Muslim Mor Thiam - does go in for multiple missuses. He currently has three and 
counting.

P Diddy is a rogue and a cad, if a report of battery filed to Hollywood police 
is to be believed. Witnesses at a post-Oscars bash at the Roosevelt Hotel were 
stunned when the professional Bad Boy socked a partygoer in the jaw after the 
man attempted to stop the rapper form stealing his girlfriend. 27-year-old 
Gerard Rechnitzer was far from happy when he emerged from the loos to see Diddy 
sidling up to his lady, offering an invitation to his private party. Rechnitzer 
intervened on his girlfriend's behalf, only to be treated to a rather 
ungentlemanly smack in the chops. Diddy's people are sticking the "No Comment" 
line.
 