
The US justice department will investigate the police shooting of a Native 
American woman inArizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona>, a 
spokesman said on Friday, a day after footage released by the Winslow police 
department raised concerns about racial bias in the fatal shooting.

The department’s civil rights division will review the local investigation 
into the 27 March shooting death of Loreal Tsingine, spokesman Wyn Hornbuckle 
said.

Tsingine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database#loreal-tsingine-2016257>
, 27, was shot and killed by Winslow police officer Austin Shipley in late 
March after officers suspected her of shoplifting in a local store and 
confronted her. Silent body-camera footage, first obtainedby the Arizona Daily 
Sun 
<http://azdailysun.com/winslow-pd-shooting-of-loreal-tsingine/youtube_fb17027f-2242-5ed6-8cdd-f3929307f8c4.html>
, shows a police officer trying to restrain Tsingine then shoving her to the 
ground and finally drawing a gun on her as she approaches him.

In the video, Tsingine gets up and walks toward Shipley with a small pair of 
medical scissors in her left hand, and another officer quickly approaches her 
from behind. Shipley draws his gun and directs it at Tsingine, and the footage 
is cut off before he fires the fatal shot.

The shooting was ruled justified by the Maricopa County attorney’s office 
<http://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona/2016/07/22/no-charges-filed-against-winslow-officer-loreal-tsingines-death/87452542/>
 last Friday.

Tsingine’s aunt, Floranda Dempsey, said her niece was 5ft tall and weighed 
95lbs. “They should have been able to subdue her with their huge size and 
weight,” she said. “It wasn’t like she came at them first. I’m sure anyone 
would be mad if they were thrown around.” She added: “Where were the Tasers, 
pepper sprays, batons?”

The family filed a $10.5m wrongful death lawsuit against the city at the 
beginning of the month, claiming that “the city of Winslow was negligent in 
hiring, training, retaining, controlling and supervising” the officer who 
killed Tsingine.

Shipley’s training records show two of his fellow officers had serious 
concerns that he was too quick to go for his service weapon, that he ignored 
directives from superiors, and that he was liable to falsify reports and not 
control his emotions.

A day before Shipley’s training ended, nearly three years ago, a police 
corporal recommended that the Winslow police department not retain him.

“They were warned he was likely to hurt someone back in 2013 or so, by another 
commanding officer,” Dempsey said. “It’s unbelievable as to why he was still 
allowed to wear a badge.”

Dempsey said watching the video shocked her and made her angry, and that all 
she saw was “a bully who got angry for getting his ego squashed” by a small 
Native American woman.


Nationwide, Native Americans are disproportionately killed by police. Based on 
data fromThe Counted, the Guardian’s database of police killings in the US, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database#loreal-tsingine-2016257>
 fatal police shootings of black, white, Hispanic and Asian Americans have all 
gone down slightly or remained roughly the same from 2015 into 2016, but twice 
as many Native Americans have been killed over the same period.

Because the number of Native Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/native-americans>, relative to other racial 
and ethnic categories, is quite small, just a handful of incidents can 
dramatically change the per capita rate. Still, 13 Native American people have 
been killed just over halfway through 2016, more than the 10 that were killed 
in all of 2015.

Tsingine is one of four Native American women killed in 2016, representing 
about 30% of the incidents affecting native people. By contrast, among all 
racial groups women represent victims in about 3% of fatal shootings. For 
comparison, only one Hispanic or Asian American woman has been shot and killed 
by police in all of 2016, even though they represent a much larger portion of 
the population than Native American women.

In another controversial shooting of a Native American woman this year, 
pregnant 32-year-old Jacqueline Salyers was killed after she allegedly drove 
her vehicle towards a Tacoma, Washington, police officer. Although the US 
justice department has repeatedly advised against officers shooting at moving 
vehicles, the incident wasruled justified by county prosecutors 
<http://www.thenewstribune.com/news/local/crime/article77484387.html> in May.

Simon Moya-Smith, an activist and Oglala-Lakota tribal member, said it was 
“unfortunate that Native Americans are routinely excluded from this 
conversation” about racialized police violence. Moya-Smith noted as an example 
that in her Democratic nomination acceptance speech Thursday night, Hillary 
Clinton did not mention systemic racialized violence or discrimination against 
Native Americans.

“We know that many people don’t see us as human. We’re relics of centuries of 
lore,” Moya-Smith said. “We first need to get the cops to recognize us as 
human, and hopefully then they won’t think of themselves as the judge, the jury 
and the executioner.”

The Associated Press contributed to this report
 