
The loosening of gambling regulations in New South Wales, announced 
<http://www.abc.net.au/pm/content/2015/s4251718.htm> during Responsible 
Gambling Awareness Week without an apparent trace of irony, tells the story of 
gambling regulation in Australia in the three years since Andrew Wilkie was 
rolled on poker machine reforms.

Among other reforms, poker machine smart cards in NSW clubs and hotels can now 
be loaded with up to $5,000, an increase from $200. This is a great deal of 
money to lose by anyone’s measure. To get a sense of just how out of step this 
government decision is with the available evidence, it’s worthwhile returning 
to theProductivity Commission’s 2010 report 
<http://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/gambling-2009/report/gambling-report-volume1.pdf#page=471>
, which recommended that the “cash input level” for poker machines be capped at 
just $20, a limit the commission believed would protect problem gamblers while 
having little adverse impact on recreational gamblers.

The fascinating maths and economics of slot machines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/may/20/maths-economics-slot-machines-gambling>
These slackened regulations are just the latest results of a series of cosy 
deals between gambling operators and state governments around Australia which 
are dealing effective poker machine regulation a death by a thousand cuts.

In NSW, successive <http://www.webcitation.org/6ZAM59HqA> state governments 
<http://www.webcitation.org/6ZAM4rp5S> have signed memoranda of understanding 
with Clubs NSW prior to state elections, effectively pledging to enact a raft 
of gambling liberalisation measures and avoid any meaningful reform, in 
exchange for political support. While the political donations from the latest 
NSW election period have not yet been disclosed, in 2010 Clubs NSW rewarded the 
NSW Liberal party handsomely for their “understanding”,donating a total of 
$200,000 
<http://searchdecs.efa.nsw.gov.au/Details.aspx?EFID=EF00037473&ID1=00000000000000141022&RPID=2011H1>
 within two months of the agreement being signed.

In the Australian Capital Territory, where the ruling Labor party benefitted 
from a $2.5m donation 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/electoral-commission-investigates-reporting-of-a-25-million-donation-from-canberra-labor-club-20141207-11z783.html>
 from its network of affiliated clubs in 2013-14, the gambling and racing 
minister enabled pokies to accept $50 notesjust three days before Christmas 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/act-government-allows-50-note-for-poker-machines-20150111-12lt4d.html>
 last year, a decision that was only reversed after a sustainedcampaign by the 
local press 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/comment/ct-editorial/act-labor-cant-hide-from-pokies-ownership-20150211-13bh78.html>
. Nevertheless,measures 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/new-tax-rates-and-poker-machine-trading-scheme-for-canberras-clubs-20150604-ghgxkn?stb=twt&skin=dumb-phone>
 have been passed which will replace low denomination pokies with more 
dangerous, high-intensity machines and replace the fixed cap on machine numbers 
with one that will rise with population growth. Once again, these 
liberalisation measures are in line with amemorandum of understanding 
<http://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/726471/Sub-No-56-ACT-Government2.pdf#page=35>
 between the government and industry.

In the Northern Territory, the most significant change to poker machine 
regulations in years – raising caps on the number of pokies per venue and 
lifting a moratorium on new venues – wasannounced by electronic press release 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-12-14/nt-gaming-minister-goes-to-ground-after-increasing-pokie-numbers/5966338>
 at 5.47 pm on Friday 12 December 2014 during which the press was preoccupied 
by a cabinet reshuffle.

In Queensland, a raft of poker machine liberalisation reforms were introduced 
last year under the banner of red tape reduction, measures that have been 
described as akin to thecutting of a safety belt 
<http://www.anglicanchurchsq.org.au/images/Anglican_Church_SQ_Gambling_Red_Tape_Reduction_Report_FINAL_08Jan15_rebadged.pdf>
 for problem gamblers.

While regulations on pokies in clubs and hotels have been slackened with 
little fanfare, the new wave of casino development has been more spectacular.
Four new casino licenses 
<https://theconversation.com/what-are-the-odds-new-casinos-lead-to-social-harm-19161>
 have been announced in the last two years, with the Tasmania government
reportedly in talks 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-03-20/mona-casino-bid-prompts-talks-over-federal-group-monopoly/6334158>
 to issue a third casino license in the small island state.

The manner by which casino development proceeds is instructive. The new casino 
in Sydney is the result of a behind-closed-doors“unsolicited proposal” 
<https://theconversation.com/not-seen-by-the-minister-how-lack-of-probity-clouds-our-democracy-10870>
 from Crown which required a new planning process to be devised to fast-track 
its approval. Crown was invited todesign its own tax rate 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/packer-on-a-good-thing-roll-your-own-tax-rate-20130705-2phha.html>
, a luxury apparently available only to those who employ a cadre of former 
politicians as lobbyists.

The aversion to transparency at Crown Sydney extends beyond the approval 
process to its desired patrons. Crown describes the casino as targetingChinese 
high rollers 
<http://www.crownresorts.com.au/CrownResorts/files/5b/5bd0ec73-b1fb-416a-a49a-238f5612d5d6.pdf#page=90>
, a customer base it claims will enable it to operate without poker machines. 
Yet the rivers of gold from Chinese VIPs in Macau have rapidly dried up as the 
Chinese government cracks down on corruption. With anti-corruption measures 
causing a spectacular42% drop 
<http://www.dicj.gov.mo/web/en/information/DadosEstat/2015/content.html#n3> in 
VIP gambling revenue in Macau over the last 12 months, it appears that many 
Chinese high rollers are merely using casinos tolaunder the proceeds of crime  
<https://wikileaks.org/cable/2009/12/09HONGKONG2313.html>or circumvent capital 
controls. It seems likely that in this newly scrupulous international 
environment Crown Sydney will struggle to meet its “tough” revenue goalswithout 
recourse to pokies 
<https://theconversation.com/packers-barangaroo-casino-and-the-inevitability-of-pokies-15892>
.

Meanwhile in Victoria, Crown secured bipartisan support to lock in the failure 
of regulations to protect the public fromaddictive-by-design poker machines 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/9156.html>. Crown Melbourne’s remarkable 
license extension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/14/crown-casino-given-200m-taxpayer-guarantee-in-extraordinary-deal>
 included a clause which prevents future state governments from implementing 
public health reforms, such as reducing maximum bet size or banning smoking in 
high-roller lounge until 2050 without compensating Crown. This kind of 
compensation clause is the envy of the tobacco industry, which iscurrently 
seeking similar compensation 
<https://theconversation.com/leaked-tpp-investment-chapter-shows-risks-to-australias-health-39799>
 through international trade negotiations.

In total, approximately $5bn to $9bn was lost in 2012-13 by those experiencing 
trouble controlling their gambling on poker machines alone. Thisastonishing 
transfer of resources 
<https://theconversation.com/who-wins-from-big-gambling-in-australia-22930> 
from an exploited minority is facilitated by theextraordinary lobbying power 
<http://insidestory.org.au/the-lobby-group-that-got-much-more-bang-for-its-buck>
 of the gambling industry.

While the gambling lobby remains unmatched by any organised and well-resourced 
advocacy body, prospects for gambling reforms in the public interest are likely 
to remain bleak.
 