
How do you represent the Holocaust? The question has rarely been answered with 
such audacity as by Dutch theatre companyHotel Modern 
<http://www.hotelmodern.nl/>. Their Auschwitz is an elaborate model which 
covers the stage, shrunk down to the size of Toytown. It's a shock to see it 
crafted seemingly as lovingly as a Victorian doll's house, complete with 
ankle-height gates with the infamous signArbeit Macht Frei  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/dec/18/sign-stolen-auschwitz-death-camp>
– which even lights up.

Yet this isn't a Chapmans-style Hell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2009/feb/23/chapman-hell-art>
, their enormous vitrines full of Nazi toy soldiers committing acts of 
depravity. Hotel Modern's hell is animated by three performers. They 
meticulously move around tiny puppets, which they film with minature cameras. 
The live feed is projected in black and white onto the stage's backdrop – very 
much in the manner of directorKatie Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/katie-mitchell>'s work with live actors. 
Technically, it's astonishing. There are no words, but a loud soundtrack 
ranging from howling winds to circus music going out of tune.

The puppets playing the Jews look like tiny versions of the figure in Munch's 
The Scream, arriving in a train, disgorged at the end of the line, enslaved, 
then finally stripped and killed. We see hideous vignettes including the 
hanging of four prisoners, the beating to death of another, the pouring of 
poison gas into the crowded chamber beneath, and finally a long tracking shot 
over the bones of the murdered Jews. It could be the audience's projection, but 
though the puppets' faces are static, they seem to express bewilderment when 
they arrive at the camp and horror when they are murdered.

Hotel Modern have performed Kamp for five years. Afterwards, the performers 
stay behind afterwards to take questions one-to-one and allow the audience to 
get a closer look. The performers are clearly still charged with the emotion of 
what they're presenting, but in Adelaide some audience members seem less moved, 
eagerly snapping images of the minature gas chambers on their iphones to upload 
to their Facebook pages.

So does it work? Clearly not for everyone, and watching the play, I worried 
that miniturising Auschwitz also minimised its horrors.Art Spiegelman's Maus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/23/art-spiegelman-maus-25th-anniversary>
 proved that a graphic novel could do justice to the Auschwitz, but can a 
puppet show?

Yet the point of Kamp ultimately has to be that it makes us see Auschwitz 
through Nazi eyes – pretty, innocuous and full of puppets, to be set to work, 
stripped naked and ultimately discarded. It demands that the audience works to 
give the puppets back their humanity – and it's hard. We have to make a leap of 
empathy and imagination, unaided by gore, individual tales of heroism or 
tearjerking sentiment. It takes time and concentration, but Kamp makes its 
point with subtlety and, ultimately, great power.
 