
The evolution of The Life of Pablo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/14/kanye-west-the-life-of-pablo-review-you-can-see-why-his-immodesty-rubs-people-up-the-wrong-way>
 continues: two months after its Tidal release, and more than 400m streams 
later, Kanye West’s seventh album is now available from iTunes, Apple Music, 
Spotify and other major services.

In a statement to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/02/arts/music/kanye-west-life-pablo-tidal-streams.html>
, the label Def Jam explained that a “newly updated, remixed and remastered 
version” of The Life of Pablo would be streaming on all major services from 1 
April. It added that the album would continue to be edited by West: “In the 
months to come, Kanye will release new updates, new versions and new iterations 
of the album.”

The news, while great for fans without a Tidal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tidal> account, does contradict previous 
comments made by the rapper. On 15 February, he told his followers:
KANYE WEST (@kanyewest) 
My album will never never never be on Apple. And it will never be for sale... 
You can only get it on Tidal.
 <https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/699376240709402624> February 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/699376240709402624> 
The album’s official release – it is also available to download from his 
website for $20 (£14) – comes after West’s impressive Tidal streaming figures 
were made public earlier this week. Until now, the album has not been eligible 
for official chart placement. The US recording industry counts 1,500 streams as 
the equivalent of one album sale – which in the case of The Life of Pablo would 
equal about 267,000 albums.

West’s album was given a completely new method of release: the record was 
premiered at Madison Square Garden on 11 February before its was made available 
on Tidal three days later. Some tracks became available to stream onSpotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> – I Love Kanye and Famous – 
but West has continued to change elements of the songs, adding a vocal by Frank 
Ocean, tweaking lyrics and adding more gospel vocals.

It is not yet known what’s next for The Life of Pablo, but according to Def 
Jam, there’s more to come: “Stay tuned for updates on Kanye West’s living album 
project, The Life of Pablo …”
 