
Coming of age has been a theme of the novel since the conception of Tom Jones, 
so to choose just 10 from the possible hordes, I had to invent some strict 
criteria. First, I decided I was only interested in single protagonists – out 
wentTell it on the Mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/nov/15/fiction.jamesbaldwin> and Jean 
Brodie <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/apr/22/murielspark>; then that a 
certain amount of inner turmoil was mandatory – off with Mr Jones – and finally 
that only stories where characters really did "come of age", and acquire, even 
briefly, some the trappings of maturity: love, wisdom or cynicism would do – 
and that put paid to Holden Caulfield, who refuses them all.

Beyond this, I've chosen novels that reflect, to my mind, the real qualities 
of adolescence: the unabashed selfishness alongside the youthful 
high-mindedness; the bodily obsessions as well as the romantic longings; and 
the callowness and yearnings for status as well as the untrammelled 
perceptions. That sort of realism was certainly what I was aiming for when I 
wrote my own coming-of-age novelMeeting the English 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330535274>
. Like my own book, too, all these stories have elements of the picaresque and 
the lurid, contain monsters, and are to some extent comical, because 
adolescence is a season of extremes, the time when we are outraged and 
horrified and have to giggle about it, our hands held over our mouths.

The books are in chronological order of publication, because preference was 
beyond me.

1. The Mill on the Floss by George Eliot 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199536764>


Passionate, clever Maggie Tulliver can't fit herself into the narrow world of 
St Oggs and her brother Tom, yet yearns to be accepted and loved. Love, lust, 
betrayal and superbly-rendered petite blonde envy all culminate in a 
melodramatic flood.

2. Great Expectations by Charles Dickens 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141198897>


Pip's journey across a childhood landscape of prisoners, mists, and decaying 
wedding veils, his drastic leap into adolescence and final turn into a 
strained, pale adulthood charts the map of adolescence for a century to come.

3. My Ántonia by Willa Cather 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844083749>


Luminous and bold, elegant and elliptical, epic and novelettish, Cather's 
story reflects the paradoxes of the small town on the wild prairie of its 
setting, and of its pioneering author. Narrator Jim Burden delivers an 
unrivalled study of the unspoken crush, unforgettably eroticising his portraits 
of the Bohemian and Swedish girls he grew up with and the landscape they shaped.

4. Decline and Fall by Evelyn Waugh
 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141187488>

Paul Pennyfeather is shaken from his studies at Oxford by the marauding 
Bollinger Club, and embarks on a vertiginous, queasy journey through the 
relative innocence of school teaching to the corrupt experience of 
chrome-covered London. Joyously comic, savagely satirical, quietly sad.

5. The Pursuit of Love by Nancy Mitford 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141044019>


Linda is impossibly posh, ridiculously well-connected, horribly pretty, and 
gets to wear some deeply enviable clothes – I cherish the memory of her 
stumping in cork-soled sandals across her Paris flat – but her hopeless 
lovelorn yearnings and hapless choices still break the hearts of sensitive 
young things everywhere. A wonderfully sad and romantic ending completes the 
sob-fest.

6. The Bell Jar by Sylvia Plath 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571226160>


Not once in this dead-pan, hilarious story of mental breakdown, attempted 
suicide and slow recovery do you doubt that the narrator is sane and the 
society which surrounds her, the one which 'Electrocuted the Rosenbergs' and 
now wants to break her into a woman's shape, is crazed. Plath's alter-ego 
Esther Greenwood emerges sturdily herself, remade and 'ready for the road.' If 
only Plath could have held on to that optimism.

7. The Magic Toyshop by Angela Carter 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844085231>


Melanie slips on her mother's wedding dress and slides immediately into 
orphanhood and the Gothic world of Uncle Phillip, who wants her for one of his 
giant puppets. There is a mute aunt, a grubby, sexy, cousin, and a brother 
disappearing into the mechanics of ships in bottles. Only Carter could make all 
this live and breathe, and deliver Melanie from the grip of her lush adolescent 
dreams to the bleak street of her adult life.

8. Brother of the More Famous Jack by Barbara Trapido 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780747599586>


The glamorous but naive Katherine is taken up by the intellectual, 
self-indulgent, Goldman family, and has her heart broken in a series of vivid, 
comical vignettes – and that's just the first half of the novel. The second 
part, when the broken narrator puts herself back together, is less 
self-consciously charming, and even more beguiling.

9. The Fall of Kelvin Walker by Alasdair Gray


The eponymous hero escapes his home town of Glaik, where they make fish glue, 
and conquers London in few brief, vigorous chapters before, like Boswell before 
him, he is summoned back to Scotland by his father. This mordant, energetic 
story started life as a play, and is a little short for a novel – the only 
reason I can think of that it's not an established classic.

10. How Should a Person Be? by Sheila Heti 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846557545>


Tiresome, narcissistic, funny, pornographic, but always unsettlingly 
authentic, Sheila Heti paints a picture of an adolescence which is these days 
enacted online, continues past your first divorce, and forces you to go on 
badgering your friends about the meaning of life right into your thirties. You 
will either identify, or be thankful that you are too old to join in.
 