
An unlikely combination of Katie Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katieprice>, Alan Whicker, Ray Mears and 
Postman Pat star in a Freeview TV ad set to the theme tune from 1970s cop show 
The Professionals.

The digital terrestrial TV service's £4m TV campaign also features the tabloid 
editor turned TV personality Piers Morgan, Duncan Bannatyne of Dragons' Den, 
Britain's Got Talent judgeAmanda Holden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/amanda-holden> and the Location, 
Location, Location presenting duo Kirstie Allsopp and Phil Spencer.

Freeview's campaign has been timed to break on ITV1 during Celebrity Who Wants 
to Be a Millionaire tonight. The ad will then run nationally across networks 
including Channel 4 and UKTV's pay-TV services, such as Gold and Dave, until 
the end of October.

The aim of the campaign is to raise awareness of Freeview+, the personal video 
recorder set-top box, ahead of the Christmas sales season.

Another consideration is the upcoming digital switchover of the Granada region 
in the north-west of England, which covers about 3m homes, which will all need 
to make the move to digital television by Christmas.

The campaign, by ad agency Beattie McGuinness Bungay, features the all-star 
lineup descending on the house of a stunnedFreeview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/freeview> viewer, using various forms of 
transport.

Price arrives by horse, Morgan in a convertible, Whicker in a tuk-tuk and 
Mears on foot.

The 60-second ad is set to the theme tune from The Professionals, the ITV 
drama which ran from 1977 to 1983 and starred Martin Shaw and Lewis Collins 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Professionals_(TV_series)>.

Freeview's TV ad ends with the voiceover: "Get the best TV delivered to your 
door, without any bills".

"Our latest ad celebrates the range and quality of the programmes we offer and 
the benefits of subscription-free TV," said Tim Hunt, the director of marketing 
communications at Freeview.

The TV campaign will be supported by direct marketing activity and a digital 
campaign. Media planning and buying has been handled by MEC.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 