
Investors lost their nerve at the last minute, as leading shares ended the day 
marginally lower after spending most of the day in positive territory.

As Italy's parliament passed a vote of confidence in its austerity budget and 
details of the proposed EU fiscal compact emerged, theFTSE 100 finished 13.51 
points lower at 5387.34, having climbed as high at 5452. The decline came in 
the last few minutes as traders awaited Standard & Poor's downgrade of France's 
sovereign debt rating in the wake of last Friday's summit. There was also talk 
of a major pan-European sell programme towards the close of trading.

But with copper and gold rebounding following signs of economic growth in the 
US, and talk of China easing monetary policy again, a number of mining 
companies were in demand.

Kazakhmys climbed 27p to 874p following news it had agreed a $1.5bn loan 
facility with the state-run China Development Bank to fund its Aktogay copper 
project in Kazakhstan. Louise Collinge at Evolution Securities said:
 While Kazakhmys will see some depletion from old mines in the medium term, it 
has significant growth potential from its large Aktogay and Bozshakol copper 
projects and a series of medium term projects - and we do not believe this is 
reflected in the group's share price. 
Antofagasta added 42p to £11.72, while Fresnillo recovered 41p to £15.53.

Glencore edged up 0.05p to 387.05p as analysts at Liberum Capital tipped the 
commodities company as a possible bidder forXstrata, up 22p at 970p, although 
not until the third quarter of next year.

Liberum also said Anglo American, down 9.5p at 2298.5p, could demerge its 
platinum business:
 [There is] still scope for a game changing platinum spin-out, although deal 
complexities may yet prevent execution.

Barclays was 0.95p better at 171.45p, shrugging off news that it was one of 
seven major global banks downgraded by Fitch.Lloyds Banking Group added 0.425p 
to 24.5p andRoyal Bank of Scotland rose 0.36p to 20p.

But BSkyB dropped 9p to 716p after Bank of America/Merrill Lynch downgraded 
the satellite broadcaster from buy to neutral and cut its target price from 
800p to 770p. It said:
 Our expectation of negative earnings per share momentum due to fibre upgrade 
costs and weak consumption, and competition concerns around YouView's launch in 
the first quarter and football uncertainty in the second quarter, could curtail 
short term performance. 
Elsewhere Shanks slipped 6.4p to 95.1p after Goldman Sachs cut its price 
target on the waste management group from 151p to 138p and removed the company 
from its pan-Europe buy list.

Logica, which announced plans to cut 1300 jobs and warned of tough trading in 
Europe, lost 2.25p to 59.7p as analyst George O'Connor at Panmure Gordon cut 
his recommendation from buy to hold. He said shareholders would only wantLogica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/logica> if there was take-over potential, 
but there was a valid concern that foreign buyers may not be interested:
 Logica is an anachronism. It is too 'pointy headed' – [foreign buyers] want 
generic skills (remember that's why Axon was acquired). The restructuring is 
half baked and half hearted, shedding 1300 staff when unplanned staff attrition 
is 14%. [This] says to the 5,600 natural leavers – hang on, you might get a 
redundancy payment. Suffering investors will argue for more decisive measures. 
We have a hold because we don't think management has the gumption to drive 
through the changes necessary to create shareholder value.

But Sports Direct International added 20p to 210p after it decided not to bid 
forBlacks Leisure, down 11% at 2p.

Ashtead added 10.2p to 209.6p following the proposed merger of rivals US 
Rentals and RSC Holdings.

Finally Conroy Gold & Natural Resources jumped 10% to 2.875p after the company 
increased the resource estimate at its Clontibret gold project in Ireland by 
20% to 600,000 ounces. Traders said there could be more to come.
 