
A Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> supporter who 
screamed “Jew-S-A” at reporters at a rally on Saturday night behaved in a 
“deplorable” way, the Republican nominee’s campaign manager agreed with CNN 
host Jake Tapper on Sunday.

Clinton and Trump camps duel over FBI director's late email revelation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-fbi-director-comey-emails>
On Saturday night in Phoenix, Arizona, a man wearing a “Hillary for prison 
2016” T-shirt turned around during a chant of “USA” to face the press 
enclosure, calling reporters the “enemy 
<https://twitter.com/alivitali/status/792507715075518464>” and shouting 
“Jew-S-A”.

“That man’s conduct was deplorable,” Trump’s campaign manager, Kellyanne 
Conway, told CNN after Tapper suggested the adjective. “His conduct is 
completely unacceptable and does not reflect our campaign or our candidate.

“And had I been there, I would have asked security to remove him immediately. 
Clearly, he doesn’t speak for the campaign or the candidate.”
Nick Corasaniti (@NYTnickc) 
Guy chants "Jew-S-A" in front of press pen pic.twitter.com/2yqgA6dD4k 
<https://t.co/2yqgA6dD4k>
 <https://twitter.com/NYTnickc/status/792510299232284672> October 29, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NYTnickc/status/792510299232284672> 
Conway, Trump and his campaign have for months criticized Hillary Clinton for 
her description of “half” the Republican’s supporters as “a basket of 
deplorables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/16/lyin-trump-fact-check-deplorables-flint-refugees-clinton>
”. Clinton later said she regretted the generalization, and said she was 
referencing extreme factions of Trump’s support, such as theformer Ku Klux Klan 
leader David Duke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/22/david-duke-kkk-senate-campaign-louisiana>
 and antisemitic andwhite nationalist groups 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/19/us/politics/anti-semitism-trump-supporters-twitter.html>
.

Trump wavered on and then disavowed Duke’s support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/28/donald-trump-former-kkk-leader-david-duke>
 earlier this year, but he has periodically echoed antisemitic tropes, for 
instancealleging the existence of a global conspiracy of media 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/us/politics/trump-comments-linked-to-antisemitism.html>
 and bankers andtweeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/02/donald-trump-star-of-david-tweet-hillary-clinton>
 anddefending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/04/donald-trump-antisemitic-hillary-clinton-tweet>
 an image of Clinton, money, a six-pointed star and the words “most corrupt 
candidate ever”.

Similar rhetoric about “rapist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
” Mexican migrants and other minorities has outraged Democrats and some 
Republicans: Clintongave an entire speech in August on Trump’s relations with 
the so-called “alt-right” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/25/hillary-clinton-alt-right-racism-speech-donald-trump-nevada>
 movement, and Mitt Romney warned in June that Trump hadmade racist groups feel 
legitimized 
<https://www.google.com/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=the%20gaurdian%20trump%20romne%20trickle%20down>
 andemboldened 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/14/us/politics/donald-trump-white-identity.html>
.

Conway was quick to argue that most of Trump’s supporters do not share racist 
beliefs, telling CNN host Jake Tapper: “I have to push back on some of the 
adjectives you just used to describe [Trump’s supporters]. These are people who 
love their country. And these are people who feel like they’re part of a 
movement, that this is not a typical politician. If you do anything, don’t 
besmirch the good hearts and the good values of the tens of thousands, the 
millions of Donald Trump supporters.”
Arizona voting 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=AZ> 
She clarified that she did not condone the Phoenix supporter’s language: “I 
think what he had to say was disgusting.”

Trump has blamed “the dishonest media”, sometimes singling out reporters by 
name, for his recent collapse in the polls, and reporters have beensubjected to 
jeers and even threats 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/15/us/politics/trump-media-attacks.html>. 

At the same Phoenix rally, a reporter alerted security to a man whose behavior 
toward the press <https://twitter.com/SchreckReports/status/792509049438818305> 
alarmed members of the media. Jewish reporters have experiencedintense 
antisemitic abuse online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/28/julia-ioffe-journalist-melania-trump-antisemitic-abuse>
.
 