
What a waste. It was only a month ago that Kevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> said he wanted to play on 
until February 2016, the end of England's tour to South Africa. Between now and 
then England will play in the World T20, the World Cup, and in a Test series 
against India and Australia. But we will not get to see a reprise of 
Pietersen's contest against Dale Steyn and the South African quicks, or Ravi 
Ashwin and the Indian spinners. We will never discover whether the most richly 
gifted batsman of his generation could have helped England regain the Ashes or 
win a World Cup. International cricket will certainly be poorer for his 
sacking, the question is whether England will be better as a consequence.

Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook>, Paul Downton, 
James Whitaker and Ashley Giles have gambled that they will be. The team's 
schedule over the next two years is as arduous as any that could be concocted, 
and it is incredible to think Pietersen has provoked such antipathy among 
England's players and management that they believe they will be better off 
without him. Especially given that they have already lost one senior player in 
Graeme Swann, and that they must be unsure whether another, Jonathan Trott, 
will ever play again.

"Small minds can't comprehend big spirits." Pietersen posted that quote on his 
Twitter account. You guess he has a degree of disdain for all four men, 
reckoning them to be little better than the "errand boy, sent by grocery 
clerks, to collect a bill", as Marlon Brando once put it playing the role of 
Kurtz in Apocalypse Now. They are certainly not in the strongest position â€“ a 
new managing director, a new chief selector, a coach who may or may not be 
about to lose his job, and a captain whose own performance in the winter 
provided just as much, if not more, cause for concern as Pietersen's own.

They will be reminded of what they are missing after each six Pietersen hits, 
and every century he scores, whether he is playing in India or England. Michael 
Vaughan, whose warm support for Pietersen belies the oft-repeated idea that he 
fell out with every dressing room he was in, has said that he was lucky to lead 
him when he still "had so much to prove". He does again now. He will relish 
proving them wrong.

The runs will come. It is already hard to make a case for his dismissal on the 
grounds of his performances on the pitch, and not just because he was the 
leading run-scorer in the Ashes. In the last two years he has played 40 games 
for England across all three formats, and has a combined averaged of 43.67, 
which is just 0.4 below his career equivalent. It is also the best any of 
England's batsmen have managed in that time. It is true that in the last 12 
months he has been in something of a slump, and the figure drops down to 31.03. 
But he has still scored eight fifties in the 17 innings he has played, as well 
as his single century against Australia at Old Trafford. It's a thin return, 
but a thinner reason for getting rid of him.

So we surmise that it is all to do with the way Pietersen handles himself 
around the team. But how do we square that with the enthusiastic remarks made 
by many younger players, who have said he has gone out of his way to help them? 
Nick Compton, who toured with him in India, said Pietersen did more than anyone 
to help him in the nets. Even Swann, who has fallen out with him in the past, 
said: "England's short-term future should include Pietersen." And it was less 
than a month ago that Giles called him "a million-pound asset" and said "there 
was no discussion about leaving Kevin out" of the provisional squad for the 
WT20. All that has changed in the meantime is that Giles's team lost a T20 
series. Pietersen, of course, was not even in the country at the time, let 
alone the dressing room. His malignant influence surely can not stretch that 
far.

Against that, we have whispers, and inferences drawn from innuendos. There was 
a row at Perth, we are told, when Pietersen was out caught at mid-wicket in one 
innings and at long-on in the other. And another at Sydney, when he made just 
three and six. Some reports have suggested that he and Cook had to be pulled 
apart. Pietersen's wife, Jessica Taylor, says that is a lie. There have been 
suggestions, too, that he somehow undermined senior players. And that is it, 
the entirely insufficient sum of what everyone outside the dressing room knows. 
So we turn back to old stories and assumptions, about how he has alienated most 
people he has played with. Opinion without evidence is pretty much just 
prejudice. In the absence of any better information, the debate about this 
decision has divided along long-established lines. Pietersen has always been 
adored and appalled in equal measure. Few on either side will have changed 
their mind about him in the last 24 hours.

The only people who know what happened and why are the ones who were inside 
the dressing room in Australia, and they are not talking. The desultory 
statement put out by the England and Wales Cricket Board provided inadequate 
explanation, just so much gibberish about the need to "rebuild not only the 
team but also team ethic and philosophy". The statement has made a martyr of 
Pietersen, but he is peddling platitudes too. Presumably both parties have been 
bound by the agreement they reached over the remainder of his contract.

England fans may feel they deserve a full explanation, but are unlikely to get 
one any time soon. And without knowledge, what understanding? It is undoubtedly 
a bold decision. It may also be a bad one. Without knowing the reasoning behind 
it, it is impossible to judge. But it is a call that will haunt the men who 
made it, unless England start winning soon.
 