
Obama's planned troop withdrawal from July 2011 has spurred momentum towards 
an Afghan endgame. But few believe a complete withdrawal is imminent. And the 
western mission faces several milestones that may determine success or failure:

• Ramadan 11 August

The holy month of fasting and prayer is traditionally a time when both 
militants and government troops slow the fight. That augurs badly for surging 
US troops wishing to press their battlefield advantage.

• Parliamentary elections 18 September President Hamid Karzai has insisted on 
holding the vote, delayed from May, even though many areas are insecure and 
widespread poll rigging is feared. Securing ballot boxes will divert Afghan 
soldiers from fighting the Taliban, highlighting the gulf between the political 
and military strategies.

• Nato summit November The international community hopes to identify provinces 
where western militaries can transfer control to Afghan security forces 
"sometime in 2011". But that will depend largely on the fragile, sometimes 
chaotic Afghan army and police forces.

• Winter December to March Obama's 30,000-troop surge will have fully deployed 
by the time the harsh winter sets in. In recent years fighting has continued 
through the cold season, but at a reduced level. A senior Nato officer said the 
military "would have to show some convincing stories" by October.

• Congressional Assessment January 2011 Progress (or lack thereof) in 
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> will come under 
sharp political scrutiny in the run up to Obama's annual State of the Union 
address.

• US withdrawal July 2011 Vice-president Joe Biden recently confirmed that 
Obama's July date was "firm", although it is likely the withdrawal will be 
staggered over several years. He faces growing public impatience. A recent poll 
found that 43% of Americans feel the war is worth fighting.
 