
&#149: After much speculation, Nicole Kidman has signed to star in Lars von 
Trier's Dogville after all. As reported in yesterday's Guardian Unlimited Film, 
uncertainty hung over Kidman's role after she delayed signing. "Our lawyers in 
New York just told me that Nicole Kidman has signed the contract," Zentropa 
producer Vibeke Vindelv said. "I just talked to Lars and obviously we are both 
very happy." Shooting on the £5m project is due to begin in Sweden in January. 
Meanwhile Ananova reports that Kidman is planning a return to the London stage 
to work with Sam Mendes, who directed her in The Blue Room three years ago. The 
Aussie star may even be on the verge of replacing pregnant Cate Blanchett in 
The Life of David Gale, with Kevin Spacey.

 Shrek has become the highest-grossing animated feature ever to be released 
in Australia, United International Pictures confirmed yesterday. After only six 
weeks in cinemas down under, the DreamWorks phenomenon has taken £10m, passing 
the mark set in 1994 by The Lion King. The film is already Australia's 12th 
highest-grossing film of all time and has its eyes on this year's number one 
spot.

 Andie MacDowell <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andie-macdowell>, the star 
of Four Weddings and a Funeral, is set to marry for the second time - this time 
to her childhood sweetheart. Ananova reports that the 43-year-old actress plans 
to marry Rhett Hartzog, an Atlanta jeweller, in November. MacDowell's father, 
Marion McBride, said: "I am very happy for her. I know they have given it a lot 
of thought. He is a friend she has known a long time. They've known each other 
since grammar school and through high school."

 Notting Hill director Roger Michell will shoot a film adaptation of Ian 
McEwan's disturbing love tale,Enduring Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/enduring-love>, about a man who becomes the 
focus of another man's obsession after a balloon accident. Variety reports that 
the Working Title project will be the first for Michell since he filmed 
Changing Lanes for Paramount, which has not yet been scheduled for release. He 
dropped out of Captain Corelli's Mandolin after suffering a heart attack.
 